 Criticisms of anarchism include moral criticisms and pragmatic criticisms . Anarchism is often evaluated as unfeasible or utopian by its critics . European history professor Carl Landauer , in his book European Socialism argued that social anarchism is unrealistic and that government is a " lesser evil " than a society without " repressive force . " He also argued that " ill intentions will cease if repressive force disappears " is an " absurdity . " 
 = Joint attention = 
 Joint attention ( also : shared attention ) is the shared focus of two individuals on an object . It is achieved when one individual alerts another to an object by means of eye @-@ gazing , pointing or other verbal or non @-@ verbal indications . An individual gazes at another individual , points to an object and then returns their gaze to the individual . Scaife and Bruner were the first researchers to present a cross @-@ sectional description of children 's ability to follow eye gaze in 1975 . They found that most eight- to ten @-@ month @-@ old children followed a line of regard , and that all 11- to 14 @-@ month @-@ old children did so . This early research showed it was possible for an adult to bring certain objects in the environment to an infant 's attention using eye gaze . 
 Subsequent research demonstrates that two important skills in joint attention are following eye gaze and identifying intention . The ability to share gaze with another individual is an important skill in establishing reference . The ability to identify intention is important in a child 's ability to learn language and direct the attention of others . Joint attention is important for many aspects of language development including comprehension , production and word learning . Episodes of joint attention provide children with information about their environment , allowing individuals to establish reference from spoken language and learn words . Socio @-@ emotional development and the ability to take part in normal relationships are also influenced by joint attention abilities . The ability to establish joint attention may be negatively affected by deafness , blindness , and developmental disorders such as autism . 
 Other animals such as great apes , orangutans , chimpanzees , dogs , and horses also show some elements of joint attention . 
 = = Humans = = 
 = = = Levels of joint attention = = = 
 Defining levels of joint attention is important in determining if children are engaging in age @-@ appropriate joint attention . There are three levels of joint attention : triadic , dyadic , and shared gaze . 
 Triadic joint attention is the highest level of joint attention and involves two individuals looking at an object . Each individual must understand that the other individual is looking at the same object and realize that there is an element of shared attention . For an instance of social engagement to count as triadic joint attention it requires at least two individuals attending to an object or focusing their attention on each other . Additionally , the individual must display awareness that focus is shared between himself or herself and another individual . Triadic attention is marked by the individual looking back to the other individual after looking at the object . 
 Dyadic joint attention is a conversation @-@ like behavior that individuals engage in . This is especially true for human adults and infants , who engage in this behavior starting at two months of age . Adults and infants take turns exchanging facial expressions , noises , and in the case of the adult , speech . 
 Shared gaze occurs when two individuals are simply looking at an object . Shared gaze is the lowest level of joint attention . 
 Individuals who engage in triadic joint attention must understand both gaze and intention to establish common reference . Gaze refers to a child 's understanding of the link between mental activity and the physical act of seeing . Intention refers to the child 's ability to understand the goal of another person 's mental processes . 
 = = = Gaze = = = 
 For an individual to engage in joint attention they must establish reference . Following the gaze or directive actions ( such as pointing ) of others is a common way of establishing reference . For an individual to understand that following gaze establishes reference the individual must display : 
 Recognition that looking is intentional behavior directed to external objects and events . Following gaze serves the purpose of establishing reference . 
 An understanding that looking results in the mental experience of seeing an object or event . 
 Recognition that eyes are responsible for seeing . 
 Recognition that others share in the capacity to see things . 
 An understanding that voice direction helps determine whether the speaker is talking to them and what he or she is referring to or focused on . 
 Gaze becomes more complex with age and practice . As gaze increases in complexity , individuals are better able to discriminate what others are referring to . Joint attention is also important for social learning . Gaze following reflects an expectation @-@ based type of orienting in which an individual 's attention is cued by another 's head turn or eye turn . Individuals are motivated to follow another 's gaze and engage in joint attention because gaze is a cue for which rewarding events occur . 
 = = = Intention = = = 
 The ability to identify intention is critical to joint attention . When individuals understand that others have goals , intentions , and attentional states , they are able to enter into and direct another 's attention . Joint attention promotes and maintains dyadic exchanges and learning about the nature of social partners . The ability to engage in joint attention is crucial for language development . 
 Individuals who are intentional in their actions display regularity in their behavior . Individuals locate objects with their eyes , move towards the object , and then use hands to make contact with and manipulate the object . Change in gaze direction is one of several behavioral cues that individuals use in combination with changes in facial and vocal displays and body posture to mark the intention to act on an object . Individuals who seek or follow a joint focus of attention display knowledge that what is in their awareness is also in another 's awareness . They believe that they are experiencing the same world as others . 
 Joint attention plays an important role in the development of theory of mind . Theory of mind and joint attention are important precursors to a fully developed grasp of another individual 's mental activity . 
 = = = Language comprehension = = = 
 The ability of children to extract information from their environment rests on understandings of attentional behaviors such as pointing . Episodes of joint attention provide children with a great deal of information about objects by establishing reference and intention . Joint attention occurs within particular environments . The items and events in that environment provide a context that enables the child to associate meaning with a particular utterance . Joint attention makes relevant aspects of the context salient , helping children comprehend what is taking place . 
 = = = Language production = = = 
 An infant 's social environment relates to his or her later language development . Children 's first words are closely linked to their early language experience . For children with typically developing language skills , there is a close match between maternal speech and their environment : up to 78 % of maternal speech is matched to the object the child is focusing on . In children with delayed language development , only 50 % of maternal speech is matched to the object the infant is focusing on . Infants are more likely to engage in joint attention when the parent talks about an object that the child is attending to as opposed to an object outside of the infant 's attention . This increased level of joint attention aids in encouraging normal language development , including word comprehension and production . When joint attention is present , it plays an important role in word learning , a crucial aspect of language development . 
 = = = Relationship to socio @-@ emotional development = = = 
 Joint attention and the ability to attend to an aspect of one 's environment are fundamental to normal relationships that rely on the sharing of experience and knowledge . Infants are highly motivated to share experience . An infant 's motivation to engage in joint attention is strong enough that infants voluntarily turn away from interesting sights to engage in joint attention with others . 
 As described in attachment theory , infants need to develop a relationship with a primary caregiver to achieve normal social and emotional development . A key part of the ability to develop this relationship may be joint attention . In addition to language development , joint attention serves the function of preparing infants for more complex social structures involved in adult conversation . Children 's skills in initiating and responding to joint attention predict their social competence at 30 months of age . <unk> smiling ( a low level form of joint attention involving smiling at an object then turning the smile to one 's communicative partner ) at 9 months positively predicts parent @-@ rated social competence scores at 30 months in infants . Early joint attention abilities account for differences in social and emotional abilities in later life . 
 = = = Developmental markers in infancy = = = 
 At the age of 2 months , children engage in dyadic joint attention and conversation @-@ like exchanges with adults during which each is the focus of the other 's attention and they take turns exchanging looks , noises and mouth movements . At age 3 months , children display joint attention skills by calling to a caregiver when they are not perceivable . When caregiver does not respond in a similar manner , child exhibits a series of responses that were first studied in early 1970s by Edward <unk> in collaboration with pediatrician T. Berry <unk> at the time when the latter was creating the Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale . At age 6 months , infants display joint attentional skills by : 
 <unk> themselves in the same general direction ( in their visual field ) as another person . Infants also cease to focus on the first interesting ( salient ) object they encounter . 
 Following outward directed gaze of adults . 
 Extending more sophisticated behaviors , such as gaze checking , when initial gaze following is not successful . 
 Paying more attention to eyes , responding to shifts in eye gaze direction , and directing their own attention based on another 's gaze . 
 At age 8 months , infants demonstrate joint attention through proto @-@ declarative pointing , particularly in girls . At 9 months of age , infants begin to display triadic joint attention . Infants also will display joint attention activities , such as communicative gestures , social referencing , and using the behavior of others to guide response to novel things . 
 At one year of age , joint attention is displayed through a child 's understanding of pointing as an intentional act . One @-@ year @-@ olds also establish joint attention for objects within their visual field before objects beyond their current visual field . At this age , infants are not yet able to represent their entire environment , only what they can see . At age 15 months , children recognize the minds of others . At this age , children also recognize the importance of eyes for seeing and that physical objects can block sight . At age 18 months , infants are capable of following an individual 's gaze to outside their visual field and establishing ( representative ) joint attention . 18 @-@ month @-@ olds also grasp the intentional , referential nature of looking , the <unk> experience of seeing and the role of eyes and are skilled at following both gaze and pointing with precision . At two years of age , children display joint attention by extending attention beyond the present and understanding that the targets of other 's attention extends to the past as well . Two @-@ year @-@ olds are also capable of representational thought or increased memory . 
 = = = Individuals with disabilities = = = 
 Several studies have shown that problems with joint attention are associated with developmental processes . Difficulties in establishing joint attention may partially account for differences in social abilities of children with developmental disorders ( i.e. Autism spectrum disorders ) . A core deficit noted in autism is eye gaze . Autistic children have difficulty alternating their attention towards a partner and third object . This difficulty is attributed to their deficiencies in following gaze , resulting in difficulty initiating and maintaining joint attention . Deaf infants are able to engage in joint attention similar to hearing infants ; however , the time spent engaged in joint attention is often reduced in deaf infants born to hearing parents . Hearing parents of deaf infants often are less likely to respond and expand on their deaf infants ' initiative and communicative acts . Deaf infants of deaf parents do not show reduced time spent in joint attention . Auditory input is not critical to joint attention but similar modes of communication and understanding are vital . Furthermore , mothers who are unable to successfully establish regular joint attention with their child rate that infant lower on scales of social competence . Judgement of low social competence can be made as early as 18 months of age . In blind infants , joint attention is established by means of auditory input or feeling another person 's hand on an object and may be delayed compared to sighted infants . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 = = = Definitions in non @-@ human animals = = = 
 Triadic joint attention is the highest level of joint attention and involves two individuals looking at an object . Each individual must understand that the other individual is looking at the same object and realize that there is an element of shared attention . Triadic attention is marked by the individual looking back to the other individual after looking at the object . Dyadic joint attention involves mutual gaze between the parent and infant . Mutual gaze is marked by both the parent and infant looking at each other 's face . If two individuals are simply looking at an object , it is referred to as shared gaze . 
 = = = Dyadic joint attention = = = 
 Infant and parent chimpanzees show dyadic joint attention in an affectionate manner by looking at each other 's eyes Non @-@ human animals such as Japanese monkeys , baboons , and other Old World monkeys seldom engage in dyadic joint attention . For these animals , the eye contact involved in dyadic joint attention is deemed threatening . 
 = = = Shared gaze = = = 
 Gaze following , or shared gaze , can be found in a number of primates . Domesticated animals such as dogs and horses also demonstrate shared gaze . This type of joint attention is important for animals because gaze shifts serve as indicators alerting the animal to the location of predators , mates , or food . 
 <unk> are capable of actively locating objects that are the focus of another individual 's attention by tracking the gaze of others . They are not limited to following eye gaze to the first interesting object in their view . They use a number of different cues to engage in shared focus , including head movement and eye gaze . Infant chimpanzees start to follow tap , point , and head turn cues of an experimenter by nine months of age . By 13 months of age , they show following responses to glance cues without a head turn . There is no evidence to support that infant chimpanzees are able to use eye gaze alone as a cue for following responses . By 20 months of age , infant chimpanzees are able to follow an experimenter 's cues to a target behind the chimpanzee but infant chimpanzees do not look back to the experimenter after looking at the target . Moving targets are more salient than stationary targets for infant chimpanzees . Chimpanzee infants are sensitive to faces which are gazing at them , but chimpanzees less than three to four years old only look within their visual field when using the experimenter 's head turn as their cue . 
 = Tillingbourne Bus Company = 
 Tillingbourne Bus Company was a bus company based in Cranleigh , Surrey . The company operated bus and coach services in Surrey , West Sussex , Hampshire and Berkshire from 1924 until 2001 . 
 It was founded as Tillingbourne Valley in 1924 , and became a limited company in 1931 , taking the name Tillingbourne Valley Services . It initially operated routes in the Guildford area from a garage in Chilworth using small single @-@ deck buses painted in a maroon livery . Coach hire and excursions began in 1931 , but two years later these activities split into a separate company , Tillingbourne Valley Coaches , which operated independently for a further 24 years . Until 1970 Tillingbourne was owned and managed by three generations of the Trice family , before being sold to Trevor Brown . 
 The company changed its name to Tillingbourne Bus Company in 1972 , changing its livery to blue and yellow , and moved to a garage in Gomshall in the same year . A second garage in Ewhurst was opened in 1974 . An expansion of operations in the late 1970s and early 1980s , much of it through the award of county council contracted routes , took the company 's vehicles into West Sussex and Hampshire as well as Surrey . Tillingbourne took over the services of London operator Orpington & District following that company 's collapse in 1981 . These were run separately from the main company as Tillingbourne ( Metropolitan ) which , in 1983 , was sold to its management to form Metrobus , now part of the Go @-@ Ahead Group . The company moved garages again in 1980 , settling in Cranleigh . A new , larger garage in the same town was opened in February 2001 . Deregulation of local bus services in 1986 led to further expansion , including the establishment in 1989 of a new brand , Hobbit , for Tillingbourne 's minibus operations . A high @-@ quality coaching subsidiary , Dorking Coaches , was also operated towards the end of Tillingbourne 's life . 
 Tillingbourne began operations with a single vehicle , expanding to operate around 70 buses by 2001 . A range of types were operated , including early Thornycroft and Dennis vehicles , and later Guy and Bedford products . The company 's fleet was updated in the 1990s with new Volvo and Optare vehicles . Following Tillingbourne 's closure , its fleet was disposed of , with vehicles sold to Shamrock Coaches , Norfolk Green , Black Prince Buses , Safeguard Coaches , Arriva Guildford & West Surrey and Islwyn Borough Transport . 
 The company was placed in administration in March 2001 , following two years of heavy losses , and closed down permanently a month later . This led to a series of service changes , which saw its operations covered by a range of different operators . Other effects causing Tillingbourne 's collapse included a fall in the total number of passengers using buses in Hampshire and local criticism following an increase in the number of vehicles using the , later closed , Arriva West Sussex garage in <unk> . The sites of both Tillingbourne garages in Cranleigh were converted for use by other industries . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Creation and early history ( 1924 @-@ 1972 ) = = = 
 Tillingbourne was formed in 1924 by Vic Smith and George Trice . It was initially known as Tillingbourne Valley , and operated a single vehicle in a maroon livery from a garage in Chilworth on a service between Guildford and Gomshall . Smith left the company in the late 1920s , and a new route from Guildford to Albury Park was introduced around the same time , with four vehicles owned by 1928 . The route to Gomshall was extended to Peaslake , and briefly faced competition from Surrey Hills Motor Services prior to their takeover by Aldershot & District , who withdrew the competing route . The company 's garage was rebuilt after being destroyed in a fire along with three of its vehicles in 1928 . Tillingbourne was reconstituted as a limited company , Tillingbourne Valley Services Limited , in October 1931 . 
 Following George Trice 's death in 1933 , control of the business passed to his son , also called George . A coach hire and excursion business had been introduced in July 1931 ; this was split out into a new company , Tillingbourne Valley Coaches , which operated independently until 1955 . From the early 1930s , until 1964 , the service to Peaslake was run jointly with the London Passenger Transport Board ; operation of the entire route was taken over in August 1964 , but falling passenger numbers meant that the route was cut back in frequency a year later . A new livery of maroon and grey was introduced in 1964 . 
 George Trice retired in 1948 and was succeeded by his son Derek , who sold Tillingbourne to Trevor Brown in September 1970 . In the same year , route numbering was introduced for the first time to the three routes then operated . The company made an operating loss in 1969 and 1970 , so one route , a local service in Guildford , was withdrawn in October 1971 due to poor usage , and another was cut in frequency . As the Chilworth garage was still owned by Trice , operations were transferred to an open @-@ air site in Gomshall in early 1972 . 
 = = = Change of name and expansion ( 1972 @-@ 1986 ) = = = 
 The company 's name was changed to Tillingbourne Bus Company in May 1972 , following the introduction of a service between Horsham and Colgate , with a new livery of blue , yellow and grey introduced . A new Managing Director , Barry King , joined Tillingbourne from North Downs Coaches in the same year . In 1974 , a small garage in Ewhurst was acquired and maintenance work transferred there , although the majority of the fleet continued to be based in Gomshall . 
 In May 1976 , the company 's long @-@ established route between Guildford and Peaslake was extended to Cranleigh via Ewhurst , and a once @-@ daily <unk> service to and from The Haven , the first bus route to serve the community , was introduced . A number of service changes saw Tillingbourne vehicles operating to Croydon and Chichester one day a week each by 1977 , although both were withdrawn after three years . The service to Colgate was withdrawn and replaced by a local half @-@ hourly route in Horsham in 1979 . In September 1980 , the company moved depots again to a larger site in Cranleigh . 
 The collapse of Orpington & District in early 1981 prompted the company to launch a new operation in Greater London . This was split from the main operation as Tillingbourne ( Metropolitan ) in July 1981 , but sold to its managerial team in 1983 . It adopted the name Metrobus and continues to operate . 
 In June 1981 , new once @-@ weekly routes linking Horsham to Steyning and Cranleigh / Ewhurst to Brighton were introduced , the second to replace a withdrawn Southdown Motor Services service . To improve profits on the Brighton route , beer was carried from the Sussex Brewery near <unk> to public houses along the route alongside passengers . The scheduled service operations of coach firm McCann 's were acquired , together with three vehicles , on 1 November 1982 , although some were withdrawn a year later . 
 Further expansion came in April 1985 , following over a year of consultation with county council members , regulators , when two new routes were introduced . One operated in competition with Alder Valley , while the other took the place of services withdrawn by other operators . Following these changes Tillingbourne became the only operator to serve Chilworth , Albury and Shere . Two new vehicles were purchased for the routes . At the same time , all of Tillingbourne 's services were renumbered into a new two @-@ digit sequence , to avoid confusion with London Country routes . A year later , the second of the new services , circular route 23 / 25 , was reduced in frequency from hourly to two @-@ hourly , although much of the route was covered by extending another route . Another new service , linking Cranleigh and Godalming , was also introduced . In August 1986 , operation of a number of council @-@ contracted services , including a route from Redhill to Reigate and a local route in Horsham , were taken over from other companies . 
 = = = Post @-@ deregulation ( 1986 @-@ 2001 ) = = = 
 Following deregulation in October 1986 , a small number of service changes were made , with a new route from Guildford to <unk> being introduced and a service to Gomshall withdrawn . At the same time , a new brand name , Hobbit , was introduced for Tillingbourne 's minibus operations . Barry King left the company in December 1986 and was replaced as Managing Director by Chris Bowler . 
 In early 1989 , operations in Horsham were reduced , following the loss of the tendered route to Barns Green . A new service to <unk> was briefly introduced in February 1989 , but withdrawn after two months . In July , a new service between Guildford and the British Aerospace site at Dunsfold Aerodrome was introduced . Further expansion eastwards came in November 1989 , when the operation of eleven tendered routes , requiring six buses , was won from the county council . These were operated under the Hobbit name . A new service linking Normandy and <unk> to Guildford two days a week was introduced in October 1989 . A second route to the two villages was added in 1995 . In January 1999 a new route from Farnham to <unk> via Normandy was launched , as was a direct service from the village to Guildford . In 1998 an outstation was opened in Aldershot following the award of contracted work in Reading to Tillingbourne . 
 Tillingbourne introduced a new tourist route in the summer of 1995 . Operating on Sundays for six months of the year , it provided a circular service linking Guildford , Godalming and Cranleigh with a number of nearby rural locations not served by other routes . Although similar services were operated by London & Country and <unk> , the new service was designed to avoid any direct competition . The route was operated with a Bristol SU single @-@ decker acquired from a bus preservationist . 
 In September 2000 , Tillingbourne controversially reduced the number of journeys on contracted route 516 , which linked Dorking , Leatherhead and Epsom . Although this was within the terms of the contract , it was criticised by residents of intermediate villages , who claimed the communities relied in particular on a cancelled morning journey . Operations were moved to a new larger site , still located in Cranleigh , in February 2001 . The company believed this would reduce operating costs and allow for future expansion . 
 = = Closure = = 
 On 19 March 2001 , Tillingbourne abruptly ceased operations and was placed in the hands of receivers <unk> Traynor . This followed two years in which the company had lost around £ 450 @,@ 000 . The receivers blamed the losses on increasing costs , low subsidies from local councils and falling passenger numbers . The closure left 140 staff unemployed and caused large numbers of passengers to be stranded . Replacement services were organised by Surrey County Council and four bus operators , with the majority of routes being covered within days by temporary contracted services . Some schoolchildren were forced to find other means of transport , although workings on routes 62 and 63 were covered by <unk> Transport . 
 It was initially thought that Tillingbourne would be sold to another operator , with four companies reported to be interested . However , by early April 2001 , it became clear that this would not take place , as the offers submitted were lower than the value of the vehicles owned by the company . 
 <unk> Traynor was criticised by Council members for refusing to keep the company operational while replacement services were being arranged . Mole Valley councillor Hazel Watson stated that the withdrawal of services at short notice was " totally unacceptable " , while Shere county councillor David Davis described the closure as a " local tragedy " . Council leaders also denied the claim that the subsidies had been too low . 
 = = Related operations = = 
 Tillingbourne Valley Coaches 
 In 1933 , the bus and coach operations of what was then Tillingbourne Valley Services were split . The coaching unit was taken over by Lionel <unk> , previously an employee of Tillingbourne , and operated from a depot in Chilworth under the name Tillingbourne Valley Coaches . This company bought three second @-@ hand coaches to run on excursions and private hire operations . After 14 years of operation it launched a bus service between Guildford and Blackheath . <unk> died in 1953 and Tillingbourne Valley Coaches passed to his wife , who sold out to established operator <unk> of Guildford a year later . <unk> was itself taken over by <unk> Coaches in 1955 , and the Blackheath service withdrawn . 
 Tillingbourne ( Metropolitan ) Limited 
 In February 1981 , the long @-@ standing operator Orpington & District collapsed due to financial difficulties , so Tillingbourne decided to launch a test operation of three former O & D services . These proved successful , so more services were added and two new AEC Reliance coaches purchased for the operation . In July 1981 , the Orpington operation was given a separate licence , under the name Tillingbourne ( Metropolitan ) Limited , with six vehicles allocated to it . By 1983 , however , it became clear that the local area management of Tillingbourne ( Metropolitan ) wanted to develop the business in a different way from that of the main company . On 24 September 1983 , the Orpington operation 's directors , Gary Wood and Peter Larking , bought out the subsidiary to form Metrobus Limited . 
 Dorking Coaches 
 Following the takeover of Dorking Coaches in the late 1990s , a coaching division was set up using the same name , under the management of former Traffic Manager John Gaff . It operated high @-@ quality coaches , including three air @-@ conditioned vehicles which joined the fleet in 2000 , on coach hire and tour work . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 The first vehicle to be bought by Tillingbourne was a single @-@ deck Chevrolet with 14 seats , which entered service on the launch of the company 's first route in 1924 . It was joined by a similar Overland Automobile bus later in the year . Two further vehicles had been purchased by 1928 , when a depot fire destroyed three of the four buses . They were replaced by second @-@ hand buses including an 18 @-@ seat Dennis and several Thornycroft A2 vehicles . From November 1934 until the outbreak of World War II , these were progressively replaced by new buses , also built by Thornycroft . The first double @-@ deck vehicle to be bought was a Bristol K Type , which joined the fleet in 1959 . Eight Guy Vixens were bought from London Transport between 1963 and 1964 to replace the entire previous fleet . These were succeeded by a wide variety of types , with Bedford coaches and buses the most numerous . In the 1970s , a number of second @-@ hand Bristol <unk> 's , with ECW <unk> bodies , were operated . 
 In the period shortly before and after deregulation , a range of types were used . As well as a large number of Bedford vehicles , which continued to be bought new until the late 1980s , the fleet also included the AEC Reliance , Leyland Leopard , Leyland Tiger and Volvo B10M models , and the first two Dennis Lancet single @-@ deckers to be built . The company bought its first minibus , a 16 @-@ seat Ford Transit , in 1985 . The Tillingbourne fleet in the late 1980s and early 1990s also included two rare Dennis <unk> bought new , and a Volvo B10M coach with the last Plaxton Derwent body built . 
 The fleet was substantially updated shortly prior to the company 's closure . Two Volvo B6 single @-@ deckers were bought in 1994 . These were followed by a number of Optare products including the <unk> minibus and four of the last Optare <unk> single @-@ deckers built . The most common type in the fleet in the late 1990s was the Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> minibus ; by 1998 21 were in use out of a total fleet of 65 . Tillingbourne bought its first low @-@ floor buses , two new Optare <unk> , in 2000 . 
 = = Legacy and subsequent history = = 
 Tillingbourne 's routes were taken over by a variety of local operators . Arriva Guildford & West Surrey took over the majority of the operations in Guildford and Cranleigh , while the Arriva West Sussex division took over services in Horsham . Operations in and around Woking were taken on by <unk> @-@ Golden Miller and <unk> Coaches . White Rose took over the route between Staines and Camberley , while Thames Travel took over the routes into Reading . 
 Following the end of Tillingbourne 's operations , many of its newer vehicles were sold for further use . Buyers included Black Prince Buses , which took three Optare <unk> , and Islwyn Borough Transport , which bought Tillingbourne 's Optare <unk> . One of the surviving Leyland Tigers was bought by Norfolk Green . The biggest customer was Shamrock Coaches of Pontypridd which took 27 vehicles , including the Mercedes minibuses and nine Optare <unk> . Some vehicles remained in Surrey , including two Dennis Dart <unk> leased from Surrey County Council which were passed on to Arriva Guildford & West Surrey , and two Optare <unk> bought by Safeguard Coaches of Guildford . 
 A fall in bus passenger numbers , between 1999 and 2001 in the areas of Hampshire served by Tillingbourne , was in part explained as being a result of the loss of services caused by the company 's closure . 
 The increased vehicle requirements at Arriva 's <unk> ( Horsham ) garage , which took over three of Tillingbourne 's former routes , led to criticism from residents in the area and the suggestion that the site should be closed and operations moved to another location . The depot , buses and operation were sold by Arriva to Metrobus in September 2009 , who moved all operations to their garage in Crawley and closed the site . 
 Both of Tillingbourne 's former garage sites in Cranleigh have been converted for other uses . Permission was granted in February 2002 for the smaller site abandoned shortly before the company closed down to be taken over by a plant and vehicle hire firm . The larger site used in the final few months of operation was converted for use by a mail order firm , with permission for the change granted by the local council in November 2002 . 
 = Beagle = 
 The Beagle is a breed of small @-@ sized hound , similar in appearance to the much larger foxhound . The Beagle is a scent hound , developed primarily for hunting hare . With a great sense of smell and their tracking instinct , the Beagle is employed as detection dog for prohibited agricultural imports and foodstuffs in quarantine around the world . The Beagle is intelligent but single @-@ minded . It is a popular pet due to its size , good temper , and lack of inherited health problems . 
 Although beagle @-@ type dogs have existed for 2 @,@ 500 years , the modern breed was developed in Great Britain around the 1830s from several breeds , including the Talbot Hound , the North Country Beagle , the Southern Hound , and possibly the Harrier . 
 Beagles have been depicted in popular culture since Elizabethan times in literature and paintings , and more recently in film , television , and comic books . Snoopy of the comic strip Peanuts has been promoted as " the world 's most famous beagle " . 
 = = History = = 
 Dogs of similar size and purpose to the modern Beagle can be traced in Ancient Greece back to around the 5th century BC . Xenophon , born around 430 BC , in his Treatise on Hunting or Cynegeticus refers to a hound that hunted hares by scent and was followed on foot . Small hounds are mentioned in the Forest Laws of Canute which exempted them from the ordinance which commanded that all dogs capable of running down a stag should have one foot mutilated . If genuine , these laws would confirm that beagle @-@ type dogs were present in England before 1016 , but it is likely the laws were written in the Middle Ages to give a sense of antiquity and tradition to Forest Law . 
 In the 11th century , William the Conqueror brought the Talbot hound to Britain . The Talbot was a predominantly white , slow , deep @-@ throated , scent hound derived from the St. Hubert Hound which had been developed in the 8th century . At some point the English Talbots were crossed with Greyhounds to give them an extra turn of speed . Long extinct , the Talbot strain probably gave rise to the Southern Hound which , in turn , is thought to be an ancestor of the modern @-@ day Beagle . 
 From medieval times , beagle was used as a generic description for the smaller hounds , though these dogs differed considerably from the modern breed . Miniature breeds of beagle @-@ type dogs were known from the times of Edward II and Henry VII , who both had packs of Glove Beagles , so named since they were small enough to fit on a glove , and Queen Elizabeth I kept a breed known as a Pocket Beagle , which stood 8 to 9 inches ( 20 to 23 cm ) at the shoulder . Small enough to fit in a " pocket " or <unk> , they rode along on the hunt . The larger hounds would run the prey to ground , then the hunters would release the small dogs to continue the chase through underbrush . Elizabeth I referred to the dogs as her singing beagles and often entertained guests at her royal table by letting her Pocket Beagles cavort amid their plates and cups . 19th @-@ century sources refer to these breeds interchangeably and it is possible that the two names refer to the same small variety . In George Jesse 's Researches into the History of the British Dog from 1866 , the early 17th @-@ century poet and writer Gervase Markham is quoted referring to the Beagle as small enough to sit on a man 's hand and to the : 
 little small mitten @-@ beagle , which may be companion for a ladies <unk> , and in the field will run as cunningly as any hound <unk> , only their <unk> is very small like reeds . 
 Standards for the Pocket Beagle were drawn up as late as 1901 ; these genetic lines are now extinct , although modern breeders have attempted to recreate the variety . 
 By the 18th century two breeds had been developed for hunting hare and rabbit : the Southern Hound and the North Country Beagle ( or Northern Hound ) . The Southern Hound , a tall , heavy dog with a square head , and long , soft ears , was common from south of the River Trent and probably closely related to the Talbot Hound . Though slow , it had stamina and an excellent scenting ability . The North Country Beagle , possibly a cross between an offshoot of the Talbot stock and a Greyhound , was bred chiefly in Yorkshire and was common in the northern counties . It was smaller than the Southern Hound , less heavy @-@ set and with a more pointed muzzle . It was faster than its southern counterpart but its scenting abilities were less well developed . As fox hunting became increasingly popular , numbers of both types of hound diminished . The beagle @-@ type dogs were crossed with larger breeds such as Stag Hounds to produce the modern Foxhound . The beagle @-@ size varieties came close to extinction but some farmers in the South ensured the survival of the prototype breeds by maintaining small rabbit @-@ hunting packs . 
 = = = Development of the modern breed = = = 
 Reverend Phillip Honeywood established a Beagle pack in Essex in the 1830s and it is believed that this pack formed the basis for the modern Beagle breed . Although details of the pack 's lineage are not recorded it is thought that North Country Beagles and Southern Hounds were strongly represented ; William Youatt suspected that Harriers formed a good majority of the Beagle 's bloodline , but the origin of the Harrier is itself obscure . Honeywood 's Beagles were small , standing at about 10 inches ( 25 cm ) at the shoulder , and pure white according to John Mills ( writing in The Sportsman 's Library in 1845 ) . Prince Albert and Lord Winterton also had Beagle packs around this time , and royal favour no doubt led to some revival of interest in the breed , but Honeywood 's pack was regarded as the finest of the three . 
 Although credited with the development of the modern breed , Honeywood concentrated on producing dogs for hunting and it was left to Thomas Johnson to refine the breeding to produce dogs that were both attractive and capable hunters . Two strains were developed : the <unk> and smooth @-@ coated varieties . The rough @-@ coated Beagle survived until the beginning of the 20th century , and there were even records of one making an appearance at a dog show as late as 1969 , but this variety is now extinct , having probably been absorbed into the standard Beagle bloodline . 
 In the 1840s , a standard Beagle type was beginning to develop ; the distinction between the North Country Beagle and Southern Hound had been lost , but there was still a large variation in size , character , and reliability among the emerging packs . In 1856 , " Stonehenge " ( the pseudonym of John Henry Walsh ) , writing in the Manual of British Rural Sports , was still dividing Beagles into four varieties : the medium Beagle ; the dwarf or lapdog Beagle ; the fox Beagle ( a smaller , slower version of the Foxhound ) ; and the rough @-@ coated or terrier Beagle , which he classified as a cross between any of the other varieties and one of the Scottish terrier breeds . Stonehenge also gives the start of a standard description : 
 In size the beagle measures from 10 inches , or even less , to 15 . In shape they resemble the old southern hound in miniature , but with more neatness and beauty ; and they also resemble that hound in style of hunting . 
 By 1887 the threat of extinction was on the wane : there were 18 Beagle packs in England . The Beagle Club was formed in 1890 and the first standard drawn up at the same time . The following year the Association of Masters of Harriers and Beagles was formed . Both organisations aimed to further the best interests of the breed , and both were keen to produce a standard type of Beagle . By 1902 , the number of packs had risen to 44 . 
 = = = Export = = = 
 Beagles were in the United States by the 1840s at the latest , but the first dogs were imported strictly for hunting and were of variable quality . Since Honeywood had only started breeding in the 1830s , it is unlikely these dogs were representative of the modern breed and the description of them as looking like straight @-@ legged <unk> with weak heads has little resemblance to the standard . Serious attempts at establishing a quality bloodline began in the early 1870s when General Richard Rowett from Illinois imported some dogs from England and began breeding . Rowett 's Beagles are believed to have formed the models for the first American standard , drawn up by Rowett , L. H. <unk> , and Norman Ellmore in 1887 . The Beagle was accepted as a breed by the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) in 1885 . In the 20th century the breed has spread worldwide . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 On its formation , the Association of Masters of Harriers and Beagles took over the running of a regular show at Peterborough that had started in 1889 , and the Beagle Club in the UK held its first show in 1896 . The regular showing of the breed led to the development of a uniform type , and the Beagle continued to prove a success up until the outbreak of World War I when all shows were suspended . After the war , the breed was again struggling for survival in the UK : the last of the Pocket Beagles was probably lost during this time , and registrations fell to an all @-@ time low . A few breeders ( notably <unk> Kennels ) managed to revive interest in the dog and by World War II , the breed was once again doing well . Registrations dropped again after the end of the war but almost immediately recovered . 
 As purebred dogs , Beagles have always been more popular in the United States and Canada than in their native country England . The National Beagle Club of America was formed in 1888 and by 1901 a Beagle had won a Best in Show title . As in the UK , activity during World War I was minimal , but the breed showed a much stronger revival in the U.S. when hostilities ceased . In 1928 it won a number of prizes at the Westminster Kennel Club 's show and by 1939 a Beagle – Champion Meadowlark Draughtsman – had captured the title of top @-@ winning American @-@ bred dog for the year . On 12 February 2008 , a Beagle , K @-@ Run 's Park Me In First ( Uno ) , won the Best In Show category at the Westminster Kennel Club show for the first time in the competition 's history . In North America they have been consistently in the top @-@ ten most @-@ popular breeds for over 30 years . From 1953 to 1959 the Beagle was ranked No. 1 on the list of the American Kennel Club 's registered breeds ; in 2005 and 2006 it ranked 5th out of the 155 breeds registered . In the UK they are not quite so popular , placing 28th and 30th in the rankings of registrations with the Kennel Club in 2005 and 2006 respectively . In the United States the Beagle ranked 4th most popular breed in 2012 and 2013 , behind the Labrador Retriever ( # 1 ) , German Shepherd ( # 2 ) and Golden Retriever ( # 3 ) breeds . 
 = = Name = = 
 According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the first mention of the beagle by name in English literature dates from c . 1475 in " The Squire of Low Degree . The origin of the word " beagle " is uncertain , although it has been suggested that the word derives from the French <unk> ( meaning " open throat " from <unk> " open wide " and <unk> " mouth " ) or from an Old English , French , or the Gaelic word <unk> , meaning " little . " Other possibilities include the French <unk> ( meaning " to bellow " ) and the German <unk> ( meaning " to scold " ) . 
 It is not known why the black and tan Kerry Beagle , present in Ireland since Celtic times , has the beagle description , since at 22 to 24 inches ( 56 to 61 cm ) it is significantly taller than the modern day Beagle , and in earlier times was even larger . Some writers suggest that the Beagle 's scenting ability may have come from cross @-@ breeding earlier strains with the Kerry Beagle . Originally used for hunting stags , it is today used for hare and drag hunting . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The general appearance of the Beagle is very nice and resembles a miniature Foxhound , but the head is broader and the muzzle shorter , the expression completely different and the legs shorter in proportion to the body . They are generally between 13 and 16 inches ( 33 and 41 cm ) high at the withers and weigh between 18 and 35 lb ( 8 @.@ 2 and 15 @.@ 9 kg ) , with females being slightly smaller than males on average . 
 They have a smooth , somewhat domed skull with a medium @-@ length , square @-@ cut muzzle and a black ( or occasionally liver ) <unk> nose . The jaw is strong and the teeth scissor together with the upper teeth fitting perfectly over the lower teeth and both sets aligned square to the jaw . The eyes are large , hazel or brown , with a mild hound @-@ like pleading look . The large ears are long , soft and low @-@ set , turning towards the cheeks slightly and rounded at the tips . Beagles have a strong , medium @-@ length neck ( which is long enough for them to easily bend to the ground to pick up a scent ) , with little folding in the skin but some evidence of a dewlap ; a broad chest narrowing to a tapered abdomen and waist and a long , slightly curved tail ( known as the " stern " ) tipped with white . The white tip , known as the flag has been selectively bred for , as it allows the dog to be easily seen when its head is down following a scent . The tail does not curl over the back , but is held upright when the dog is active . The Beagle has a muscular body and a medium @-@ length , smooth , hard coat . The front legs are straight and carried under the body while the rear legs are muscular and well bent at the stifles . 
 The tricolored Beagle — white with large black areas and light brown shading — is the most common . <unk> Beagles occur in a number of shades , from the " Classic Tri " with a jet black saddle ( also known as " <unk> " ) , to the " Dark Tri " ( where faint brown markings are intermingled with more prominent black markings ) , to the " Faded Tri " ( where faint black markings are intermingled with more prominent brown markings ) . Some tricolored dogs have a broken pattern , sometimes referred to as pied . These dogs have mostly white coats with patches of black and brown hair . Tricolor Beagles are almost always born black and white . The white areas are typically set by eight weeks , but the black areas may fade to brown as the puppy matures . ( The brown may take between one and two years to fully develop . ) Some Beagles gradually change color during their lives , and may lose their black markings entirely . 
 Two @-@ color varieties always have a white base color with areas of the second color . Tan and white is the most common two @-@ color variety , but there is a wide range of other colors including lemon , a very light tan ; red , a reddish , almost orange , brown ; and liver , a darker brown , and black . Liver is not common and is not permitted in some standards ; it tends to occur with yellow eyes . <unk> or mottled varieties may be either white or black with different colored flecks ( ticking ) , such as the blue @-@ mottled or <unk> Beagle , which has spots that appear to be a midnight @-@ blue color , similar to the coloring of the <unk> Coonhound . Some tricolour Beagles also have ticking of various colors in their white areas . 
 = = Sense of smell = = 
 Alongside the Bloodhound and Basset Hound , the Beagle has one of the best developed senses of smell of any dog . In the 1950s , John Paul Scott and John Fuller began a 13 @-@ year study of canine behavior . As part of this research , they tested the scenting abilities of various breeds by putting a mouse in a one @-@ acre field and timing how long it took the dogs to find it . The Beagles found it in less than a minute , while Fox Terriers took 15 minutes and Scottish Terriers failed to find it at all . Beagles are better at ground @-@ scenting ( following a trail on the ground ) than they are at air @-@ scenting , and for this reason they have been excluded from most mountain rescue teams in favor of collies , which use sight in addition to air @-@ scenting and are more <unk> . The long ears and large lips of the Beagle probably assist in trapping the scents close to the nose . 
 = = Variations = = 
 = = = Breed varieties = = = 
 The American Kennel Club recognizes two separate varieties of Beagle : the 13 @-@ inch for hounds less than 13 inches ( 33 cm ) , and the 15 @-@ inch for those between 13 and 15 inches ( 33 and 38 cm ) . The Canadian Kennel Club recognizes a single type , with a height not exceeding 15 inches ( 38 cm ) . The Kennel Club ( UK ) and FCI affiliated clubs recognize a single type , with a height of between 13 and 16 inches ( 33 and 41 cm ) . 
 English and American varieties are sometimes mentioned . However , there is no official recognition from any Kennel Club for this distinction . Beagles fitting the American Kennel Club standard – which disallows animals over 15 inches ( 38 cm ) – are smaller on average than those fitting the Kennel Club standard which allows heights up to 16 inches ( 41 cm ) . 
 Pocket Beagles are sometimes advertised for sale but while the UK Kennel Club originally specified a standard for the Pocket Beagle in 1901 , the variety is not now recognized by any Kennel Club . A strain known as Patch Hounds was developed by Willet Randall and his family from 1896 specifically for their rabbit hunting ability . They trace their bloodline back to Field Champion Patch , but do not necessarily have a patchwork marking . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In the 1850s , Stonehenge recommended a cross between a Beagle and a Scottish Terrier as a retriever . He found the crossbreed to be a good worker , silent and obedient , but it had the drawback that it was small and could barely carry a hare . 
 More recently the trend has been for " designer dogs " and one of the most popular has been the Beagle / Pug cross known as a <unk> . Some puppies of this cross are less excitable than a Beagle and with a lower exercise requirement , similar to the Pug parent ; but many are highly excitable and require vigorous exercise . 
 = = Temperament = = 
 The Beagle has an even temper and gentle disposition . Described in several breed standards as " merry " , they are amiable and typically neither aggressive nor timid , although this depends on the individual . They enjoy company , and although they may initially be standoffish with strangers , they are easily won over . They make poor guard dogs for this reason , although their tendency to bark or howl when confronted with the unfamiliar makes them good watch dogs . In a 1985 study conducted by Ben and Lynette Hart , the Beagle was given the highest excitability rating , along with the Yorkshire Terrier , Cairn Terrier , Miniature Schnauzer , West Highland White Terrier , and Fox Terrier . 
 Beagles are intelligent but , as a result of being bred for the long chase , are single @-@ minded and determined , which can make them hard to train . They can be difficult to recall once they have picked up a scent , and are easily distracted by smells around them . They do not generally feature in obedience trials ; while they are alert , respond well to food @-@ reward training , and are eager to please , they are easily bored or distracted . They are ranked 72nd in Stanley Coren 's The Intelligence of Dogs , as Coren places them among the group with the lowest degree of working / obedience intelligence . Coren 's scale , however , does not assess understanding , independence , or creativity . 
 Beagles are excellent with children and this is one of the reasons they have become popular family pets , but they are pack animals , and are prone to separation anxiety , a condition which causes them to destroy things when left unattended . Not all Beagles will howl , but most will bark when confronted with strange situations , and some will bay ( also referred to as " speaking " , " giving tongue " , or " opening " ) when they catch the scent of potential quarry . They also generally get along well with other dogs . They are not too demanding with regard to exercise ; their inbred stamina means they do not easily tire when exercised , but they also do not need to be worked to exhaustion before they will rest . Regular exercise helps ward off the weight gain to which the breed is prone . 
 = = Health = = 
 The typical longevity of Beagles is 12 – 15 years , which is a common lifespan for dogs of their size . 
 Beagles may be prone to epilepsy , but this can often be controlled with medication . Hypothyroidism and a number of types of dwarfism occur in Beagles . Two conditions in particular are unique to the breed : " Funny Puppy " , in which the puppy is slow to develop and eventually develops weak legs , a crooked back and although normally healthy , is prone to a range of illnesses ; Hip dysplasia , common in Harriers and in some larger breeds , is rarely considered a problem in Beagles . Beagles are considered a <unk> breed , meaning that they are prone to types of disk diseases . 
 In rare cases , Beagles may develop immune mediated polygenic arthritis ( where the immune system attacks the joints ) even at a young age . The symptoms can sometimes be relieved by steroid treatments . Another rare disease in the breed is neonatal cerebellar cortical degeneration . Affected puppies are slow , have lower co @-@ ordination , fall more often and don 't have a normal gait . It has an estimated carrier rate of 5 % and affected rate of 0 @.@ 1 % . A genetic test is available . 
 Their long floppy ears can mean that the inner ear does not receive a substantial air flow or that moist air becomes trapped , and this can lead to ear infections . Beagles may also be affected by a range of eye problems ; two common ophthalmic conditions in Beagles are glaucoma and corneal dystrophy . " Cherry eye " , a prolapse of the gland of the third eyelid , and <unk> , a condition in which eyelashes grow into the eye causing irritation , sometimes exist ; both these conditions can be corrected with surgery . They can suffer from several types of retinal atrophy . Failure of the <unk> drainage system can cause dry eye or leakage of tears onto the face . 
 As field dogs they are prone to minor injuries such as cuts and sprains , and , if inactive , obesity is a common problem as they will eat whenever food is available and rely on their owners to regulate their weight . When working or running free they are also likely to pick up parasites such as fleas , ticks , harvest mites , and tapeworms , and irritants such as grass seeds can become trapped in their eyes , soft ears , or paws . 
 Beagles may exhibit a behaviour known as reverse sneezing , in which they sound as if they are choking or gasping for breath , but are actually drawing air in through the mouth and nose . The exact cause of this behaviour is not known , but it is not harmful to the dog . 
 = = Hunting = = 
 Beagles were developed primarily for hunting hare , an activity known as <unk> . They were seen as ideal hunting companions for the elderly who could follow on horseback without exerting themselves , for young hunters who could keep up with them on ponies , and for the poorer hunters who could not afford to maintain a stable of good hunting horses . Before the advent of the fashion for foxhunting in the 19th century , hunting was an all day event where the enjoyment was derived from the chase rather than the kill . In this setting the tiny Beagle was well matched to the hare , as unlike Harriers they would not quickly finish the hunt , but because of their excellent scent @-@ tracking skills and stamina they were almost guaranteed to eventually catch the hare . The Beagle packs would run closely together ( " so close that they might be covered with a sheet " ) which was useful in a long hunt , as it prevented stray dogs from obscuring the trail . In thick undergrowth they were also preferred to spaniels when hunting pheasant . 
 With the fashion for faster hunts , the Beagle fell out of favour for chasing hare , but was still employed for rabbit hunting . In Anecdotes of Dogs ( 1846 ) , Edward Jesse says : 
 In rabbit @-@ shooting , in gorse and thick cover , nothing can be more cheerful than the beagle . They also are easily heard over long distances and in thick cover . They have been called rabbit @-@ beagles from this employment , for which they are peculiarly qualified , especially those dogs which are somewhat wire @-@ haired . 
 In the United States they appear to have been employed chiefly for hunting rabbits from the earliest imports . Hunting hare with Beagles became popular again in Britain in the mid @-@ 19th century and continued until it was made illegal in Scotland by the Protection of Wild Mammals ( Scotland ) Act 2002 and in England and Wales by the Hunting Act 2004 . Under this legislation Beagles may still pursue rabbits with the landowner 's permission . Drag hunting is popular where hunting is no longer permitted or for those owners who do not wish to participate in hunting a live animal , but still wish to exercise their dog 's innate skills . 
 The traditional foot pack consists of up to 40 Beagles , marshaled by a Huntsman who directs the pack and who is assisted by a variable number of <unk> @-@ in whose job is to return straying hounds to the pack . The Master of the Hunt is in overall day @-@ to @-@ day charge of the pack , and may or may not take on the role of Huntsman on the day of the hunt . 
 As hunting with Beagles was seen as ideal for young people , many of the British public schools traditionally maintained Beagle packs . Protests were lodged against Eton 's use of Beagles for hunting as early as 1902 but the pack is still in existence today , and a pack used by Imperial College in Wye , Kent was stolen by the Animal Liberation Front in 2001 . School and university packs are still maintained by Eton , Marlborough , Wye , Radley , the Royal Agricultural University and Christ Church , Oxford . 
 In addition to organized <unk> , beagles have been used for hunting or flushing to guns ( often in pairs ) a wide range of game including snowshoe hare , cottontail rabbits , game birds , roe deer , red deer , bobcat , coyote , wild boar and foxes , and have even been recorded as being used to hunt stoat . In most of these cases , the Beagle is employed as a gun dog , flushing game for hunter 's guns . 
 = = Detection = = 
 Beagles are used as detection dogs in the Beagle Brigade of the United States Department of Agriculture . These dogs are used to detect food items in luggage being taken into the United States . After trialling several breeds , Beagles were chosen because they are relatively small and <unk> for people who are uncomfortable around dogs , easy to care for , intelligent and work well for rewards . They are also used for this purpose in a number of other countries including by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry in New Zealand , the Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service , and in Canada , Japan and the People 's Republic of China . Larger breeds are generally used for detection of explosives as this often involves climbing over luggage and on large conveyor belts , work for which the smaller Beagle is not suited . 
 = = Testing = = 
 Beagles are the dog breed most often used in animal testing , due to their size and passive nature . Beagles are used in a range of research procedures : fundamental biological research , applied human medicine , applied veterinary medicine , and protection of man , animals or the environment . Of the 8 @,@ 018 dogs used in testing in the UK in 2004 , 7 @,@ 799 were Beagles ( 97 @.@ 3 % ) . In the UK , the Animals ( Scientific Procedures ) Act 1986 gave special status to primates , equids , cats and dogs and in 2005 the Animal Procedures Committee ( set up by the act ) ruled that testing on mice was preferable , even though a greater number of individual animals were involved . In 2005 Beagles were involved in less than 0 @.@ 3 % of the total experiments on animals in the UK , but of the <unk> experiments performed on dogs <unk> involved Beagles ( 96 @.@ 6 % ) . Most dogs are bred specifically for this purpose , by companies such as Harlan . In the UK companies breeding animals for research must be licensed under the Animals ( Scientific Procedures ) Act . 
 Testing of cosmetic products on animals is banned in the member states of European Community , although France protested the ban and has made efforts to have it lifted . It is permitted in the United States but is not mandatory if safety can be ascertained by other methods , and the test species is not specified by the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) . When testing toxicity of food additives , food contaminants , and some drugs and chemicals the FDA uses Beagles and miniature pigs as surrogates for direct human testing . Minnesota was the first state to enact a Beagle freedom adoption law in 2014 , mandating that dogs and cats are allowed to be adopted once they have completed with research testing . 
 Anti @-@ vivisection groups have reported on abuse of animals inside testing facilities . In 1997 footage secretly filmed by a freelance journalist inside Huntingdon Life Sciences in the UK showed staff punching and screaming at Beagles . Consort Kennels , a UK @-@ based breeder of Beagles for testing , closed down in 1997 after pressure from animal rights groups . 
 = = Other roles = = 
 Although bred for hunting , Beagles are versatile and are nowadays employed for various other roles in detection , therapy , and as family pets . Beagles are used as sniffer dogs for termite detection in Australia , and have been mentioned as possible candidates for drug and explosive detection . Because of their gentle nature and unimposing build , they are also frequently used in pet therapy , visiting the sick and elderly in hospital . In June 2006 , a trained Beagle assistance dog was credited with saving the life of its owner after using her owner 's mobile phone to dial an emergency number . In the aftermath of the 2010 Haiti earthquake , a Beagle search and rescue dog with a Colombian rescue squad was credited with locating the owner of the Hôtel Montana , who was subsequently rescued after spending 100 hours buried in the rubble . Beagles were hired by New York City to help with <unk> detection , while the role of such dogs in this type of detection may have doubts . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Beagles have been featured across a wide range of media . References to the dog appear before the 19th century in works by such writers as William Shakespeare , John Webster , John Dryden , Thomas Tickell , Henry Fielding , and William Cowper , as well as in Alexander Pope 's translation of Homer 's Iliad . Beagles appeared in funny animal comic strips and animated cartoons from the 1950s with the Peanuts character Snoopy billed as " the world 's most famous Beagle " ; Walt Disney 's Beagle Boys ; Garfield 's friend and " chew dog " <unk> ; and <unk> Beagle , the constant companion of Hanna @-@ Barbera 's Grape Ape and Cartoon Network 's Courage the Cowardly Dog . They have appeared in numerous films , taking a central role in Underdog , Cats & Dogs and its sequel , and the title role in the adaptation of Phyllis Reynolds Naylor 's book Shiloh . They have played supporting roles in films including Audition , The Monster Squad , I Am Number Four , and The Royal Tenenbaums , and on television in Star Trek : Enterprise , EastEnders , The Wonder Years , and To the Manor Born , among others . Former US President Lyndon Baines Johnson had several Beagles , and caused an outcry when he picked up one of them by its ears during an official greeting on the White House lawn . The ship on which Charles Darwin made the voyage which provided much of the inspiration for On the Origin of Species was named HMS Beagle after the breed , and , in turn , lent its name to the ill @-@ fated British Martian lander Beagle 2 . A Canadian bred 15 inch female Beagle with the registered name of Gr Ch <unk> Lookin For Trouble and the pet name of " Miss P " won the 2015 Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show . 
 = John Knox = 
 John Knox ( c . 1513 – 24 November 1572 ) was a Scottish clergyman , theologian , and writer who was a leader of the Protestant Reformation and is considered the founder of the Presbyterian denomination in Scotland . He is believed to have been educated at the University of St Andrews and worked as a notary @-@ priest . Influenced by early church reformers such as George Wishart , he joined the movement to reform the Scottish church . He was caught up in the ecclesiastical and political events that involved the murder of Cardinal Beaton in 1546 and the intervention of the regent of Scotland Mary of Guise . He was taken prisoner by French forces the following year and exiled to England on his release in 1549 . 
 While in exile , Knox was licensed to work in the Church of England , where he rose in the ranks to serve King Edward VI of England as a royal chaplain . He exerted a reforming influence on the text of the Book of Common Prayer . In England he met and married his first wife , Margery Bowes . When Mary Tudor ascended the throne and re @-@ established Roman Catholicism , Knox was forced to resign his position and leave the country . Knox moved to Geneva and then to Frankfurt . In Geneva he met John Calvin , from whom he gained experience and knowledge of Reformed theology and Presbyterian polity . He created a new order of service , which was eventually adopted by the reformed church in Scotland . He left Geneva to head the English refugee church in Frankfurt but he was forced to leave over differences concerning the liturgy , thus ending his association with the Church of England . 
 On his return to Scotland he led the Protestant Reformation in Scotland , in partnership with the Scottish Protestant nobility . The movement may be seen as a revolution , since it led to the ousting of Mary of Guise , who governed the country in the name of her young daughter Mary , Queen of Scots . Knox helped write the new confession of faith and the ecclesiastical order for the newly created reformed church , the Kirk . He continued to serve as the religious leader of the Protestants throughout Mary 's reign . In several interviews with the Queen , Knox admonished her for supporting Catholic practices . When she was imprisoned for her alleged role in the murder of her husband Lord Darnley , and King James VI enthroned in her stead , he openly called for her execution . He continued to preach until his final days . 
 = = Early life , 1505 – 1546 = = 
 John Knox was born sometime between 1505 and 1515 in or near Haddington , the county town of East Lothian . His father , William Knox , was a merchant . All that is known of his mother is that her maiden name was Sinclair and that she died when John Knox was a child . Their eldest son , William , carried on his father 's business , which helped in Knox 's international communications . 
 Knox was probably educated at the grammar school in Haddington . In this time , the priesthood was the only path for those whose inclinations were academic rather than mercantile or agricultural . He proceeded to further studies at the University of St Andrews or possibly at the University of Glasgow . He studied under John Major , one of the greatest scholars of the time . 
 Knox first appears in public records as a priest and a notary in 1540 . He was still serving in these capacities as late as 1543 when he described himself as a " minister of the sacred altar in the diocese of St. Andrews , notary by apostolic authority " in a <unk> deed dated 27 March . Rather than taking up parochial duties in a parish , he became tutor to two sons of Hugh Douglas of Longniddry . He also taught the son of John Cockburn of Ormiston . Both of these lairds had embraced the new religious ideas of the Reformation . 
 = = Embracing the Protestant Reformation , 1546 – 1547 = = 
 Knox did not record when or how he was converted to the Protestant faith , but perhaps the key formative influences on Knox were Patrick Hamilton and George Wishart . Wishart was a reformer who had fled Scotland in 1538 to escape punishment for heresy . He first moved to England , where in Bristol he preached against the veneration of the Virgin Mary . He was forced to make a public recantation and was burned in effigy at the Church of St Nicholas as a sign of his abjuration . He then took refuge in Germany and Switzerland . While on the Continent , he translated the First Helvetic Confession into English . He returned to Scotland in 1544 , but the timing of his return was unfortunate . In December 1543 , James Hamilton , Duke of Châtellerault , the appointed regent for the infant Mary , Queen of Scots , had decided with the Queen Mother , Mary of Guise , and Cardinal David Beaton to persecute the Protestant sect that had taken root in Scotland . Wishart travelled throughout Scotland preaching in favour of the reformation and when he arrived in East Lothian , Knox became one of his closest associates . Knox acted as his bodyguard , bearing a two @-@ handed sword in order to defend him . In December 1545 , Wishart was seized on Cardinal Beaton 's orders by the Earl of Bothwell and taken to the Castle of St Andrews . Knox was present on the night of Wishart 's arrest and was prepared to follow him into captivity , but Wishart persuaded him against this course saying , " Nay , return to your bairns [ children ] and God bless you . One is sufficient for a sacrifice . " Wishart was subsequently prosecuted by Beaton 's Public Accuser of Heretics , Archdeacon John Lauder . On 1 March 1546 , he was burnt at the stake in the presence of Cardinal Beaton . 
 Knox had avoided being arrested by Lord Bothwell through Wishart 's advice to return to tutoring . He took shelter with Douglas in Longniddry . Several months later he was still in charge of the pupils , the sons of Douglas and Cockburn , who wearied of moving from place to place while being pursued . He toyed with the idea of fleeing to Germany and taking his pupils with him . While Knox remained a fugitive , Cardinal Beaton was murdered on 29 May 1546 , within his residence , the Castle of St Andrews , by a gang of five persons in revenge for Wishart 's execution . The assassins seized the castle and eventually their families and friends took refuge with them , about a hundred and fifty men in all . Among their friends was Henry Balnaves , a former secretary of state in the government , who negotiated with England for the financial support of the rebels . Douglas and Cockburn suggested to Knox to take their sons to the relative safety of the castle to continue their instruction in reformed doctrine . Knox arrived at the castle on 10 April 1547 . 
 Knox 's powers as a preacher came to the attention of the chaplain of the garrison , John Rough . While Rough was preaching in the parish church on the Protestant principle of the popular election of a pastor , he proposed Knox to the congregation for that office . Knox did not relish the idea . According to his own account , he burst into tears and fled to his room . Within a week , however , he was giving his first sermon to a congregation that included his old teacher , John Major . He expounded on the seventh chapter of the Book of Daniel , comparing the Pope with the Antichrist . His sermon was marked by his consideration of the Bible as his sole authority and the doctrine of justification by faith alone , two elements that would remain in his thoughts throughout the rest of his life . A few days later , a debate was staged that allowed him to lay down additional theses including the rejection of the Mass , Purgatory , and prayers for the dead . 
 = = Confinement in the French galleys , 1547 – 1549 = = 
 John Knox 's chaplaincy of the castle garrison was not to last long . While Hamilton was willing to negotiate with England to stop their support of the rebels and bring the castle back under his control , Mary of Guise decided that it could only be taken by force and requested the king of France , Henry II to intervene . On 29 June 1547 , 21 French galleys approached St Andrews under the command of Leone Strozzi , prior of Capua . The French besieged the castle and forced the surrender of the garrison on 31 July . The Protestant nobles and others , including Knox , were taken prisoner and forced to row in the French galleys . The galley slaves were chained to benches and rowed throughout the day without a change of posture while an officer watched over them with a whip in hand . They sailed to France and navigated up the Seine to Rouen . The nobles , some of whom would have an impact later in Knox 's life such as William Kirkcaldy and Henry Balnaves , were sent to various castle @-@ prisons in France . Knox and the other galley slaves continued to Nantes and stayed on the Loire throughout the winter . They were threatened with torture if they did not give proper signs of reverence when mass was performed on the ship . Knox recounted an incident in which one Scot — possibly himself , as he tended to narrate personal anecdotes in the third person — was required to show devotion to a picture of the Virgin Mary . The prisoner was told to give it a kiss of veneration . He refused and when the picture was pushed up to his face , the prisoner seized the picture and threw it into the sea , saying , " Let our Lady now save herself : she is light enough : let her learn to swim . " After that , according to Knox , the Scottish prisoners were no longer forced to perform such devotions . 
 In summer 1548 , the galleys returned to Scotland to scout for English ships . Knox 's health was now at its lowest point due to the severity of his confinement . He was ill with a fever and others on the ship were afraid for his life . Even in this state , Knox recalled , his mind remained sharp and he comforted his fellow prisoners with hopes of release . While the ships were lying offshore between St Andrews and Dundee , the spires of the parish church where he preached appeared in view . James Balfour , a fellow prisoner , asked Knox whether he recognised the landmark . He replied that he knew it well , recognising the steeple of the place where he first preached and he declared that he would not die until he had preached there again . 
 In February 1549 , after spending a total of 19 months in the galley @-@ prison , Knox was released . It is uncertain how he obtained his liberty . Later in the year , Henry II arranged with Edward VI of England the release of all remaining Castilian prisoners . 
 = = Exile in England , 1549 – 1554 = = 
 On his release , Knox took refuge in England . The Reformation in England was a less radical movement than its Continental counterparts , but there was a definite breach with Rome . The Archbishop of Canterbury , Thomas Cranmer , and the regent of King Edward VI , the Duke of Somerset , were decidedly Protestant @-@ minded . However , much work remained to bring reformed ideas to the clergy and to the people . On 7 April 1549 , Knox was licensed to work in the Church of England . His first commission was in Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed . He was obliged to use the recently released Book of Common Prayer , which maintained the structure of the Sarum Rite while adapting the content to the doctrine of the reformed Church of England . Knox , however , modified its use to accord with the doctrinal emphases of the Continental reformers . In the pulpit he preached Protestant doctrines with great effect as his congregation grew . 
 In England , Knox met his wife , Margery Bowes ( died <unk> ) . Her father , Richard Bowes ( <unk> ) , was a descendant of an old Durham family and her mother , Elizabeth Aske , was an heiress of a Yorkshire family , the <unk> of Richmondshire . Elizabeth Bowes presumably met Knox when he was employed in Berwick . Several letters reveal a close friendship between them . It is not recorded when Knox married Margery Bowes . Knox attempted to obtain the consent of the Bowes family , but her father and her brother Robert Bowes were opposed to the marriage . 
 Towards the end of 1550 , Knox was appointed a preacher of St Nicholas ' Church in Newcastle upon Tyne . The following year he was appointed one of the six royal chaplains serving the King . On 16 October 1551 , John Dudley , 1st Duke of Northumberland , overthrew the Duke of Somerset to become the new regent of the young King . Knox condemned the coup d 'état in a sermon on All Saints Day . When Dudley visited Newcastle and listened to his preaching in June 1552 , he had mixed feelings about the fire @-@ brand preacher , but he saw Knox as a potential asset . Knox was asked to come to London to preach before the Court . In his first sermon , he advocated a change for the second edition of the Book of Common Prayer . The liturgy required worshippers to kneel during communion . Knox and the other chaplains considered this to be idolatry . It triggered a debate where Archbishop Cranmer was called upon to defend the practice . The end result was a compromise in which the famous Black Rubric , which declared that no adoration is intended while kneeling , was included in the second edition . 
 Soon afterwards , Dudley , who saw Knox as a useful political tool , offered him the bishopric of Rochester . Knox refused , and he returned to Newcastle . On 2 February 1553 Cranmer was ordered to appoint Knox as vicar of <unk> Church in London placing him under the authority of the Bishop of London , Nicholas Ridley . Knox returned to London in order to deliver a sermon before the King and the Court during Lent and he again refused to take the assigned post . Knox was then told to preach in Buckinghamshire and he remained there until Edward 's death on 6 July . Edward 's successor , Mary Tudor , re @-@ established Roman Catholicism in England and restored the Mass in all the churches . With the country no longer safe for Protestant preachers , Knox left for the Continent in January 1554 on the advice of friends . On the eve of his flight , he wrote : 
 Sometime I have thought that impossible it had been , so to have removed my affection from the realm of Scotland , that any realm or nation could have been equal dear to me . But God I take to record in my conscience , that the troubles present ( and appearing to be ) in the realm of England are double more <unk> unto my heart than ever were the troubles of Scotland . 
 = = From Geneva to Frankfurt and Scotland , 1554 – 1556 = = 
 Knox disembarked in Dieppe , France , and continued to Geneva , where John Calvin had established his authority . When Knox arrived Calvin was in a difficult position . He had recently prosecuted the execution of the scholar Michael Servetus for heresy . Knox asked Calvin four difficult political questions : whether a minor could rule by divine right , whether a female could rule and transfer sovereignty to her husband , whether people should obey ungodly or idolatrous rulers , and what party godly persons should follow if they resisted an idolatrous ruler . Calvin gave cautious replies and referred him to the Swiss reformer Heinrich Bullinger in Zürich . Bullinger 's responses were equally cautious ; but Knox had already made up his mind . On 20 July 1554 , he published a pamphlet attacking Mary Tudor and the bishops who had brought her to the throne . He also attacked the Holy Roman Emperor , Charles V , calling him " no less enemy to Christ than was Nero " . 
 In a letter dated 24 September 1554 , Knox received an invitation from a congregation of English exiles in Frankfurt to become one of their ministers . He accepted the call with Calvin 's blessing . But no sooner had he arrived than he found himself in a conflict . The first set of refugees to arrive in Frankfurt had subscribed to a reformed liturgy and used a modified version of the Book of Common Prayer . More recently arrived refugees , however , including Edmund Grindal , the future Archbishop of Canterbury , favoured a stricter application of the book . When Knox and a supporting colleague , William Whittingham , wrote to Calvin for advice , they were told to avoid contention . Knox therefore agreed on a temporary order of service based on a compromise between the two sides . This delicate balance was disturbed when a new batch of refugees arrived that included Richard Cox , one of the principal authors of the Book of Common Prayer . Cox brought Knox 's pamphlet attacking the emperor to the attention of the Frankfurt authorities , who advised that Knox leave . His departure from Frankfurt on 26 March 1555 marked his final breach with the Church of England . 
 After his return to Geneva , Knox was chosen to be the minister at a new place of worship petitioned from Calvin . In the meantime , Elizabeth Bowes wrote to Knox , asking him to return to Margery in Scotland , which he did at the end of August . Despite initial doubts about the state of the Reformation in Scotland , Knox found the country significantly changed since he was carried off in the galley in 1547 . When he toured various parts of Scotland preaching the reformed doctrines and liturgy , he was welcomed by many of the nobility including two future regents of Scotland , the Earl of Moray and the Earl of Mar. 
 Though the Queen Regent , Mary of Guise , made no move to act against Knox , his activities caused concern among the church authorities . The bishops of Scotland viewed him as a threat to their authority and summoned him to appear in Edinburgh on 15 May 1556 . He was accompanied to the trial by so many influential persons that the bishops decided to call the hearing off . Knox was now free to preach openly in Edinburgh . William Keith , the Earl Marischal , was impressed and urged Knox to write to the Queen Regent . Knox 's unusually respectful letter urged her to support the Reformation and overthrow the church hierarchy . Queen Mary took the letter as a joke and ignored it . 
 = = Return to Geneva , 1556 – 1559 = = 
 Shortly after Knox sent the letter to the Queen Regent , he suddenly announced that he felt his duty was to return to Geneva . In the previous year on 1 November 1555 , the congregation in Geneva had elected Knox as their minister and he decided to take up the post . He wrote a final letter of advice to his supporters and left Scotland with his wife and mother @-@ in @-@ law . He arrived in Geneva on 13 September 1556 . 
 For the next two years , he lived a happy life in Geneva . He recommended Geneva to his friends in England as the best place of asylum for Protestants . In one letter he wrote : 
 I neither fear nor <unk> to say , is the most perfect school of Christ that ever was in the earth since the days of the apostles . In other places I confess Christ to be truly preached ; but manners and religion so sincerely reformed , I have not yet seen in any other place ... 
 Knox led a busy life in Geneva . He preached three sermons a week , each lasting well over two hours . The services used a liturgy that was derived by Knox and other ministers from Calvin 's <unk> des Prières <unk> . The church in which he preached , the Église de Notre Dame la Neuve — now known as the <unk> de Calvin — had been granted by the municipal authorities , at Calvin 's request , for the use of the English and Italian congregations . Knox 's two sons , Nathaniel and Eleazar , were born in Geneva , with Whittingham and Myles Coverdale their respective godfathers . 
 In the summer of 1558 , Knox published his best known pamphlet , The first blast of the trumpet against the monstruous regiment of women . In calling the " regiment " or rule of women " monstruous " , he meant that it was " unnatural " . The pamphlet has been called a classic of misogyny . Knox states that his purpose was to demonstrate " how abominable before God is the Empire or Rule of a wicked woman , yea , of a <unk> and bastard " . The women rulers that Knox had in mind were Queen Mary I of England and Mary of Guise , the Dowager Queen of Scotland and regent on behalf of her daughter , Mary , Queen of Scots . Knox 's prejudices against women were not unusual in his day ; however , even he was aware that the pamphlet was dangerously seditious . He therefore published it anonymously and did not tell Calvin , who denied knowledge of it until a year after its publication , that he had written it . In England , the pamphlet was officially condemned by royal proclamation . The impact of the document was complicated later that year , when Elizabeth Tudor became Queen of England . Although Knox had not targeted Elizabeth , he had deeply offended her , and she never forgave him . 
 With a Protestant on the throne , the English refugees in Geneva prepared to return home . Knox himself decided to return to Scotland . Before his departure , various honours were conferred on him , including the freedom of the city of Geneva . Knox left in January 1559 , but he did not arrive in Scotland until 2 May 1559 , owing to Elizabeth 's refusal to issue him a passport through England . 
 = = Revolution and end of the regency , 1559 – 1560 = = 
 Two days after Knox arrived in Edinburgh , he proceeded to Dundee where a large number of Protestant sympathisers had gathered . Knox was declared an outlaw , and the Queen Regent summoned the Protestants to Stirling . Fearing the possibility of a summary trial and execution , the Protestants proceeded instead to Perth , a walled town that could be defended in case of a siege . At the church of St John the Baptist , Knox preached a fiery sermon and a small incident precipitated into a riot . A mob poured into the church and it was soon gutted . The mob then attacked two friaries in the town , looting their gold and silver and smashing images . Mary of Guise gathered those nobles loyal to her and a small French army . She dispatched the Earl of Argyll and Lord Moray to offer terms and avert a war . She promised not to send any French troops into Perth if the Protestants evacuated the town . The Protestants agreed , but when the Queen Regent entered Perth , she garrisoned it with Scottish soldiers on the French pay roll . This was seen as treacherous by Lord Argyll and Lord Moray , who both switched sides and joined Knox , who now based himself in St Andrews . Knox 's return to St Andrews fulfilled the prophecy he made in the galleys that he would one day preach again in its church . When he did give a sermon , the effect was the same as in Perth . The people engaged in vandalism and looting . 
 With Protestant reinforcements arriving from neighbouring counties , the Queen Regent retreated to Dunbar . By now , the mob fury had spilled over central Scotland . Her own troops were on the verge of mutiny . On 30 June , the Protestant Lords of the Congregation occupied Edinburgh , though they were only able to hold it for a month . But even before their arrival , the mob had already sacked the churches and the friaries . On 1 July , Knox preached from the pulpit of St Giles ' , the most influential in the capital . The Lords of the Congregation negotiated their withdrawal from Edinburgh by the Articles of Leith signed 25 July 1559 , and Mary of Guise promised freedom of conscience . 
 Knox knew that the Queen Regent would ask for help from France . So he negotiated by letter under the assumed name John Sinclair with William Cecil , Elizabeth 's chief adviser , for English support . Knox sailed secretly to Lindisfarne , off the northeast coast of England at the end of July , to meet James Croft and Sir Henry Percy at Berwick upon Tweed . Knox was indiscreet and news of his mission soon reached Mary of Guise . He returned to Edinburgh telling Croft he had to return to his flock , and suggested that Henry Balnaves should go to Cecil . 
 When additional French troops arrived in Leith , Edinburgh 's seaport , the Protestants responded by retaking Edinburgh . This time , on 24 October 1559 , the Scottish nobility formally deposed Mary of Guise from the regency . Her secretary , William Maitland of Lethington , defected to the Protestant side , bringing his administrative skills . From then on , Maitland took over the political tasks , freeing Knox for the role of religious leader . For the final stage of the revolution , Maitland appealed to Scottish patriotism to fight French domination . Following the Treaty of Berwick , support from England finally arrived and by the end of March , a significant English army joined the Scottish Protestant forces . The sudden death of Mary of Guise in Edinburgh Castle on 10 June 1560 paved the way for an end to hostilities , the signing of the Treaty of Edinburgh , and the withdrawal of French and English troops from Scotland . On 19 July , Knox held a National Thanksgiving Service at St Giles ' . 
 = = Reformation in Scotland , 1560 – 1561 = = 
 On 1 August , the Scottish Parliament met to settle religious issues . Knox and five other ministers were called upon to draw up a new confession of faith . Within four days , the Scots Confession was presented to Parliament , voted upon , and approved . A week later , the Parliament passed three acts in one day : the first abolished the jurisdiction of the Pope in Scotland , the second condemned all doctrine and practice contrary to the reformed faith , and the third forbade the celebration of Mass in Scotland . Before the dissolution of Parliament , Knox and the other ministers were given the task of organising the newly reformed church or the Kirk . They would work for several months on the Book of Discipline , the document describing the organisation of the new church . During this period , in December 1560 , Knox 's wife , Margery , died , leaving Knox to care for their two sons , aged three and a half and two years old . John Calvin , who had lost his own wife in 1549 , wrote a letter of condolence . 
 Parliament reconvened on 15 January 1561 to consider the Book of Discipline . The Kirk was to be run on democratic lines . Each congregation was free to choose or reject its own pastor , but once he was chosen he could not be fired . Each parish was to be self @-@ supporting , as far as possible . The bishops were replaced by ten to twelve " superintendents " . The plan included a system of national education based on universality as a fundamental principle . Certain areas of law were placed under ecclesiastical authority . The Parliament did not approve the plan , however , mainly for reasons of finance . The Kirk was to be financed out of the patrimony of the Roman Catholic Church in Scotland . Much of this was now in the hands of the nobles , who were reluctant to give up their possessions . A final decision on the plan was delayed because of the impending return of Mary , Queen of Scots . 
 = = Knox and Queen Mary , 1561 – 1564 = = 
 On 19 August 1561 , cannons were fired in Leith to announce Queen Mary 's arrival in Scotland . When she attended Mass being celebrated in the royal chapel at Holyrood Palace five days later , this prompted a protest in which one of her servants was jostled . The next day she issued a proclamation that there would be no alteration in the current state of religion and that her servants should not be molested or troubled . Many nobles accepted this , but not Knox . The following Sunday , he protested from the pulpit of St Giles ' . As a result , just two weeks after her return , Mary summoned Knox . She accused him of inciting a rebellion against her mother and of writing a book against her own authority . Knox answered that as long as her subjects found her rule convenient , he was willing to accept her governance , noting that Paul the Apostle had been willing to live under Nero 's rule . Mary noted , however , that he had written against the principle of female rule itself . He responded that she should not to be troubled by what had never harmed her . When Mary asked him whether subjects had a right to resist their ruler , he replied that if monarchs exceeded their lawful limits , they might be resisted , even by force . 
 On 13 December 1562 , Mary sent for Knox again after he gave a sermon denouncing certain celebrations which Knox had interpreted as rejoicing at the expense of the Reformation . She charged that Knox spoke irreverently of the Queen in order to make her appear contemptible to her subjects . After Knox gave an explanation of the sermon , Mary stated that she did not blame Knox for the differences of opinion and asked that in the future he come to her directly if he heard anything about her that he disliked . Despite her friendly gesture , Knox replied that he would continue to voice his convictions in his sermons and would not wait upon her . 
 During Easter in 1563 , some priests in Ayrshire celebrated Mass , thus defying the law . Some Protestants tried to enforce the law themselves by apprehending these priests . This prompted Mary to summon Knox for the third time . She asked Knox to use his influence to promote religious toleration . He defended their actions and noted she was bound to uphold the laws and if she did not , others would . Mary surprised Knox by agreeing that the priests would be brought to justice . 
 The most dramatic interview between Mary and Knox took place on 24 June 1563 . Mary summoned Knox to Holyrood after hearing that he had been preaching against her proposed marriage to Don Carlos , the son of Philip II of Spain . Mary began by scolding Knox , then she burst into tears . " What have ye to do with my marriage ? " she asked , and " What are ye within this commonwealth ? " " A subject born within the same , Madam , " Knox replied . He noted that though he was not of noble birth , he had the same duty as any subject to warn of dangers to the realm . When Mary started to cry again , he said , " Madam , in God 's presence I speak : I never delighted in the weeping of any of God 's creatures ; yea I can scarcely well abide the tears of my own boys whom my own hand corrects , much less can I rejoice in your Majesty 's weeping . " He added that he would rather endure her tears , however , than remain silent and " betray my Commonwealth " . At this , Mary ordered him out of the room . 
 Knox 's final encounter with Mary was prompted by an incident at Holyrood . While Mary was absent from Edinburgh on her summer progress in 1563 , a crowd forced its way into her private chapel as Mass was being celebrated . During the altercation , the priest 's life was threatened . As a result , two of the ringleaders , burgesses of Edinburgh , were scheduled for trial on 24 October 1563 . In order to defend these men , Knox sent out letters calling the nobles to convene . Mary obtained one of these letters and asked her advisors if this was not a treasonable act . Stewart and Maitland , wanting to keep good relations with both the Kirk and the Queen , asked Knox to admit he was wrong and to settle the matter quietly . Knox refused and he defended himself in front of Mary and the Privy Council . He argued that he had called a legal , not an illegal , assembly as part of his duties as a minister of the Kirk . After he left , the councillors voted not to charge him with treason . 
 = = Final years in Edinburgh , 1564 – 1572 = = 
 On 26 March 1564 Knox stirred controversy again , when he married Margaret Stewart , the daughter of an old friend , Andrew Stewart , 2nd Lord <unk> , a member of the Stuart family and a distant relative of the Queen , Mary Stuart . The marriage was unusual because he was a widower of fifty , while the bride was only seventeen . Very few details are known of their domestic life . They had three daughters , Martha , Margaret , and Elizabeth . 
 When the General Assembly convened in June 1564 , an argument broke out between Knox and Maitland over the authority of the civil government . Maitland told Knox to refrain from stirring up emotions over Mary 's insistence on having mass celebrated and he quoted from Martin Luther and John Calvin about obedience to earthly rulers . Knox retorted that the Bible notes that Israel was punished when it followed an unfaithful king and that the Continental reformers were refuting arguments made by the Anabaptists who rejected all forms of government . The debate revealed his waning influence on political events as the nobility continued to support Mary . 
 On 29 July 1565 when Mary married Henry Stuart , Lord Darnley , some of the Protestant nobles , including James Stewart , 1st Earl of Moray , rose up in rebellion . Knox revealed his own objection while preaching in the presence of the new King Consort on 19 August 1565 . He made passing allusions on ungodly rulers which caused Darnley to walk out . Knox was summoned and prohibited from preaching while the court was in Edinburgh . 
 On 9 March 1566 , Mary 's secretary , David Rizzio , was murdered by conspirators loyal to Darnley . Mary escaped from Edinburgh to Dunbar and by 18 March returned with a formidable force . Knox fled to Kyle in Ayrshire , where he completed the major part of his magnum opus , History of the Reformation in Scotland . When he returned to Edinburgh , he found the Protestant nobles divided over what to do with Mary . Lord Darnley had been murdered and the Queen almost immediately married the chief suspect , the Earl of Bothwell . The indictment of murder thus upon her , she had been forced to abdicate and was imprisoned in Loch Leven Castle . Lord Moray had become the regent of King James VI . Other old friends of Knox 's , Lord Argyll and William Kirkcaldy , stood by Mary . On 29 July 1567 , Knox preached James VI 's coronation sermon at the church in Stirling . During this period Knox thundered against her in his sermons , even to the point of calling for her death . However , Mary 's life was spared , and she escaped on 2 May 1568 . 
 The fighting in Scotland continued as a civil war . Lord Moray was assassinated on 23 January 1570 . The regent who succeeded him , the Earl of Lennox , was also a victim of violence . On 30 April 1571 , the controller of Edinburgh Castle , Kirkcaldy of Grange , ordered all enemies of the Queen to leave the city . But for Knox , his former friend and fellow galley @-@ slave , he made an exception . If Knox did not leave , he could stay in Edinburgh , but only if he remained captive in the castle . Knox chose to leave , and on 5 May he left for St Andrews . He continued to preach , spoke to students , and worked on his History . At the end of July 1572 , after a truce was called , he returned to Edinburgh . Although by this time exceedingly feeble and his voice faint , he continued to preach at St Giles ' . 
 After inducting his successor , Lawson of Aberdeen , as minister of St Giles ' on 9 November , Knox returned to his home for the last time . With his friends and some of the greatest Scottish nobles around him , he asked for the Bible to be read aloud . On his last day , 24 November 1572 , his young wife read from Paul 's first letter to the Corinthians . A testimony to Knox was pronounced at his grave in the churchyard of St Giles ' by James Douglas , 4th Earl of Morton and newly elected regent of Scotland : " Here lies one who never feared any flesh " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his will , Knox claimed : " None have I corrupted , none have I defrauded ; merchandise have I not made . " The paltry sum of money Knox bequeathed to his family , which would have left them in dire poverty , showed that he had not profited from his work in the Kirk . The regent , Lord Morton , asked the General Assembly to continue paying his stipend to his widow for one year after his death , and the regent ensured that Knox 's dependents were decently supported . 
 Knox was survived by his five children and his second wife . Nathaniel and Eleazar , his two sons by his first wife , attended St John 's College , Cambridge . Nathaniel became a Fellow of St John 's but died early in 1580 . Eleazar was ordained into the Church of England and served in the parish of Clacton Magna . He also died young , and was buried in the chapel of St John 's College in 1591 . Knox 's second wife , Margaret Stewart , got remarried to Andrew Ker , one of those involved in the murder of David Rizzio . Knox 's three daughters also married : Martha to Alexander Fairlie ; Margaret to Zachary Pont , son of Robert Pont and brother of Timothy Pont ; and Elizabeth to John Welsh , a minister of the Kirk . 
 Knox 's death was barely noticed at the time . Although his funeral was attended by the nobles of Scotland , no major politician or diplomat mentioned his death in their letters that survive . Mary , Queen of Scots made only two brief references to him in her letters . However , what the rulers feared were Knox 's ideas more than Knox himself . He was a ruthless and successful revolutionary and it was this revolutionary philosophy that had a great impact on the English Puritans . Despite his strictness and dogmatism , he has also been described by partisans as contributing to the struggle for genuine human freedom , by teaching a duty to oppose unjust government in order to bring about moral and spiritual change . 
 Knox was notable not so much for the overthrow of Roman Catholicism in Scotland , but for assuring the replacement of the established Christian religion with Presbyterianism rather than Anglicanism . It was thanks to Knox that the Presbyterian polity was established , though it took 120 years following his death for this to be achieved in 1689 . Meanwhile , he accepted the status quo and was happy to see his friends appointed bishops and archbishops , even preaching at the inauguration of the Protestant Archbishop of St Andrews John Douglas in 1571 . In that regard , Knox is considered the notional founder of the Presbyterian denomination , whose members number millions worldwide . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Selected works = = 
 An Epistle to the Congregation of the Castle of St Andrews ; with a Brief Summary of Balnaves on Justification by Faith ( 1548 ) 
 A Vindication of the Doctrine that the Sacrifice of the Mass is Idolatry ( 1550 ) 
 A Godly Letter of Warning or Admonition to the Faithful in London , Newcastle , and Berwick ( 1554 ) 
 Certain Questions Concerning Obedience to Lawful Magistrates with Answers by Henry Bullinger ( 1554 ) 
 A Faithful Admonition to the Professors of God 's Truth in England ( 1554 ) 
 A Narrative of the Proceedings and Troubles of the English Congregation at Frankfurt on the Maine ( 1554 – 1555 ) 
 A Letter to the Queen Dowager , Regent of Scotland ( 1556 ) 
 A Letter of Wholesome Counsel Addressed to his Brethren in Scotland ( 1556 ) 
 The Form of Prayers and <unk> of the Sacraments Used in the English Congregation at Geneva ( 1556 ) 
 The first blast of the trumpet against the monstruous regiment of women ( 1558 ) 
 A Letter to the Queen Dowager , Regent of Scotland : Augmented and Explained by the Author ( 1558 ) 
 The Appellation from the Sentence Pronounced by the Bishops and Clergy : Addressed to the Nobility and Estates of Scotland ( 1558 ) 
 A Letter Addressed to the Commonalty of Scotland ( 1558 ) 
 On Predestination in Answer to the <unk> by an Anabaptist ( 1560 ) 
 The History of the Reformation in Scotland ( 1586 – 1587 ) 
 = Samuel Escue Tillman = 
 Samuel Escue Tillman ( October 3 , 1847 – June 24 , 1942 ) was an astronomer , engineer , military educator , and career officer in the United States Army who spent 30 years teaching at the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York . In addition to writing for periodicals on a wide range of subjects and authoring several influential textbooks on chemistry and geology , in 1917 Tillman was recalled from previous mandatory retirement to serve as superintendent of the United States Military Academy for the duration of conflict which became known as World War I. 
 = = Early life = = 
 Samuel Tillman was born in Bedford County , Tennessee , near modern Shelbyville on October 3 , 1847 , one of several sons of Lewis Tillman and his wife Mary C. Davidson Tillman . The younger Tillman and his brothers were raised on the family plantation in wartime Tennessee during much of the American Civil War . Tillman left the farm in 1864 to attend Miami University in Oxford , Ohio , but left after a year to accept an at @-@ large appointment to the United States Military Academy in July , 1865 , months after the end of the rebellion . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Tillman proved an excellent cadet , graduating 3rd out of 39 in the USMA graduating class of 1869 . Tillman spent fifteen months on the frontier at Fort Riley , Kansas , then returned to the academy for a period as assistant professor of mathematics . The following years would see Tillman alternating tours between teaching assignments at the academy and surveying the last unexplored portions of the American West . In addition to involvement in expeditions to explore and map parts of the western states of Arizona , California , Idaho , Montana , Nevada , New Mexico , and Utah , Tillman was detailed for a year as assistant astronomer on the national expedition to Northern Tasmania observe the Transit of Venus . In late 1878 , Tillman became the sixtieth of the founding members of Washington , D.C. ' s Cosmos Club , but resigned in 1881 , after he was given permanent assignment at West Point as professor of chemistry , mineralogy , and geology . 
 Lieutenant Tillman sat on the board of inquiry concerning the alleged assault by cadets on Johnson Chesnut Whittaker . As full professor Tillman was given responsibility for redesigning the physical science curriculum at the academy ; U.S. Army Adjutant General Richard C. Drum ordered Tillman and fellow academy instructor George L. Andrews to visit Harvard , Yale , and other American institutions of higher learning to investigate new educational technologies in order to incorporate them into the curriculum . 
 The next thirty years of Tillman 's life were devoted to writing and teaching at the academy . He wrote for popular periodicals like Popular Science and Cosmopolitan and literary journals like American Monthly Review of Reviews . Tillman authored several science textbooks for use by academy instructors , notably the physics work Elementary Lessons in Heat ( 1889 ) , Descriptive General Chemistry ( 1897 ) , and A text @-@ book of Important Minerals and Rocks ( 1900 ) . He was responsible for the academy 's mineralogical and geological cabinet . Tillman also wrote a series of memoirs which have been featured in the works of Miami University historian Dwight L. Smith . 
 Toward the end of his career , Tillman was presented with an honorary degree from Yale University in 1906 . In 1911 , after 44 years of active U.S. Army service in the classroom and field , Tillman was retired . He spent some time in Italy , leaving at the outbreak of World War I ; Tillman settled in Princeton , New Jersey , continuing to write , presenting A Review of West Point 's History before the New York Historical Society in October , 1915 . 
 In early 1917 , the United States Army was preparing for its involvement in the war raging in Europe , and all academy instructors who could be detailed were assigned to field commands . This left an understrength USMA teaching staff not only doing " double duty , " but also teaching in officer training schools during the summer . When Colonel Tillman was recalled from retirement to serve as USMA superintendent in June , 1917 , the cadet class of 1917 had already graduated two months early and been assigned to wartime posts . The USMA class of 1918 graduated in the Autumn of 1917 , the classes of 1919 and 1920 graduated in June 1918 , and the cadet class of 1921 were graduated before the Armistice was signed . " On November 2 , 1918 , the Corps of Cadets consisted of members of the Fourth Class only . " Tillman had seen the graduation of an entire corps of cadets before he was again retired , this time with promotion to Brigadier General and the Distinguished Service Medal for his wartime service . While Superintendent of West Point , Tillman refused repeated requests to add military aviation to the curriculum . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Samuel Escue Tillman died June 24 , 1942 at the home of his daughter , Katherine Tillman Martin , in Southampton , New York and was buried at West Point Cemetery . According to his obituary , he was survived by one brother , A.H. Tillman , who served for a time as United States district attorney in Washington D.C .. Four brothers had preceded him in death . 
 In 1885 , when Henry <unk> Allen was exploring the Copper River in the new U.S. territory of Alaska , he named a discovered peak after Tillman , his academy professor , but the discovery proved to be one major error in the survey , Allen mistaking either Mount Wrangell or Mount Sanford for the non @-@ existent Mount Tillman . 
 In 2008 , Kent Biffle of the Dallas Morning News reported receiving newspaper clippings from a local lawyer and historian on the subject of UFO sightings in Stephenville , Texas . Apparently in 1897 , widespread newspaper reports of a cigar @-@ shaped flying object started to circulate in the Midwest and Southwest . Responding to sightings previously reported in the Morning News , on April 17 , 1897 , one respected Erath County farmer , C.L. McIlhany discovered such a craft had landed on his property , and reported two human operators , a pilot and an engineer , who gave their names as " S.E. Tilman " and " A.E. <unk> . " The two operators performed minor repairs on their electrically powered lighter @-@ than @-@ air craft , then again flew away . 
 = = Selected works by Tillman = = 
 Tillman , Samuel Escue ( 1990 ) . Smith , Dwight La Vern , ed . The Kansas Frontier , 1869 @-@ 1870 : Lt. Samuel Tillman 's First Tour of Duty . Kansas State Historical Society . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 Tillman , Samuel ( May 21 , 1878 ) . Wheeler , George W. , ed . Annual report upon the geographical explorations and surveys west of the one hundredth meridian ... Geographical Surveys West of the 100th Meridian . Washington , D.C. : Government Printing Office. p . 107 . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 Tillman , Samuel Escue ( 1892 ) [ 1889 ] . Elementary Lessons in Heat ( 2 ed . ) . Philadelphia , Pennsylvania : J.B. <unk> p . 160 . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 Tillman , Samuel E. ( 1893 ) . " Fossil Forests of the Yellowstone " . The Popular science monthly 43 ( New York : D. Appleton ) . p . 301 . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 Tillman , Samuel Escue ( 1911 ) [ 1897 ] . Descriptive General Chemistry ( 4 ed . ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons. p . 459 . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 Tillman , Samuel Escue ( 1903 ) [ 1900 ] . A text @-@ book of Important Minerals and Rocks ( 2 ed . ) . New York : John Wiley & Sons. p . 176 . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 Tillman , Samuel E. ( 1902 ) . " West Point and Its Centenary " . American Monthly Review of Reviews 26 ( New York : Review of Reviews ) . p . 45 . Retrieved April 25 , 2009 . 
 = John Sherman = 
 John Sherman ( May 10 , 1823 – October 22 , 1900 ) was an American Republican representative and senator from Ohio during the Civil War and into the late nineteenth century . He also served as both Secretary of the Treasury and Secretary of State . Sherman ran for the Republican presidential nomination three times , coming closest in 1888 , but never won . His brothers included General William Tecumseh Sherman , Charles Taylor Sherman , a federal judge in Ohio , and Hoyt Sherman , an Iowa banker . 
 Born in Lancaster , Ohio , Sherman later moved to Mansfield , Ohio , where he began a law career before entering politics . Initially a Whig , Sherman was among those anti @-@ slavery activists who formed what became the Republican Party . He served three terms in the House of Representatives . As a member of the House , Sherman traveled to Kansas to investigate the unrest between pro- and anti @-@ slavery partisans there . He rose in party leadership and was nearly elected Speaker in 1859 . Sherman was elevated to the Senate in 1861 . As a senator , he was a leader in financial matters , helping to redesign the United States ' monetary system to meet the needs of a nation torn apart by civil war . After the war , he worked to produce legislation that would restore the nation 's credit abroad and produce a stable , gold @-@ backed currency at home . 
 Serving as Secretary of the Treasury in the administration of Rutherford B. Hayes , Sherman continued his efforts for financial stability and solvency , overseeing an end to wartime inflationary measures and a return to gold @-@ backed money . He returned to the Senate after his term expired , serving there for a further sixteen years . During that time he continued his work on financial legislation , as well as writing and debating laws on immigration , business competition law , and the regulation of interstate commerce . Sherman was the principal author of the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 , which was signed into law by President Benjamin Harrison . In 1897 , President William McKinley appointed him Secretary of State . Failing health and declining faculties made him unable to handle the burdens of the job , and he retired in 1898 at the start of the Spanish – American War . Sherman died at his home in Washington , D.C. in 1900 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 John Sherman was born in Lancaster , Ohio , May 10 , 1823 , to Charles Robert Sherman and his wife , Mary Hoyt Sherman , the eighth of their eleven children . John Sherman 's grandfather , Taylor Sherman , a Connecticut lawyer and judge , first visited Ohio in the early nineteenth century , where he gained title to several parcels of land before returning to Connecticut . After Taylor 's death in 1815 , his son Charles , newly married to Mary Hoyt , moved the family west to Ohio . Several other Sherman relatives soon followed , and Charles became established as a lawyer in Lancaster . By the time of John Sherman 's birth , Charles had just been appointed a justice of the Supreme Court of Ohio . 
 Sherman 's father died suddenly in 1829 , leaving his mother to care for eleven children . Several of the oldest children , including Sherman 's older brother William , were fostered with nearby relatives , but John and his brother Hoyt stayed with their mother in Lancaster until 1831 . In that year , Sherman 's father 's cousin ( also named John Sherman ) took Sherman into his home in Mount Vernon , Ohio , where he enrolled in school . The other John Sherman intended for his namesake to study there until he was ready to enroll at nearby Kenyon College , but Sherman disliked school and was , in his own words , " a troublesome boy . " In 1835 , he returned to his mother 's home in Lancaster . Sherman continued his education there at a local academy where , after being briefly expelled for punching a teacher , he studied for two years . 
 In 1837 , Sherman left school and found a job as a junior surveyor on construction of improvements to the Muskingum River . Because he had obtained the job through Whig Party patronage , the election of a Democratic governor in 1838 meant that Sherman and the rest of his surveying crew were discharged from their jobs in June 1839 . The following year , he moved to Mansfield , Ohio to study law in the office of his older brother , Charles Taylor Sherman . He was admitted to the bar in 1844 and joined his brother 's firm . Sherman quickly became successful at the practice of law , and by 1847 had accumulated property worth $ 10 @,@ 000 and was a partner in several local businesses . By that time , Sherman and his brother Charles were able to support their mother and two unmarried sisters , who now moved to a house Sherman purchased in Mansfield . In 1848 , Sherman married Margaret Cecelia Stewart , the daughter of a local judge . The couple never had any biological children , but adopted a daughter , Mary , in 1864 . 
 Around the same time , Sherman began to take a larger role in politics . In 1844 , he addressed a political rally on behalf of the Whig candidate for president that year , Henry Clay . Four years later , Sherman was a delegate to the Whig National Convention where Zachary Taylor was nominated . As with most conservative Whigs , Sherman supported the Compromise of 1850 as the best solution to the growing sectional divide . In 1852 , Sherman was again a delegate to the Whig National Convention , where he supported the eventual nominee , Winfield Scott , against rivals Daniel Webster and Millard Fillmore . 
 = = House of Representatives = = 
 Sherman moved north to Cleveland , Ohio , in 1853 and established a law office there with two partners . Events soon interrupted Sherman 's plans for a new law firm , as the passage of the Kansas – Nebraska Act in 1854 inspired him ( and many other anti @-@ slavery Northerners ) to take a more involved role in politics . That Act , the brainchild of Illinois Democrat Stephen A. Douglas , opened the two named territories to slavery , an implicit repeal of the Missouri Compromise of 1820 . Intended to quiet national agitation over slavery by shifting the decision to local settlers , Douglas 's Act instead inflamed anti @-@ slavery sentiment in the North by allowing the possibility of slavery 's expansion to territories held as free soil for three decades . Two months after the Act 's passage , Sherman became a candidate for Ohio 's thirteenth district in the federal House of Representatives . A local convention nominated Sherman over two other candidates to represent what was then called the Opposition Party ( later to become the Republican Party . ) The new party , a fusion of Free Soilers , Whigs , and anti @-@ slavery Democrats , had many discordant elements , and some among the former group thought Sherman too conservative on the slavery question . Nevertheless , they supported him against the incumbent Democrat , William D. Lindsley . Democrats were defeated across Ohio that year , and Sherman was elected by <unk> votes . 
 = = = Kansas = = = 
 When the 34th United States Congress convened in December 1855 , members opposed to Democratic President Franklin Pierce ( most of them Northerners ) held the majority in the House , while the Democrats retained their majority in the Senate . That House majority , however , was not fully unified , with some members adhering to the new anti @-@ Nebraska party , and others loyal to the new nativist American ( or Know @-@ Nothing ) party . The Know Nothings were also fractious , with some former Whigs and some former Free Soilers in their ranks . The result was a House that was unable to elect a Speaker for two months . When they finally agreed on the election of Nathaniel Banks of Massachusetts , the House quickly turned to the matter of Kansas . Preventing the expansion of slavery to Kansas was the one issue that united Banks ' fragile majority , and the House resolved to send three members to investigate the situation in that territory ; Sherman was one of the three selected . 
 Sherman spent two months in the territory and was the primary author of the 1 @,@ 188 @-@ page report filed on conditions there when they returned in April 1856 . The report explained what anti @-@ administration members already feared : that the principle of local control was being seriously undermined by the invasion of Missourians who , while not intending to settle there , used violence to coerce the Kansans to elect pro @-@ slavery members to the territorial legislature . The House took no action on the reports , but they were widely distributed as campaign documents . That July , Sherman proposed an amendment to an army appropriation act to bar use of federal troops to enforce the acts of the Kansas territorial legislature , which many now viewed as an illegitimate body . The amendment narrowly passed the House , but was removed by the Senate ; the House ultimately agreed to the change . In spite of this defeat , however , Sherman had achieved considerable prominence for a freshman representative . 
 = = = Lecompton and financial reform = = = 
 Sherman was reelected in 1856 , defeating his Democratic opponent , Herman J. <unk> , by 2861 votes . The Republican candidate for president , John C. Frémont carried Ohio while losing the national vote to the Democrat , James Buchanan . When the 35th Congress assembled in December 1857 , the anti @-@ Nebraska coalition — now formally the Republicans — had lost control of the House , and Sherman found himself in the minority . The sectional crisis had also deepened in the past year . In March 1857 , the Supreme Court issued its decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford , holding that Congress had no power to prevent slavery in the territories and that blacks — whether free or enslaved — could not be citizens of the United States . In December of that year , in an election boycotted by free @-@ state partisans , Kansas adopted the pro @-@ slavery Lecompton Constitution and petitioned Congress to be admitted as a slave state . Buchanan urged that Congress take up the matter , and the Senate approved a bill to admit Kansas . Sherman spoke against the Kansas bill in the House , pointing out the evidence of fraud in the elections there . Some of the Northern Democrats joined with a unanimous Republican caucus to defeat the measure . Congress agreed to a compromise measure , by which Kansas would be admitted after another referendum on the Lecompton constitution . The electorate rejected slavery and remained a territory , a decision Sherman would later call " the turning point of the slavery controversy . " 
 Sherman 's second term also saw his first speeches in Congress on the country 's financial situation , which had been harmed by the Panic of 1857 . Citing the need to pare unnecessary expenditures in light of diminished revenue , Sherman especially criticized Southern senators for adding appropriations to the House 's bills . His speech attracted attention , and was the start of Sherman 's focus on financial matters , which would continue throughout his long political career . 
 = = = House leadership = = = 
 The voters returned Sherman to office for a third term in 1858 . After a brief special session in March 1859 , the 36th Congress adjourned , and Sherman and his wife went on vacation to Europe . When they returned that December , the situation was similar to that of four years earlier : no party had an absolute majority . Republicans held 109 seats , Democrats 101 , and Know Nothings 27 . Again , sectional tension had increased while Congress was in recess , this time due to John Brown 's raid on Harpers Ferry , Virginia . The election for Speaker of the House promised to be contentious . This time , Sherman was among the leading candidates , receiving the second @-@ largest number of votes on the first ballot , with no candidate receiving a majority . The election for Speaker was sidetracked immediately by a furor over an anti @-@ slavery book , The Impending Crisis of the South , written by Hinton Rowan Helper and endorsed by many Republican members . Southerners accused Sherman of having endorsed the book , while he protested that he only endorsed its use as a campaign tool and had never read it . After two months of balloting , no decision had been reached . After their attempts to adopt a plurality rule failed , Sherman accepted that he could not be elected , and withdrew . Republicans then shifted their support to William Pennington , who was elected on the forty @-@ fourth ballot . 
 Pennington assigned Sherman to serve as chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means , where he spent much of his time on appropriations bills , while cooperating with his colleague Justin Smith Morrill on the passage of what became known as the Morrill Tariff . The Morrill Tariff raised duties on imports in order to close the deficit that had resulted from falling revenues . It also had the effect of encouraging domestic industries , which appealed to the former Whigs in the Republican party . Sherman spoke in favor of the bill and it passed the House by a vote of 105 to 64 . The tariff bill would likely have died in the Senate , but the withdrawal of Southern members at the start of the Civil War allowed the rump Senate to pass the bill in the 36th Congress 's final session , and President Buchanan signed it into law in February 1861 . Likewise , Sherman supported a bill admitting Kansas as a free state that passed in 1861 . 
 Sherman was renominated for Congress in 1860 and was active in Abraham Lincoln 's campaign for President , giving speeches on his behalf in several states . Both were elected , with Sherman defeating his opponent , Barnabas Burns , by <unk> votes . He returned to Washington for the lame duck session of the 36th Congress . By February 1861 , seven states had reacted to Lincoln 's election by seceding from the Union . In response , Congress passed a constitutional amendment proposed by Representative Thomas Corwin of Ohio . Known today as the Corwin Amendment , it was an attempt to forge a compromise to keep the remaining slave states in the Union and entice the seceded states to return . Corwin 's legislation would have preserved the status quo on slavery and prohibited any future amendment granting Congress power to interfere with slavery in the states . Sherman voted for the amendment , which passed both houses of Congress and was sent to the states for ratification . Few states ratified it , and the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment in 1865 , outlawing slavery , rendered the compromise measure moot . 
 = = Senate = = 
 Lincoln took office on March 4 , 1861 . Among his first acts was to nominate Senator Salmon P. Chase of Ohio to be Secretary of the Treasury . Chase resigned his Senate seat on March 7 , and after two weeks of indecisive balloting , the Ohio Legislature elected Sherman to the vacant seat . He took his seat on March 23 , 1861 , as the Senate had been called into special session to deal with the secession crisis . The Senate that convened at the start of the 37th Congress had a Republican majority for the first time , a majority that grew as more Southern members resigned or were expelled . In April , Sherman 's brother William visited Washington to rejoin the army , and the brothers went together to the White House to meet Lincoln . Lincoln soon called for 75 @,@ 000 men to enlist for three months to put down the rebellion , which William Sherman thought too few and too short a duration . William 's thoughts on the war greatly influenced his brother , and John Sherman returned home to Ohio to encourage enlistment , briefly serving as an unpaid colonel of Ohio Volunteers . 
 = = = Financing the Civil War = = = 
 The Civil War expenditures quickly strained the government 's already @-@ fragile financial situation and Sherman , assigned to the Senate Finance Committee , was involved in the process of increasing the revenue . In July 1861 , Congress authorized the government to issue Demand Notes , the first form of paper money issued directly by the United States government . The notes were redeemable in specie ( i.e. , gold or silver coin ) but , as Sherman would note in his memoirs , they did not solve the revenue problem , as the government did not have the coin to redeem the notes should they all be presented for payment . To solve this problem , Chase asked for and Congress authorized the issuance of $ 150 million in bonds , which ( as banks purchased them with gold ) replenished the treasury . Congress also sought to increase revenue when they passed the Revenue Act of 1861 , which imposed the first federal income tax in American history . Sherman endorsed the measure , and even spoke in favor of a steeper tax than the one imposed by the Act ( 3 % on income above $ 800 , ) preferring to raise revenue by taxation than by borrowing . In August , the special session closed and Sherman returned home to Mansfield to promote military recruitment again . 
 When Congress returned to Washington in December 1861 , Sherman and the Finance Committee continued their attempts to fix the deepening financial crisis caused by the war . The financial situation had continued to worsen resulting that month in banks suspending specie payments — that is , they refused to redeem their banknotes for gold . Gold began to disappear from circulation . With the 500 @,@ 000 soldiers in the field , the government was spending the then @-@ unheard @-@ of sum of $ 2 million per day . Sherman understood that " a radical change in existing laws relating to our currency must be made , or ... the destruction of the Union would be unavoidable ... " Secretary Chase agreed , and proposed that the Treasury Department issue United States Notes that were redeemable not in specie but in 6 % government bonds . The bills would be " lawful money and a legal tender in the payment of all debts . " Nothing but gold and silver coin had ever been legal tender in the United States , but Congress yielded to the wartime necessities and the resulting First Legal Tender Act passed both the House and the Senate . The Act limited the notes ( later known as " greenbacks " ) to $ 150 million , but two subsequent Legal Tender Acts that year expanded the limit to $ 450 million . The idea of making paper money legal tender was controversial , and William Pitt Fessenden of Maine , chairman of the Senate Finance Committee , was among many who opposed the proposal . Sherman disagreed , and spoke in favor of the idea . He defended his position as necessary in his memoirs , saying " from the passage of the legal tender act , by which means were provided for utilizing the wealth of the country in the suppression of the rebellion , the tide of war turned in our favor . " 
 Reform of the nation 's financial system continued in 1863 with the passage of the National Banking Act of 1863 . This Act , first proposed by Chase in 1861 and introduced by Sherman two years later , established a series of nationally chartered private banks that would issue banknotes in coordination with the Treasury , replacing ( though not completely ) the system of state @-@ chartered banks then in existence . Although the immediate purpose was to fund the war , the National Bank Act was intended to be permanent , and remained the law until 1913 . A 10 % tax on state banknotes passed in 1865 to facilitate the shift to a national bank system . Sherman agreed with Chase wholeheartedly , and hoped that state banking would be completely eliminated . Sherman believed the state @-@ by @-@ state system of regulation was disorderly and unable to facilitate the level of borrowing a modern nation might require . He also believed the state banks were unconstitutional . Not all Republicans shared Sherman 's views , and when the Act eventually passed the Senate , it was by a narrow 23 – 21 vote . Lincoln signed the bill into law on February 25 , 1863 . 
 = = = Slavery and Reconstruction = = = 
 Besides his role in financial matters , Sherman also participated in debate over the conduct of the war and goals for the post @-@ war nation . Sherman voted for the Confiscation Act of 1861 , which allowed the government to confiscate any property being used to support the Confederate war effort ( including slaves ) and for the act abolishing slavery in the District of Columbia . He also voted for the Confiscation Act of 1862 , which clarified that slaves " confiscated " under the 1861 Act were freed . In 1864 , Sherman voted for the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , abolishing slavery . After some effort , it passed Congress and was ratified by the states the next year . 
 When the session ended , Sherman campaigned in Indiana and Ohio for Lincoln 's reelection . In 1865 , he attended Lincoln 's second inauguration , then traveled to Savannah , Georgia to meet with his brother William , who had arrived there after his army 's march to the sea . Sherman returned home to Mansfield in April , where he learned of Lincoln 's assassination . He was again in Washington for the Grand Review of the Armies and then returned home until December , when the 39th Congress assembled . There had been no special session that summer , and President Andrew Johnson , Lincoln 's successor , had taken the lead on Reconstruction of the conquered South , to the consternation of many in Congress . Sherman and Johnson had been friendly , and some observers hoped that Sherman could serve as a liaison between Johnson and the party 's " Radical " wing . By February 1866 , however , Johnson was publicly attacking these Radical Republicans , who demanded harsh punishment of the rebels and federal action to assist the freedmen . The following month Johnson vetoed the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1866 , which had passed Congress with overwhelming numbers . Sherman joined in re @-@ passing the bill over Johnson 's veto . That same year , Sherman voted for the Fourteenth Amendment , which guaranteed equal protection of the laws to the freedmen . It became law in 1868 . 
 By then , Johnson had made himself the enemy of most Republicans in Congress , including Sherman . Sherman , a moderate , took the side of the Radicals in voting for the Tenure of Office Act , which passed over Johnson 's veto in 1867 — but in debating the First Reconstruction Act , he argued against disenfranchising Southern men who had participated in the rebellion . The latter bill , amended to remove that provision , also passed over Johnson 's veto . The continued conflict between Johnson and Congress culminated in Johnson 's impeachment by the House in 1868 . After a trial in the Senate , Sherman voted to convict , but the total vote was one short of the required two @-@ thirds majority , and Johnson continued in office . Writing later , Sherman said that although he " liked the President personally and harbored against him none of the prejudice and animosity of some others , " he believed Johnson had violated the Tenure of Office Act , and accordingly voted to remove him from office . 
 With Ulysses S. Grant elected to the Presidency in 1868 , Congress had a more willing partner in Reconstruction . The 40th Congress 's lame duck session passed the Fifteenth Amendment , which guaranteed that the right to vote could not be restricted because of race ; Sherman joined the two @-@ thirds majority that voted for its passage . The 41st Congress passed the Enforcement Act of 1870 in an effort to enforce its civil rights Amendments among a hostile Southern population . That Act , written by John Bingham of Ohio to mirror the Fourteenth Amendment , created penalties for violating another person 's constitutional rights . The next year , Congress passed the Ku Klux Klan Act , which strengthened the Enforcement Act by allowing federal trials and federal troops to be used . Sherman voted in favor of both Acts , which had Grant 's support . 
 = = = Post @-@ war finances = = = 
 With the financial crisis abated , many in Congress wanted the greenbacks to be withdrawn from circulation . The public had never seen greenbacks as equivalent to specie , and by 1866 they circulated at a considerable discount , although their value had risen since the end of the war . Hugh McCulloch , the Treasury Secretary under Lincoln and Johnson , believed the notes were an emergency measure only , and thought they should be gradually withdrawn . McCulloch proposed a bill , the Contraction Act , to convert some of the greenbacks from notes redeemable in bonds to interest @-@ bearing notes redeemable in coin . Most Senate Finance Committee members had no objection , and Sherman found himself alone in opposition to it , believing that withdrawing greenbacks from circulation would contract the money supply and harm the economy . Sherman instead favored leaving the existing notes in circulation and letting the growth in population catch up to the growth in money supply . He suggested an amendment that would instead just allow the Treasury to redeem the notes for lower @-@ interest bonds , now that the government 's borrowing costs had decreased . Sherman 's amendment was voted down , and the Contraction Act passed ; greenbacks would be gradually withdrawn , but those still circulating would be redeemable for the high @-@ interest bonds as before . In his memoirs , Sherman called this law " the most injurious and expensive financial measure ever enacted by Congress , " as the continued high interest payments it required " added fully $ 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 of interest " to the national debt . 
 The Ohio legislature reelected Sherman to another six @-@ year term that year , and when ( after a three @-@ month vacation in Europe ) he resumed his seat he again turned to the greenback question . Public support for greenbacks had grown , especially among businessmen who thought withdrawal would lead to lower prices . When a bill passed the House suspending the authority to retire greenbacks under the Contraction Act , Sherman supported it in the Senate . It passed the Senate 33 – 4 , and became law in 1868 . 
 In the next Congress , among the first bills to pass the house was the Public Credit Act of 1869 , which would require the government to pay bondholders in gold , not greenbacks . The 1868 election campaign had seen the Democrats proposing to repay the bondholders ( mostly supporters of the Union war effort ) in paper ; Republicans favored gold , as the bonds had been purchased with gold . Sherman agreed with his fellow Republicans and voted with them to pass the bill 42 @-@ 13 . Sherman continued to favor wider circulation of the greenback when he voted for the Currency Act of 1870 , which authorized an additional $ 54 million in United States Notes . Sherman was also involved in debate over the Funding Act of 1870 . The Funding Act , which Sherman called " [ t ] he most important financial measure of that Congress , " refunded the national debt . The bill as Sherman wrote it authorized $ 1 @.@ 2 billion of low interest rate bonds to be used to purchase the high @-@ rate bonds issued during the war , in order to take advantage of the lower borrowing costs brought about by the peace and security that followed the Union victory . The Act was the subject of considerable debate over the exact rates and amounts , but once the differences were ironed out , it passed by large majorities in both houses . While Sherman was unhappy with the compromises ( especially the extension of the bonds ' term to 30 years , which he believed too long ) , he saw the bill as an improvement over the existing conditions , and urged its passage . 
 = = = Coinage Act of 1873 = = = 
 The Ohio Legislature elected Sherman to a third term in 1872 , after then @-@ governor Rutherford B. Hayes declined the invitation of several legislators to run against Sherman . Sherman returned to his leadership of the Finance Committee , and the issues of greenbacks , gold , and silver continued into the next several congresses . Since the early days of the republic , the United States had minted both gold and silver coins , and for decades the ratio of value between them had been set by law at 16 : 1 . Both metals were subject to " free coinage " ; that is , anyone could bring any amount of silver or gold to the United States Mint and have it converted to coinage . The ratio was bound to be imperfect , as the amount of gold and silver mined and the demand for it around the world fluctuated from year to year ; as a metal 's market price exceeded its legal price , coins of that metal would disappear from circulation ( a phenomenon known as Gresham 's law ) . Before the Civil War , gold circulated freely and silver disappeared , and while silver dollars were legal tender , Sherman wrote that " [ a ] lthough I was quite active in business ... I do not remember at that time to have ever seen a silver dollar . " The issuance of greenbacks had pushed debate over gold @-@ silver ratios to the background as coins of both metals disappeared from the nation 's commerce in favor of the new paper notes , but as the dollar became stronger in peacetime and the national debt payments were guaranteed to be paid in specie , Congress saw the need to update the coinage laws . 
 Grant 's Treasury Secretary , George S. Boutwell , sent Sherman ( who was by now Senate Finance Committee Chairman ) a draft of what would become the Coinage Act of 1873 . The list of legal coins duplicated that of the previous coinage act , leaving off only the silver dollar and two smaller coins . The rationale given in the Treasury report accompanying the draft bill was that to mint a gold dollar and a silver dollar with different intrinsic values was problematic ; as the silver dollar did not circulate and the gold did , it made sense to drop the unused coin . Opponents of the bill would later call this omission the " Crime of ' 73 , " and would mean it quite literally , circulating tales of widespread bribery of Congressmen by foreign agents . Sherman emphasized in his memoirs that the bill was openly debated for several years and passed both Houses with overwhelming support and that , given the continued circulation of smaller silver coins at the same 16 : 1 ratio , nothing had been " demonetized , " as his opponents claimed . Silver was still legal tender , but only for sums up to five dollars . On the other hand , later scholars have suggested that Sherman and others wished to demonetize silver for years and move the country onto a gold @-@ only standard of currency — not for some corrupt gain , but because they believed it was the path to a strong , secure currency . 
 In switching to what was essentially a gold standard , the United States joined a host of nations around the world that based their currencies on gold alone . But in doing so , these nations exacerbated the demand for gold as opposed to silver which , combined with more silver being mined , drove the cost of gold up and silver down . The result was not apparent immediately after the Coinage Act 's passage , but by 1879 the ratio between the price of gold and that of silver had risen from 16 @.@ 4 : 1 to 18 @.@ 4 : 1 ; by 1896 it was 30 : 1 . The ultimate effect was more expensive gold , which meant lower prices and deflation for other goods . The deflation made the effects of the Panic of 1873 worse , making it more expensive for debtors to pay debts they had contracted when currency was less valuable . Farmers and laborers , especially , clamored for the return of coinage in both metals , believing the increased money supply would restore wages and property values , and the divide between pro- and anti @-@ silver forces grew in the decades to come . Writing in 1895 , Sherman defended the bill , saying that , barring some international agreement to switch the entire world to a bimetallic standard , the United States dollar should remain a gold @-@ backed currency . 
 = = = Resumption of specie payments = = = 
 At the same time as he sought to reform the coinage , Sherman worked for " resumption " — the policy of resuming specie payment on all bank notes , including the greenbacks . The idea of withdrawing the greenbacks from circulation altogether had been tried and quickly rejected in 1866 ; the notes were , as Sherman said , " a great favorite of the people . " The economic turmoil of the Panic of 1873 made it even more clear that shrinking the money supply would be harmful to the average American . Still , Sherman ( and others ) desired an eventual return to a single circulating medium : gold . As he said in an 1874 speech , " a specie standard is the best and the only true standard of all values , recognized as such by all civilized nations of our generation . " If greenbacks were not to be withdrawn from circulation , therefore , they must be made equal to the gold dollar . 
 While Sherman stood against printing additional greenbacks , as late as 1872 he remained a proponent of keeping existing greenbacks backed by bonds in circulation . Over the next two years , Sherman worked to develop what became the Specie Payment Resumption Act . The Act was a compromise . It required gradual reduction of the maximum value of greenbacks allowed to circulate to $ 300 million and , while earlier drafts had allowed the Treasury the choice between paying in bonds or in coin , the final version of the Act required payment in specie , starting in 1879 . The bill passed on a party @-@ line vote in the lame duck session of the 43rd Congress , and President Grant signed it into law on January 14 , 1875 . 
 = = = Election of 1876 = = = 
 After the close of the session , Sherman returned to Ohio to campaign for the Republican nominee for governor there , former governor Rutherford B. Hayes . The issue of specie payments was debated in the campaign , with Hayes endorsing Sherman 's position and his Democratic opponent , incumbent Governor William Allen , in favor of increased circulation of greenbacks redeemable in bonds . Hayes won a narrow victory , and was soon mentioned as a possible presidential candidate in 1876 . The controversy over resumption carried into the presidential election . The Democratic platform that year demanded repeal of the Resumption Act , while the Republicans nominated Hayes , whose position in favor of a gold standard was well known . The election of 1876 was very close and the electoral votes of several states were ardently disputed until mere days before the new president was to be inaugurated . Louisiana was one of the states in which both parties claimed victory , and Grant asked Sherman and a few other men to go to New Orleans and ensure the party 's interests were represented . 
 Sherman , by this time thoroughly displeased with Grant and his administration , nonetheless took up the call in the name of party loyalty , joining James A. Garfield , Stanley Matthews , and other Republican politicians in Louisiana a few days later . The Democrats likewise sent their politicos , and the two sides met to observe the elections return board arrive at its decision that Hayes should be awarded their state 's electoral votes . This ended Sherman 's direct role in the matter , and he returned to Washington , but the dispute carried over until a bipartisan election commission was convened in the capital . A few days before Grant 's term would end , the commission narrowly decided in Hayes 's favor , and he became the 19th President of the United States . 
 = = Secretary of the Treasury = = 
 Sherman 's financial expertise and his friendship with Hayes made him a natural choice for Treasury Secretary in 1877 . Like Grant before him , Hayes had not consulted party leaders about his cabinet appointments , and the Senate took the then @-@ unusual step of referring all of them to committee . Two days later , senators approved Sherman 's nomination after an hour of debate , and he began lobbying his former colleagues to approve the other nominations , which they eventually did . Hayes and Sherman became close friends in the next four years , taking regular carriage rides together to discuss matters of state in private . In the Treasury , as in the Senate , Sherman was confronted with two tasks : first , to prepare for specie resumption when it took effect in 1879 ; second , to deal with the backlash against the diminution of silver coinage . 
 = = = Preparing for specie resumption = = = 
 Sherman and Hayes agreed to stockpile gold in preparation for the exchange of greenbacks for specie . The Act remained unpopular in some quarters , leading to four attempts to repeal it in the Senate and fourteen in the House — all unsuccessful . By this time , public confidence in the Treasury had grown to the extent that the a dollar in gold was worth only $ 1 @.@ 05 in greenbacks . Once the public was confident that they could redeem greenbacks for gold , few actually did so ; when the Act took effect in 1879 , only $ 130 @,@ 000 out of the $ 346 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 outstanding dollars in greenbacks were redeemed . Greenbacks were now at parity with gold dollars , and the nation had , for the first time since the Civil War , a unified monetary system . 
 = = = Bland – Allison Act = = = 
 Sentiment against the Coinage Act of 1873 gained strength as the economy worsened following the Panic of 1873 . Democratic Representative Richard P. Bland of Missouri proposed a bill that would require the United States buy as much silver as miners could sell the government and strike it into coins , a system that would increase the money supply and aid debtors . In short , silver miners would sell the government metal worth fifty to seventy cents , and receive back a silver dollar . The pro @-@ silver idea cut across party lines , and William B. Allison , a Republican from Iowa led the effort in the Senate . Allison offered an amendment in the Senate requiring the purchase of two to four million dollars per month of silver , but not allowing private deposit of silver at the mints . Thus , the seignorage , or difference between the face value of the coin and the worth of the metal contained within it accrued to the government 's credit , not private citizens . The resulting Bland – Allison Act passed both houses of Congress in 1878 . Hayes feared that the act would cause inflation through the expansion of the money supply that would be ruinous to business . Sherman 's opinion was more complicated . He knew that silver was gaining popularity , and opposing it might harm the party 's candidates in the 1880 elections , but he also agreed with Hayes in wanting to avoid inflation . 
 Sherman pressured his friends in the Senate to defeat the bill , or to limit it to production of a larger silver dollar , which would actually be worth 1 / 16th its weight in gold . These efforts were unsuccessful , but Allison 's amendment made the bill less financially risky . Sherman thought Hayes should sign the amended bill did not press the matter , and the President vetoed it . " In view of the strong public sentiment in favor of the free coinage of the silver dollar , " he later wrote , " I thought it better to make no objections to the passage of the bill , but I did not care to antagonize the wishes of the President . " Congress overrode Hayes 's veto and the bill became law . The effects of the Bland – Allison Act were limited : the premium on gold over silver continued to grow and financial conditions in the country continued to improve . 
 = = = Civil service reform = = = 
 Hayes took office determined to reform the system of civil service appointments , which had been based on the spoils system since Andrew Jackson was president . Sherman was not a civil service reformer , but he went along with Hayes 's instructions . The foremost enemy of reform — and Hayes — was New York Senator Roscoe Conkling , and it was to Conkling 's <unk> that Hayes first turned his attention . At Hayes 's direction , Sherman ordered John Jay to investigate the New York Custom House , which was stacked with Conkling 's appointees . Jay 's report suggested that the New York Custom House was so overstaffed with political appointees that 20 % of the employees were expendable . 
 Hayes issued an executive order that forbade federal office holders from being required to make campaign contributions or otherwise taking part in party politics . Chester A. Arthur , the Collector of the Port of New York , and his subordinates Alonzo B. Cornell and George H. Sharpe , all Conkling supporters , refused to obey the president 's order . Sherman agreed with Hayes that the three had to resign , but he made clear in a letter to Arthur that he had no personal grudge against the Collector . In September 1877 , Hayes demanded the three men 's resignations , which they refused to give . He submitted appointments to the Senate for confirmation as their replacements but the Senate 's Commerce Committee , which Conkling chaired , voted unanimously to reject the nominees . 
 During a congressional recess in July 1878 , Hayes finally sacked Arthur and Cornell ( Sharpe 's term had expired ) and appointed replacements . When Congress reconvened , Sherman pressured his former Senate colleagues to confirm the President 's replacement nominees , which they did after considerable debate . Jay and other reformers criticized Sherman the next year when he traveled to New York to speak on Cornell 's behalf in his campaign for governor of New York . Sherman replied that it was important that the Republican party win the election there , despite their intra @-@ party differences . His friendliness may also have related , as Arthur 's biographer Thomas C. Reeves suggests , to a desire to keep Conkling 's New York machine friendly to him as the 1880 presidential election approached . 
 = = Election of 1880 = = 
 Hayes had pledged himself to a one @-@ term presidency , and the Republican nomination in 1880 attracted many candidates , including Sherman . Hayes 's preference was for Sherman to succeed him , but he made no official endorsement , and he did not think Sherman could win the nomination . Among the early favorites for the nomination were former President Grant , Senator James G. Blaine of Maine , and Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont . Grant did not actively promote his candidacy , but his entry into the race energized his partisans and when the convention met in Chicago in June 1880 , they instantly divided the delegates into Grant and anti @-@ Grant factions , with Blaine the most popular choice of the latter group . After Grant and Blaine were nominated , James Garfield nominated Sherman with an eloquent speech , saying " You ask for his monuments , I point you to twenty @-@ five years of national statutes . Not one great beneficent statute has been placed in our statute books without his intelligent and powerful aid . " The speech , while heartfelt , was not particularly stirring . As Senator George Frisbie Hoar later explained , " [ t ] here was nothing stimulant or romantic in the plain wisdom of John Sherman . " 
 After the other candidates were nominated , the first ballot showed Grant leading with 304 votes and Blaine in second with 284 ; Sherman 's 93 placed him in a distant third , and no candidate had the required majority of 379 . Sherman 's delegates could swing the nomination to either Grant or Blaine , but he refused to release them through twenty @-@ eight ballots in the hope that the anti @-@ Grant forces would desert Blaine and flock to him . By the end of the first day , it was clear that neither Grant nor Blaine could muster a majority ; a compromise candidate would be necessary . Sherman held out hope that he would be that compromise candidate , but while his vote tally reached as high as 120 , he never commanded even all of Ohio 's delegates . His divided home @-@ state support was likely fatal to his cause , as Blaine delegates , searching for a new champion , did not think Sherman would make a popular candidate . After several days of balloting , Blaine 's men found their compromise candidate , but instead of Sherman they shifted their votes to his fellow Ohioan , Garfield . By the thirty @-@ sixth ballot , Garfield had 399 votes , enough for victory . 
 Sherman was respected among his fellow Republicans for his intelligence and hard work , but there were always doubts about his potential as a national candidate . As one author described him , Sherman was " thin as a rail , over six feet high , with close cropped beard and possessed of bad teeth and a divine laugh , when he laughs . " His public speeches were adequate and informative , but never " of a sort to arouse a warm feeling for John Sherman , the man . " Unlike Blaine or Conkling , Sherman " communicated no colorful personality , no magnetic current . " His nickname , " the Ohio Icicle , " deserved or not , hindered his presidential ambitions . 
 Garfield placated the pro @-@ Grant faction by endorsing Chester A. Arthur as nominee for vice president . Despite his good relations with Arthur in 1879 , Sherman thought the choice a bad one : " The nomination of Arthur is a ridiculous burlesque , " he wrote in a letter to a friend , " and I am afraid was inspired by a desire to defeat the ticket ... His nomination attaches to the ticket all the odium of machine politics , and will greatly endanger the success of Garfield . " He was nearly correct , as Garfield eked out a narrow victory over the Democratic nominee Winfield Scott Hancock . Sherman continued at the Treasury for the rest of Hayes 's term , leaving office March 3 , 1881 . 
 = = Return to the Senate = = 
 The Ohio legislature had elected Garfield to the Senate in 1880 , and when he was elected President before taking his seat , they elected Sherman in his place . Sherman 's position in the Senate changed after his four @-@ year absence . He rejoined the Finance Committee , but Justin Smith Morrill , his old House colleague , now held the chairmanship . When Sherman re @-@ entered the Senate in the 47th United States Congress , the Republicans were not in the majority . The Senate was divided among 37 Republicans , 37 Democrats , one independent ( David Davis ) who caucused with the Democrats , one Readjuster ( William Mahone ) , who caucused with the Republicans . Arthur 's tie @-@ breaking vote as Vice President left the Republicans with a narrow hold on the chamber . Even so , the special session convened in March 1881 remained deadlocked for two months over Garfield 's nominations because of Conkling 's opposition to some of them , resulting in the resignation of Conkling and the other Senator from New York , Thomas C. Platt , in protest of Garfield 's continuing opposition to their faction . Sherman sided with Garfield on the appointments , and was pleased when the New York legislature declined to reelect Conkling and Platt , replacing them with two less troublesome Republicans . 
 = = = Garfield 's assassination and the Pendleton Act = = = 
 After the special session of Congress had adjourned , Sherman returned home to Mansfield . He spoke on behalf of Ohio Governor Charles Foster 's effort for a second term and went to Kenyon College with ex @-@ President Hayes , where he received an honorary degree . Sherman looked forward to staying with his wife at home for an extended period for the first time in years , when news arrived that Garfield had been shot in Washington . The assassin , Charles J. Guiteau , was a deranged office @-@ seeker who believed that Garfield 's successor would appoint him to a patronage job . After lingering for several months , Garfield died and Arthur became president . After completing a long @-@ planned visit to Yellowstone National Park and other Western sites with his brother William , Sherman returned to a second special session of Congress in October 1881 . 
 Garfield 's assassination by an office @-@ seeker amplified the public demand for civil service reform . Both Democratic and Republican leaders realized that they could attract the votes of reformers by turning against the spoils system and , by 1882 , a bipartisan effort began in favor of reform . In the previous Congress , Sherman 's fellow Ohio Senator , Democrat George H. Pendleton , had introduced legislation that required selection of civil servants based on merit as determined by an examination , but Congress declined to act on it right away . Republicans lost seats in the 1882 congressional elections , in which Democrats campaigned on the reform issue , and in the lame duck session were more amenable to civil service reform . Sherman spoke in favor of merit selection and against removing employees from office without cause . He was against the idea that civil servants should have unlimited terms of office , but believed that efficiency , not political activity , should determine an employee 's length of service . Sherman voted in favor of Pendleton 's bill , and the Senate approved it 38 – 5 . The House concurred by a vote of 155 – 47 . Arthur signed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act into law on January 16 , 1883 . 
 = = = The Mongrel Tariff = = = 
 There was relatively little financial legislation in the 1880s . By that time , fewer bonds were necessary , as the government now ran a consistent surplus which by 1882 reached $ 145 million . Opinions varied on how to balance the budget ; Democrats wished to lower tariffs to reduce revenues and the cost of imported goods , while Republicans believed that high tariffs ensured high wages in manufacturing and mining . They preferred the government spend more on internal improvements and reduce excise taxes . Congress passed a law creating a committee to study tariff reduction , but Arthur appointed mostly protectionists to it . In December 1882 , the committee submitted a report to Congress calling for tariff cuts averaging between 20 and 25 % . The commission 's recommendations were ignored , however , as the House Ways and Means Committee , dominated by protectionists , provided a 10 % reduction . After conference with the Senate , the bill that emerged only reduced tariffs by an average of 1 @.@ 47 % , but it did remove or reduce many excise taxes . Sherman supported the bill , more for the excise reduction than for the tariff changes . The bill , known as the Tariff of 1883 ( or , by detractors , as the " Mongrel Tariff " ) passed both houses narrowly on March 3 , 1883 , the last full day of the 47th Congress ; Arthur signed the measure into law , but it had no effect on the surplus . 
 = = = Chinese immigration = = = 
 Sherman paid greater attention to foreign affairs during the second half of his Senate career , serving as chairman of the Committee on Foreign Relations . In 1868 , the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China , allowing unrestricted immigration from China . After the Panic of 1873 , Chinese immigrants were blamed for depressing wages ; in reaction Congress in 1879 passed the Chinese Exclusion Act , but Hayes vetoed it . Now , three years later , after China had agreed to treaty revisions , Congress tried again to exclude Chinese immigrants : Senator John F. Miller of California introduced another Exclusion Act that denied Chinese immigrants United States citizenship and banned their immigration for a twenty @-@ year period . Sherman opposed both the 1880 treaty revisions and the bill Miller proposed , believing that the Exclusion Act reversed the United States ' traditional welcoming of all people and our dependence on foreign immigration for growth . President Arthur vetoed the bill , and Sherman voted to sustain the veto . A new Exclusion Act passed to conform to Arthur 's objections . Sherman voted against this bill , too , but it passed and Arthur signed it into law . In 1885 , Sherman voted in favor of the Alien Contract Labor Law , which barred engaging in a labor contract before immigrating or transporting a person under such a contract to the United States . Sherman saw this Act as a more appropriate solution to depressed wages than Chinese exclusion : the problem , as he saw it , was not the national origin of Chinese immigrants , but their employment under serf @-@ like conditions . 
 = = = Further presidential ambitions = = = 
 In 1884 , Sherman again ran for the Republican nomination , but his campaign never gained steam . Blaine was considered the favorite and President Arthur also gathered delegates in an attempt to win the a term in his own right . Again , the Ohio delegation failed to unite behind Sherman , and he entered the convention with only 30 total delegates pledged to him . Former Cincinnati judge Joseph B. Foraker gave a speech nominating Sherman , but it drew little attention . Blaine gathered support the next day , and Sherman withdrew after the fourth ballot . Blaine was duly nominated , and went on to lose the election to Democrat Grover Cleveland of New York . Sherman returned to the Senate where , in 1885 , he was elected President pro tempore of the Senate . After the death of Vice President Thomas A. Hendricks later that year , Sherman was next in line to the presidency until February 26 , 1887 , when he resigned the position . 
 In 1886 , the Ohio legislature elected Sherman to a fifth term but , before long , he was considering another run for the presidency . To broaden his national image , he traveled to Nashville to give a speech defending Republican principles . He encouraged fairness in the treatment of black Americans and denounced their mistreatment at the hands of the " redeemed " Southern state governments . The tour had its effect , and Sherman 's hopes were high . His old friend , ex @-@ President Hayes , thought him the best candidate . The early favorite for the nomination was again Blaine , but after Blaine wrote several letters denying any interest in the nomination , his supporters divided among other candidates , including Sherman . With no clear consensus going into the 1888 convention , delegates divided their support among an unusual number of favorite sons . Daniel H. Hastings of Pennsylvania placed Sherman 's name in nomination , seconded by Foraker ( who was , by then , Governor of Ohio ) . Sherman , at last , had a unified Ohio delegation behind him and led on the first ballot with 229 votes — more than double his nearest competitor , but well short of the 416 needed for nomination . Walter Q. Gresham of Indiana was in second place with 111 , followed by Russell A. Alger of Michigan with 84 . Sherman gained votes on the second ballot , but plateaued there ; by the fifth ballot , it was clear that he would gain no more delegates . He refused to withdraw , but his supporters began to abandon him ; by the eighth ballot , the delegates coalesced around Benjamin Harrison of Indiana and voted him the nomination . Sherman thought Harrison a good candidate , and bore him no ill will , but he did begrudge Alger , who he believed " purchased the votes of many of the delegates from the southern states who had been instructed by their conventions to vote for me . " A loyal Republican , Sherman gave speeches for Harrison in Ohio and Indiana and was pleased with his victory over Cleveland that November . After 1888 , Sherman , aware that he would be seventy @-@ three years old when the nomination was next open , resolved that from then on " no temptation of office will induce me to seek further political honors " and did not run for president again . 
 = = = Interstate commerce = = = 
 For some time , there had been concern about the power of the railroads and the way they charged different rates for different customers . In 1885 , a bill to regulate the practice , authored by John Henninger Reagan , of Texas passed the House . The Reagan bill forbade discrimination in railroad or pipeline freight rates , required that rates be reasonable , and fixed maximum charges allowed . Sherman agreed with the general idea of the law , but objected to certain portions , especially a provision that gave state courts jurisdiction over enforcement disputes . Sherman believed the law should allow for more nuance as well , insisting that competition against other forms of transit be considered . These changes were adopted in the conference committee and the result , the Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 , owed much to Sherman 's influence . Cleveland signed it into law on February 4 , 1887 , and appointed members to the new Interstate Commerce Commission . The act displeased the railroad industry , but was a boon to farmers and the oil industry . 
 = = = Sherman Antitrust Act = = = 
 By the late 19th century , businesses began to form combinations , known as trusts , which claimed a larger and larger share of the market — large enough to dictate prices , their detractors claimed . Members of both major parties were concerned with the growth of the power of trusts and monopolies , and , at the opening of the 51st Congress Sherman proposed what would become the Sherman Antitrust Act . The bill Sherman proposed was largely derivative of a failed bill from the previous Congress written by Senator George F. Edmunds , which Sherman had amended during its consideration . Until 1888 , Sherman had shown little interest in the trust question but it was rising in the national consciousness and Sherman now entered the fray . The revised bill Sherman proposed was simple , stating that " [ e ] very contract , combination in the form of trust or otherwise , or conspiracy , in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States , or with foreign nations , is declared to be illegal . " The bill further prescribed criminal penalties for any person who monopolizes trade . In debate , Sherman praised the effects of corporations in developing industry and railroads and asserted the right for people to form corporations , so long as they were " not in any sense a monopoly . " 
 The bill passed the Senate by an overwhelming 52 – 1 vote , and passed the House without dissent . President Harrison signed the bill into law on July 2 , 1890 . Sherman was the prime mover in getting the bill passed and became " by far the most articulate spokesman for antitrust in Congress . " The Act was later criticized for its simple language and lack of defined terms , but Sherman defended it , saying that it drew on common @-@ law language and precedents . He also denied that the Act was anti @-@ business at all , saying that it only opposed unfair business practices . Sherman emphasized that the Act aimed not at lawful competition , but at illegal combination . Later analysis was more generous : " The Sherman Act was as good an antitrust law as the Congress of 1890 could have devised . " 
 = = = Silver Purchase Act = = = 
 Since the passage of the Bland – Allison Act in 1878 , there had been little discussion of gold versus silver coinage . Silver had been hardly mentioned in the 1888 campaign , and Harrison 's exact position on the issue was initially unclear , but his appointment of a silverite Treasury Secretary , William Windom , encouraged the free silver supporters . Silver supporters ' numbers had grown in Congress with the addition of new Western states . The drop in agricultural prices , which made farmers ' debts harder to pay , broadened their cause 's appeal . Harrison attempted to steer a middle course between the two positions , advocating a free coinage of silver , but at its own value , not at a fixed ratio to gold . This served only to disappoint both factions . Windom suggested keeping the Bland – Allison system , but doubling the amount of silver allowed to be coined . The intrinsic value of the silver dollar had fallen to 72 @.@ 3 cents , but Windom believed ( though gold supporters doubted ) that coining more silver would increase demand and raise its value . Harrison was willing to sign whatever bill would satisfy the largest group of people , as long as it did not make the currency unsound . 
 Both Houses of Congress were majority @-@ Republican , but their solutions differed . The House passed a bill in June 1890 requiring the government to purchase 4 @.@ 5 million ounces of silver each month ( in addition to the $ 2 – $ 4 million required to be coined under Bland – Allison . ) The Senate passed a bill by Republican Preston B. Plumb of Kansas for free coinage of silver at the legal ( 16 : 1 ) ratio . Sherman voted against Plumb 's bill , but was appointed to the conference committee to produce a compromise bill that , now called the Sherman Silver Purchase Act , passed that July . The Treasury would buy 4 @.@ 5 million oz. of silver , and would issue Treasury Notes to pay for it , which would be redeemable in gold or silver . The law also provided that the Treasury could coin more silver dollars if the Secretary believed it necessary to redeem the new notes . Sherman thought the bill was the least harmful option . Harrison believed it would end the controversy , and he signed it into law . The effect of the bill , however , was the increased depletion of the nation 's gold supply . 
 In 1893 , a financial panic struck the stock market , and the nation soon faced an acute economic depression . The panic was worsened by the acute shortage of gold that resulted from the increased coinage of silver , and President Cleveland , who had replaced Harrison that March , called Congress into session and demanded repeal of the part of the Act requiring the government to purchase silver . The effects of the panic had driven more moderates to support repeal ; even so , the silverites rallied their following at a convention in Chicago , and the House debated for fifteen weeks before passing the repeal by a considerable margin . In the Senate , the repeal of silver purchase was equally contentious , but Cleveland convinced enough Democrats to stand by him that they , along with eastern Republicans , formed a 48 – 37 majority . Sherman voted for repeal of " his " bill . After repeal , depletion of the Treasury 's gold reserves continued , but at a lesser rate and subsequent bond issues replenished supplies of gold . Academic debate continues over the efficacy of the bond issues , but the consensus is that the repeal of the Silver Purchase Act was , at worst , <unk> and , at best , useful in restoring the nation 's financial health . 
 = = = Final years in the Senate = = = 
 Sherman was elected in 1892 to a sixth term , easily defeating the Democratic candidate in the state legislature . The more difficult fight had been for the Republican caucus 's vote , as many preferred Foraker to Sherman . With assistance from Cleveland businessman Mark Hanna , and after four days of balloting , the caucus agreed to support Sherman over Foraker , and he was re @-@ elected by the full legislature on January 12 , 1893 . In 1894 , Sherman surpassed Thomas Hart Benton 's record for longest tenure in the Senate . His memoirs , Recollections of Forty Years in the House , Senate and Cabinet , were published the following year . In 1896 , he gave speeches on behalf of fellow Ohioan William McKinley in his campaign for the presidency , but took a lesser role than in previous campaigns because of his advanced age . McKinley was elected over Democrat William Jennings Bryan . Wishing to see the appointment of Hanna , his friend and political manager , to the Senate , McKinley created a vacancy by appointing Sherman to his cabinet as Secretary of State . 
 = = Secretary of State = = 
 In January 1897 , McKinley offered Sherman the Secretary of State position , which Sherman , facing a difficult reelection campaign in 1898 , quickly accepted . His appointment was swiftly confirmed when Congress convened that March . The appointment was seen as a good one , but many in Washington soon began to question whether Sherman , at age 73 , still had the strength and intellectual vigor to handle the job ; rumors circulated to that effect , but McKinley did not believe them . Asked for advice on the inaugural address , Sherman offered a draft threatening intervention in Cuba , then in rebellion against Spain ; the suggestion was ignored . 
 Both Sherman and McKinley sought a peaceful resolution to the Cuban War , preferably involving an independent Cuba without American intervention . The United States and Spain began negotiations on the subject in 1897 , but it became clear that Spain would never concede Cuban independence , while the rebels ( and their American supporters ) would never settle for anything less . In January 1898 , Spain promised some concessions to the rebels , but when American consul Fitzhugh Lee reported riots in Havana , McKinley agreed to send the battleship USS Maine there to protect American lives and property . On February 15 , the Maine exploded and sank with 266 men killed . 
 War fever ran high , and by April , McKinley reported to Congress that efforts at diplomatic resolution had failed ; a week later , Congress declared war . By this time , McKinley had begun to rely on Assistant Secretary of State William R. Day for day @-@ to @-@ day management of the State Department , and was even inviting him to cabinet meetings , as Sherman had stopped attending them . Day , a McKinley associate of long standing , superseded his boss as the real power in the State Department . Sherman , sensing that he was being made a mere figurehead and recognizing , at last , his declining health and worsening memory , resigned his office on April 25 , 1898 . 
 = = Retirement , death , and legacy = = 
 Sherman retired from public life after resigning as Secretary of State . Except for one day , Sherman had spent the previous forty @-@ two years , four months , and twenty @-@ two days in government service . He gave a few interviews in which he disagreed with the administration 's policy of annexing Puerto Rico and the Philippines . Later that year , his wife , Margaret , had a stroke ; she died two years later on June 5 , 1900 . Sherman continued to alternate between houses in Mansfield and Washington . He mostly remained out of politics , except for a letter he wrote endorsing George K. Nash for Governor of Ohio in 1899 . Sherman died at his Washington home on October 22 , 1900 , in the company of his daughter , relatives and friends . After a funeral at St. John 's Episcopal Church in Washington , he was interred in Mansfield City Cemetery with his wife . 
 Sherman was not unmindful of his legacy and left $ 10 @,@ 000 in his will for a biography to be written " by some competent person . " Two biographies were published shortly thereafter , but neither mentions the bequest . In 1906 , Congressman Theodore E. Burton of Ohio published a biography ; two years later , former Representative Winfield S. Kerr of Mansfield , Ohio , published another . Both were very favorable to Sherman . A scholarly biography was said to be in preparation in Allan Nevins 's " American Political Leaders " series of the 1920s and 1930s , to be written by Roy Franklin Nichols and his wife , Jeanette Paddock Nichols , but the work was never completed . Jeanette Nichols later published several articles on Sherman in the next few decades , but he still awaits a full @-@ length scholarly biography . He is most remembered now by the antitrust act that bears his name . Burton , in summing up his subject , wrote : 
 It is true that there was much that was prosaic in the life of Sherman , and that his best efforts were not connected with that glamour which gains the loudest applause ; but in substantial influence upon those characteristic features which have made this country what it is , and in the unrecognized but permanent results of efficient and patriotic service for its best interests , there are few for whom a more beneficial record can be claimed . 
 = HMS Enterprise ( 1864 ) = 
 The seventh HMS Enterprise of the Royal Navy was an armoured sloop launched in 1864 at Deptford Dockyard . Originally laid down as a wooden screw sloop of the <unk> class , she was redesigned by Edward Reed and completed as a central battery ironclad . The ship spent the bulk of her career assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet before returning to England in 1871 where she was paid off . Enterprise was sold for scrap in 1885 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship had a length between perpendiculars of 180 feet ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 36 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 m ) , and a draught of 15 feet 10 inches ( 4 @.@ 83 m ) at deep load . She displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) . Her crew consisted of 130 officers and men . 
 Enterprise 's wooden hull was remodeled shortly after she was laid down ; she was given a plough @-@ shaped ram bow and a semi @-@ circular stern . The ship had only two decks : the main deck , very close to the ship 's waterline , and the upper deck which carried her armament , about 6 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) above the waterline . She was the first ship of composite construction in the Royal Navy , with iron upperworks . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Enterprise had a Ravenhill , Salkeld & Co. direct @-@ acting horizontal single @-@ expansion 2 @-@ cylinder direct acting steam engine driving a single propeller . Steam was provided by a pair of tubular boilers . The engine produced 690 indicated horsepower ( 510 kW ) which gave the ship a maximum speed around 9 @.@ 9 knots ( 18 @.@ 3 km / h ; 11 @.@ 4 mph ) . Enterprise carried 95 long tons ( 97 t ) of coal . As built , her funnel was mounted in the middle of the battery for protection , which impaired the working of her guns until it was relocated forward of the battery in November 1864 . She was barque @-@ rigged with three masts and had a sail area of 18 @,@ 250 square feet ( 1 @,@ 695 m2 ) . Her best speed under sail and steam was 9 @.@ 8 knots ( 18 @.@ 1 km / h ; 11 @.@ 3 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Enterprise was armed with two 100 @-@ pounder smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading Somerset cannon and two rifled 110 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns . The breech @-@ loading guns were of a new design from Armstrong and much was hoped for them . Firing tests carried out in September 1861 against an armoured target , however , proved that the 110 @-@ pounder was inferior to the 68 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun in armour penetration , and repeated incidents of breech explosions during the Battles for Shimonoseki and the Bombardment of Kagoshima in 1863 – 64 caused the navy to withdraw the guns from service shortly afterwards . 
 In an attempt to provide axial fire the sides of the hull at the upper deck level were cut away in front and behind the battery and covered by a 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) bulwark . The bulwark hinged inwards and covered a gun port though which a gun could traverse and fire . While providing better coverage than the traditional broadside layout this still left a 120 ° arc forward and another aft on which no gun could bear . 
 The 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) solid shot of the Somerset gun weighed approximately 113 pounds ( 51 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 13 @,@ 514 pounds ( 6 @,@ 130 kg ) . The gun had a velocity of 1 @,@ 462 ft / s ( 446 m / s ) at 563 feet ( 171 @.@ 6 m ) and had a range of 5 @,@ 253 yards ( 4 @,@ 803 m ) . The 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 110 @-@ pounder Armstrong breech @-@ loader weighed 107 – 110 pounds ( 48 @.@ 5 – 49 @.@ 9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) and , at an elevation of 11 @.@ 25 ° , a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . The 110 @-@ pounder gun weighed 9 @,@ 520 pounds ( 4 @,@ 320 kg ) . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . Both guns were mounted on wooden gun carriages with slides " which were difficult to traverse even on an even keel ; in a seaway few captains would have run the risk of casting them loose . " 
 Enterprise was rearmed during her 1868 refit with four 7 @-@ inch ( 180 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The 16 @-@ calibre 7 @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 @-@ pound ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 Enterprise had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick . It protected only the main deck and was shallow , reaching just 3 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) below the waterline . The guns were protected by a section of 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch armour , 34 feet ( 10 @.@ 4 m ) long , and by 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads . The armour was backed by 19 @.@ 5 inches ( 500 mm ) of teak wood . The total weight of her armour was 195 long tons ( 198 t ) . 
 = = Service = = 
 The ship was laid down on 5 May 1862 at the Royal Dockyard in Deptford , England , as the 17 @-@ gun sloop Circassian . She was renamed Enterprise in July 1862 and reclassified as an armoured corvette . Construction had barely begun before she was redesigned with an iron upper hull as well as armoured sides and battery . The ship was launched on 9 February 1864 , commissioned on 5 May 1864 and completed on 3 June 1864 . She cost £ 62 @,@ 474 to build . Enterprise initially served with the Channel Fleet , but was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet where she remained until 1871 when she returned to England . She was refitted and rearmed at Malta in 1868 . Upon her return the ship was paid off into 4th Class Reserve in August 1871 at Sheerness . Enterprise was sold for scrap in 1885 for £ 2 @,@ 072 . 
 = Leo Minor = 
 Leo Minor is a small and faint constellation in the northern celestial hemisphere . Its name is Latin for " the smaller lion " , in contrast to Leo , the larger lion . It lies between the larger and more recognizable Ursa Major to the north and Leo to the south . Leo Minor was not regarded as a separate constellation by classical astronomers ; it was designated by Johannes Hevelius in 1687 . 
 There are 37 stars brighter than apparent magnitude 6 @.@ 5 in the constellation ; three are brighter than magnitude 4 @.@ 5 . 46 Leonis Minoris , an orange giant of magnitude 3 @.@ 8 , is located some 95 light @-@ years from Earth . At magnitude 4 @.@ 4 , Beta Leonis Minoris is the second brightest star and the only one in the constellation with a Bayer designation . It is a binary star , the brighter component of which is an orange giant and the fainter a yellow @-@ white main sequence star . The third brightest star is 21 Leonis Minoris , a rapidly rotating white main @-@ sequence star of average magnitude 4 @.@ 5 . The constellation also includes two stars with planetary systems , two pairs of interacting galaxies , and the unique deep @-@ sky object Hanny 's Voorwerp . 
 = = History = = 
 The classical astronomers Aratus and Ptolemy had noted the region of what is now Leo Minor to be undefined and not containing any distinctive pattern ; Ptolemy classified the stars in this area as <unk> ( not belonging to a constellation outline ) within the constellation Leo . 
 Johannes Hevelius first depicted Leo Minor in 1687 when he outlined ten new constellations in his star atlas Firmamentum Sobiescianum , and included 18 of its objects in the accompanying Catalogus <unk> <unk> . Hevelius decided upon Leo Minor or Leo Junior as a depiction that would align with its beastly neighbours the Lion and the Great Bear . In 1845 , English astronomer Francis Baily revised the catalogue of Hevelius 's new constellations , and assigned a Greek letter known as Bayer designation to stars brighter than apparent magnitude 4 @.@ 5 . Richard A. Proctor gave the constellation the name <unk> " the Lioness " in 1870 , explaining that he sought to shorten the constellation names to make them more manageable on celestial charts . 
 German astronomer Christian Ludwig <unk> posited that the stars of Leo Minor had been termed Al <unk> ' wa @-@ <unk> " Gazelle with her Young " on a 13th @-@ century Arabic celestial globe , recovered by Cardinal Stefano Borgia and housed in the prelate 's museum at Velletri . Arabist Friedrich Wilhelm Lach describes a different view , noting that they had been seen as Al Haud " the Pond " , which the Gazelle jumps into . In Chinese astronomy , the stars Beta , 30 , 37 and 46 Leonis Minoris made up <unk> , a " Court of Judge or Mediator " , or Shi " Court Eunuch " or were combined with stars of the neighbouring Leo to make up a large celestial dragon or State Chariot . A line of four stars was known as <unk> ; it represented four Imperial advisors and may have been located in Leo Minor , Leo or adjacent regions . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 A dark area of the sky with a triangle of brighter stars just visible to the naked eye in good conditions , Leo Minor has been described by Patrick Moore as having " dubious claims to a separate identity " . It is a small constellation bordered by Ursa Major to the north , Lynx to the west , Leo to the south , and touching the corner of Cancer to the southwest . The three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is ' <unk> ' . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 16 sides . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 9h <unk> and 11h <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between 22 @.@ 84 ° and 41 @.@ 43 ° . Ranked 64th out of 88 constellations in size , Leo Minor covers an area of 232 @.@ 0 square degrees , or 0 @.@ 562 percent of the sky . It culminates each year at midnight on February 24 , and at 9 p.m. on May 24 . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 There are only three stars in the constellation brighter than magnitude 4 @.@ 5 , and 37 stars with a magnitude brighter than 6 @.@ 5 . Leo Minor does not have a star designated Alpha because Baily erred and allocated a Greek letter to only one star , Beta . It is unclear whether he intended to give 46 Leonis Minoris a Bayer designation , as he recognised Beta and 46 Leonis Minoris as of the appropriate brightness in his catalogue . He died before revising his proofs , which might explain this star 's omission . 
 At magnitude 3 @.@ 8 , the brightest star in Leo Minor is an orange giant of spectral class K0III named 46 Leonis Minoris or Praecipua ; its colour is evident when seen through binoculars . Situated 95 light @-@ years ( 29 parsecs ) from Earth , it has around 32 times the luminosity and is 8 @.@ 5 times the size of the Sun . It was also catalogued and named as o Leonis Minoris by Johann Elert Bode , which has been misinterpreted as Omicron Leonis Minoris . More confusion occurred with its proper name Praecipua , which appears to have been originally applied to 37 Leonis Minoris in the 1814 Palermo Catalogue of Giuseppe Piazzi , who mistakenly assessed the latter star as the brighter . This name was later connected by Allen with 46 Leonis Minoris — an error perpetuated by subsequent astronomers . The original " Praecipua " , 37 Leonis Minoris , has an apparent magnitude of 4 @.@ 69 , but is a distant yellow supergiant of spectral type <unk> and absolute magnitude of − 1 @.@ 84 , around 578 light @-@ years ( 177 parsecs ) distant . 
 Beta Leonis Minoris is a binary star system . The primary is a giant star of spectral class G8 and apparent magnitude of 4 @.@ 4 . It has around double the mass , 7 @.@ 8 times the radius and is 36 times the luminosity of the Earth 's Sun . Separated by 11 seconds of arc from the primary , the secondary is a yellow @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type F8 . The two orbit around a common centre of gravity every 38 @.@ 62 years , and lie 154 light @-@ years ( 47 parsecs ) away from the Solar System . 
 Around 98 light @-@ years ( 30 parsecs ) away and around 10 times as luminous as the Sun , 21 Leonis Minoris is a rapidly rotating white main @-@ sequence star , spinning on its axis in less than 12 hours and very likely flattened in shape . Of average apparent magnitude 4 @.@ 5 and spectral type A7V , it is a Delta Scuti variable . These are short period ( six hours at most ) pulsating stars which have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study asteroseismology . 
 Also known as SU and SV Leonis Minoris , 10 and 11 Leonis Minoris are yellow giants of spectral type G8III , with average magnitudes 4 @.@ 54 and 5 @.@ 34 respectively . Both are RS Canum Venaticorum variables , with 10 Leonis Minoris varying by 0 @.@ 012 magnitude over 40 @.@ 4 days , and 11 Leonis Minoris by 0 @.@ 033 magnitude over 18 days . 11 Leonis Minoris has a red dwarf companion of spectral type <unk> and apparent magnitude 13 @.@ 0 . 20 Leonis Minoris is a multiple star system 49 light @-@ years ( 15 parsecs ) away from the Sun . The main star is another yellow star , this time a dwarf of spectral type <unk> and apparent magnitude 5 @.@ 4 . The companion is an old , active red dwarf that has a relatively high metallicity and is of spectral type <unk> The fact that the secondary star is brighter than expected indicates it is likely two stars very close together that are unable to be made out separately with current viewing technology . 
 R and S Leonis Minoris are long @-@ period Mira variables , while U Leonis Minoris is a semiregular variable ; all three are red giants of spectral types <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> and M6 respectively . R varies between magnitudes 6 @.@ 3 and 13 @.@ 2 during a period of 372 days , S varies between magnitudes 8 @.@ 6 and 13 @.@ 9 during a period of 234 days , and U varies between magnitudes 10 @.@ 0 and 13 @.@ 3 during a period of 272 days . The lack of bright stars makes finding these objects challenging for amateur astronomers . G 117 @-@ <unk> , also known as RY Leonis Minoris , is a pulsating white dwarf of apparent magnitude 15 @.@ 5 . With a period of approximately 215 seconds , and losing a second every 8 @.@ 9 million years , the 400 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old star has been proposed as the most stable celestial clock . 
 SX Leonis Minoris is a dwarf nova of the SU Ursae Majoris type that was identified in 1994 . It consists of a white dwarf and a donor star , which orbit each other every 97 minutes . The white dwarf sucks matter from the other star onto an accretion disc and heats up to between 6000 and 10000 K. The dwarf star erupts every 34 to 64 days , reaching magnitude 13 @.@ 4 in these outbursts and remaining at magnitude 16 @.@ 8 when quiet . Leo Minor contains another dwarf nova , RZ Leonis Minoris , which brightens to magnitude 14 @.@ 2 from a baseline magnitude of around 17 but does so at shorter intervals than other dwarf novae . 
 Two stars with planetary systems have been found . HD <unk> is an orange dwarf of magnitude 7 @.@ 57 and spectral type <unk> 18 parsecs distant from Earth . With a diameter three quarters that of Earth 's sun , it is only 31 percent as luminous . It is orbited by a planet around 1 @.@ 78 times the mass of Jupiter every 7 @.@ 9 years , and there are possibly other smaller planets . HD <unk> is a yellow dwarf of spectral type G0 and visual magnitude 7 @.@ 63 . A planet 1 @.@ 3 times the mass of Jupiter and orbiting every 705 days was discovered in 2011 . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 In terms of deep @-@ sky objects , Leo Minor contains many galaxies viewable in amateur telescopes . Located 3 degrees southeast of 38 Leonis Minoris , NGC <unk> is seen nearly edge on . Known as the knitting needle galaxy , it is of apparent magnitude 11 @.@ 7 and measures 6 @.@ 8 by 1 @.@ 4 arcminutes . Located 42 million light years away , it is moving away from the Solar System at a rate of 616 km per second . In 2000 , a star within the galaxy brightened to magnitude 17 @.@ 4 , and has since been determined to be a luminous blue variable and supernova impostor . NGC 3003 , a <unk> barred spiral galaxy with an apparent magnitude of 12 @.@ 3 and an angular size of 5 @.@ 8 arcminutes , is seen almost edge @-@ on . NGC <unk> , 25 million light years distant , is face @-@ on towards Earth . Measuring 7 @.@ 1 by 6 @.@ 5 arcminutes in size , it has an apparent magnitude of 10 @.@ 45 . NGC <unk> is a starburst barred spiral galaxy of apparent magnitude 11 @.@ 67 and measuring 2 @.@ 1 by 2 @.@ 7 arcminutes . It has hosted supernovae in 1998 and 2001 . It and the spiral galaxy NGC <unk> are also almost face @-@ on towards Earth ; the latter is of magnitude 11 @.@ 05 and measures 7 @.@ 1 by 5 @.@ 2 arcminutes . NGC 2859 is an <unk> @-@ type lenticular galaxy . 
 At least two pairs of interacting galaxies have been observed . Arp 107 is a pair of galaxies in the process of merging , located 450 million light years away . NGC <unk> and NGC <unk> are a spiral and irregular barred spiral galaxy respectively that are interacting , located 1 @.@ 33 degrees southwest of 46 Leonis Minoris . 
 The unique deep @-@ sky object known as Hanny 's Voorwerp was discovered in Leo Minor in 2007 by Dutch school teacher Hanny van Arkel while participating as a volunteer in the Galaxy Zoo project . Lying near the 650 million light year @-@ distant spiral galaxy IC <unk> , it is around the same size as the Milky Way . It contains a 16 @,@ 000 light year wide hole . The <unk> is thought to be the visual light echo of a quasar now gone inactive , possibly as recently as 200 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 = = = Meteor shower = = = 
 Discovered by Dick McCloskey and Annette Posen of the Harvard Meteor Program in 1959 , the Leonis <unk> meteor shower peaks between October 18 and October 29 . The shower 's parent body is the long period comet C / 1739 K1 ( Zanotti ) . It is a minor shower , and can only be seen from the Northern Hemisphere . 
 = Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) = 
 " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " is a song from American singer Beyoncé 's third studio album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . Columbia Records released " Single Ladies " as a single on October 13 , 2008 alongside " If I Were a Boy " , showcasing the contrast between Beyoncé and her aggressive onstage alter ego Sasha Fierce . It explores men 's unwillingness to propose or commit . In the song , the female protagonist is in a club to celebrate her single status . 
 Most music critics praised the song 's smooth production and some noted its similarity to Beyoncé 's 2007 single " Get Me Bodied " . " Single Ladies " won three Grammy Awards in 2010 , among other accolades . Several news media sources named it as one of the best songs of 2008 , while some considered it one of the best songs of the decade . 
 It topped the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and has been certified quadruple @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , with more than 5 million paid digital downloads . The song charted among the top ten within the singles category in several other countries . Globally , it was 2009 's seventh best @-@ selling digital single with 6 @.@ 1 million units sold and is one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . 
 A black @-@ and @-@ white music video accompanied the single 's release . It won several awards , including the Video of the Year at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards . Beyoncé has performed " Single Ladies " on television and during her concert tours . The song and particularly its music video have been widely parodied and imitated . Several notable artists have performed cover versions . Media usage has included placement in popular television shows . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " was written by Beyoncé , Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , <unk> " Kuk " Harrell , and Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , and was produced by Nash and Stewart . Beyoncé recorded the song in April 2008 at the The Boom Boom Room Studio in Burbank , California , and it was mixed by Jaycen Joshua and Dave Pensado , with assistance from Randy Urbanski and Andrew Wuepper . Nash conceptualized " Single Ladies " after Beyoncé 's secret marriage to hip hop recording artist Jay @-@ Z in April 2008 . Stewart commented that the song was " the only public statement that [ Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z had ] ever made about marriage " , and that while in the studio recording the song Beyoncé had remained <unk> , even to the point of removing her wedding band . Beyoncé 's marriage inspired Nash to compose a song about an issue that affected many people 's relationships : the fear or unwillingness of men to commit . In an interview with Billboard magazine , Beyoncé added that she was drawn to the song because of the universality of the topic , an issue that " people are passionate about and want to talk about and debate " . She stated that although " Single Ladies " is a playful uptempo song , it addresses an issue that women experience every day . 
 In " Single Ladies " , Beyoncé portrays her alter ego Sasha Fierce , which appears on the second part of I Am ... Sasha Fierce . The song was released simultaneously with " If I Were a Boy " ; as lead singles , they were meant to demonstrate the concept of the dueling personalities of the singer . This reinforced the theme of the album , which was created by placing its ballads and uptempo tracks on separate discs . The singles debuted on US radio on October 8 , 2008 ; " Single Ladies " did so on mainstream urban New York radio station Power 105 @.@ 1 . Both singles were added to rhythmic contemporary radio playlists on October 12 , 2008 ; " Single Ladies " was sent to urban contemporary playlists the same day , while " If I Were a Boy " was instead classified for contemporary hit radio . The two songs were released as a double A @-@ side single on November 7 , 2008 , in Australia , New Zealand , and Germany . Dance remixes of the song were made available in the US on February 10 , 2009 , and in Europe on February 16 , 2009 . " Single Ladies " was not originally released as a single in the UK , but the song became increasingly popular there and reached the top ten in the UK Singles Chart as a result of download sales . On February 16 , 2009 , it was released as a CD single , and the dance remixes became available as a digital download . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Single Ladies " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop and R & B song with dancehall , disco and bounce influences . It is set in common time , and makes use of staccato bounce @-@ based hand claps , Morse code beeps , an ascending whistle in the background , and a punchy organic beat . The instrumentation includes a bass drum , a keyboard and spaced out synthesizers that occasionally zoom in and out ; one commentator , Sarah Liss of CBC News , noted that their arrangement surprisingly comes as light , instead of dense . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Single Ladies " is written in the key of E major and played in a moderate groove of 96 beats per minute . Beyoncé 's vocals range from the note of F ♯ 3 to D5 . It has a chord progression of E in the verses , and <unk> – C – <unk> – Am in the chorus . J. Freedom du Lac of The Washington Post noted the song features " playground vocals " . 
 " Single Ladies " is musically similar to Beyoncé 's 2007 single " Get Me Bodied " ; Andy Kellman of Allmusic called it a " dire throwback " to the song . Stewart and Harrell said in an interview given to People magazine that the similar rhythm of the two songs is " what Beyoncé responds to " . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times saw the song 's theme of female empowerment as an extension of that of " Irreplaceable " ( 2006 ) , and Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix noted that its usage of " blurry pronouns " such as " it " resembles Beyoncé 's 2005 single " Check on It " . Liss commented that the beat of the " Single Ladies " evokes African <unk> dancing and schoolyard Double Dutch chants , a view shared by Douglas Wolf of Time magazine . Trish Crawford of the Toronto Star concluded that " Single Ladies " is " a strong song of female empowerment " , and other music critics have noted its appeal to Beyoncé 's fan base of independent women as in the song , Beyoncé offers support to women who have split up from their no @-@ good boyfriends . 
 In " Single Ladies " , Beyoncé emphasizes her aggressive and sensual alter ego Sasha Fierce . She displays much attitude in her voice , as stated by Nick Levine of Digital Spy . Echoing Levine 's sentiments , Liss wrote that Beyoncé sounds " gleefully sassy " . The lyrics reflect post @-@ breakup situations . Accompanied by robotic @-@ like sounds , the opening lines of the song are call and response ; Beyoncé chants , " All the single ladies " , and background singers echo the line each time . In the first verse , Beyoncé narrates the recent end to a poor relationship after she " cried [ her ] tears for three good years " . She reclaims her right to flirt , have fun , and find a lover who is more devoted than the previous one . Beyoncé goes out to celebrate with her friends in a club where she meets a new love interest . However , her former boyfriend is watching her , and she directs the song to him . She then sings the chorus , which uses minor chords and contains several hooks , " If you like it then you shoulda put a ring on it ... Oh oh oh " . 
 In the second verse , Beyoncé tells her ex @-@ lover that , as he did not attempt to make things more permanent when he had the chance , he has no reason to complain now that she has found someone else . On the bridge , she affirms that she wants her new love interest " to make like a prince and grab her , delivering her to ' a destiny , to infinity and beyond ' " while " Prince Charming is left standing there like the second lead in a romantic comedy " . Towards the end of the song , Beyoncé takes a more aggressive vocal approach and employs a middle eight as she sings , " And like a ghost I 'll be gone " . When she chants the chorus for the third and final time , her vocals are omnipresent within layers of music , as described by Frannie Kelley of NPR . An electronic swoop tugs in continuously until the song ends . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Single Ladies " received positive reviews from music critics , who complimented its production . Nick Levine of Digital Spy particularly praised its beats , which according to him , " just don 't quit " . Michelangelo Matos of The A.V. Club wrote that the song is " fabulous , with glowing production , a humongous hook , and beats for weeks " . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times was also impressed with the overall production of the song , specifically the chorus , adding " More than most female singers , Beyoncé understands the funky art of singing rhythmically , and this is a prime example . " Fraser McAlpine of BBC Online considered " Single Ladies " to be the best song Beyoncé has attempted since " Ring the Alarm " ( 2006 ) and complimented the former 's refrain , describing it as " so amazingly catchy that it provides a surprisingly solid foundation for the entire song " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian commended the threatening atmosphere that " Single Ladies " creates by using minor chords . Daniel Brockman of The Phoenix complimented the song 's use of the word " it " , and wrote that the technique " sums up her divided musical persona far more effectively than the [ album 's ] two @-@ disc split @-@ personality gimmick . " 
 Darryl Sterdan of Jam ! called the song single @-@ worthy , and wrote that it is " a tune that actually sounds like a Beyoncé number " . Sarah Liss of CBC News wrote that " Single Ladies " represents Beyoncé at her best , describing it as " an instantly addictive [ and ] a bouncy featherweight dance @-@ pop track " . She further commented that it was pleasant hear a voice which " changes timbre naturally , a voice with actual cracks and fissures ( however slight ) " in contrast to the " Auto @-@ Tune epidemic that seems to be plaguing so many of her mainstream pop peers " . Douglas Wolf of Time magazine added that " Single Ladies " is a sing @-@ along which allows Beyoncé to demonstrate her virtuosity and " a focused , commanding display of individuality that speaks for every raised hand without a ring on it " . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The New Yorker wrote that the song combines a jumble of feelings and sounds that " don 't resolve but also never become tiring " . He concluded that " Single Ladies " was generally jubilant and that Beyoncé 's vocals were pure and glimmering . Andy Kellman of Allmusic and Jessica Suarez of Paste magazine noted the song as one of the standouts from I Am ... Sasha Fierce , and saw similarities to " Get Me Bodied " . 
 Writers praised the song 's dance beat ; Colin McGuire of PopMatters praised " Single Ladies " as one of Beyoncé 's best dance tracks . Spence D. of IGN Music described the song as a " Caribbean flair and booty shaking jubilation that should get even the most staid of listeners snapping their necks and gyrating joyfully " . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle wrote that it is a " hip @-@ shaking club " song similar to " Check on It " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly magazine wrote that " Single Ladies " is a " giddy , high @-@ stepping hybrid of lyrical kiss @-@ off and fizzy jump @-@ rope jam " . Describing the song as a " winning high @-@ stepping " one , Adam Mazmanian of The Washington Times wrote that " Single Ladies " is designed to get the women out on the dance floor as Beyoncé sings it with " a genuinely defiant , independent voice " . Some critics were unimpressed by " Single Ladies " . Mariel Concepcion of Billboard magazine called it " standard screech @-@ thump fare " . The Observer 's Adam Mattera saw " Single Ladies " and " Diva " as potential sources of inspiration for drag queens , although they may leave others confused . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine criticized its lyrical inconsistencies , suggesting it is a " leftover " from B 'Day . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 Rolling Stone named " Single Ladies " the best song of 2008 , and wrote , " The beat ... is irresistible and exuberant , the vocal hook is stormy and virtuosic . " " Single Ladies " ranked as the second @-@ best song of the 2000s decade in the magazine 's 2009 readers ' poll , and Rolling Stone critics placed it at number 50 on the list of the 100 Best Songs of the Decade . " Single Ladies " was placed at number two on MTV News ' list of The Best Songs of 2008 ; James Montgomery called it " hyperactive and supercharged in ways I never thought possible . It 's epic and sexy and even a bit sad . " " There is absolutely zero chance Beyoncé ever releases a single like this ever again " , Montgomery concluded . Time magazine 's critic Josh Tyrangiel , who called the song " ludicrously infectious " , ranked it as the seventh @-@ best song of 2008 . Douglas Wolf of the same publication placed it at number nine on his list of the All @-@ Time 100 Songs . 
 " Single Ladies " appeared at number six on the Eye Weekly 's critics ' list of the Best Singles of 2008 , and at number six on About.com 's Mark Edward Nero 's list of the Best R & B Songs of 2008 . On The Village Voice 's year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Single Ladies " was ranked at numbers three and forty one in 2008 and 2009 respectively . Additionally , the Maurice Joshua Club Mix of the song was ranked at number 443 on the 2008 list . " Single Ladies " was named the best song of the 2000s decade by Black Entertainment Television ( BET ) . Sarah Rodman , writing for The Boston Globe , named " Single Ladies " the fourth most irresistible song of the decade , and stated , " [ Beyoncé ] combined leotards with crass engagement @-@ bling baiting into one delicious sexy @-@ yet @-@ antiquated package . The video had the whole world dancing and waving along via YouTube . " VH1 ranked " Single Ladies " at number sixteen on its list of The 100 Greatest Songs of the 2000s . In his book Eating the Dinosaur ( 2009 ) , Chuck Klosterman wrote that " Single Ladies " is " arguably the first song overtly marketed toward urban bachelorette parties " . Jody Rosen of The New Yorker credited the melodies that float and dart over the thump for creating a new sound in music that didn 't exist in the world before Beyoncé . He further wrote , " If they sound ' normal ' now , it 's because Beyoncé , and her many followers , have retrained our ears . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 " Single Ladies " has received awards and nominations , including the Song of the Year , Best R & B Song and Best Female R & B Vocal Performance at the 52nd Grammy Awards . It also won the awards for Favorite Song at the 2009 Kids ' Choice Awards , Song of the Year at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards , and Best R & B Song at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards . The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized " Single Ladies " as one of the most performed songs of 2009 at the 27th ASCAP Pop Music Awards . The song was nominated in the Best Song category at the 2009 NAACP Image Awards and in the English @-@ language " Record of the Year " category at the 2009 Premios Oye ! Awards . It was also nominated for Record of the Year at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards , Viewer 's Choice Award at the 2009 BET Awards , Best R & B / Urban Dance Track at the 2009 International Dance Music Awards , and World 's Best Single at the 2010 World Music Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Single Ladies " debuted at number 72 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart issue dated November 1 , 2008 . On December 6 , 2008 , it moved from number 28 to number two on the Hot 100 chart , as a result of its debut at number one on the Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 204 @,@ 000 digital downloads . The song became Beyoncé 's fifth solo single to top the Hot Digital Songs chart . " If I Were a Boy " charted at number three on the Hot 100 chart the same week , and thus Beyoncé became the seventh female in the US to have two songs in the top five positions of that particular chart . The following week " Single Ladies " climbed to number one on the Hot 100 chart , selling 228 @,@ 000 downloads , and became Beyoncé 's fifth solo single to top the chart . It tied her with Olivia Newton @-@ John and Barbra Streisand at number six on the list of female artists with the most Hot 100 number one hits . 
 The song was at the top of the chart for four non @-@ consecutive weeks , during the last of which digital downloads of " Single Ladies " increased by 157 percent to 382 @,@ 000 units — its best week of digital sales . For the week ending January 15 , 2009 , the song moved to number one on the Hot 100 Airplay chart with 147 @.@ 3 million listener impressions . It reached number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , where it remained for twelve consecutive weeks . " Single Ladies " topped the Pop Songs and the Hot Dance Club Play charts , and reached number two on the Pop 100 chart . The song has been certified quadruple @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of over 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . It has sold over 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the US as of October 2012 , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 " Single Ladies " debuted at number 81 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart for the week ending November 29 , 2008 . On January 24 , 2009 , its ninth charting week , it moved to its peak spot at number two , and was subsequently certified double @-@ platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for sales of over 160 @,@ 000 copies . The song peaked at number seven , and spent 112 weeks on the UK Singles Chart . It topped the UK R & B Chart , where it succeeded the song 's double A @-@ side , " If I Were a Boy " . On October 23 , 2009 , " Single Ladies " was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for sales of over 600 @,@ 000 copies . As of November 2013 , it has sold 704 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . On the Irish Singles Chart , it reached number four and enjoyed twenty weeks of charting , while on the Japan Hot 100 chart it made its way to number 25 . In Australia , the single attained a high point of number five on the ARIA Singles Chart , and received a five @-@ times platinum certification from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of over 350 @,@ 000 copies . It peaked at number two on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of over 15 @,@ 000 copies . " Single Ladies " appeared on several charts in mainland Europe , and peaked at number 20 on the European Hot 100 Singles chart . It reached the top 10 in the Netherlands , Italy and Spain , and the top 40 in both Belgian territories ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , as well as in Hungary , Norway , Sweden and Switzerland . " Single Ladies " was 2009 's seventh best @-@ selling digital single with 6 @.@ 1 million units sold worldwide , and is one of the best @-@ selling singles of all @-@ time . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 The music video for " Single Ladies " was shot immediately after that of " If I Were a Boy " , but it received less attention during production than the " higher @-@ gloss , higher @-@ profile video " for " If I Were a Boy " . Both videos were shot in black @-@ and @-@ white in New York City and were directed by Jake Nava , with whom Beyoncé had worked on previous music videos including " Crazy in Love " and " Beautiful Liar " . " Single Ladies " was choreographed by Frank Gatson and JaQuel Knight , and incorporates J @-@ Setting choreography . The two music videos premiered on MTV 's Total Request Live show on October 13 , 2008 to reinforce the concept of conflicting personalities . The videos were released to other media outlets on the same date and subsequently included on Beyoncé 's remix album with videography , Above and Beyoncé , and the platinum edition of I Am ... Sasha Fierce . 
 Beyoncé told Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly that the inspiration for the video was a 1969 Bob Fosse routine entitled " Mexican Breakfast " seen on The Ed Sullivan Show , which featured Fosse 's wife , Gwen Verdon , dancing with two other women . " Mexican Breakfast " had become an Internet viral sensation the previous summer after Unk 's " Walk It Out " was dubbed over the original mix . Beyoncé wanted to attempt a similar dance and eventually , the choreography of " Single Ladies " was liberally adapted from " Mexican Breakfast " : 
 I saw a video on YouTube . [ The dancers ] had a plain background and it was shot on the crane ; it was 360 degrees , they could move around . And I said , ' This is genius . ' We kept a lot of the Fosse choreography and added the down @-@ south thing — it 's called J @-@ Setting , where one person does something and the next person follows . So it was a strange mixture ... It 's like the most urban choreography , mixed with Fosse — very modern and very vintage . 
 Beyoncé wanted a simple music video ; it was filmed with minimal alternative camera shots and cuts , and no changes to hairstyles , costumes and sets . According to JaQuel Knight , Beyoncé also wanted the video to feel " good and powerful " and include choreography that could be attempted by anybody . The day the video was shot , the song was divided into three parts . Nava deliberately used lengthy shots so that viewers " would connect with the human endeavor of Beyoncé 's awe @-@ inspiring dance " , with all the changes in looks , angles , and lighting executed live on @-@ camera because he wanted to keep the feel " very organic and un @-@ gimmicky " . The styling was inspired by a Vogue photo shoot . In the video Beyoncé wears a titanium roboglove designed by her long @-@ time jeweler , Lorraine Schwartz , to complement her alter ego Sasha Fierce . The glove consists of several pieces , including a ring and a separate component that covers Beyoncé 's upper arm . She first wore the roboglove on the red carpet at the MTV Europe Music Awards on November 8 , 2008 . The video shoot took around twelve hours . Many performances of the song were filmed without interruption , and edited together to give the impression that the final video was filmed in a single take . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the video for " Single Ladies " , emphasis is laid on Beyoncé 's more aggressive and sensual side , her alter ego Sasha Fierce . It shows her in an asymmetrical leotard and high @-@ heels , with two backup dancers , Ebony Williams and Ashley Everett . Beyoncé 's mother , Tina Knowles , designed the high @-@ cut leotards after seeing something similar in the American musical films A Chorus Line and All That Jazz . The dance routine incorporates many styles , including jazz , tap , and hip hop , and is credited with popularizing J @-@ Setting , a flamboyant lead and follow dance style prominent in many African American gay clubs across Atlanta and used by the all @-@ female <unk> J @-@ <unk> dance troupe of Jackson State University . 
 The video features Beyoncé and her two companions dancing inside an infinity cove , which alternates between black and white and places the focus on the complex choreography . Throughout the video the women click their heels and shake their hips and legs . However , the main intention is to attract the viewers ' attention toward their hands and ring fingers as they do the hand @-@ twirl move . At one point during the video , the dancers run up to a wall , which , according to Frank Gatson Jr . , pays homage to Shirley MacLaine 's act in the 1969 film Sweet Charity . Toward the end of the video , Beyoncé flashes her own wedding ring on her finger . 
 = = = Response and accolades = = = 
 Although the video for " Single Ladies " was the cheapest and quickest of all her videos to produce , Beyoncé felt that it ended up being " the most iconic ... something special " . It spawned a dance craze and inspired thousands of imitations all over the world , many of which were posted on YouTube . In an interview with MTV , Beyoncé expressed her appreciation of the public 's response to the video , and stated that she had spent much time watching several of these parodies : " It 's beautiful to feel you touch people and bring a song to life with a video . " Nava also expressed his surprise at the positive reception of the video , and attributed its success to the video 's understated , less @-@ is @-@ more approach . In an interview with Chandler <unk> for Eye Weekly , Toronto director Scott Cudmore stated that the Internet age has impacted the way music videos are made , as well as perceived by an audience . Although Cudmore believes that the music video as a medium is " disappearing ... from the mainstream public eye " , he accredited " Single Ladies " with its resurgence , and stated that after the video appeared on the Internet , people began to " consciously look for music videos because of its art " . 
 The music video has won several awards and accolades . It was voted Best Dance Routine in the 2008 Popjustice Readers ' Poll ; and won Video of the Year , Best Choreography , and Best Editing at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards . The song also won Best Video at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards , the 2009 MOBO Awards , and the 2009 BET Awards . The video has also received many nominations : Best Video in the 2009 Popjustice Readers Polls ( placed 4th ) ; nine ( including the three that it won ) in the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards ; Best International Artist Video at the 2009 MuchMusic Video Awards ( losing to Lady Gaga 's " Poker Face " ) ; Outstanding Music Video at the 2009 NAACP Image Awards ; and two at the 2009 MTV Australia Awards for Best Video and Best Moves . The video was ranked at number four on BET 's Notarized : Top 100 Videos of 2008 countdown , and at number three on VH1 's Top 40 Videos of 2009 . It was voted best music video of the 2000s decade by fans of the music website MUZU TV and fifth @-@ best of the decade by readers of Billboard magazine . Claire Suddath of Time magazine included it in her 30 All @-@ Time Best Music Videos , writing that " sometimes the best creations are also the simplest " . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the video at number one on their list of Beyoncé 's ten best music videos writing , " [ It has ] All of the sex appeal . Ever ... Beyoncé doesn 't need anything but an empty room in this one . It 's all about the dancing . It 's all about the leotard . It 's all about the fierceness . And it 's epic . " . The music video was certified platinum by CRIA for shipment of sales 10 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = = = " <unk> " = = = = 
 " Single Ladies " was nominated for nine awards at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , ultimately winning three including Video of the Year . Its failure to win the Best Female Video category , which went to American country pop singer Taylor Swift 's " You Belong with Me " , sparked controversy during the ceremony . Swift 's acceptance speech was interrupted by rapper Kanye West , who grabbed her microphone to declare the " Single Ladies " video as " one of the best videos of all time " . Footage of Beyoncé in the audience looking shocked was then shown . When Beyoncé won the Video of the Year award later that night , she reminisced about when she won her first MTV award with her former group , Destiny 's Child , and called the experience " one of the most exciting moments in [ her ] life " . She then invited Swift on @-@ stage to finish her speech and " have her moment " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé first promoted " Single Ladies " in a concert organized by Power 105 @.@ 1 radio in New York on October 29 , 2008 , and subsequently performed the song at various awards ceremonies , concerts and television shows . At the 2008 World Music Awards in Monaco , Beyoncé performed " Single Ladies " while wearing her roboglove , and pointed to the glove as she sang the song 's chorus . Beyoncé sang " Single Ladies " on Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) on November 15 , 2008 . That night , Beyoncé was featured in a parody of the song 's music video , where the two female backup dancers from the video were replaced by pop singer Justin Timberlake and SNL cast members Andy Samberg and Bobby Moynihan . On November 16 , 2008 , Beyoncé performed a medley of " If I Were a Boy " , " Single Ladies " , and " Crazy in Love " during the final episode of Total Request Live . " Single Ladies " was also performed by Beyoncé on November 18 , 2008 , on 106 & Park , on November 23 , 2008 , at the 2008 American Music Awards , on November 25 , 2008 , on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and on November 26 , 2008 , at Rockefeller Plaza on The Today Show . She delivered a performance of " Single Ladies " with two male dancers on The Tyra Banks Show on January 9 , 2009 . 
 In July 2009 , Beyoncé gave a concert at the Staples Center in Los Angeles where American actor Tom Cruise danced with her and her dancers as they performed the dance routine of " Single Ladies " . At the MTV Video Music Awards on September 13 , 2009 , Beyoncé performed " Single Ladies " backed by " an army of single ladies " on stage . In a poll conducted by Billboard magazine , the performance was ranked as the seventh best in the history of MTV Video Music Awards . A critic wrote in the magazine : " The world gave a collective ' whoa ' when Beyonce unleashed her ' Single Ladies ' video , but to see those dance moves come to life at the 2009 VMAs was beyond eye @-@ popping . " Erika Ramirez of the same publication placed the performance at number two on her list of Beyoncé 's five biggest TV performances . " Single Ladies " was included on the set lists of Beyoncé 's I Am ... Yours concerts and her I Am ... World Tour . The song was subsequently included on Beyoncé 's live albums I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas ( 2009 ) and I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) . " Single Ladies " was later performed by Beyoncé in a pink fringe dress at a concert at Palais Nikaia in Nice , France , on June 20 , 2011 , and at the Glastonbury Festival on June 26 , 2011 , in front of more than 175 @,@ 000 spectators . On July 1 , 2011 , Beyoncé gave a free concert on Good Morning America as part of its Summer Concert Series , which included " Single Ladies " . Backed by her all @-@ female band and her backing singers The Mamas , Beyoncé performed " Single Ladies " in front of 3 @,@ 500 people during the 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé revue at the Roseland Ballroom in New York , in August 2011 . In May , 2012 , Beyoncé performed the song during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue at Revel Atlantic City , a hotel . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times mentioned " Single Ladies " in the " almost continuous high point " of the concert . Rebecca Thomas of MTV News wrote that Beyoncé 's dancing during " Single Ladies " reflected the female empowerment theme of the song . On February 3 , 2013 , Beyoncé performed the song along with her former bandmates from Destiny 's Child during the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show . The song was added to the set list of her Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 ) . Beyoncé 's performed " Single Ladies " at The Sound of Change Live concert on June 1 , 2013 at Twickenham Stadium , London as part of the Chime for Change movement . 
 = = Cultural impact and legacy = = 
 " Single Ladies " gained widespread popularity for its catchy hook and theme of female empowerment . Critics have compared the song to Aretha Franklin 's " Respect " and Gloria Gaynor 's " I Will Survive " , prompted by their lyrics , which all promote female empowerment . The music video achieved fame for its intricate choreography and its deployment of jazz hands with a wrist twist . It has been credited with starting the " first major dance craze of both the new millennium and the Internet " , triggering a number of parodies of the dance choreography . Billy Johnson of Yahoo ! Music wrote that the video of " Single Ladies " was the top music @-@ related viral hit of 2009 . MTV News ' James Montgomery wrote that " it appears like [ the music video ] was custom @-@ made for the YouTube generation , which probably explains why making homages became a worldwide phenomenon . " The video generated interest in J @-@ Setting , the dance form that choreographer JaQuel Knight highlights in the video , and Beyoncé is credited with bringing the dance style to the mainstream . 
 In a radio interview on NPR 's All Things Considered , Knight shared his excitement that the popular video made people want to learn to dance . Trish Crawford from the Toronto Star observed how it has appealed to all age groups and genders , in contrast with the short @-@ lived dance craze inspired by Soulja Boy two years before , which she considered " mainly a male hip @-@ hop dance " . Crawford mentioned , " Toddlers have tackled [ the ' Single Ladies ' dance ] . [ So have ] recreation centre dance classes , sorority sisters in their dorm rooms , suburban teenagers in their basements and high school cheerleaders . " In February 2009 , Columbia Records announced the launch of a " Single Ladies " Dance Video Contest . Fans aged eighteen and older were invited to adhere precisely to the dance routine performed by Beyoncé and her two dancers in the original production . The winning video was included in her live album , I Am ... World Tour . 
 = = = Parodies and homages = = = 
 " Single Ladies " was first parodied in the November 15 , 2008 , episode of SNL , which featured Beyoncé . She was initially reluctant to participate in the segment but agreed to after a visit from Timberlake in her dressing room . Beyoncé 's choreographer , Frank Gatson Jr . , expressed mixed emotions at the result , saying : " I was upset because I know that Justin 's a great dancer and if he learned the choreography , he could do it really well ... If they 're making parodies [ of our work ] just like they make parodies of politicians and presidents , that means it must be big time . So in that respect , I have to take my hat off to them for doing it . " Later , Joe Jonas of the pop rock band Jonas Brothers posted a video on their YouTube account where he imitated the dance in a black leotard and heels . Irish pop duo Jedward parodied Beyoncé 's dance moves for the video of their cover version of " All the Small Things " . In London , one hundred dancers wearing leotards similar to the one worn by Beyoncé performed the choreography on April 20 , 2009 , to promote Trident Unwrapped gum . On November 20 , 2009 , BBC <unk> including Fiona Bruce , Sophie <unk> , Kate Silverton , and Susanna Reid performed " Single Ladies " in black military @-@ style uniforms . They were later joined onstage by their male newsreader colleagues Bill Turnbull , Ben Brown , Nicholas Owen , and Charlie <unk> before taking on Diversity , winners of the third series of Britain 's Got Talent , in a dance @-@ off . They performed the choreography to raise funds for the UK campaign , Children In Need . 
 The music video inspired a legion of amateur imitators to post videos of themselves performing the choreography on YouTube . One of the most viewed viral videos is that of Shane Mercado , who appeared on The Bonnie Hunt Show in bikini bottoms to perform the choreography . His subsequent meeting with Beyoncé became a media event . Beyoncé has acknowledged the popularity of the videos on YouTube ; during her concert tour , excerpts from many of the YouTube videos were played in the background while Beyoncé was performing the song . Cubby , who is an on air personality for Charlotte , North Carolina 's 96 @.@ 1 The Beat AM , based his parody on the SNL one . His video lead to a meet and greet with Beyoncé and eventually , an opportunity to join her on stage at a show stop in Atlanta during her I Am ... World Tour . Many videos featuring babies of different ages , imitating the dance choreography of " Single Ladies " , have been uploaded on YouTube . A video showing Cory Elliott , a baby boy from New Zealand , performing the dance while watching Beyoncé on television , gained significant coverage from several media outlets . Time magazine 's critic Dan Fletcher ranked it as the fourth best viral video of 2009 and wrote , " Young children love songs with good rhythm and repetition , and ' Single Ladies ' certainly has both . " However , when a video of seven @-@ year @-@ old girls performing choreography from " Single Ladies " at a dance competition in Los Angeles went viral on YouTube , it created a controversy and sparked outrage from many viewers , who felt the girls were sexualized by the suggestive dance moves . 
 In a video filmed by singer John Legend , US President Barack Obama appears with his wife Michelle performing part of the " Single Ladies " routine . He also briefly performed the hand @-@ twirl move from the song 's video at the Obama Inaugural Celebration . This video prompted an Obama look @-@ alike , Iman Crosson , to do his own version of the " Single Ladies " choreography . Several other well @-@ known personalities , including American environmentalist and politician Joe Nation and American actor Tom Hanks , have performed the dance . In the music video for " Dancin on Me " by DJ Webstar and Jim Jones , three females are featured in the background , imitating the " Single Ladies " dance . Wearing a black leotard and gold glove , Katy Brand performed the choreography with two backup female dancers for the final of BBC One 's Let 's Dance for Comic Relief to raise money for the charity Comic Relief on March 12 , 2010 . Jenna Ushkowitz , Chris Colfer and Heather Morris did the " Single Ladies " dance as part of the Glee Live tour in June 2011 . The music minister at Geyer Springs First Baptist Church in Little Rock , Arkansas , thought it would be " an excellent idea " to attract interest in the church choir by using a remix of " Single Ladies " and having choir members dance to it . In the music video he made , the choir members sing , " All the singing ladies , all the singing fellas ... If you like the choir , then won 't you come and sing in it . " Cyndi Wilkerson , Music Ministry Assistant at Geyer Springs First Baptist Church , uploaded the video to YouTube on August 29 , 2011 . In April 2013 , YouTube phenomenon Psy did the dance routine during a concert in Seoul while wearing a red leotard and red boots . 
 = = = Usage in media = = = 
 " Single Ladies " has been used in various media including television shows , commercials and books . In the Best of 2009 issue of People magazine , Khloe , Kim , and Kourtney Kardashian were ranked at number nine on the magazine 's list of " 25 Most Intriguing People " ; the photograph accompanying the article showed the three women in leotards mimicking the look from the " Single Ladies " video . The song has been included in many television shows , including CSI : Miami , Cougar Town , and in two episodes in Glee . In the United Kingdom , the video for " Single Ladies " was used for a 2009 television commercial for the new <unk> kebab flavored Pot Noodle . In other media , issue 33 of comic book series The Brave and the Bold features a scene in which Wonder Woman , Zatanna , and Barbara Gordon sing a karaoke version of the song while at a club . A mash @-@ up video of the theme of " Single Ladies " and The Andy Griffith Show circulated on the Internet in early 2010 . It was produced by Party Ben at the end of 2008 . In July 2010 , the line " Put a Ring on It " was used by the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV / AIDS as the tagline for a female condom public awareness campaign in the US . 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 Singers and bands of various genres have covered the song in their own style . Scottish band Marmaduke Duke performed a cover version in April 2009 on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge show . In October 2009 , it was released on Radio 1 's Live Lounge – Volume 4 , a compilation of Live Lounge recordings . Australian singer Stan Walker sang a jazzier version of the song on the seventh series of Australian Idol in October 2009 . The same year , elementary school group PS22 chorus covered " Single Ladies " and " Halo " ( 2009 ) during Billboard 's annual Women In Music luncheon held at The Pierre in New York City . In her short @-@ lived Broadway revue " All About Me " in March 2010 , Dame Edna Everage performed a version of the song with backup dancers Gregory Butler and Jon @-@ Paul Mateo . It was also covered by Jeff Tweedy and British singer @-@ songwriter Alan Pownall . According to Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly , Tweedy sang only a few bars ; he gave " Single Ladies " an acoustic feel and recited the rest of the song 's lyrics . He performed the hand movements that Beyoncé and her dancers do in the song 's video . <unk> , an American indie music duo consisting of Jack Conte and <unk> Dawn , recorded a cover of " Single Ladies " on video , which makes use of split screens to show Dawn on vocals and Conte playing the instruments . Inspired by the avant @-@ garde Dogme 95 movement in cinema , Conte began to record songs on video as a quick way to create " organic and raw " music . They chose " Single Ladies " as they believed that it would help them grow their audience . 
 During a concert at New York 's Madison Square Garden , Prince performed a mash @-@ up of his 1984 songs " Pop Life " and " I Would Die For You , incorporating a sample of " Single Ladies " . During her tour in Melbourne , Australia , on August 13 , 2010 , Katy Perry performed " Single Ladies " and attempted to emulate the choreography . English composer of classical music Mark @-@ Anthony Turnage composed a setting of the song which he titled " <unk> Out " . Describing it as his " most R & B work to date " , Turnage told Tim Rutherford @-@ Johnson of The Guardian that he was motivated to put the " Single Ladies " reference in his work by his young son , a fan of the song . The piece premiered at the BBC Proms on August 27 , 2010 . Sara Bareilles covered the song as part of Billboard 's " Mashup Mondays " and performed it as part of her set list on the 2010 Lilith Fair Tour . As stated by a critic writing for the magazine , Bareilles put " a piano @-@ pop " twist on " Single Ladies " and turned it " into a slow , jazzy track , complete with creeping bassline and vocal harmonies " . American rock band A Rocket to the Moon covered " Single Ladies " and placed it on their EP , The Rainy Day Sessions , which was released in October 2010 . 
 On September 26 , 2010 , <unk> sang their version of the song on the second series of The X Factor Australia , and on May 31 , 2011 , Matthew Raymond @-@ Barker sang the song live on the seventh prime of the second series of the X Factor France . During the finale of the tenth season of American Idol on May 25 , 2011 , the lady contestants joined together onstage to perform " Single Ladies " and attempted the dance moves from the song 's video . " Single Ladies " was covered by The Chipettes in the film Alvin and the Chipmunks : The Squeakquel and is on the film 's soundtrack . Their three @-@ part harmonies were all sung by Janice Karman , who recorded all parts , which were then layered and pitched up . The Chipettes attempted the Bob Fosse @-@ styled choreography . Billy Johnson of Yahoo ! Music commented that for the first time the movie includes a performance he wanted to watch , and concluded , " this is definitely one of the best ' Single Ladies ' parodies . It is worth it just to see the squirrels singing . " The film Sex and the City 2 features a performance of the song by American singer and actress Liza Minnelli . On October 18 , 2011 , Young Men Society sang " Single Ladies " on the third series of The X Factor Australia , and on June 30 , 2014 , Holly Tapp sang the song on the third series of The Voice Australia . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from I Am ... Sasha Fierce album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release and radio history = = 
 = Asher Levi = 
 Asher Levi is a fictional character from EastEnders : E20 , an Internet spin @-@ off of the BBC soap opera EastEnders . Played by Heshima Thompson , Asher is a main character in series two . He is a charismatic street dancer , who uses his talent to escape from his criminal past . As a father @-@ figure to his younger brother Sol Levi ( Tosin Cole ) , Asher occasionally resorts to stealing in order to provide for them both . He is willing to go to extreme lengths to protect Sol , including being stabbed by their schizophrenic mother . Over the course of the series , Asher betrays Sol by sleeping with his girlfriend , Naz Mehmet ( Emaa Hussen ) . The two are ultimately able to reconcile , and Asher makes amends by encouraging his brother 's dancing talent . 
 The character was created by the programme 's team of thirteen writers , alongside the series ' other main characters : Sol , Naz , and their friend Stevie Dickinson ( Amanda Fairbank @-@ Hynes ) . Thompson appreciated that the role allowed him to combine his love of acting and dancing . It brought him public recognition , and led fans of the series to hope that he and the other main characters would appear in the parent show , EastEnders . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 After being evicted by their mother Caroline ( Sandra Yaw ) , Asher and his younger brother Sol ( Tosin Cole ) move in with Walford resident Stevie Dickinson ( Amanda Fairbank @-@ Hynes ) . The brothers attend a dance audition , at which Asher is successful but Sol fails . Asher offers the judge a bribe on his brother 's behalf , and is witnessed doing so by Fatboy ( Ricky Norwood ) . He threatens him with a knife , revealing a stab wound on his abdomen , but disposes of the weapon when Fatboy leaves . While practicing dancing in the local community centre , Asher is mistaken for a Latin dance class instructor and steals the group 's money . Though he attempts to find legitimate work , he is turned down due to having a criminal record , and again resorts to stealing . 
 When Sol begins a romantic relationship with his new friend Naz Mehmet ( Emaa Hussen ) , Asher tells Naz 's fiancé , Ekin Beg ( Hemi Yeroham ) , that she is cheating on him . Ekin leads Sol to believe that Asher and Naz are an item , which causes Sol to insult them both . Annoyed , the two go clubbing together , and have sex after getting drunk and taking drugs . Naz later confesses the one @-@ night stand to Sol , who punches his brother . He leaves Stevie 's flat after Asher returns home drunk , having got into trouble selling stolen property . Asher later finds Sol with their mother , who has been hospitalised . It is revealed that she is schizophrenic , and that Asher 's stab wound was caused by her . Asher apologises for sleeping with Naz , and tells Sol that she loves him . Finally , he encourages Sol to enter a dance competition . Though nervous , Sol is reassured by his brother and completes his routine to great acclaim . 
 = = Other appearances = = 
 Asher appears in extra video content on the E20 website . In one video , he and Sol argue during filming of an advert for " SmasherDance " — a video in which they demonstrate various dancing styles — as Sol is more interested in getting food . The full SmasherDance advert is also on YouTube . In another video , the four friends play a drinking game in the local café , and in another he is an Elvis Presley impersonator marrying Naz and Ekin in Naz 's nightmare . 
 = = Creation , development and characterisation = = 
 Asher is one of the four main characters in series two of EastEnders : E20 , alongside Sol , Naz and Stevie . They were created by the programme 's team of thirteen writers . Actor and singer Heshima Thompson auditioned for the series , having learned about it from his agent . Part of the process involved a dance audition with Tony Adigun , the leader of dance group Avant Garde . Thompson was subsequently cast as Asher , and the character and his casting were announced on 28 July 2010 . Deborah Sathe , the show 's producer , expressed pride in the writers and stated , " [ They ] have created four new faces for [ Albert ] Square and their reaction to Walford life is really exciting . " Thompson called E20 " a great project to be part of " , and eagerly anticipated the dancing the role would entail . He later said in an interview with Daniel Kilkelly from entertainment news website Digital Spy that it was good to be able to combine his love of acting with his love of dance . 
 Asher is described on the E20 website as being charming and sexy , with the talent to make him a star . Thompson deemed his character " very confident " and a " bit of a bad boy " . He is a hustler , who finds it difficult to refuse easy money , and seizes opportunities regardless of their legality . He has a criminal past , having recently been released from prison for theft prior to the start of the series . Thompson explained that Asher becomes a street dancer to help keep himself away from crime , which he commits in order to provide for Sol . He stated that Asher would " try his best to stay out of trouble " , but may return to crime through learned behaviour . 
 Asher 's life is complicated by his mother and brother . He has been a father @-@ figure to Sol since a young age , and , as revealed in episode nine , has cared for him through their mother 's schizophrenic episodes . Thompson assessed that Asher is not necessarily the best role model for Sol , but is willing to go to great lengths to protect him and ensure his success , such as being stabbed by his mother and giving away his father 's Rolex watch to secure Sol a place in the dance group . Thompson said that looking after Sol has " taken a toll on [ Asher ] " . Although he initially feels optimistic about moving to Walford , he loses perspective and makes a mistake by sleeping with Naz . Thompson deemed this out of character for Asher , as he loves his brother so much , but opined that despite his mistakes , Asher is still a good brother : " At heart , he 's like anyone trying to do well . He wants to escape his old past and do well by his brother . " 
 Aware of his own sex appeal , Asher 's confidence and dance ability mean he has little difficulty in attracting women . Thompson characterises him as having youthful fun , rather than being " dirty " . He feels he is easily intimidating , and intelligent enough to use his unpleasant façade to his advantage . This is demonstrated in the first episode , when he threatens Fatboy with a knife despite having no intention of using it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Appearing in EastEnders : E20 brought Thompson public recognition , from groups ranging from " screaming girls to proud parents " . He has received comments on Asher 's immoral behaviour , and compliments for his dancing . In October 2010 , Thompson stated that many fans hoped Asher and the other E20 spin @-@ off characters would go on to appear in EastEnders itself . 
 = Hugh B. Cott = 
 Hugh Bamford Cott , ( 6 July 1900 – 18 April 1987 ) , was a British zoologist , an authority on both natural and military camouflage , and a scientific illustrator and photographer . Many of his field studies took place in Africa , where he was especially interested in the Nile crocodile , the evolution of pattern and colour in animals . During the Second World War , Cott worked as a camouflage expert for the British Army and helped to influence War Office policy on camouflage . His book Adaptive Coloration in Animals ( 1940 ) , popular among serving soldiers , was the major textbook on camouflage in zoology of the twentieth century . After the war , he became a Fellow of Selwyn College , Cambridge . As a Fellow of the Zoological Society of London , he undertook expeditions to Africa and the Amazon to collect specimens , mainly reptiles and amphibians . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Cott was born in Ashby Magna , Leicestershire , England , on 6 July 1900 ; his father was the rector there . He was schooled at Rugby . In 1919 , he graduated from the Royal Military College , Sandhurst , and was commissioned into the Leicestershire Regiment . Between 1922 and 1925 , he studied at Selwyn College , Cambridge . 
 He had intended to become a priest , and went to Cambridge to read theology , but after his first year he went on the university expedition to South America , where he studied natural forms in eastern Brazil in 1923 , led by the entomologist Frank Balfour Browne , where he became fascinated by natural history , and changed his studies to zoology on his return . He then went on an expedition to the lower Amazon ( 1925 – 1926 ) , and on research trips to the Zambesi river area in Africa ( 1927 ) , including Mozambique , Zambia and East Africa , and Lanzarote ( 1930 ) . He married Joyce Radford in 1928 . He was a lecturer in Zoology at Bristol University from 1928 until 1932 , when he moved to Glasgow University . He studied under another advocate of military camouflage , John Graham Kerr . His thesis , which he completed in 1935 under a Carnegie Fellowship , was on ' adaptive coloration ' – both camouflage and warning coloration – in the Anura ( frogs ) . In 1938 he was made a Doctor of Science at Glasgow , and he became a Zoology lecturer at Cambridge University and Strickland Curator of Birds at the university 's Museum of Zoology . 
 Cott served in the Leicestershire Regiment of the British Army as a camouflage expert from 1919 – 1922 , and , during the Second World War , with the Royal Engineers as a camouflage instructor from 1939 – 1945 . Cott was chief instructor at the Camouflage Development and Training Camp at Helwan , Egypt , under filmmaker Geoffrey Barkas from its inception in November 1941 . 
 After the war , Cott returned to Cambridge , becoming a Fellow of Selwyn College in 1945 ; he worked there until he retired in 1967 . He gave the Fison Memorial Lecture of 1958 on ' Protective Coloration in Animals ' . He continued to work from time to time after his retirement , for instance conducting a survey of crocodile nests on the Victoria Nile for the Uganda National Parks in 1972 . He died at the age of 86 on 18 April 1987 . 
 = = Camouflage = = 
 While trying to photograph a hen partridge on her nest , Cott waited for hours for the bird to return , finally taking some pictures of the empty nest before giving up . On developing the photographs , he realized the bird had been there all along , perfectly camouflaged . 
 As a camouflage expert during the Second World War , Cott likened the functions of military camouflage to those of protective coloration in nature . The three main categories of coloration in his book Adaptive Coloration in Animals are concealment , disguise , and advertisement . He studied , described and presented examples of such diverse camouflage effects as obliterative shading , disruption , differential blending , high contrast , coincident disruption , concealment of the eye , contour obliteration , shadow elimination , and mimicry . In his wartime lectures at Farnham Castle , he described nine categories of visual deception : 
 merging , e.g. hare , polar bear 
 disruption , e.g. ringed plover 
 disguise , e.g. stick insect 
 mis @-@ direction , e.g. butterfly and fish eyespots 
 dazzle , e.g. some grasshoppers 
 decoy , e.g. angler fish 
 smokescreen , e.g. cuttlefish 
 the dummy , e.g. flies , ants 
 false display of strength , e.g. toads , lizards 
 Cott 's account of all this ( illustrated by his own pen and ink drawings ) is the 550 @-@ page book Adaptive Coloration in Animals ( 1940 ) . It was proof @-@ read by Kerr , who commented on its publication ' It is by far the finest thing of the kind in existence ' . His co @-@ workers ' first @-@ hand accounts of his work in military camouflage can be found in the memoirs of two of his fellow camoufleurs : Julian Trevelyan and Roland Penrose . 
 Peter Forbes wrote of Cott 's book : 
 Cott 's Adaptive Coloration in Animals must be the only compendious zoology tract ever to be packed in a soldier 's <unk> . The book also marks the apotheosis of the descriptive natural history phase of mimicry studies . Although Cott does report experiments on predation to test the efficacy of mimicry and camouflage , the book is essentially a narrative of examples plus theory . 
 The book was written as war loomed , and published in wartime . Cott makes use of his knowledge of natural history to draw parallels between survival in nature and in war , and to advise on military camouflage , for example commenting : 
 Various recent attempts to camouflage tanks , armoured cars , and the roofs of buildings with paint reveal an almost complete failure by those responsible to grasp the essential factor in the disguise of surface continuity and contour … in nature vigorous disruptive contrasts are frequently seen at work , and their wonderful effectiveness in hindering recognition needs to be experienced in the field to be fully appreciated . 
 Forbes notes that Adaptive Coloration in Animals is a narrative , short on the experimentation that followed after the war , but Forbes continues : 
 But Cott 's book is still valuable today for its enormous range , for its passionate exposition of the theories of mimicry and camouflage . 
 Cott attempted to persuade the British army to use more effective camouflage techniques , including countershading . For example , in August 1940 , with the Battle of Britain imminent , he painted two rail @-@ mounted coastal guns , one in conventional style , one countershaded . In aerial photographs , the countershaded gun is essentially invisible . Cott was triumphant , announcing : 
 These photographs furnish most convincing proof of the effectiveness of countershading , and are especially valuable in that we have in them a direct comparison between the two methods . 
 However ( like Kerr before him in the First World War ) , Cott did not succeed in influencing policy on camouflage , and he resigned from the Camouflage Advisory Panel in 1940 . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 Cott was a founding member of the Society of Wildlife Artists , and a fellow of the Royal Photographic Society . From material gathered in field expeditions , he made contributions to the Cambridge University zoological museum . 
 Cott possessed considerable artistic skill . Like Abbott Thayer , he used his artistry in his scientific work , including in Adaptive Coloration in Animals , to help argue the case he was making . For example , his black @-@ and @-@ white potoo shows this rainforest bird sitting motionless on a mottled tree trunk , its behaviour and disruptive pattern combining to provide effective camouflage . The philosopher and jazz musician David Rothenberg wrote of Cott 's art : 
 Back to Hugh Cott 's marvelous engraving of a potoo hidden in a black and white Costa Rican forest , frozen vertically like the tree trunk on which it hides . In nature the visible and invisible dance back and forth with each other , depending on how much we have learned to see . The science and art of this magic merge into one at the moment we grasp it . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The journalist and author Peter Forbes praised Cott 's balance of science and artistry : 
 .. in the conflict between artists and biologists , he was both . Cott was a competent illustrator as well as a biologist . Without having Nabokov 's <unk> and anti @-@ Darwinism , he brought an artistic sensibility to bear on these phenomena . His text is radiant with the wonder of these adaptations . 
 Over 60 years after its publication , Adaptive Coloration in Animals remains a core reference on the subject ; the Evolutionary biologists Graeme Ruxton , Thomas Sherratt and Michael Speed conclude their book on animal coloration by writing 
 The study of animal coloration and associated anti @-@ predator adaptations has a long history ... this field of research has been blessed from the earliest years with the insights of particularly gifted scientists . The writings of Wallace , Bates , Müller , Poulton and Cott truly stand up to the test of time : these individuals deserve even better renown not just as great natural historians but as exceptional scientists too . 
 The biologist Steven Vogel commented that 
 The zoologist Hugh Cott had the final word in Adaptive Coloration in Animals ( 1940 ) , a definitive synthesis of everything known about camouflage and mimicry in nature . Cott ruffled fewer feathers [ than Trofim Lysenko or Vladimir Nabokov ] , and his well @-@ organized and <unk> ideas proved militarily effective , even under the scrutiny of improved techniques for target detection . Thayer ’ s principles reemerged in more temperate and rational terms , and camouflage schemes based on them survived both photometric analyses and enemy encounters . Biomimetic camouflage took its place as yet another technique in a sophisticated <unk> of visual deceptions . 
 = = Writings = = 
 In addition to Adaptive Coloration in Animals , Cott wrote two essays on camouflage : “ Camouflage in nature and in war ” in the Royal Engineers Journal ( December 1938 ) , <unk> – 517 ; and ” Animal form in relation to appearance ” in Lancelot Law Whyte , ed . Aspects of form : a symposium on form in nature and art ( London : Percy Lund Humphries , 1951 ) . As a scientific illustrator and photographer , he also wrote three other books : Zoological photography in practice ( 1956 ) ; Uganda in black and white ( 1959 ) ; and Looking at animals : a zoologist in Africa ( 1975 ) . He became interested in the relationship of bird colours with their role as warning colours , an idea that arose when he observed hornets attracted to some birds being skinned while ignoring others . This led him to study the palatability of birds and their eggs . Among his papers were several studies on the relative palatibility of the eggs based initially on the preferences of ferrets , rats and hedgehogs and later on the use of a panel of expert egg tasters . In one study he found that of 123 species of bird , the kittiwake eggs scored highly with 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 . 
 = = = By Cott = = = 
 Books 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1940 ) . Adaptive Coloration in Animals . Methuen . 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1975 ) . Looking at Animals : a Zoologist in Africa . Scribner . 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1959 ) . Uganda in Black and White . Macmillan . 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1956 ) . Zoological Photography in Practice . Fountain Press . 
 Journals 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1936 ) . " The effectiveness of protective adaptations in the Hive @-@ Bee , illustrated by experiments on the feeding reactions , habit formation , and memory of the common toad ( Bufo bufo bufo ) " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 106 ( 1 ) : 111 – 133 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1096 @-@ <unk> 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1951 ) . " The <unk> of the Eggs of Birds : Illustrated by Experiments on the Food Preferences of the Hedgehog ( <unk> <unk> ) . " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 121 ( 1 ) : 1 – 41 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1096 @-@ <unk> 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1952 ) . " The palatability of the eggs of birds : illustrated by three seasons ' experiments ( 1947 , 1948 and 1950 ) on the food preferences of the Rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) ; and with special reference to the protective adaptations of eggs considered in relation to vulnerability " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 122 ( 1 ) : 1 – 54 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1469 @-@ <unk> 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1953 ) . " The palatability of the eggs of birds : illustrated by experiments on the food preferences of the Ferret ( <unk> <unk> ) and Cat ( Felis catus ) ; with notes on other egg @-@ eating Carnivora " . Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 123 ( 1 ) : 123 – 141 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / j.1096 @-@ <unk> 
 Cott , Hugh B. ( 1938 ) . Wonder Island of the Amazon Delta ; on <unk> Cowboys Ride Oxen , Tree @-@ Dwelling Animals <unk> Dense Forests . National Geographic Magazine . 
 = = = About Cott = = = 
 Forbes , Peter ( 2009 ) . Dazzled and Deceived : Mimicry and Camouflage . Yale . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Forsyth , Isla McLean ( 2012 ) . From dazzle to the desert : a cultural @-@ historical geography of camouflage . PhD thesis , University of Glasgow . 
 Forsyth , Isla ( 2014 ) . " The practice and poetics of fieldwork : Hugh Cott and the study of camouflage " . Journal of Historical Geography 43 : 128 – 137 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> 
 Penrose , Roland ( 1981 ) . Scrapbook 1900 – 1981 . Thames and Hudson . 
 Ruxton , G. D. ; Speed , M. P. ; Sherratt , T. N. ( 2004 ) . Avoiding Attack . The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis , Warning Signals and Mimicry . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Trevelyan , Julian ( 1957 ) . Indigo days . MacGibbon and Kee . 
 = The Book of Taliesyn = 
 For the Middle Welsh manuscript , see Book of Taliesin . 
 The Book of Taliesyn is the second studio album by English rock band Deep Purple , recorded only three months after Shades of Deep Purple and released by Tetragrammaton Records in October 1968 , just before their first US tour . The name for the album was taken from the 14th @-@ century Book of Taliesin . 
 The structure of the album is similar to that of their debut , with four original songs and three rearranged covers , although the tracks are longer , the arrangements more complex and the sound more polished than on Shades of Deep Purple . The music style is a mix of psychedelic rock , progressive rock and hard rock , with several inserts of classical music arranged by the band 's keyboard player Jon Lord . 
 Deep Purple 's American record label aimed at a hippie audience , which was very influential in the US at the time , but the chart results of album and singles were not as high as expected . This setback did not hinder the success of the three months long US tour , when the band played in many important venues and festivals and received positive feedback from audience and press . On the contrary , Deep Purple were still an underground band which played in small clubs and colleges in the United Kingdom , largely ignored by media and public . The British record company EMI released The Book of Taliesyn only in June 1969 on the new underground prog rock sub @-@ label Harvest Records , but the album did not chart . Even the release of the new single " <unk> " and new dates in their home country in the summer of 1969 did not increase the album sales or the popularity of Deep Purple in the UK . Perception of the album changed in modern times , when it received more favourable reviews . 
 = = Background = = 
 Deep Purple were booked for a long tour in the United States , starting in October 1968 , as a result of the unexpected success gathered in North America by their debut album Shades of Deep Purple , fronted by the hit single " Hush " . The single , released in June , had reached No. 4 in the US Singles Chart and No. 2 in Canada and was the main reason of their sudden popularity overseas . The situation was quite the opposite at home , where the band had been heavily criticized by media and audience . 
 In July , band and crew relocated from West Sussex to London . Their management rented a house at 13 Second Avenue , Acton Vale , which was used as living quarters and for preparing the upcoming US tour when not away for gigs or promotion . Guitarist Ritchie Blackmore went to live there with his German fiancée Babs Hardie . 
 Executives at Tetragrammaton Records , Deep Purple 's American label , thought that it would have been more profitable to have a new album to promote during the US tour , besides the already successful Shades of Deep Purple . Moreover , the eight tracks recorded in May for Deep Purple 's debut album and performed live in the British gigs of July and August were deemed insufficient for their shows as headliners in the US . For these reasons , they were pushed back into the studio just a couple of months before the tour began , even though their debut album had not been released in the United Kingdom yet . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 The request of the record label to record a new album only three months after their debut found the band unprepared , because the intense activity after the release of Shades of Deep Purple had left very little time for writing and rehearsing new songs . Under pressure , the musicians eventually came up with four lengthy original compositions , but to fill up the new album they reworked and expanded three cover songs , following again the example of the American band Vanilla Fudge , which many band members admired . The first was " Kentucky Woman " , a hit single for Neil Diamond in 1967 which Deep Purple performed live at a BBC session in August . Though written by Diamond , Deep Purple 's version musically leans toward the style of Mitch Ryder 's recording of " Devil with a Blue Dress On " . The second cover was " River Deep – Mountain High " , a single released by Ike & Tina Turner in 1966 . Finally , the 1965 Beatles song " We Can Work It Out " was chosen after Paul McCartney himself had reportedly expressed appreciation for Deep Purple 's version of " Help ! " . 
 On the first of August 1968 , Deep Purple entered De Lane Lea Studios in Kingsway , London , with producer Derek Lawrence and sound engineer Brian <unk> , who had both worked on their previous album . Tetragrammaton 's advance of $ 250 @,@ 000 had been used to book two weeks in the studio , a time which covered songwriting , rehearsals and recording sessions . Time was granted in larger amount than for the making of Shades of Deep Purple in May , feeding the band ’ s ambition of coming up with better original material than their previous effort . 
 Deep Purple recorded " Shield " and " Anthem " on the first day . On the first song Ian Paice plays a complex drum pattern which sounds like a repeated clash of glass objects , while the second one required a string quartet for the baroque style interlude in the middle . The following days they proceeded with the composition and recording of " Exposition / We Can Work It Out " and of the original track " Listen , Learn , Read On " . On 19 August , they concluded these sessions with the recording of " Kentucky Woman " and of the heavy and up @-@ tempo instrumental " Wring That Neck " , which came out from a tight collaboration between Blackmore and bass player Nick Simper . The name " Wring That Neck " comes from a phrase the band used when they were playing live , describing the bassist or guitarist really bursting at their instruments to create a hard noise ( i.e. , squeezing , or " wringing " , the neck of the guitar ) . Another instrumental called " Playground " was written and recorded on 18 August , but the lyrics were never completed and it was eventually discarded . " River Deep - Mountain High " was always intended as the final track , so its recording was postponed until the other tracks were finished . The musicians ’ perfectionism required extra time to complete the track and it was taped only on 10 October , a long time after the planned deadline for studio recording . 
 The mixing was supposed to be overseen by the band members , but their schedule in October was so tight that Lawrence did it without them . This dismayed the band at first , but the sound turned out cleaner , heavier and more polished than on their debut . The tapes were mixed in both mono and stereo , but the mono tapes were trashed , as neither Tetragrammaton nor EMI , Deep Purple 's British label , had any use for them . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was released in the United States in October 1968 , just in time for the tour . The American label insisted on changing the title of the instrumental " Wring That Neck " , considered too violent , to " Hard Road " . The track was used as B @-@ side of the single " Kentucky Woman " , issued in December 1968 . The Book of Taliesyn reached No. 54 in the US chart and No. 48 in the Canadian chart . The single peaked at No. 38 in the US and received much airplay , but did not replicate the success of " Hush " . 
 In an attempt to improve sales of the album , a shorter and heavily edited version of " River Deep - Mountain High " was released as single exclusively in the United States and Canada in February 1969 , with " Listen , Learn , Read On " as the B @-@ side . It reached No. 53 and No. 42 respectively in the two countries and was not a success , charting lower than " Kentucky Woman " . The album was distributed in Canada ( in 1968 ) and Japan ( in June 1969 ) by Polydor Records . 
 EMI delayed the release of the album in the UK to June 1969 , after the band had come back from the US and set up a proper tour of their home country . By that time , the band had already recorded and released their third album Deep Purple in the US , and recorded a single with a new line @-@ up . The Book of Taliesyn was the first release by Harvest Records , a new sub @-@ label which EMI executives had devised as an outlet for British underground progressive rock groups . " Kentucky Woman " , with " Wring That Neck " as B @-@ side , was the only single released in the UK in December 1969 , but it was retired after only six weeks . Just as it had happened with Shades of Deep Purple the year before , both album and single received little promotion and were widely overlooked , selling much less in the UK than overseas . 
 The Book of Taliesyn was reissued many times all over the world , often in a set with the two other albums recorded by the Mk . I line @-@ up . Besides the original issues , the most significant version of the album is the Remastered CD edition of 2000 by EMI , which contains previously unreleased recordings taken from the sessions of August and December 1968 and from TV shows appearances as bonus tracks . All the songs were digitally remastered by Peter Mew at Abbey Road Studios in London . Other notable re @-@ releases of the album include a white vinyl collector 's edition issued in 2015 for a Record Store Day . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The musical style of The Book of Taliesyn is a mix of progressive rock , psychedelic rock and hard rock and different observers think that in this album the band is more mature and in greater control of its own means of expression . Critics highlight how the compositions are generally longer and more complex than in their debut album . Deep Purple biographer Dave Thompson writes that a dark mood permeates The Book of Taliesyn with little indulgence to pop rock , citing influences of the American band The Doors in the original tracks written for this album . 
 The influence of keyboard player Jon Lord 's classical music upbringing is felt strongly in all the tracks , but this time he was not the main responsible for songwriting and arrangements , which are considered by critics Deep Purple 's first real group effort . Lord 's interest in mixing rock and classical music would culminate in late 1969 with his Concerto for Group and Orchestra suite , but he already defined Deep Purple as a symphonic rock band in a 1968 interview . Nick Simper complained about Lord 's excessive influence in composition and arrangements in a 1983 interview , which he said " resulted in a lack of direction for the band . " " Anthem " is perhaps the band 's deepest venture into classical music on a regular studio album , with its baroque style interlude reminiscent of a Bach fugue written by Lord and performed using Mellotron and string quartet . A similar approach can be found on King Crimson 's debut album , released a year later . <unk> excerpts from the second movement of Beethoven 's Symphony No. 7 and Tchaikovsky 's Ouverture @-@ Fantasy " Romeo and Juliet " are in the instrumental intro " Exposition " , while " River Deep , Mountain High " is introduced by the notes of " Also sprach Zarathustra " , written in 1896 by Richard Strauss and very popular after its inclusion in the film 2001 : A Space Odyssey , screened earlier in 1968 . 
 " Wring that Neck " and " Kentucky Woman " show more traces of the heavier music that the band would embrace in their 70s albums with the Mk.II line @-@ up . Blackmore 's guitar work is generally praised by critics . However , in a recent interview , the guitarist defined the album as " lame " and remembered that he had not yet found his own style of guitar playing at the time of recording . 
 The lyrics written by the band 's singer Rod Evans are very functional to the music and the marketing Deep Purple 's record label was building up for the American hippie audience . Evans took inspiration for the fantasy @-@ themed " Listen , Learn , Read On " , which contains lyrical reference to the album 's title , from the 14th @-@ century Welsh manuscript Book of Taliesin , a collection of poems attributed to the 6th @-@ century poet Taliesin . The title and cover art of the album were also inspired by the manuscript . Instead psychedelia and its rituals play a large part in the lyrics of " Shield " . Simper thinks that Evans ' lyrics are " far better than anything ( ... ) has ever been written in other line ups , in Deep Purple . " 
 = = Cover art = = 
 Cover art and sleeve notes convey Tetragrammaton 's decision to aim the album at the vast American hippie audience , which was very influential in the US at the time . The notes in particular were written in a mystical tone , evoking the bard Taliesyn as a spiritual guide and comparing listening to the songs to an exploration in the band members ' souls . The original cover was drawn in pen , ink and color by the British illustrator and author John Vernon Lord , who coincidentally appears to share the same name as Deep Purple 's keyboard player . The Book of Taliesyn was the only record cover John Vernon Lord ever designed and , according to the artist 's recent retrospective book Drawing upon Drawing , the original artwork was never returned . In his book , John Vernon Lord remembers the assignment received from his agency Saxon Artists : 
 The agent gave me the title saying that the art director wanted a ' fantasy Arthurian touch ' and to include hand lettering for the title and the musicians ' names . I mainly drew from The Book of Taliesin , which is a collection of poems , said to be written by the sixth century Welsh bard Taliesin . 
 The fee for the job was £ 30 , minus 25 % for the agent . John Vernon Lord was , until recently , Professor of Illustration at the University of Brighton . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Deep Purple arrived in California on 15 October 1968 and their first public appearance on American soil was at The Dating Game TV show on ABC on 17 October . They were the first rock band to perform on the show , where Jon Lord was one of the contestants . The next two days the band played live in the US for the first time as supporting act of Cream in their Goodbye tour . The concerts were held at the Inglewood Forum near Los Angeles , California , in front of more than 16 @,@ 000 people every night . Recordings of those live shows were issued in 2002 as Inglewood – Live in California . The next gig at San Diego was the last one supporting Cream , whose management apparently did not appreciate the cheerful reaction of the audience to Deep Purple and dropped them . After a week of forced stop , their American manager succeeded in setting up a tour which included the San Francisco International Pop Festival and venues on the West Coast . This opportunity was very useful for the young musicians , who as headliners could lengthen their live shows up to 90 minutes and gained much needed experience on the road . This was particularly true for Blackmore , who developed and extended his guitar solos , incorporating more improvisations . 
 The tour was a success and Deep Purple 's popularity in the US received another boost from a TV appearance at Playboy After Dark alongside Hugh Hefner on 23 October 1968 . The band had become a much requested act and more dates were added on the East Coast till the end of the year , including a two nights gig at the Fillmore East with Creedence Clearwater Revival and the James Cotton Blues Band , and Christmas holiday shows at the famous Electric Circus club in New York . 
 In late December , the band managers Tony Edwards and John Coletta booked some studio time in New York to record a new single , after the relative failure of " Kentucky Woman " and " River Deep , Mountain High " . The band recorded the cover of Ben E. King 's song " Oh No No No " and tried " Lay Lady Lay " by Bob Dylan and " Glory Road " by Neil Diamond , without satisfying results . The record label did not publish those recordings and a surviving take of " Oh No No No " can be heard only in the 2000 remastered edition of The Book of Taliesyn . 
 The band returned in England on 3 January 1969 and went straight into De Lane Lea Studios to record new songs . The recording sessions were interspersed with gigs and lasted from January to March ; most of the songs ended up in their eponymous album , which would be released by Tetragrammaton in the US only in June 1969 . 
 Deep Purple debuted the new single " <unk> " , new material and new takes on songs from their released albums at BBC sessions for the Top Gear radio show on 14 January . The song " Hey Bop a Re Bop " played at those sessions would later become " The Painter " . Starting on the first of February the band went on tour in Denmark and the UK , with gigs in colleges and small clubs . In an interview , the band commented that in comparison with what they earned in America " they were actually losing a couple of thousand pounds every night they played in Britain . " The last UK gig was on 22 March and on 1 April 1969 the band was again on tour in the US , despite the lack of a new album to promote . It was at this time that Blackmore and Lord decided to change Deep Purple 's musical style , veering towards straight hard rock , which led to Evans and Simper 's dismissal in July . 
 When The Book of Taliesyn was finally released in the UK in June 1969 a few more dates in the band 's home country were added to promote the album release , even if the Mk.II line @-@ up with new members Ian Gillan and Roger Glover was already rehearsing and recording new material in secret . 
 Songs from this album were performed regularly by the Mk . I line @-@ up . The exceptions were " Exposition / We Can Work It Out " and " Anthem " , whose complex arrangements could not be easily reproduced in a live setting . The Mk . II formation performed " Kentucky Woman " in their first shows , but dropped it from the set list together with the few other songs from the first three albums , in favour of new material . Only the instrumental " Wring That Neck " remained a staple of Deep Purple 's performances for a couple of years , working as a frame for Blackmore and Lord 's long improvisations and coming back in the set list of the current line @-@ up in the 2000s . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Deep Purple 's albums and singles were almost completely ignored in the UK , a fact that puzzled American reporters . In an interview , Simper tried to justify their lack of success in their home country , saying that the British audience was more interested in a fancy presentation than music and that blues rock " was becoming very big " at the time in England . John Peel , head of the Top Gear radio show , who had met the band in 1968 and had great expectations for The Book of Taliesyn , was not too pleased with the final result : 
 The group have done some fine things for Radio One and they excite when they play live . I don 't understand where this record went wrong , it is all too restrained somehow . They recorded " Wring That Neck " much better for a recent Top Gear . 
 American reviewers were enthusiastic of Deep Purple 's live performances and the lack of a new successful single apparently did not ruin the positive perception of the band in the US , to the point that they were often addressed as an American band . Band members even thought about transferring their residence in the United States , but renounced when they learned that the 21 year old Paice could be drafted for the Vietnam War . 
 Modern reviews of the album go from positive to mixed . Joe Viglione of AllMusic compares Deep Purple 's production to Vanilla Fudge 's , underlining how the two bands covered songs from the same authors and used similar arrangements . He writes that on The Book of Taliesyn Deep Purple veered more towards progressive rock than their American counterparts , combining meaningful lyrics and " innovative musical passages " . On the contrary , PopMatters criticizes the " Spinal <unk> " lyrics and the lack of hit material on the album with the exception of " Wring That Neck " , considered " perhaps the first real Deep Purple composition . " Blogcritics reviewers stress how the original material , and " Wring That Neck " in particular , " stands the test of time well " . However , Greg <unk> finds " Jon Lord ’ s classical leanings ( ... ) a bit too much " on tracks like " Exposition " and " Anthem " , where they " threaten to derail the proceedings " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Deep Purple = = = 
 Rod Evans - lead vocals 
 Ritchie Blackmore - guitar 
 Jon Lord - Hammond organ , keyboards , backing vocals , strings arrangement on " Anthem " 
 Nick Simper - bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Ian Paice - drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Derek Lawrence - producer , mixing 
 Barry Ainsworth - engineer 
 Peter Mew - restoring and digital remastering at Abbey Road Studios , London 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Egardus = 
 Egardus , alternatively <unk> or Johannes <unk> , was a European composer of music in the late fourteenth and early fifteenth centuries . Almost no information survives about his life , and only three of his works are known . A certain " Johannes <unk> " , who held chaplaincies in Bruges and <unk> , may be a possible match for Egardus . The extant works — a canon and two <unk> — appear to be less complex than music by mid @-@ century composers , possibly because they date from either very early or very late in Egardus ' career . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Little is known with certainty about his life . The enigma of his biography stems from a difficulty in knowing whether he was Flemish or Italian . A northern origin is suggested by his name , a copy of one of his works in a Flemish manuscript , and a possible citation of his music by Thomas Fabri . But with only one other exception , all of his works are found in Northern Italian manuscripts , and that exception , a Polish manuscript , has strong Italian connections . The most important biographical research on the composer was conducted by Reinhard Strohm , who notes that it was more common for Northern works ( and composers ) to travel to Italy than the opposite . 
 Strohm identifies a " Magister Johannes <unk> " appointed as succentor of St <unk> 's Cathedral ( Sint @-@ <unk> ) in Bruges in 1370 as a possible match for the composer . This appointment suggests to Strohm that <unk> would have been born by or before 1340 . Strohm also finds connections to a work by Thomas Fabri , a Dutch composer , in the text of Furnos reliquisti , an unlikely coincidence if they were not working in close proximity to each other . Johannes Egardus held chaplaincies in <unk> and Bruges . The number of his pieces in Paduan manuscripts suggested to Strohm that he may have been resident there . Nino Pirrotta had suggested that he may have been one of the musicians in the papal court of Bologna <unk> However , Pirrotta 's evidence was based on the position of Egardus 's works within the manuscript Mod A — a connection between manuscript and court now considered more tenuous , and not from the lists of singers in the Italian papal chapels : lists from which Egardus is absent . 
 = = Works = = 
 Only three works by Egardus survive . A canon , Furnos reliquisti <unk> ; <unk> est et <unk> is found in a single source , Mod A ( Modena , Biblioteca Estense e Universitaria <unk> ) . His other two works have a somewhat wider distribution . The Gloria with the trope " Spiritus et Alme " appears in three sources , Utrecht , <unk> 1846 ( olim 37 , independently discovered by Schmid and Strohm ) and two sources from Padua , Biblioteca Universitaria : MSS Ba <unk> ( formerly 1225 , part of Pad D ) and 1475 ( part of Pad A ) . Both of the Paduan sources originally come from the Paduan abbey of Santa Giustina . An <unk> Gloria appears in five independent sources : Warsaw , Biblioteka Narodowa , MS <unk> ( olim Biblioteka Krasiński 52 , commonly called <unk> . ) f . <unk> @-@ <unk> , Mod A f . <unk> @-@ <unk> , a collection of sources in <unk> and at Dartmouth College ( f . Dv @-@ <unk> ) , Padua Ba <unk> ( 1225 ) , f . 1v , and , recently identified , in Udine , <unk> di Stato <unk> . 22 recto ( part of Cividale A ) . In the Warsaw source , the work is labeled " Opus <unk> . " In Mod A , " Egardus " is used . In no other source of this work is there an attribution . Strohm notes that Egardus 's music is less complex than other mid @-@ century composers , but this lack of complexity can either be attributed to an early date for its composition , contemporaneous with Philippe de Vitry , or a far later date , just prior to Johannes Ciconia ) . 
 = = = Editions of music = = = 
 Additional editions are listed in the critical notes of the Polyphonic Music of the Fourteenth Century editions : 
 Fischer , Kurt von and F. Alberto Gallo , editors . Italian Sacred and Ceremonial Music , Polyphonic Music of the Fourteenth Century 12 ( Monaco : Éditions de l 'Oiseau @-@ Lyre , 1976 ) , p . 21 ( <unk> Gloria ) . 
 Fischer , Kurt von and F. Alberto Gallo , editors . Italian Sacred and Ceremonial Music , Polyphonic Music of the Fourteenth Century 13 ( Monaco : Éditions de l 'Oiseau @-@ Lyre , 1987 ) , p . 90 ( Gloria , " Spiritus et Alme " ) , 214 ( Furnos reliquisti ) . 
 = C. R. M. F. Cruttwell = 
 Charles Robert Mowbray Fraser Cruttwell ( 23 May 1887 – 14 March 1941 ) was a British historian and academic who served as dean and later principal of Hertford College , Oxford . His field of expertise was modern European history , his most notable work being A History of the Great War , 1914 – 18 . He is mainly remembered , however , for the vendetta pursued against him by the novelist Evelyn Waugh , in which Waugh showed his distaste for his former tutor by repeatedly using the name " Cruttwell " in his early novels and stories to depict a sequence of unsavoury or ridiculous characters . The prolonged minor humiliation thus inflicted may have contributed to Cruttwell 's eventual mental breakdown . 
 After gaining first @-@ class honours at The Queen 's College , Oxford , Cruttwell was elected a Fellow of All Souls College , Oxford in 1911 , and the following year became a lecturer in history at Hertford College . His academic career was interrupted by war service during which he suffered severe wounds ; after his return to Oxford in 1919 he became dean of Hertford , and in 1930 , principal of the college . It was during his tenure as dean that the feud with Waugh developed while the latter was a history scholar at Hertford , in 1922 – 24 . This hostility was pursued on Waugh 's part until shortly before Cruttwell 's death . 
 Cruttwell 's term as Hertford 's principal saw the production of his most important scholarly works , including his war history which earned him the degree of DLitt . Beyond his college and academic duties Cruttwell held various administrative offices within the university , and was a member of its Hebdomadal Council , or ruling body . In private life Cruttwell served as a Justice of the Peace in Hampshire , where he had a country home , and stood unsuccessfully for the university 's parliamentary seat in the 1935 general election , representing the Conservative party . Ill @-@ health , aggravated by his war injuries , caused his retirement from the Hertford principalship in 1939 . A mental collapse led to his committal to an institution , where he died two years later . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Cruttwell was born on 23 May 1887 , in the village of Denton , Norfolk , the eldest of three sons of the Rev. Charles Thomas Cruttwell , Rector of St Mary 's Church . The elder Cruttwell was a scholar and historian of Roman literature ; his wife Annie ( née Mowbray ) , was the daughter of Sir John Mowbray , who served as Conservative Member of Parliament for Durham from 1853 to 1868 and for one of the two Oxford University parliamentary seats from 1868 to 1899 . Cruttwell was educated at Rugby School , where in 1906 he won a scholarship to Queen 's College , Oxford , to read classics and history . At Queen 's , Cruttwell enjoyed considerable academic success , including a first class honours degree in modern history . In 1911 he was elected to a fellowship at All Souls College and a year later was appointed to a history lectureship at Hertford College . 
 On the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Cruttwell enlisted in the Royal Berkshire Regiment and was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant . He fought in France and Belgium , until a severe leg wound in 1916 ended his front line military service . Apart from its physical effects , Cruttwell 's experience in the trenches seemingly inflicted permanent psychological damage on his personality , replacing the general good manners of his youth with a short @-@ tempered , impatient and bullying character . The novelist Evelyn Waugh , an undergraduate at Hertford in the 1920s , wrote later that " It was as though he had never cleansed himself from the muck of the trenches " . In the latter part of the war , Cruttwell was employed in the military intelligence department at the War Office in London , before returning to Oxford in 1919 . In 1922 , he published a short history of his regiment 's wartime exploits . 
 = = Hertford College = = 
 On his return to Hertford College , Cruttwell was elected to a fellowship in modern history and a year later was appointed Hertford 's Dean , responsible for general discipline within the college ; he held this post for five years . He also became active in the administration of Oxford University and was elected to its ruling body , the Hebdomadal Council . He served as a university statutory commissioner and was one of several academics nominated by the Vice @-@ Chancellor as delegates to the Oxford University Press . 
 Cruttwell 's administrative competence was recognised in 1930 , when he was elected principal of Hertford College . In this office , he helped to establish the university 's geography school and arranged that the first Oxford professorship in geography was based at Hertford . During his tenure as principal , he completed his most significant academic works , including his Great War history ( 1934 ) which earned him the Oxford degree of DLitt . In 1936 Cruttwell delivered the Lees @-@ Knowles Lecture at Trinity College , Cambridge , under the title " The Role of British Strategy in the Great War " . In the same year he published a biography of the Duke of Wellington and in 1937 produced his final major academic work , A History of Peaceful Change in the Modern World . An attempt in 1935 to emulate his grandfather and become one of the university 's members of parliament failed when , as a Conservative candidate in the general election of 1935 , Cruttwell was defeated . An Independent , A. P. Herbert , beat him on the third ballot in a single transferable vote system . This was the first time since the 1860s , that a Conservative had failed to hold either of the two university seats , a humiliation noted with relish by Waugh who harboured a deep hostility towards his former tutor . According to The Times , Cruttwell had underestimated the nature and determination of the opposition and had taken his election as a Conservative for granted . In first preferences , he came bottom of the poll with only 1 @,@ 803 votes , while his Conservative running mate , Lord Hugh Cecil , gained 7 @,@ 365 , almost five times as many . Because he polled less than one @-@ eighth of the first ballot votes , Cruttwell forfeited his deposit . 
 = = Feud with Evelyn Waugh = = 
 Waugh joined Hertford College on a scholarship , in January 1922 . He had received a congratulatory letter from Cruttwell welcoming him to the college and complimenting him on his English prose : " about the best of any of the Candidates in the group " . Despite this warmth , Waugh 's initial impressions of his tutor were unfavourable — " not at all the kind of don for whom I had been prepared by stories of Jowett . " The first recorded clash between them came early in Waugh 's first term ; in a letter to his school friend Dudley Carew , Waugh reports that his tutor verbally abused him for a Latin mistranslation with the words " Damn you , you 're a scholar ! " The main basis for the rift that rapidly developed was Waugh 's increasingly casual attitude towards his scholarship . Whereas Cruttwell saw the scholarship as a commitment to hard and devoted study , Waugh considered it a reward for his successful school studies and a passport to a life of pleasure . To the detriment of his work , Waugh involved himself in a range of university activities : the Oxford Union , the Hertford debating society , journalism and drawings for the undergraduate papers Isis and Cherwell , and a hectic social life . In his third term , he was brusquely advised by Cruttwell that he should take his studies more seriously , a warning which Waugh chose to interpret as an insult . " I think it was from then on that our mutual dislike became incurable " , he later wrote . 
 During his remaining time at Hertford , Waugh missed few opportunities to ridicule Cruttwell . He did this in numerous unsigned contributions to Isis , including an article in March 1924 , in the " Isis Idols " series . In this , according to Waugh 's biographer Martin Stannard , the mockery was cleverly disguised as a paean of praise , arranged around an unflattering photograph of Cruttwell displaying " bad teeth within an unfortunate smile " . In Cherwell , in August 1923 , Waugh published a short story , " Edward of Unique Achievement " , in which the protagonist , a history student at an Oxford college , murders his tutor , " Mr Curtis " ( who is , among other things , revealed to be a sexual deviant ) . Waugh and an accomplice , spread a rumour that Cruttwell favoured sex with animals ; they bought a stuffed dog which they placed in the college quadrangle and began the practice of barking under the dean 's window . Cruttwell made no apparent response to these provocations , other than a dismissive reference to Waugh as " a silly suburban sod with an inferiority complex " . 
 Waugh left Hertford in the summer of 1924 , with a third class degree and a brief note from Cruttwell , expressing disappointment with this performance . Although the pair never met again , a few years later Cruttwell spoke disparagingly of Waugh , to the latter 's prospective mother @-@ in @-@ law , Lady Burghclere , describing him as vice @-@ ridden and " living off vodka and absinthe " . Once Waugh had established himself as a writer , he resumed the vendetta against his former tutor by introducing a succession of disreputable or absurd characters called " Cruttwell " into his novels and stories . In Decline and Fall ( 1928 ) " Toby Cruttwell " is a psychopathic burglar ; in Vile Bodies ( 1930 ) the name belongs to a snobbish Conservative MP . In Black Mischief ( 1932 ) " Cruttwell " is a social parasite , and he becomes a dubious osteopath or " bone @-@ setter " in A Handful of Dust ( 1934 ) . In Scoop ( 1938 ) , " General Cruttwell " is a salesman with a fake tropical tan at the Army & Navy Stores . The 1935 short story " Mr Loveday 's Little Outing " , which recounts the grisly deeds of an escaped homicidal maniac , was originally published as " Mr Cruttwell 's Little Outing " . The final Cruttwell reference in Waugh 's fiction came in 1939 , in the short story " An Englishman 's Home " , in the form of an embezzling Wolf Cub master . In 1935 , in an additional gesture of sarcastic ridicule , Waugh told a survey in which modern novelists were asked to nominate their best work that he had yet to write his masterpiece : " It is the memorial biography of C. R. M. F. Cruttwell , some time Dean of Hertford College , Oxford , and my old history tutor . It is a labour of love to one to whom , under God , I owe everything " . As with Waugh 's student taunting , Cruttwell made no public response , although according to Stannard he anticipated each new Waugh novel with much trepidation about how he might be portrayed . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Cruttwell remained a bachelor throughout his life . His one proposal of marriage — to the socialite and later New York society hostess Anne Huth @-@ Jackson — was rebuffed and there are no accounts of other romantic attachments . Beyond his academic duties , he enjoyed entertaining at his country house near the village of <unk> in Hampshire , where he was active in the local community and served as a Justice of the Peace . Since the war , his health had suffered from the effects of his wounds , and he was subject to recurrent rheumatic fever . In 1939 his poor physical condition caused his early retirement from Hertford , followed a period of mental illness possibly exacerbated by the continuing mockery from Waugh . Eventually Cruttwell was confined to a mental hospital , the Burden Institute at Stapleton , near Bristol , where he died on 14 March 1941 , aged 53 . He left his book collection and a bequest of £ 1 @,@ 000 to Hertford College , together with an oil portrait of him , painted in 1937 by his cousin , Grace Cruttwell . The probate value of his estate was £ 19 @,@ 814 . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Cruttwell was an accepted authority on the political and military history of the Rhineland . His professional standing is largely based on his Great War history , which his ODNB biographer Geoffrey Ellis suggests is " most notable for its frank and fearless judgements on those identified as the principal actors ( military , naval and political ) in that tragic conflict " . This work was widely admired at the time and has undergone several reprints but has also been criticised as lacking in humanity , displaying " almost no awareness of the appalling degree of suffering it chronicles " . Ellis describes Cruttwell 's textbooks on modern British and European history as " models of clarity and cogency " . Cruttwell 's professional reputation has been largely overshadowed , by the attention given to his feud with Waugh , the true significance of which , Ellis believes , may have been somewhat exaggerated . 
 Cruttwell 's relations with his colleagues and students have been the subject of contradictory reports . Waugh 's biographer , Selena Hastings , describes him as of " unprepossessing " appearance , " good @-@ hearted but difficult " , inclined to misogyny , brusque and sometimes offensive towards his male colleagues . Waugh 's description is of someone " tall , almost loutish , with the face of a petulant baby " , of indistinct speech , who " smoked a pipe which was attached to his blubber @-@ lips by a thread of slime " . Stannard records that Waugh 's student contemporary Christopher Hollis , found nothing particularly remarkable about Cruttwell . " Like Waugh " , says Stannard , " Cruttwell played up his eccentricities and had an uncharitable sense of humour " . Ellis 's 2004 biographical sketch suggests that much of Cruttwell 's <unk> manner , may have been the result of simple shyness . 
 Although there was clearly mutual animosity between Cruttwell and Waugh , Hastings points out that Cruttwell would have been justified in suspending Waugh from the college on numerous occasions , but did not do so . Ellis acknowledges a " forceful , forthright and eccentric character " but stresses Cruttwell 's generous hospitality " to many who became his close friends " and concern for his undergraduates ' welfare . 
 = Putana = 
 In Hindu mythology , Putana ( Sanskrit : Pūtanā , lit . " putrefaction " ) is a <unk> ( demoness ) , who is killed by the infant @-@ god Krishna . Putana is also considered as a foster @-@ mother of Krishna as she breast @-@ fed him , though it was with the motive of killing Krishna by poisoned milk . By offering her milk , Putana had performed " the supreme act of maternal devotion " , in the shadow of her evil motives . The myth is told and retold in Hindu scriptures and some Indian books , which portray her variously as an evil hag or a demoness who surrendered herself to Krishna , though she initially came with evil motives . 
 Putana is interpreted as an infantile disease or bird , symbolizing danger to an infant or desire respectively , and even as a symbolic bad mother . She is included in a group of malevolent Hindu mother goddesses called the Matrikas and also in the group of Yoginis and <unk> ( <unk> ) . Ancient Indian medical texts prescribe her worship to protect children from diseases . A group of multiple Putanas is mentioned in ancient Indian texts . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " Pūtanā " , broken as " <unk> " ( virtue ) and " <unk> " ( no ) means " devoid of virtue " . Another explanation derives " Pūtanā " from " <unk> " ( purifying ) , thus meaning " she who purifies " . Herbert theorizes " Pūtanā " is derived from " Put " , a hell in Hindu mythology , associated with parents and children . Thus , Herbert proposes , on the basis of the etymology and her association with the Matrikas , that Putana is closely linked to motherhood . White translates Putana as " stinky " , and relates it to <unk> sores , the eruption of which is a symptom of chicken pox . Putana is also the name of the weapon of or a form of the goddess of small pox , Sitala . 
 = = Legend = = 
 The legend of Putana and Krishna is narrated in many Hindu texts : Bhagavata Purana , Harivamsa ( part of Mahabharata ) , Brahma Vaivarta Purana , Vishnu Purana , Garga Samhita and Prem Sagar . 
 Putana ( also called as <unk> ) , the " killer of infants " , was sent by Krishna 's evil uncle Kamsa to kill Krishna . Putana assumed the disguise of a young , beautiful woman and came to <unk> ( <unk> ) - Krishna 's home @-@ town . Her beauty resulted in her being mistaken by <unk> ( cowherds ) as a manifestation of goddess Lakshmi . Stunned by her beauty , Krishna 's foster @-@ mother Yashoda allowed Putana to take the infant Krishna in her lap and suckle him . Putana had smeared her breast with a <unk> , an intoxicant , to kill Krishna . However , Krishna squeezed her breasts and sucked her life ( prana ) , as well as her milk . In pain , Putana screamed , pleading for her release , but in vain . She ran out of the town with Krishna still clinging to her and finally fell dead . She then assumed her real demonic form , turning trees to a distance of three <unk> ( a unit of distance equivalent totally to 12 miles ) to dust . The people of <unk> cut Putana 's body , burying her bones and feet and burning the flesh and skin . The fragrant smoke rose out of the flames , as Putana was cleansed of all sin by breast @-@ feeding Krishna and she attained the same heaven that Yashoda acquired . Thus , Putana , like <unk> , is also considered as a foster @-@ mother of Krishna as she breast @-@ fed him . 
 In later versions of the myth , the intoxicant smearing on Putana 's breast is replaced with poison or the milk itself is said to be poisoned . Another version of the tale portrays Putana as stealing Krishna at night , when everyone else is asleep . 
 K. M. Munshi had a totally different take on the myth in his <unk> series . Though Putana came with evil intentions , she is portrayed as being happy to see Krishna and her maternal instinct rises , telling her " Take this lovely boy to your breast . You are a wicked and miserable woman . You have never seen joy before , joy which thrills your whole body and mind with mad delight . " Overjoyed and forgetful of her poisoned breasts , she took Krishna in her lap and suckled him . In the process , she surrenders to Krishna saying " I give you all , my beloved child ... I am yours . " Further , Putana is purified and liberated from her mortal body by Krishna . 
 = = = Previous birth = = = 
 Garga Samhita ( a work on the life of Krishna ) and Brahma Vaivarta Purana further tell of the previous birth of Putana as <unk> , the daughter of demon king Bali . When she saw Vamana , the previous incarnation of Krishna as a dwarf , she felt a desire to have him as her son and suckle him . She soon changed her mind and decided to kill Vamana , after he acquired all possessions of Bali . Krishna knew her desires and allowed her to fulfil both of them - to suckle him and to attempt to take his life . 
 = = = Symbolism = = = 
 One theory interprets Putana as being the first foe faced by Krishna ( further numerous demons are sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna ) or as the first obstacle of possessive maternal instinct faced by yogis . The legend assures a devotee liberation if they treat god as their own son . Another theory interprets Putana as an infantile disease that Krishna survived , which can be cured by forcefully suckling the child affected . Further , the theory relates to Krishna 's later life when he fights a demon called <unk> ( fever ) . 
 In Vishnu Purana , it is explicitly stated that Putana should work in the dark , symbolizing the lack of illumination of knowledge . Her ear @-@ rings are described not as radiant , but as quivering , signifying her unstable nature . Agrawal equates Putana to Varuna , the Vedic god of darkness and chaos in the water . As Varuna pollutes life @-@ giving water , Putana mixed her breast milk with poison . Thus , Putana stands for death and darkness . O 'Flaherty says : 
 The myth of Pūtanā is significant not merely for the image it presents ... but for the intensity with which the image is depicted and the frequency with which the myth itself is told in India . 
 Kakar further adds : 
 The secret fantasy of poisoned milk , of nourishment that kills , originates early in life when the decisive separation between child and mother takes place . The elevation of this fantasy , ... , to the status of myth for a whole culture indicates the intensity of ( this ) inner conflict ... in the Indian setting . 
 According to Kakar , Putana may represent a dangerous schizophrenic mother , who has trapped her child in an emotional net , of which he cannot let go . He interprets Krishna clinging to Putana 's breast as not only the infant 's excitement and anger , but also a form of " incestuous intercourse " , as in the killing of other maternal demons . By killing the " bad mother " , the son kills " sexually ravenous maternal images in his psyche " , leaving the protective images unhurt , and thus emerges as an adult , drawing boundaries between her and him . 
 = = Textual descriptions = = 
 Putana is defined as <unk> at the beginning and the end of Bhagavata Purana . Though the word <unk> is rarely used , <unk> - the masculine form - is frequently used in Hindu scriptures to mean an evil spirit . In the Rigveda , <unk> are to be killed , their bodies broken and their flesh eaten , just as Putana was treated . The Bhagavata Purana further tells of a <unk> or milkmaid , narrating a hymn for protection from evil spirits including the Matrikas and Putana , even though Putana is dead . In another instance in the Purana , it is said that Putana and " her tribe " still had access to Krishna . Finally , the whole chapter is called " Deliverance of Putana " , and not " Killing of Putana " . Both incidences enforce the view that though Putana 's mortal body is killed by Krishna , she lives on in the world as a spirit . 
 In the Mahabharata , when mentioned with the Matrikas ( Mothers ) and the war @-@ god Skanda , Putana is mentioned as a protectress rakshasi , a Grahini ( female <unk> ) , as well as a Matrika and Yogini . In Harivamsa , an appendix to Mahabharata , she is listed as a Grahini , with a prayer to protect the child at the end . In Agni Purana , she is mentioned as a Grahini and also a Yogini . 
 = = = Group of Putanas = = = 
 The medical text <unk> mentions Putana as the common name of 16 sisters of the demon king Ravana , who are permitted to eat the flesh of infants . The Buddhist text , <unk> Sutra and the 1131 CE encyclopedia Manasollasa by Western Chalukya king Someshvara III lists multiple demons , including a group of Putanas . The Brahmanda Purana and <unk> Samhita mention Putanas as a sub @-@ group of Matrikas and <unk> , whose individual names include Kali and Dakini . 
 = = In Ayurvedic medicine = = 
 The Ayurvedic medical text <unk> Samhita describes Putana as " black in colour , with a gaping mouth and projecting teeth and disheveled hair , clad in filthy garments , very smelly , and dwelling in empty broken @-@ down buildings . " It further prescribes an offering of crow dung , fish , a rice dish , ground sesame and alcohol to Putana and recitation of hymns to Putana , urging her to protect the baby , along with other treatments . <unk> ( " Rituals related to childhood " ) , a branch of Ayurveda , specifically mentions that it aims to heal diseases that arise from " <unk> milk of <unk> " ( Grahini ) , Putana being one . As per <unk> , all childhood diseases falling on the third day , the third month , or the third year of a child 's life are attributed to Putana , regardless of the disease 's symptoms . 
 = = Depiction as a bird = = 
