 Putana is portrayed as a bird in sculpture and myth . Kushan images of Putana as a bird are found in Mathura , Deogarh and <unk> . In a third @-@ century version of Harivamsa , Putana is called the " nurse of Kamsa " , who comes to a child as a female bird ( <unk> ) , and is one of many birdlike female divinities mentioned in Harivamsa . Putana 's bird form symbolizes desire of materialistic objectives . In some texts , Putana is described as a <unk> , a female crane , thus a symbol of <unk> and hypocrisy . 
 = Battle of Battle Mountain = 
 The Battle of Battle Mountain was an engagement between United Nations ( UN ) and North Korean ( NK ) forces early in the Korean War from August 15 to September 19 , 1950 , on and around the Sobuk @-@ san mountain area in South Korea . It was one of several large engagements fought simultaneously during the Battle of Pusan Perimeter . The battle ended in a victory for the UN after large numbers of United States ( US ) and Republic of Korea ( ROK ) troops were able to prevent a North Korean division from capturing the mountain area . 
 Operating in defense of Masan , the US Army 's 25th Infantry Division placed its 24th Infantry Regiment and 5th Infantry Regiment on Sobuk @-@ san to defend its two peaks , P 'il @-@ bong and Hill 665 , which would later be known as " Battle Mountain . " What followed was a month @-@ long struggle with the North Korean People 's Army 's 6th Division , in which Battle Mountain changed hands 20 times . 
 During the deadlock , neither side was able to secure a definite victory in capturing the mountaintop , but the US forces succeeded in their mission of preventing the North Koreans from advancing beyond Battle Mountain , paving the way for the North Koreans ' eventual defeat and withdrawal from the area after the Battle of Inchon . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the June 25 , 1950 , outbreak of the Korean War as a result of the invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by its northern neighbor , the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) , the United Nations committed troops to the conflict in support of South Korea . The United States , a member of the UN , subsequently dispatched ground forces to the Korean peninsula with the goal of pushing back the North Korean invasion and preventing South Korea from collapsing . However , the number of US forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier , and at the time the closest forces were the 24th Infantry Division , headquartered in Japan . The division was understrength however , and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . Regardless , the 24th was ordered to South Korea . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea with the mission to take the initial " shock " of North Korean advances , delaying the much larger North Korean units to buy time to allow reinforcements to arrive . The division was consequently alone for several weeks while the 1st Cavalry Division and the 7th and 25th Infantry Divisions moved into position , along with other Eighth United States Army supporting units . Advance elements of the 24th Infantry were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , the first encounter between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after the defeat at Osan , 24th Infantry was repeatedly defeated and forced south by superior North Korean numbers and equipment . The regiments of the 24th Infantry were systematically pushed south in engagements around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The 24th made a final stand in the Battle of Taejon , where it was almost completely destroyed but delayed North Korean forces from advancing until July 20 . By that time , the Eighth Army 's force of combat troops were roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 With Taejon captured , North Korean forces attempted to envelop the Pusan Perimeter . The 4th and 6th North Korean ( NK ) Infantry Divisions advanced south in a wide flanking maneuver . The two divisions were forced to spread their units along a thin line , but managed to penetrate the UN 's left flank with armor and superior numbers , repeatedly pushing back US and South Korean forces . American forces were pushed back repeatedly before finally halting the North Korean advance in a series of engagements in the southern section of the country . The 3rd Battalion , 29th Infantry Regiment , newly arrived in the country , sustained massive casualties at Hadong in a coordinated ambush on July 27 that opened a pass to the Pusan area . Soon after , North Korean forces took Chinju to the west , pushing back the US 19th Infantry Regiment and leaving routes to the Pusan area open for more North Korean attacks . US formations were subsequently able to defeat and push back the North Koreans on the flank in the Battle of the Notch on August 2 . Suffering mounting losses , the KPA force in the west withdrew for several days to re @-@ equip and receive reinforcements . This granted both sides a reprieve to prepare for the attack on the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = = Emplacement of the 25th Infantry Division = = = 
 The Eighth Army commander , Lieutenant General Walton Walker , then ordered the US 25th Infantry Division , under Major General William B. Kean , to take up defensive positions on the Pusan Perimeter 's southern flank west of Masan . By August 15 , the 25th Infantry Division had moved into the line , but rough terrain west of Masan limited the choice of its positions . The mountain group west of Masan was the first readily defensible ground east of the Chinju pass . The 2 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 610 m ) mountain ridges of Sobuk @-@ san dominated the area and protected the road from Komam @-@ ni to Haman to Chindong @-@ ni , the only means of north – south communication west of Masan . 
 Northwest of Komam @-@ ni was the broken spur ridge of P 'il @-@ bong , dominated by 900 feet ( 270 m ) Sibidang @-@ san , along the Nam River . Sibidang provided an excellent observation point for the surrounding area , and US artillery emplaced in the Komam @-@ ni area could interdict the road junction at Chungam @-@ ni . The US 35th Infantry Regiment set up positions at Sibidang @-@ Komam @-@ ni , in the northern part of the 25th Infantry Division defense line . The 35th Regiment line extended from a point 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Komam @-@ ni to the Nam River and then turned east along that stream to its confluence with the Naktong River . It was a long regimental line , about 26 @,@ 000 yards ( 24 @,@ 000 m ) , twice the length a regiment was typically assigned . 
 The 1st Battalion , 35th Infantry , held the regiment 's left flank west of Komam @-@ ni , and the 2nd Battalion held the regimental right along the Nam River . Meanwhile , the 3rd Battalion , redesignated from the 1st Battalion , 29th Infantry , was in reserve on the road south of Chirwon , with quick access to any part of the line . To the south was the US 24th Infantry Regiment ; west of Chindong @-@ ni , the 5th Regimental Combat Team ( RCT ) was on the division 's left flank . On division orders , 5th RCT first held the ground above the Chindong @-@ ni coastal road only as far as <unk> @-@ san , but Kean soon ordered them to close the gap with the 24th Infantry northward . When the 5th sent a South Korean unit of 100 men under American officers to the higher slope of Sobuk @-@ san , North Korean troops already there drove them back . Kean then ordered the 5th Regimental Combat Team to take this ground , but it was too late ; the ground was firmly in North Korean hands . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The NK 6th Division and NK 7th Division closed on Masan , attacking the US 25th Infantry Division on multiple fronts , with the main efforts aimed at the 24th and 35th Infantry regiments . At the same time that the North Korean 7th Division was trying to penetrate the 35th Infantry positions around Sibidang and Komam @-@ ni , the 6th Division also sent strong patrols and probing attacks against the mountainous middle part of the 25th Infantry Division line . When the division issued orders to its subordinate units to take up defensive positions west of Masan , the 2nd Battalion , 24th Infantry was still trying to seize Obong @-@ san , the mountain ridge just west of Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong , and across a gorge @-@ like valley from them . At daybreak on August 15 , the 2nd Battalion broke contact with the North Koreans and withdrew to Sobuk @-@ san and the ridge west of Haman . The 3rd Battalion , 24th Infantry now came to the Haman area to help in the regimental defense of the sector . 
 = = = Battle Mountain = = = 
 The high ground west of Haman on which the 24th Infantry established its defensive line was part of the Sobuk @-@ san mountain mass . Sobuk @-@ san reaches its 2 @,@ 400 feet ( 730 m ) peak at P 'il @-@ bong , also called Hill 743 , 8 miles ( 13 km ) northwest of Chindong @-@ ni and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southwest of Haman . From P 'il @-@ bong , the crest of the ridge line curves northwestward , to rise again 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) away in the bald peak designated Hill 665 , which became known as Battle Mountain . US troops also occasionally called it " Napalm Hill , " " Old Baldy , " and " Bloody Knob . " Between P 'il @-@ bong and Battle Mountain the ridge line narrows to a rocky ledge which the troops called the " Rocky Crags . " Northward from Battle Mountain toward the Nam River , the ground drops sharply in two long spur ridges . US troops who fought there called the eastern one Green Peak . 
 At the western , North Korean – held base of Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong were the villages of Ogok and Tundok , 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) from the crest . A north – south mountain trail crossed a high saddle just north of these villages and up the west slope about halfway to the top of Battle Mountain . This road gave the North Koreans an advantage in mounting and supplying their attacks in the area . A trail system ran from Ogok and Tundok to the crests of Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong . From the top of Battle Mountain , an observer could look directly down into the North Korean – held valley . At the same time , from Battle Mountain the North Koreans could look down into the Haman valley eastward and observe the US 24th Infantry command post , supply road , artillery positions , and approach trails . Whichever side held the crest of Battle Mountain could observe the rear areas of the other . Both forces , seeing the advantages of holding the crest of Battle Mountain , fought relentlessly to capture it in a six @-@ week @-@ long battle . 
 = = = Logistics = = = 
 The approach to Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong was much more difficult from the east , the American @-@ held side , than from the west , the North Korean side . On the east side there was no road climbing halfway to the top ; from the base of the mountain at the edge of the Haman valley the only way to make the ascent was by foot trail . Climbers took two to three hours to reach the top of P 'il @-@ bong from the reservoir area , and required from three to four hours to get on top of Battle Mountain from the valley floor . The turnaround time for supply trains to Battle Mountain was six hours . Often a dispatch runner required eight hours to go up Battle Mountain and come back down . In some places the trail was so steep that climbers had to set up ropes to hold along the side of the trail . North Korean night patrols constantly cut telephone lines . The wire men had a difficult and dangerous job trying to maintain wire communication with units on the mountain . Food , water and ammunition were frequently short for the units at the tops of the peaks . 
 Bringing dead and seriously wounded down from the top was difficult for both sides . UN litter @-@ bearing teams of six men had to carry each wounded man on a stretcher down the mountain . A medical aide was also needed to administer care during the trip if the man was critically wounded , and riflemen often accompanied the groups to protect them from North Korean snipers along the trail . Critically wounded men often died before reaching the bottom where full medical care could be administered . This possibility was one of the factors that lowered morale in the 24th Infantry units fighting on Battle Mountain . Many men were afraid that if they were wounded there they would die before reaching adequate medical care . North Korean troops often did not have time to move dead and wounded from the peak at all , forcing both sides to bury casualties in shallow graves along the peak . 
 The 24th Infantry 's supporting artillery , the 159th Field Artillery Battalion , emplaced in the valley south of Haman . On August 19 , the artillery moved farther to the rear , except for C Battery , which remained in a creek bed north of Haman . Regimental engineers worked to improve a trail running from Haman northeast to the main Komam @-@ ni @-@ Masan road . The engineers intended to use it as an evacuation road for the artillery , if that became necessary , and to improve the road net of the regimental sector for better movement of troops and supplies . This road became known as the " Engineer Road " . 
 On August 15 , there was a gap 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) wide in the P 'il @-@ bong area between the 24th Infantry and the US 5th Infantry Regimental Combat Team to the south . The 24th Infantry had not performed well during previous engagements , so Kean sent 432 ROK National Police to the area the next day and placed them in this gap , ensuring the North Koreans would not be able to exploit any holes in the line . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Opposing the US 24th Infantry at Battle Mountain was the NK 6th Division , which had been engaging Task Force Kean since August 5 . The division , which had originally numbered 10 @,@ 000 , had suffered 4 @,@ 000 casualties thus far fighting at the Pusan Perimeter . However it brought in 3 @,@ 100 South Koreans forcibly conscripted from neighboring towns to replenish its ranks . The South Koreans fought as ordered , though the North Koreans dispatched rearguard soldiers with them to shoot any who attempted to desert , defect , or surrender . 
 = = = US 24th Infantry repulsed = = = 
 The first attack against the mountain line of the 24th Infantry came on the morning of August 18 , when the North Koreans overran several E Company positions on the northern spur of Battle Mountain and killed the company commander . During the day , Lieutenant Colonel Paul F. Roberts succeeded Lieutenant Colonel George R. Cole in command of the 2nd Battalion , 24th Infantry there . The next day , the North Koreans attacked C Company on Battle Mountain and routed it . Officers could collect only 40 men to bring them back into position . Many ROK police on P 'il @-@ bong also ran from the fight , and only 56 of them remained in their defensive positions . American officers used threats and physical force to get others back into position . A 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) gap in the line north of P 'il @-@ bong existed in the 24th Infantry lines at the close of the day , and an unknown number of North Koreans were moving into it . 
 On August 20 , the NK 6th Division intensified its efforts to capture Battle Mountain , and began sending stronger attacks to capture the two peaks . In the face of attack , all of C Company except the company commander and about 25 men abandoned their position on Battle Mountain . Upon reaching the bottom of the mountain those who had fled reported erroneously that the company commander had been killed and their position surrounded , then overrun by the North Koreans . On the basis of this misinformation , American artillery and mortars fired concentrations on the position , and fighter @-@ bombers , in 38 sorties , attacked the crest of Battle Mountain , using napalm , fragmentation bombs , rockets , and machine guns , forcing the 26 remaining men off Battle Mountain after they had held it for 20 hours . In this time they had declined an offer from the North Koreans to surrender . A platoon of E Company , except for about 10 men , also left its position on the mountain as soon as the attack progressed . On the regimental left , an ROK patrol from K Company 's position on Sobuk @-@ san captured the commanding officer of the NK 15th Regiment , but he was killed a few minutes later while trying to escape . The patrol removed several intelligence reports from his body . During the day of fighting at Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong , the North Koreans drove off the ROK police from the 24th Infantry 's left flank on Sobuk @-@ san . 24th Infantry troops continued to <unk> from their positions , ignoring commands from officers to stay in place . Both African American and white officers , infuriated by the disobedience , wrote sworn statements implicating the deserters . The situation was so severe that those who stayed in their positions were often given Bronze Star Medals with Valor Devices because they were so far outnumbered in the fighting . 
 = = = US 5th RCT enters the fight = = = 
 Kean then alerted 5th Regimental Combat Team commander Colonel John L. Throckmorton to prepare a force from the 5th Infantry to attack Sobuk @-@ san and retake it . On the morning of August 21 , the 1st Battalion , 5th Regimental Combat Team , attacked across the 24th Infantry 's boundary and secured the southernmost ridges of the mountain against light North Korean resistance . That evening a strong force of North Koreans counterattacked and drove the 1st Battalion , 5th Infantry off the mountain . At 12 : 00 on August 22 , the 1st Battalion , 5th Infantry again attacked the heights , and five hours later B Company seized the highest ridges . Kean now changed the boundary line between the 5th Regimental Combat Team and the 24th Infantry , giving responsibility for the southern ridges to the 5th , and Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong to the 24th . During the night , the North Koreans launched counterattacks against the 1st Battalion , 5th Regimental Combat Team , and prevented it from consolidating its position . On the morning of August 23 , A Company tried to secure the high ground 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) southwest of the peak and link up with B Company , but was unable to do so . The North Koreans considered the Sobuk @-@ san ridges so important that they committed substantial resources to defending them , and attacked the nearby 5th Regimental Combat Team daily . 
 North of B Company 's position on Sobuk , the battle situation was similar . North Korean troops in the Rocky Crags , which extended from Sobuk @-@ san toward P 'il @-@ bong , took cover during air strikes . Napalm , 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) bombs , and strafing had little effect . Every time the UN aircraft departed , the North Koreans reoccupied their battle positions . Elements of the 24th Infantry were not able to extend southward and join with B Company of the 5th Regimental Combat Team because of stubborn North Korean resistance . 
 = = = August 21 – 26 attack = = = 
 Still farther north along the mountain ridge , in the Battle Mountain area , the battle was going poorly for the 24th Infantry . After C Company lost Battle Mountain , heavy UN airstrikes and artillery fire struck its crest in preparation for an infantry counterattack planned to regain the mountain from the North Koreans . The hot and sultry weather made climbing the steep slope difficult , but L Company was on top by 12 : 00 on August 21 . North Korean troops had left the summit under fire from the UN aircraft , artillery , and mortars . The North Koreans placed their own mortar fire on the crest and prevented L Company from consolidating its position . This situation continued until mid afternoon when a North Korean platoon came out of the trenches on the eastern slope of the mountain and surprised a platoon of L Company with an attack from behind . The other two platoons of L Company , upon hearing firing , started to leave their positions and drift down the hill . The North Koreans swiftly reoccupied the peak while officers tried to assemble L and I Companies on the eastern slope . Elements of E Company also left their position during the day . 
 American air , artillery , mortar , and tank fire now concentrated on Battle Mountain , and I and L Companies prepared another counterattack to retake it . This attack launched soon after , but made slow progress and at midnight it halted to wait for daylight . Shortly after dawn on August 22 , I and L Companies resumed the attack . L Company moved up the mountain , with I Company supplying a base of fire . Three North Korean grenades wounded six of the troops , causing the rest to retreat without orders from their frustrated commander . They were eventually returned to the hill with some coercion . A few hours later , when a small North Korean force worked around its right flank , the company again withdrew back down the hill to I Company 's position without orders . 
 Fighting continued on Battle Mountain the next day , August 23 , with more ROK police units arriving to reinforce I and L Companies . The American and South Korean troops finally secured precarious possession of Battle Mountain , mainly because the supporting fire of US mortars targeting the North Korean avenues of approach on the western slope . During the day the North Koreans counterattacked the hill six times , but were repulsed each time . The 3rd Battalion , 24th Infantry units continued to come apart under fire , so much that the battalion commander complained to Kean that he needed more officers to keep the men in line . The situation in the Haman area caused Walker to alert the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade , a reserve unit , for possible movement to this part of the front . However , it was never dispatched . On August 24 , I and L Companies had been so racked by deserters and casualties that they withdrew from the hill . They had suffered 120 casualties during the fight . C Company , along with the ROK police , took charge of the peak . 
 North Korean troops continued attacking the 24th Infantry all across its line , probing for weaknesses . On August 25 and 26 , C Company beat off several more North Korean attacks on Battle Mountain coming along the long ridge extending from Tundok . At one point in these fights , a flight of US Air Force aircraft caught about 100 North Korean soldiers in the open and immediately <unk> , bombed , and strafed them . The North Korean force was destroyed with few survivors . Task Force Baker , comprising C Company and a platoon of E Company , 24th Infantry with an ROK police company , defended Battle Mountain at this time . The special command was established because of the isolated Battle Mountain area and the extended regimental battle front . For the next two days , air strikes continued to rack North Korean counterattacks and to prevent them from forming into any serious attack on Battle Mountain . 
 = = = August 28 – 29 attack = = = 
 The 3rd Battalion , 24th Infantry relieved the 1st Battalion in the Battle Mountain area on August 27 , and 1st Battalion withdrew to reserve , except for C Company which remained on Battle Mountain as a part of Task Force Baker . The next day , August 28 , North Korean attacks continued . That day , a North Korean company @-@ sized attack struck between C and I Companies before dawn . That night , North Korean mortar fire fell on C Company on Battle Mountain . After midnight , a North Korean infantry force appeared in the rear area and captured the command post . Some men of C Company left their positions on Battle Mountain without firing when the attack began at 02 : 45 the next morning , August 29 . The North Koreans then directed their attack toward E Company and overran part of its positions . Airdrops after daylight kept C Company supplied with ammunition , and a curtain of artillery fire , sealing off approaches from the North Koreans ' main positions prevented substantial reinforcements from entering the fight . All day on August 29 , artillery fire and air strikes racked the North Koreans occupying E Company 's old positions . Then , in the evening , E Company counterattacked and reoccupied the lost ground . 
 At 23 : 00 on August 29 , the North Koreans attacked C Company again . Men on the left flank of the company position quickly abandoned their positions and soon the entire company was retreating , leaving the North Koreans in possession of the mountain again . Captain Lawrence M. Corcoran , the company commander , was left with only the 17 men in his command post , which included several wounded . All of those who stayed were later given Bronze Star Medals . After daylight on August 30 , UN air strikes again came in on Battle Mountain , and US artillery , mortar , and tank fire from the valley concentrated on the North Korean @-@ held peak . A wounded US soldier came down off the mountain where he had hidden for several hours while cut off from escape . He reported that the main body of the North Koreans had withdrawn to the wooded ridges west of the peak for better cover from the airstrikes , leaving only a small covering force on the mountain itself . At 11 : 00 , B Company , which had to this point been the reserve unit , with the 3rd Battalion in support , attacked toward the heights and retook the top by 13 : 00 . The poor defensive positions were repaired but logistical difficulties continued for the US troops at the top . 
 The 24th Infantry consistently captured Battle Mountain in the same way . Artillery , mortar , and tank fire raked the crest and air strikes employing napalm blanketed the top of the peak . Then , the infantry attacked from the hill beneath the east slope of the summit . Supporting mortars would set up a base of fire and would keep the heights under barrage until the infantry had arrived at a point just short of the crest . The mortar fire then lifted and the infantry moved rapidly up the last stretch to the top , usually to find it abandoned by the North Koreans . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 Battle Mountain changed hands so often during August that there is no agreement on the exact number of times . The intelligence sergeant of the 1st Battalion , 24th Infantry estimated the peak changed hands 19 times . Subsequent research suggests the actual number was 20 . From August 18 to the end of the month , North Korean troops attacked the mountain every night . The peak often changed hands two or three times in a 24 @-@ hour period . The usual pattern was for the North Koreans to take it at night and the US 24th Infantry to recapture it the next day . This type of fluctuating battle resulted in relatively high losses among artillery forward observers and their equipment . During the period of August 15 – 31 , seven forward observers and eight other members of the Observer and Liaison Section of the 159th Field Artillery Battalion were casualties , and they lost eight radios , 11 telephones , and two vehicles in the process . 
 In its defense of that part of Sobuk @-@ san south of Battle Mountain and P <unk> , the 1st Battalion , 5th Regimental Combat Team , also had nearly continuous action in the last week of the month . During this time , Master Sergeant Melvin O. Handrich of C Company , 5th Regimental Combat Team posthumously won the Medal of Honor for actions on August 25 and 26 . From a forward position he directed artillery fire on an attacking North Korean force and at one point personally kept part of the company from abandoning its positions . Although wounded , Handrich returned to his forward position , to continue directing artillery fire , and engaged North Korean troops alone until he was killed . When the 5th Regimental Combat Team regained the area , it counted over 70 dead North Koreans in the vicinity , all likely killed by Handrich . By the end of August , the fighting in the mountains west of Masan remained a stalemate . Neither side had secured a definite advantage . 
 = = = September push = = = 
 Although the NK 6th and 7th Divisions had massed their troops primarily for the attempted breakthrough of the US 25th Infantry Division positions along the Nam and Naktong Rivers during their September offensive , the NK 6th Division continued its attacks on the area . North Korean artillery and mortar fire fell on Battle Mountain , P 'il @-@ bong and Sobuk @-@ san , and during the period of September 1 – 6 there were strong local attacks and patrols by North Korean troops . The 1st Battalion , 5th Infantry , never succeeded in gaining complete possession of the southern parts of Sobuk @-@ san , which would have given observation into the valley below and into the North Koreans ' rear areas . The instability of the 24th Infantry made it necessary for Kean to order Throckmorton to send his only regimental reserve , E Company , north into the 24th Infantry sector along the Haman road to protect the right flank of the 5th Regimental Combat Team . In this position , E Company collected stragglers from the 24th Infantry every night and the next morning sent them back to their units . The US Navy then entered the battle in this part of the line , its destroyers standing off the south coast gave illumination at night by directing their searchlights against low @-@ hanging clouds on Sobuk @-@ san . One destroyer was on station almost continuously , supporting the ground action with the fire of six 5 @-@ inch guns . An artillery aerial observer directed this naval gunfire through the fire direction center . 
 On September 7 , a North Korean attack succeeded once again in driving ROK and American troops from Battle Mountain . The 25th Division ordered Lieutenant Colonel George H. DeChow 's 3rd Battalion , US 27th Infantry Regiment to retake the peak . DeChow had just counterattacked through the rear areas of the 24th Infantry to the vicinity of Haman . K and B Companies of the 24th Infantry were to follow him and secure the crest if he regained it . From September 7 – 9 , the 3rd Battalion counterattacked up Battle Mountain . On September 9 , I Company reached the top and engaged in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with the North Koreans . L Company followed to the crest but the dug @-@ in North Koreans drove both companies off and back down the slope . An estimated two companies of North Korean troops held the crest of Battle Mountain and two more companies protected their flanks . DeChow 's 3rd Battalion suffered heavy casualties in these three days of fighting . On the afternoon of September 9 , the American counterattack force dropped back to the high ground which it had recaptured on September 7 , 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) east of Battle Mountain . Artillery , mortars , and air strikes pounded the North Korean position on Battle Mountain . During this stalemate , word came from the 25th Division for the 3rd Battalion , 27th Infantry to move to the vicinity of Masan . It was needed elsewhere along the Pusan Perimeter front . 
 = = = Containment action = = = 
 With the failure of the 3rd Battalion , 27th Infantry , to hold the high knob on Battle Mountain after its attacks on September 8 and 9 , the 24th Infantry stopped trying to retake Battle Mountain . K Company , 24th Infantry , and C Company , 65th Engineer Combat Battalion , dug in on the hill east of and beneath Battle Mountain , fortified their position with barbed wire and mine fields , and placed registered artillery and mortar fires on all approaches to the position . The regimental commander planned to contain the North Koreans on Battle Mountain by artillery and mortar fire . The North Koreans on Battle Mountain attacked the lower American defensive position many times on subsequent nights , but all their attacks were driven off . After a month of almost constant battle the North Koreans gained and held possession of the crest of Battle Mountain . The defensive fires of the 24th Regiment and attached artillery , however , contained them there and they were unable to exploit the possession on the peak or attack further . 
 With Battle Mountain in their possession , the North Koreans set out to gain control of P 'il @-@ bong to the southeast . In the predawn hours of September 14 a force of 400 to 500 North Korean men attacked I and L Companies , 24th Infantry , on P <unk> . Several attacks were repulsed , but because of men leaving their positions L Company 's strength dwindled from 100 to 40 men . The remnant of L Company withdrew toward I Company 's position on the crest of P 'il @-@ bong , only to find that this company under a relatively minor attack had left the hill . They could not hold P 'il @-@ bong with the handful of men remaining and it was also lost . 
 As soon as the heaviest attacks subsided against the 25th Division , Walker ordered it to release the 5th Regimental Combat Team on September 7 to move to other engagements along the Pusan Perimeter . The continuing fighting north of Taegu made it necessary to move reserves there . That evening the 1st and 2nd Battalions , 27th Infantry , moved from the Nam River battlefield to relieve the 5th Regimental Combat Team on the Masan front . 27th commander Colonel John H. Michaelis assumed command of the regimental zone at 15 : 00 on September 9 . The 3rd Battalion , 27th Infantry , broke off its counterattacks on Battle Mountain that day , rejoined the regiment , and took its place in the southern end of the line on September 11 . Meanwhile , the 5th Regimental Combat Team began moving to Samnangjin on the September 10 . Upon arrival at Samnangjin , it passed to Eighth Army reserve . 
 At mid @-@ September the Eighth Army and the ROK Army were still engaged with North Korean forces at nearly all points of the Pusan Perimeter . After two weeks of the heaviest fighting of the war they had just barely turned back the North Korean Great Naktong Offensive on the main axes of the attack around the approaches to Masan . 
 = = = Inchon landing = = = 
 The UN counterattack at Inchon collapsed the North Korean line and forced them back on all fronts . On 16 September , however , 25th Infantry Division was still fighting North Korean forces behind its lines , and North Korean strong points existed on the heights of Battle Mountain , P 'il @-@ bong , and Sobuk @-@ san . Kean felt that the division could advance along the roads toward Chinju only when the mountainous center of the division front was clear . He therefore believed that the key to the advance of the 25th Division lay in its center where the North Koreans held the heights and kept the 24th Infantry Regiment under daily attack . The 27th Infantry on the left and the 35th Infantry on the right , astride the roads between Chinju and Masan held their positions and could not advance until the situation in front of the 24th Infantry improved . 
 To carry out his plan , Kean organized a composite battalion @-@ sized task force on September 16 under command of Major Robert L. Woolfolk , commanding officer of the 3rd Battalion , 35th Infantry , and ordered it to attack Battle Mountain and P 'il @-@ bong the next day , with the mission of restoring the 24th Infantry positions there . On September 17 – 18 the task force repeatedly attacked these heights , heavily supported by artillery fire from the 8th and 90th Field Artillery Battalions and by numerous air strikes , but North Korean automatic fire from the heights drove back the assaulting troops every time with heavy casualties . Within one day , A Company , 27th Infantry , alone suffered 57 casualties . The 24th Infantry bogged down behind Battle Mountain . Woolfolk 's force abandoned its effort to drive the North Korean from the peaks after its failure on September 18 , and the task group was dissolved the next day . 
 = = = North Korean withdrawal = = = 
 On September 19 the UN discovered the North Koreans had abandoned of Battle Mountain during the night , and the 1st Battalion , 24th Infantry , moved up and occupied it . On the right , the 35th Infantry began moving forward . There was only light resistance until it reached the high ground in front of Chungam @-@ ni where hidden North Korean soldiers in spider holes shot at 1st Battalion soldiers from the rear . The next day the 1st Battalion captured Chungam @-@ ni , and the 2nd Battalion captured the long ridge line running northwest from it to the Nam River . Meanwhile , the North Koreans still held strongly against the division left where the 27th Infantry had heavy fighting in trying to move forward . 
 The North Koreans withdrew from the Masan area the night of September 18 – 19 . The NK 7th Division withdrew from south of the Nam River while the 6th Division sideslipped elements to cover the entire front . Covered by the 6th Division , the 7th had crossed to the north side of the Nam River by the morning of September 19 . Then the NK 6th Division withdrew from its positions on Sobuk @-@ san . The US units rapidly pursued them north , passing over the Battle Mountain positions , which were no longer of strategic importance . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The US 5th Regimental Combat Team suffered 269 killed , 573 wounded and four missing during its battles at the Pusan Perimeter , most of these at Masan . The 24th Infantry suffered 267 killed , 796 wounded , one captured and two missing during its time at Pusan Perimeter , however these figures are split between the portions of the regiment which fought at Battle Mountain , which accounted for about 450 of those wounded and 150 of those killed , and those which fought in Haman after August 31 . The 65th Engineer Battalion , supporting the 24th Infantry , suffered 27 killed , 75 wounded . 
 The North Korean troops suffered heavily in the fight , and most became casualties in the attack . By mid @-@ September , the NK 7th Division was reduced to just 4 @,@ 000 men , a loss of 6 @,@ 000 from when it was committed to the perimeter . Only 2 @,@ 000 from the NK 6th Division returned to North Korea , a loss of 80 percent of its strength . Large groups of troops from the divisions were captured as they attempted to return to North Korea , including up to 3 @,@ 000 North Korean troops . The attacking force of over 20 @,@ 000 had been reduced to only 6 @,@ 000 by the end of the fights at Masan . 
 Desertion had continued to be a problem for the 24th Infantry , a de facto segregated unit . Statistics compiled by the Eighth Army found the 25th Infantry Division had to detain 116 deserters from the 25th Infantry throughout August , compared to 15 from the 27th Infantry and 12 from the 35th Infantry . The regiment had already been criticized for its poor performance at the Battle of Sangju several weeks earlier . In late August , Kean began investigating the unit 's behavior , and found its poor performance was starting to bring other units of the division down as well . Kean considered the regiment a weak link in the chain , and after its poor performance at the battles of Battle Mountain and Haman , he suggested to Walker that the regiment be disbanded and its troops used as replacements for other units in the field . Virtually all of the officers and enlisted men in the regiment were supportive of this idea , but Walker declined , feeling he could not afford to lose a regiment . 
 = Salisbury Sports Club tournament in 1970 = 
 Garfield Sobers , captain of the West Indies cricket team and one of the most prominent cricketers in the world , outraged many in the Caribbean in September 1970 when he took part in a friendly double @-@ wicket tournament at Salisbury Sports Club in Rhodesia ( renamed Zimbabwe in 1980 ) , a country in southern Africa that was unrecognised internationally because of its mostly white minority government . The resulting furore nearly caused him to lose the captaincy , and threatened the unity of the West Indies team itself . 
 Sobers was captain of the " Rest of the World " team that toured England between May and August 1970 in place of the South Africa national team , whose proposed tour had been cancelled by English cricketing authorities because of apartheid . He accepted an invitation to the Rhodesian competition from Eddie Barlow , a South African member of the Rest of the World team , and arrived in Salisbury on the day of the event . To ecstatic applause from the mostly white spectators , Sobers partnered South African Test captain Ali Bacher in the tournament , and said afterwards that he had enjoyed himself , though he and Bacher had not won . Having established a personal rapport with the Rhodesian Prime Minister , Ian Smith , Sobers left the next day and returned home to Barbados . 
 Many in the West Indies were appalled by Sobers ' actions , and when he subsequently made positive comments about Smith , Rhodesia and white South African cricketers in press interviews and announced his intention to play more cricket in Rhodesia , the vitriol intensified , with one Antiguan newspaper branding him a " white black man " . A number of prominent figures , including entire political parties , called for Sobers to be stripped of the West Indies cricket captaincy . Guyanese Prime Minister Forbes Burnham barred Sobers from Guyana , and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India announced that if Sobers remained in the team , India would pull out of its upcoming tour of the West Indies . Sobers argued that as a " professional cricketer and a sportsman , not a politician " , he had done nothing wrong . 
 The West Indies Cricket Board ( WICB ) contemplated whether it would be better to cancel all matches in Guyana or to sack Sobers ; neither prospect was attractive . The crisis ended when Eric Williams , the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago , wrote a letter of apology for Sobers to sign , which was relayed to the WICB and several governmental bodies in late October 1970 . This was accepted , and the incident was soon largely forgotten . Sobers regained his overwhelming popularity with West Indian cricket fans , continued as team captain until 1972 and retired from cricket two years later . He thereafter retained his stance that politics should not interfere with sport . His Rhodesian visit has been cited as <unk> the South African rebel tours controversy of the 1980s . 
 = = Background = = 
 Garfield Sobers , from the Caribbean island of Barbados , was widely regarded as one of the world 's finest cricketers from the late 1950s to the early 1970s , and is placed by many among the best to ever play the sport . An all @-@ rounder , he made his debut for the West Indies cricket team , the multinational side representing the Caribbean in international cricket , at the age of 17 in 1954 . He was a regular member of the team for the next two decades . Sobers set a then @-@ world record highest individual score of 365 runs not out during a Test match against Pakistan in 1958 , and became captain of the West Indies team six years later . In domestic first @-@ class cricket , he was one of the first West Indians to play abroad , representing South Australia and Nottinghamshire during the 1960s and 1970s . His batting , bowling and fielding were all regarded as excellent by contemporaries , but his decision making and tactics were occasionally criticised . 
 Rhodesia was an unrecognised state in southern Africa , run by a predominantly white minority government headed by Prime Minister Ian Smith . Taking exception to the UK 's insistence on majority rule as a condition for independence , Smith 's colonial administration had unilaterally declared independence in 1965 following a long dispute over the terms . International uproar and the first ever United Nations economic sanctions had ensued , making Rhodesia deeply isolated . This quarantine variously extended to sports . Rhodesian athletes , including the 1968 , 1972 and 1976 Olympic squads ( which were racially integrated ) , were barred from international competition on political grounds . Rhodesian cricket and rugby were not greatly affected as these sports largely operated in tandem with South Africa . The Rhodesia cricket team , for example , took part in the annual Currie Cup tournament against South African provincial sides . 
 As world opinion hardened against South Africa during the 1960s because of apartheid , international governing bodies in various sports introduced boycotts of South African teams and athletes . Until 1976 , non @-@ whites were legally barred from the South Africa cricket team , and , as the law required matches to be racially homogenous , this also applied to visiting squads . The South African government provoked overseas ire in 1968 when it refused entry to the England cricket team because its proposed tour party included Basil D 'Oliveira , a Cape Coloured . Amid the ensuing scandal , Marylebone Cricket Club ( which then governed English cricket ) called off the tour . Two years later , a tour of England by the South Africa cricket team was cancelled by the English Test and County Cricket Board ( TCCB ) at a week 's notice following public protests and immense pressure from the UK government . South Africa did not play another official international cricket match until 1991 . 
 The TCCB sought to recoup the lost revenues for the 1970 season by hastily organising a replacement series of matches between England and a " Rest of the World " team comprising leading cricketers from around the world . This squad , described by the leading cricket publication Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack as " one of the strongest teams ever to take the field " , included five South Africans , five West Indians ( including Sobers , as captain ) , two Pakistanis and a player each from Australia and India . It defeated England 4 – 1 over a tour lasting from late June to late August 1970 . 
 = = Sobers in Rhodesia = = 
 Eddie Barlow , one of the South African members of the Rest of the World team , suggested to Sobers towards the end of the English series that the West Indian might like to take part in a friendly double @-@ wicket competition in the Rhodesian capital Salisbury on 12 September , the local Pioneers ' Day holiday . Barlow was one of several prominent South African cricketers already booked to play . Sobers was initially noncommittal , but decided to go following assurances that Rhodesia did not practice apartheid and there would be no racial discrimination regarding team selection . Sobers ' intended participation became public on 7 September when a London newspaper reported on it ; widespread condemnation of the West Indian captain followed , but he still travelled , landing in Salisbury early on the day of the event . 
 Sobers was enthusiastically received in Salisbury by blacks and whites alike ; he described the reception and hospitality as " wonderful " and " just great " . After a few hours ' rest , he made his way to Salisbury Sports Club for the competition , in which he partnered the South African Test captain Ali Bacher , whom he had never met . Sobers received £ 600 for appearing . The largely white capacity crowd gave the Barbadian a hero 's welcome , accompanying his walk out to the wicket with a standing ovation and a chorus of " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " . Having flown in just that morning , Sobers underperformed , and he and Bacher did not win . All the same , the other teams formed a guard of honour for them as they left the field . Bacher found Sobers be " a great guy with no airs or graces " ; he suggested to his teammate that he should consider also playing in South Africa . 
 Sobers spent part of the day sitting with Ian Smith in the stands . Both reported enjoying the occasion ; Smith , a keen sports fan and a talented player in his day , fondly recounted his " lovely day discussing the great men of cricket " with Sobers in his memoirs , while Sobers recalled the Rhodesian premier as " a tremendous person to talk to " . After the tournament ended , they continued their conversation over dinner . Smith told Sobers that he was welcome to come back to Rhodesia whenever he liked . Sobers left the next day , after less than 48 hours in the country , and returned home to Barbados on 15 September 1970 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Sobers was met in Bridgetown by an enormous and hostile press storm . " To say there was an uproar in the Caribbean is comprehensively to understate what took place , " the Jamaican politician Michael Manley later wrote in his History of West Indies Cricket . The Antigua Labour Party 's Workers ' Voice newspaper damned Sobers as " a white black man " and charged that by playing in Rhodesia , he had " abdicated his loyalty to Africans everywhere , and all West Indians in particular " . Manley 's opinion was that if Sobers did not apologise , he " may not be welcomed anywhere by people who believe that justice is bigger than even sport " . Frank Walcott of the Barbados Workers ' Union , who was a personal friend of Sobers , publicly called for his captaincy of the West Indies to be revoked , as did many others . Sobers told reporters at Seawell Airport that he had " never been bothered about criticism , and I do not see why I should start now " . Sympathy for Sobers amid the affair came mainly from his fellow Barbadians . Vernon <unk> , Leader of the Opposition in Trinidad and Tobago , praised Sobers ' " calm dignity in response to the primitive savagery of West Indian gutter politicians " . 
 Sobers told the media that he had played in Rhodesia as he felt it would be good for cricket , particularly after the cancellation of the South African tour of England , and that politics had not entered his mind . He told interviewers that he had had no problems whatsoever in Rhodesia , that sport in Rhodesia appeared to him to be integrated and that he intended to accept Smith 's invitation to return there in the future to play more cricket . Reporting Bacher 's suggestion of playing in South Africa , Sobers said that he probably would not do so : " I don 't know if I would want to get involved in that , " he said , " but it does show that South African cricketers are willing to play with and against players of any colour , race or creed . " Sobers said that the white South African members of the Rest of the World squad in England had functioned well as part of the multiracial team , and that he hoped for a similar Rest of the World series in the Caribbean as he believed West Indian cricket fans would enjoy seeing the South African players . He expressed confusion regarding the calls for him to be stripped of his captaincy . " I am a professional cricketer and a sportsman , not a politician , " he said . " I went to play cricket . I don 't see why this should affect my position as captain of the West Indies team . " 
 The crisis deepened on 10 October 1970 , when Guyanese Prime Minister Forbes Burnham announced that Sobers would not be allowed to enter Guyana until he apologised . This was a major issue for the West Indies Cricket Board ( WICB ) as the team played at least one Test match a year in Georgetown , the Guyanese capital . The Jamaica Labour Party called for Sobers to resign as captain four days later ; Indira Gandhi , the Indian Prime Minister , then announced that if Sobers were not removed from the West Indies team , India would cancel its upcoming tour of the West Indies , scheduled for early 1971 . The WICB considered its options . Cancelling matches in Guyana might prompt Burnham to instruct Guyanese members of the West Indian team to boycott , and sacking Sobers might cause Barbados to withdraw in protest ; either way , the unity of the West Indies team was threatened . Meanwhile , no sign of an apology emanated from Sobers . 
 = = Apology , resolution and legacy = = 
 Taking matters into his own hands , the Prime Minister of Trinidad and Tobago Eric Williams wrote an apology letter for Sobers to sign , addressed to WICB president Noel Pierce , and had it delivered to the West Indies captain by the Barbadian fast bowler Wes Hall . The letter explained that Sobers had not known of the " deep feelings of the West Indian people " on Rhodesia , that he now better understood the political issues , and that he would not go to the southern African country again . " I therefore wish to convey to you and the members of the board my sincere regrets for any embarrassment which my action may have caused , and to assure you of my unqualified dedication whenever I may be called upon to represent my country — the West Indies — and my people , " it concluded . Sobers signed , and the apology was promptly conveyed to the WICB in late October 1970 , with copies also going to the council of the West Indies Associated States and the prime ministerial offices of Barbados , Guyana , Trinidad and Tobago and Jamaica . " A grateful Caribbean grabbed the apology with both hands , " Manley records — " The thought that [ Sobers ] might be lost as a consequence of a political gaffe was intolerable . For the great majority , the incident was forgiven and promptly forgotten . " 
 Sobers regained his former popularity and kept the West Indies cricket captaincy until 1972 ; he retired from the sport two years later . He was subsequently knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1975 for his services to cricket , and named one of the ten National Heroes of Barbados by the Barbadian government in 1998 . His controversial visit to Rhodesia has been described by cricket journalist Siddhartha Vaidyanathan as <unk> the West Indian " rebel tours " affair of the early 1980s , in which black cricketers from the Caribbean broke the apartheid sporting boycott and played in South Africa . The West Indian rebel players became wildly popular among South African cricket fans , but were punished at home with bans from all organised cricket ( initially for life , but lifted in 1989 ) , compounded by lasting social and professional ostracism . Sobers retained his stance that politics should not interfere with sport , and was reluctant to criticise the West Indians who toured South Africa . All the same , he came to regret having gone to Rhodesia because of the scandal he had provoked . " Had I known the furore my visit was to cause , " he later said , " I would not have gone . " 
 = Shangguan Yunzhu = 
 Shangguan Yunzhu ( Chinese : <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Shang @-@ kuan <unk> @-@ chu ; 2 March 1920 – 23 November 1968 ) was a Chinese actress active from the 1940s to the 1960s . She was considered one of the most talented and versatile actresses in China , and was named one of the 100 best actors of the 100 years of Chinese cinema in 2005 . 
 Born Wei Junluo , Shangguan Yunzhu fled to Shanghai when her hometown Jiangyin was attacked by the Japanese . In Shanghai she became a drama and film actress , and her career took off after the end of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . She starred in several prominent leftist films such as Spring River Flows East , Crows and Sparrows , and Women Side by Side . After the Communist victory in mainland China in 1949 , her career was set back when her husband was embroiled in the anti @-@ capitalist Five @-@ anti Campaign , but she later portrayed a wide variety of characters in many films . 
 Shangguan Yunzhu was married three times and had three children , but all her marriages ended in divorce . She was said to have had an affair with Mao Zedong , for which she was severely persecuted by the followers of Mao 's wife Jiang Qing during the Cultural Revolution , leading to her suicide in November 1968 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shangguan Yunzhu was born in 1920 in the town of <unk> ( <unk> ) in Jiangyin , Jiangsu province . Her birth name was Wei Junluo ( Chinese : <unk> ) , and she also used the name Wei Yajun ( <unk> ) . She was the fifth and youngest child of her parents . In 1936 she married Zhang Dayan ( <unk> ) , an art teacher and a friend of her brother 's , and soon gave birth to a son named Zhang <unk> ( <unk> ) at the age of 17 . 
 Soon after her marriage , the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War erupted . In November 1937 the invading Japanese army attacked Jiangyin , and one of Wei Junluo 's sisters was killed in a bombing raid . She fled to Shanghai with her family . 
 = = 1940s = = 
 In Shanghai Wei Junluo found work at a photo studio owned by He <unk> , a photographer for the Mingxing Film Company . Influenced by the studio 's many customers from the film industry , she became fascinated with acting . In 1940 she enrolled in a drama school and was employed by the Xinhua Film Company after graduation . She adopted the name Shangguan Yunzhu suggested by the influential director Bu <unk> . After successfully playing the female lead in Cao Yu 's stage play Thunderstorm , Shangguan joined the <unk> Company and made her film debut in Fallen Rose in 1941 . 
 In 1942 Shangguan joined the <unk> Drama Society , where she met the playwright Yao Ke ( <unk> ) . The next year Shangguan divorced Zhang Dayan and married Yao . In August 1944 she gave birth to a daughter named Yao Yao ( <unk> ) . However , her new marriage was short @-@ lived due to Yao 's infidelity , and the couple divorced before their daughter turned two . Shangguan subsequently had a brief relationship with the actor Lan Ma ( <unk> ) . 
 In the post @-@ war period , Shangguan Yunzhu played her first lead roles in Dream in Paradise directed by Tang <unk> and Long Live the Missus directed by Sang Hu . She then starred in several leftist films including Spring River Flows East ( 1947 , directors Cai Chusheng and Zheng Junli ) , Myriad of Lights ( 1948 , director Shen Fu ) , Crows and Sparrows ( 1949 , director Zheng Junli ) , and Women Side by Side ( 1949 , director Chen Liting ) . Her masterful performances in these popular films brought her great fame and critical acclaim . 
 = = After 1949 = = 
 After Mao Zedong 's communists won the Chinese Civil War and established the People 's Republic of China in 1949 , Shangguan Yunzhu continued her acting career under the new government . In 1951 she married her third husband Cheng Shuyao ( <unk> ) , manager of Shanghai 's Lyceum Theatre . She gave birth to a son named Wei Ran ( <unk> ) . However , Cheng Shuyao was soon embroiled in the Five @-@ anti Campaign , a political campaign launched by Mao against the capitalist class in 1952 . He was accused of embezzlement and confessed to the charges under pressure . Shangguan decided to divorce Cheng ; their marriage lasted less than two years . She later had another relationship with the director He Lu ( <unk> ) . 
 Affected by her association with Cheng Shuyao , Shangguan did not play any major role for several years . This changed in 1955 , when she starred in the film Storm on the Southern Island . Director Bai Chen ( <unk> ) chose her to play the leading role as a heroic nurse , a far cry from her traditional roles of socialites and rich wives . She adjusted to her new role well , and portrayed a wide variety of characters in many films including It 's My Day Off ( 1959 ) , Spring Comes to the Withered Tree ( 1961 , director Zheng Junli ) , Early Spring in February ( 1963 , director Xie <unk> ) , and Stage Sisters ( 1965 , director Xie Jin ) . She was recognized as one of the most talented and versatile actresses in China . 
 = = Relationship with Mao = = 
 Shangguan Yunzhu was said to have had an intimate relationship with Chairman Mao Zedong . On 10 January 1956 , Shangguan and Mao had a private meeting set up by Shanghai mayor Chen Yi , at which Mao said he was a fan of hers . Mao was said to have requested to meet her " in private " many times . 
 = = Suicide = = 
 In 1966 Shangguan was diagnosed with breast cancer and had a successful surgery . However , only two months later it was found that she also had cancer in her brain and had to undergo another major operation . 
 At the same time , the Cultural Revolution was under way . Two films Shangguan had appeared in , Early Spring in February and Stage Sister , had been denounced as " huge poisonous weeds " . She was also under severe persecution for her alleged affair with Mao . She was badly beaten by followers of Mao 's wife Jiang Qing , who gave her an ultimatum to confess her relationship with Mao . At 3 am on 23 November 1968 , Shangguan Yunzhu jumped from her apartment in the <unk> Mansion to her death . 
 = = Biographies and museum = = 
 Several biographies have been published in Chinese about Shangguan Yunzhu 's life : 
 Chen <unk> , Shanghai Beauty ( <unk> ) ( 2000 ) – Biographical account of Shangguan and her daughter Yao Yao , who was killed in a traffic accident in 1975 . 
 Wei <unk> , Grieving for a movie star : a biography of Shangguan Yunzhu ( 1986 ) . 
 Chen <unk> ( <unk> ) , Shangguan Yunzhu . 
 In 2007 , her childhood home in <unk> , Jiangyin was opened to the public as the Shangguan Yunzhu Museum . 
 = = Selected filmography = = 
 1941 Fallen Rose ( <unk> . Wu <unk> and Wen <unk> ) 
 1947 Dream in Paradise ( dir . Tang <unk> ) 
 1947 Long Live the Missus ( dir . Sang Hu ) 
 1947 Spring River Flows East ( <unk> . Cai Chusheng and Zheng Junli ) 
 1948 Myriad of Lights ( dir . Shen Fu ) 
 1949 Hope in the World ( dir . Shen Fu ) 
 1949 Crows and Sparrows ( dir . Zheng Junli ) 
 1949 Women Side by Side ( dir . Chen Liting ) 
 1955 Storm on the Southern Island ( dir . Bai Chen ) 
 1959 It 's My Day Off ( dir . Lu Ren ) 
 1961 Spring Comes to the Withered Tree ( dir . Zheng Junli ) 
 1963 Early Spring in February ( dir . Xie <unk> ) 
 1965 Stage Sisters ( dir . Xie Jin ) 
 = South Park = 
 South Park is an American adult animated sitcom created by Trey Parker and Matt Stone for the Comedy Central television network . The show revolves around four boys — Stan Marsh , Kyle Broflovski , Eric Cartman , and Kenny McCormick — and their bizarre adventures in and around the titular Colorado town . Much like The Simpsons , South Park uses a very large ensemble cast of recurring characters . Intended for mature audiences , the show has become infamous for its crude language and dark , surreal humor that satirizes a wide range of topics . 
 Parker and Stone developed the show from two animated shorts they created in 1992 and 1995 . The latter became one of the first Internet viral videos , which ultimately led to its production as a series . South Park debuted in August 1997 with great success , consistently earning the highest ratings of any basic cable program . Subsequent ratings have varied but it remains one of Comedy Central 's highest rated shows , and is slated to air through at least 2019 . 
 The pilot episode was produced using cutout animation . All subsequent episodes are created with software that emulates the cutout technique . Parker and Stone perform most of the voice acting . Since 2000 , each episode is typically written and produced during the week preceding its broadcast , with Parker serving as the primary writer and director . There have been a total of 267 episodes over the course of the show 's 19 seasons . Season 20 will premiere on September 14 , 2016 . 
 South Park has received numerous accolades , including five Primetime Emmy Awards , a Peabody Award , and numerous inclusions in various publications ' lists of greatest television shows . The show 's popularity resulted in a feature @-@ length theatrical film , South Park : Bigger , Longer and Uncut which was released in June 1999 , less than two years after the show 's premiere , and became a commercial and critical success . In 2013 , TV Guide ranked South Park the tenth Greatest TV Cartoon of All Time . 
 = = Premise = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The show follows the exploits of four boys , Stan Marsh , Kyle Broflovski , Eric Cartman and Kenny McCormick . The boys live in the fictional small town of South Park , located within the real life South Park basin in the Rocky Mountains of central Colorado . The town is also home to an assortment of frequent characters such as students , families , elementary school staff , and other various residents , who tend to regard South Park as a bland and quiet place to live . Prominent settings on the show include the local elementary school , bus stop , various neighborhoods and the surrounding snowy landscape , actual Colorado landmarks , and the shops and businesses along the town 's main street , all of which are based on the appearance of similar locations in the town of Fairplay , Colorado . 
 Stan is portrayed as the everyman of the group , as the show 's official website describes him as an " average , American 4th grader " . Kyle is the lone Jew among the group , and his portrayal in this role is often dealt with satirically . Stan is modeled after Parker , while Kyle is modeled after Stone . Stan and Kyle are best friends , and their friendship , which is intended to reflect the real life friendship between Parker and Stone , is a common topic throughout the series . Eric Cartman ( usually referred to by his surname only ) is a loud , obnoxious , manipulative , racist and obese literal psychopath . He is often portrayed as an antagonist whose anti @-@ Semitic attitude has resulted in an ever @-@ progressing rivalry with Kyle , although the deeper reason for the antagonistic relationship is the strong clash between Kyle 's strong morality , and Cartman 's complete lack of such . Kenny , who comes from a poor family , wears his parka hood so tightly that it covers most of his face and <unk> his speech . During the show 's first five seasons , Kenny would die in nearly every episode before returning in the next with little or no definitive explanation given . He was written out of the show 's sixth season in 2002 , re @-@ appearing in the season finale . Since then , the practice of killing Kenny has been seldom used by the show 's creators . During the show 's first 58 episodes , the boys were in the third grade . In the season four episode " 4th Grade " ( 2000 ) , they entered the fourth grade , where they have remained ever since . 
 Plots are often set in motion by events , ranging from the fairly typical to the supernatural and extraordinary , which frequently happen in the town . The boys often act as the voice of reason when these events cause panic or incongruous behavior among the adult populace , who are customarily depicted as irrational , gullible , and prone to <unk> . The boys are also frequently confused by the contradictory and hypocritical behavior of their parents and other adults , and often perceive them as having distorted views on morality and society . 
 = = = Themes and style = = = 
 Each episode opens with a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek disclaimer : " All characters and events in this show — even those based on real people — are entirely fictional . All celebrity voices are impersonated ..... poorly . The following program contains coarse language and due to its content it should not be viewed by anyone . " 
 South Park was the first weekly program to be assigned the TV @-@ MA rating , and is generally intended for adult audiences . The boys and most other child characters use strong profanity , with only the most taboo words being bleeped by censors during a typical broadcast . The use of such language serves as a means for Parker and Stone to display how they claim young boys really talk when they are alone . 
 South Park commonly makes use of carnivalesque and absurdist techniques , numerous running gags , violence , sexual content , offhand pop @-@ cultural references , and satirical portrayal of celebrities . 
 Early episodes tended to be shock value @-@ oriented and featured more slapstick @-@ style humor . While social satire had been used on the show occasionally earlier on , it became more prevalent as the series progressed , with the show retaining some of its focus on the boys ' fondness of scatological humor in an attempt to remind adult viewers " what it was like to be eight years old . " Parker and Stone also began further developing other characters by giving them larger roles in certain storylines , and began writing plots as parables based on religion , politics , and numerous other topics . This provided the opportunity for the show to spoof both extreme sides of contentious issues , while lampooning both liberal and conservative points of view . Parker and Stone describe themselves as " equal opportunity offenders " , whose main agenda is to " be funny " and " make people laugh " , while stating that no particular topic or group of people be spared the expense of being subject to mockery and satire . 
 Parker and Stone insist that the show is still more about " kids being kids " and " what it 's like to be in [ elementary school ] in America " , stating that the introduction of a more satirical element to the series was the result of the two adding more of a " moral center " to the show so that it would rely less on simply being crude and shocking in an attempt to maintain an audience . While profane , and with a tendency to sometimes be cynical , Parker notes that there is still an " underlying sweetness " aspect to the child characters , and Time described the boys as " sometimes cruel but with a core of innocence . " Usually , the boys and / or other characters ponder over what has transpired during an episode and convey the important lesson taken from it with a short monologue . During earlier seasons , this speech would commonly begin with a variation of the phrase " You know , I 've learned something today ... " . 
 = = Origins and creation = = 
 Soon after meeting in film class at the University of Colorado in 1992 , Parker and Stone created an animated short entitled The Spirit of Christmas . The film was created by animating construction paper cutouts with stop motion , and features prototypes of the main characters of South Park , including a character resembling Cartman but named " Kenny " , an unnamed character resembling what is today Kenny , and two near @-@ identical unnamed characters who resemble Stan and Kyle . Brian Graden , Fox network executive and mutual friend , commissioned Parker and Stone to create a second short film as a video Christmas card . Created in 1995 , the second The Spirit of Christmas short resembled the style of the later series more closely . To differentiate between the two homonymous shorts , the first short is often referred to as Jesus vs. Frosty , and the second short as Jesus vs. Santa . Graden sent copies of the video to several of his friends , and from there it was copied and distributed , including on the internet , where it became one of the first viral videos . 
 As Jesus vs. Santa became more popular , Parker and Stone began talks of developing the short into a television series . Fox refused to pick up the series , not wanting to air a show that included the character Mr. Hankey , a talking piece of feces . The two then entered negotiations with both MTV and Comedy Central . Parker preferred the show be produced by Comedy Central , fearing that MTV would turn it into a kids show . When Comedy Central executive Doug Herzog watched the short , he commissioned for it to be developed into a series . 
 Parker and Stone assembled a small staff and spent three months creating the pilot episode " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " . South Park was in danger of being canceled before it even aired when the show fared poorly with test audiences , particularly with women . However , the shorts were still gaining more popularity over the Internet , and Comedy Central agreed to order a run of six episodes . South Park debuted with " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " on August 13 , 1997 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Except for the pilot episode , which was produced using cutout animation , all episodes of South Park are created with the use of software . As opposed to the pilot , which took three months to complete , and other animated sitcoms , which are traditionally hand @-@ drawn by companies in South Korea in a process that takes roughly eight @-@ to @-@ nine months , individual episodes of South Park take significantly less time to produce . Using computers as an animation method , the show 's production staff were able to generate an episode in about three weeks during the first seasons . Now , with a staff of about 70 people , episodes are typically completed in one week , with some in as little as three to four days . Nearly the entire production of an episode is accomplished within one set of offices , which were originally at a complex in Westwood , Los Angeles , California , and are now part of South Park Studios in Culver City , California . Parker and Stone have been the show 's executive producers throughout its entire history , while Anne Garefino has served as South Park 's co @-@ executive producer since the latter part of the first season . 20th Century Fox Senior Production Executive Debbie Liebling also served as an executive producer during the show 's first five seasons , coordinating the show 's production efforts between South Park Studios and Comedy Central 's headquarters in New York City . 
 Scripts are not written before a season begins . Production of an episode begins on a Thursday , with the show 's writing consultants brainstorming with Parker and Stone . Former staff writers include Pam Brady , who has since written scripts for the films Hot Rod and Hamlet 2 , and Nancy <unk> , who served as co @-@ host of Win Ben Stein 's Money and wrote the film The Sweetest Thing after her tenure with the show during its first three seasons . Television producer and writer Norman Lear , an idol of both Parker and Stone , served as a guest writing consultant for the season seven ( 2003 ) episodes " Cancelled " and " I 'm a Little Bit Country " . During the 12th and 13th seasons , Saturday Night Live actor and writer Bill Hader served as a creative consultant and co @-@ producer . 
 After exchanging ideas , Parker will write a script , and from there the entire team of animators , editors , technicians , and sound engineers will each typically work 100 – 120 hours in the ensuing week . Since the show 's fourth season ( 2000 ) , Parker has assumed most of the show 's directorial duties , while Stone relinquished his share of the directing to focus on handling the coordination and business aspects of the production . On Wednesday , a completed episode is sent to Comedy Central 's headquarters via satellite uplink , sometimes in just a few hours before its air time of 10 PM Eastern Time . 
 Parker and Stone state that subjecting themselves to a one @-@ week deadline creates more spontaneity amongst themselves in the creative process , which they feel results in a funnier show . The schedule also allows South Park to both stay more topical and respond more quickly to specific current events than other satiric animated shows . One of the earliest examples of this was in the season four ( 2000 ) episode " <unk> 2000 " , which references the United States Border Patrol 's raid of a house during the <unk> González affair , an event which occurred only four days before the episode originally aired . The season nine ( 2005 ) episode " Best Friends Forever " references the Terri Schiavo case , and originally aired in the midst of the controversy and less than 12 hours before she died . A scene in the season seven ( 2003 ) finale " It 's Christmas in Canada " references the discovery of dictator Saddam Hussein in a " spider hole " and his subsequent capture , which happened a mere three days prior to the episode airing . The season 12 ( 2008 ) episode " About Last Night ... " revolves around Barack Obama 's victory in the 2008 presidential election , and aired less than 24 hours after Obama was declared the winner , using segments of dialogue from Obama 's real victory speech . 
 On October 16 , 2013 , the show failed to meet their production deadline for the first time ever , after a power outage on October 15 at the production studio prevented the episode , season 17 's " Goth Kids 3 : Dawn of the <unk> " , from being finished in time . The episode was rescheduled to air a week later on October 23 , 2013 . In July 2015 , South Park was renewed through 2019 ; extending the show through season 23 with 304 episodes overall . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 The show 's style of animation is inspired by the paper cut @-@ out cartoons made by Terry Gilliam for Monty Python 's Flying Circus , of which Parker and Stone have been lifelong fans . Construction paper and traditional stop motion cutout animation techniques were used in the original animated shorts and in the pilot episode . Subsequent episodes have been produced by computer animation , providing a similar look to the originals while requiring a fraction of the time to produce . Before computer artists begin animating an episode , a series of animatics drawn in Toon Boom are provided by the show 's storyboard artists . 
 The characters and objects are composed of simple geometrical shapes and primary colors . Most child characters are the same size and shape , and are distinguished by their clothing and headwear . Characters are mostly presented two @-@ dimensionally and from only one angle . Their movements are animated in an intentionally jerky fashion , as they are purposely not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand @-@ drawn characters . Occasionally , some non @-@ fictional characters are depicted with photographic cutouts of their actual head and face in lieu of a face reminiscent of the show 's traditional style . Canadians on the show are often portrayed in an even more minimalist fashion ; they have simple beady eyes , and the top halves of their heads simply flap up and down when the characters speak . 
 When the show began using computers , the cardboard cutouts were scanned and re @-@ drawn with <unk> , then imported into PowerAnimator , which was used with SGI workstations to animate the characters . The workstations were linked to a 54 @-@ processor render farm that could render 10 to 15 shots an hour . Beginning with season five , the animators began using Maya instead of PowerAnimator . The studio now runs a 120 @-@ processor render farm that can produce 30 or more shots an hour . 
 PowerAnimator and Maya are high @-@ end programs mainly used for 3D computer graphics , while co @-@ producer and former animation director Eric Stough notes that PowerAnimator was initially chosen because its features helped animators retain the show 's " homemade " look . PowerAnimator was also used for making some of the show 's visual effects , which are now created using Motion , a newer graphics program created by Apple , Inc. for their Mac OS X operating system . The show 's visual quality has improved in recent seasons , though several other techniques are used to intentionally preserve the cheap cutout animation look . 
 A few episodes feature sections of live @-@ action footage , while others have incorporated other styles of animation . Portions of the season eight ( 2004 ) premiere " Good Times with Weapons " are done in anime style , while the season 10 episode " Make Love , Not Warcraft " is done partly in machinima . The season 12 episode " Major <unk> " , a homage to the 1981 animated film Heavy Metal , implements scenes accomplished with rotoscoping . 
 = = = Voice cast = = = 
 Parker and Stone voice most of the male South Park characters . Mary Kay Bergman voiced the majority of the female characters until her suicide on November 11 , 1999 . Mona Marshall and Eliza Schneider succeeded Bergman , with Schneider leaving the show after its seventh season ( 2003 ) . She was replaced by April Stewart , who , along with Marshall , continues to voice most of the female characters . Bergman was originally listed in the credits under the alias Shannen Cassidy to protect her reputation as the voice of several Disney and other kid @-@ friendly characters . Stewart was originally credited under the name Gracie Lazar , while Schneider was sometimes credited under her rock opera performance pseudonym Blue Girl . 
 Other voice actors and members of South Park 's production staff have voiced minor characters for various episodes , while a few staff members voice recurring characters ; supervising producer Jennifer Howell voices student Bebe Stevens , co @-@ producer and storyboard artist Adrien Beard voices the school 's only black student , Token Black , writing consultant Vernon Chatman voices an anthropomorphic towel named Towelie , and production supervisor John Hansen voices Mr. Slave , the former gay lover of Mr. Garrison . Throughout the show 's run , the voices for toddler and kindergarten characters have been provided by various small children of the show 's production staff . 
 When voicing child characters , the voice actors speak within their normal vocal range while adding a childlike inflection . The recorded audio is then edited with Pro Tools , and the pitch is altered to make the voice sound more like that of a fourth grader . 
 Isaac Hayes voiced the character of Chef , a black , soul @-@ singing cafeteria worker who was one of the few adults the boys consistently trusted . Hayes agreed to voice the character after being among Parker and Stone 's ideal candidates which also included Lou Rawls and Barry White . Hayes , who lived and hosted a radio show in New York during his tenure with South Park , would record his dialogue on a digital audio tape while a respective episode 's director would give directions over the phone , then the tape would be shipped to the show 's production studio in California . After Hayes left the show in early 2006 , the character of Chef was killed off in the season 10 ( 2006 ) premiere " The Return of Chef " . 
 = = = = Guest stars = = = = 
 Celebrities who are depicted on the show are usually impersonated , though some celebrities do their own voices for the show . Celebrities who have voiced themselves include Michael Buffer , Brent Musburger , Jay Leno , Robert Smith , and the bands Radiohead and Korn . Comedy team Cheech & Chong voiced characters representing their likenesses for the season four ( 2000 ) episode " Cherokee Hair Tampons " , which was the duo 's first collaborative effort in 20 years . Malcolm McDowell appears in live @-@ action sequences as the narrator of the season four episode " Pip " . 
 Jennifer Aniston , Richard Belzer , Natasha Henstridge , Norman Lear , and Peter Serafinowicz have guest starred as other speaking characters . During South Park 's earliest seasons , several high @-@ profile celebrities inquired about guest @-@ starring on the show . As a joke , Parker and Stone responded by offering low @-@ profile , non @-@ speaking roles , most of which were accepted ; George Clooney provided the barks for Stan 's dog Sparky in the season one ( 1997 ) episode " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " , Leno provided the meows for Cartman 's cat in the season one finale " Cartman 's Mom Is a Dirty Slut " , and Henry Winkler voiced the various growls and grunts of a kid @-@ eating monster in the season two ( 1998 ) episode " City on the Edge of Forever " . Jerry Seinfeld offered to lend his voice for the Thanksgiving episode " Starvin ' Marvin " , but declined to appear when he was only offered a role as " Turkey # 2 " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Parker says that the varying uses of music is of utmost importance to South Park . Several characters often play or sing songs in order to change or influence a group 's behavior , or to educate , motivate , or indoctrinate others . The show also frequently features scenes in which its characters have disapproving reactions to the performances of certain popular musicians . 
 Adam Berry , the show 's original score composer , used sound synthesis to simulate a small orchestra , and frequently alluded to existing famous pieces of music . Berry also used signature acoustic guitar and mandolin cues as leitmotifs for the show 's establishing shots . After Berry left in 2001 , Jamie Dunlap and Scott <unk> of the Los Angeles @-@ based Mad City Production Studios provided the show 's original music for the next seven seasons . Since 2008 , Dunlap has been credited as the show 's sole score composer . Dunlap 's contributions to the show are one of the few that are not achieved at the show 's own production offices . Dunlap reads a script , creates a score using digital audio software , and then e @-@ mails the audio file to South Park Studios , where it is edited to fit with the completed episode . 
 In addition to singing in an effort to explain something to the children , Chef would also sing about things relevant to what had transpired in the plot . These songs were original compositions written by Parker , and performed by Hayes in the same sexually suggestive R & B style he had utilized during his own music career . The band <unk> , which consists of Parker and Stone , along with show staff members Bruce Howell and D.A. Young , would perform the music for these compositions , and , until the character 's death on the show , were listed as " Chef 's Band " in the closing credits . 
 Rick James , Elton John , Meat Loaf , Joe Strummer , Ozzy Osbourne , Primus , Rancid , and Ween all guest starred and briefly performed in the season two ( 1998 ) episode " Chef Aid " . Korn debuted their single " Falling Away from Me " as guest stars on the season three ( 1999 ) episode " Korn 's Groovy Pirate Ghost Mystery " . 
 = = = = Title sequence = = = = 
 The show 's original theme song was a musical score performed by the band Primus , while the lyrics are alternately sung by the band 's lead singer , Les Claypool , and the show 's four central characters . Kenny 's muffled lines are altered after every few seasons . The original composition was originally slower but was sped up for the show , while an instrumental version of the original composition is often played during the show 's closing credits . The song 's melody is similar to the song " <unk> " , on Primus 's Brown Album . The opening theme song has been remixed three times during the course of the series , including a remix performed by Paul Robb . In 2006 , the theme music was remixed with the song " <unk> " by Colonel Les Claypool 's Fearless Flying Frog Brigade , from the album Purple Onion . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 Internationally , South Park is broadcast in India , New Zealand , and several countries throughout Europe and Latin America on channels that are divisions of Comedy Central and MTV Networks , both subsidiaries of Viacom . In distribution deals with Comedy Central , other independent networks also broadcast the series in other international markets . In Australia , the show is broadcast on The Comedy Channel , SBS One ( Season 1 – 13 edited and 14 – 15 Uncut ) & <unk> ( Season 16 Uncut ) . The series is broadcast uncensored in Canada in English on The Comedy Network and , later , Much . South Park also airs on TG4 in Ireland , STV in Scotland , Comedy Central and MTV in the UK ( previously on Channel 4 ) and B92 in Serbia . 
 = = = Syndication = = = 
 Broadcast syndication rights to South Park were acquired by <unk> @-@ Mercury and Tribune Entertainment in 2003 and 2004 respectively . Episodes further edited for content began running in syndication on September 19 , 2005 , and are aired in the United States with the TV @-@ 14 rating . 20th Television replaced Tribune as co @-@ distributor in early 2008 . The series is currently aired in syndication in 90 percent of the television markets across the U.S. and Canada , where it generates an estimated US $ 25 million a year in advertising revenue . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The first eighteen seasons of South Park are available in their entirety on DVD . Several other themed DVD compilations have been released by Rhino Entertainment and Comedy Central , while the three @-@ episode Imaginationland story arc was reissued straight @-@ to @-@ DVD as a full @-@ length feature in 2008 . 
 = = = Streaming = = = 
 In March 2008 , Comedy Central made every episode of South Park available for free full @-@ length on @-@ demand legal streaming on the official South Park Studios website . From March 2008 until December 2013 new episodes were added to the site the day following their debut , and an uncensored version was posted the following day . The episode stayed up for the remainder of the week , then taken down , and added to the site three weeks later . 
 Within a week , the site served more than a million streams of full episodes , and the number grew to 55 million by October 2008 . Legal issues prevent the U.S. content from being accessible outside the U.S. , so local servers have been set up in other countries . In September 2009 , a South Park Studios website with streaming episodes was launched in the UK . In Canada , episodes were available for streaming from The Comedy Network 's website , though due to digital rights restrictions , they are no longer available . 
 In July 2014 it was announced that Hulu had signed a three @-@ year deal purchasing exclusive online streaming rights to the South Park for a reported 80 million dollars . Following the announcement every episode remained available for free on the South Park Studios website , using the Hulu player . As of September 2014 , following the premiere of the eighteenth season , only 30 select episodes are featured for free viewing at a time on a rationing basis on the website , with new episodes being available for an entire month starting the day following their original airings . The entire series will be available for viewing on Hulu Plus . 
 In April 2010 , the season five episode " Super Best Friends " and the season fourteen episodes " 200 " and " 201 " ( which all depict the Muslim prophet Muhammad ) were removed from the site ; additionally , these episodes no longer air in reruns and are only available exclusively on DVD . These episodes remain unavailable following the 2014 purchase by Hulu . 
 = = = Re @-@ rendered episodes = = = 
 From its debut in 1997 until the season twelve finale in 2008 the series had been natively produced in 4 : 3 480i standard definition . In 2009 the series switched to being natively produced in 16 : 9 1080i high definition with the beginning of the thirteenth season . 
 All seasons originally produced in standard definition have been remastered by being completely re @-@ rendered scene @-@ by @-@ scene and frame @-@ by @-@ frame by South Park Studios from their original resolution to full 1080i high definition . Additionally , the original 4 : 3 aspect ratio has been converted to 16 : 9 as well . The re @-@ rendering process took South Park Studios several years , and resulted in the picture quality being in true HD as opposed to being up @-@ converted . The re @-@ rendered episodes from the earlier seasons also feature their original uncensored audio tracks , which have never previously been released to the public uncensored . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 When South Park debuted , it was a huge ratings success for Comedy Central and is seen as being largely responsible for the success of the channel , with Herzog crediting it for putting the network " on the map " . 
 The show 's first episode , " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , earned a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 3 ( 980 @,@ 000 viewers ) , at the time considered high for a cable program . The show instantly generated buzz among television viewers , and mass viewing parties began assembling on college campuses . By the time the eighth episode , " Starvin ' Marvin " , aired — three months after the show debuted — ratings and viewership had tripled , and South Park was already the most successful show in Comedy Central 's history . When the tenth episode " Damien " aired the following February , viewership increased another 33 percent . The episode earned a 6 @.@ 4 rating , which at the time was over 10 times the average rating earned by a cable show aired in prime time . The ratings peaked with the second episode of season two , " Cartman 's Mom Is Still a Dirty Slut " , which aired on April 22 , 1998 . The episode earned an 8 @.@ 2 rating ( 6 @.@ 2 million viewers ) and , at the time , set a record as the highest @-@ rated non @-@ sports show in basic cable history . During the spring of 1998 , eight of the ten highest @-@ rated shows on basic cable were South Park episodes . 
 The success of South Park prompted more cable companies to carry Comedy Central and led it to its becoming one of the fastest @-@ growing cable channels . The number of households that had Comedy Central jumped from 9 @.@ 1 million in 1997 to 50 million in June 1998 . When the show debuted , the most Comedy Central had earned for a 30 @-@ second commercial was US $ 7 @,@ 500 . Within a year , advertisers were paying an average of US $ 40 @,@ 000 for 30 seconds of advertising time during airings of South Park in its second season , while some paid as much as US $ 80 @,@ 000 . 
 By the third season ( 1999 ) , the series ' ratings began to decrease . The third season premiere episode drew 3 @.@ 4 million viewers , a dramatic drop from the 5 @.@ 5 million of the previous season 's premiere . Stone and Parker attributed this drop in the show 's ratings to the media hype that surrounded the show in the previous year , adding that the third season ratings reflected the show 's " true " fan base . The show 's ratings dropped further in its fourth season ( 2000 ) , with episodes averaging just above 1 @.@ 5 million viewers . The ratings eventually increased , and seasons five through nine consistently averaged about 3 million viewers per episode . Though its viewership is lower than it was at the height of its popularity in its earliest seasons , South Park remains one of the highest @-@ rated series on Comedy Central . The season 14 ( 2010 ) premiere gained 3 @.@ 7 million viewers , the show 's highest @-@ rated season premiere since 1998 . 
 = = = Recognitions and awards = = = 
 In 2004 , Channel 4 voted South Park the third @-@ greatest cartoon of all time . In 2007 , Time magazine included the show on its list of the " 100 Best TV Shows of All Time " , proclaiming it as " America 's best source of rapid @-@ fire satire for [ the past ] decade " . The same year , Rolling Stone declared it to be the funniest show on television since its debut 10 years prior . In 2008 , South Park was named the 12th @-@ greatest TV show of the past 25 years by Entertainment Weekly , while AOL declared it as having the " most astute " characters of any show in history when naming it the 16th @-@ best television comedy series of all time . In 2011 , South Park was voted number one in the 25 Greatest Animated TV Series poll by Entertainment Weekly . The character of Cartman ranked 10th on TV Guide 's 2002 list of the " Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters " , 198th on VH1 's " 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons " , 19th on Bravo 's " 100 Greatest TV Characters " television special in 2004 , and second on MSNBC 's 2005 list of TV 's scariest characters behind Mr. Burns from The Simpsons . In 2006 , Comedy Central received a Peabody Award for South Park 's " stringent social commentary " and " undeniably fearless lampooning of all that is self @-@ important and hypocritical in American life " . In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America ranked South Park at number 63 among the " 101 Best @-@ Written Shows Ever " . Also in 2013 , TV Guide listed the show at number 10 among the " 60 Greatest Cartoons of All Time " . 
 South Park won the CableACE Award for Best Animated Series in 1997 , the last year the awards were given out . In 1998 , South Park was nominated for the Annie Award for Outstanding Achievement in an Animated Primetime or Late Night Television Program . It was also nominated for the 1998 GLAAD Award for Outstanding TV – Individual Episode for " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " . 
 South Park has been nominated for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ten times ( 1998 , 2000 , 2002 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2007 , 2009 , 2010 and 2013 ) . The show has won the award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming Less Than One Hour ) four times , for the 2005 episode " Best Friends Forever " , the 2006 episode " Make Love , Not Warcraft " , the 2009 episode " Margaritaville " , and the 2012 episode " Raising the Bar " . The " Imaginationland " trilogy of episodes won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or More ) in 2008 . 
 = = = Criticism and controversy = = = 
 The show 's frequent depiction of taboo subject matter , general toilet humor , accessibility to younger viewers , disregard for conservative sensibilities , negative depiction of liberal causes , and portrayal of religion for comic effect have been the main sources for generating controversy and debate over the course of its run . As the series first became popular , students in several schools were barred from wearing South Park @-@ related T @-@ shirts , while several parent councils in the United Kingdom expressed concern when eight- and nine @-@ year @-@ old children voted the South Park character Cartman as their favorite personality in a 1999 poll . Parker and Stone assert that the show is not meant to be viewed by young children , and the show is certified with TV ratings that indicate its intention for mature audiences . 
 Parents Television Council founder L. Brent Bozell III and Action for Children 's Television founder Peggy <unk> have both condemned the show , with the latter claiming it is " dangerous to the democracy " . Several other activist groups have protested the show 's parodies of Christianity and portrayal of Jesus Christ . Stone claims that parents who disapprove of South Park for its portrayal of how kids behave are upset because they " have an idyllic vision of what kids are like " , adding " [ kids ] don 't have any kind of social tact or etiquette , they 're just complete little raging bastards " . 
 The show further lampooned the controversy surrounding its use of profanity , as well as the media attention surrounding the network show Chicago Hope 's singular use of the word shit , with the season five premiere " It Hits the Fan " , in which the word shit is said 162 times without being bleeped for censorship purposes , while also appearing uncensored in written form . In the days following the show 's original airing , 5 @,@ 000 disapproving e @-@ mails were sent to Comedy Central . Despite its 43 uncensored uses of the racial slur nigger , the season 11 episode " With Apologies to Jesse Jackson " generated relatively little controversy , as most in the black community and the NAACP praised the episode for its context and its comedic way of conveying other races ' perceptions of how black people must feel when hearing the word . 
 Specific controversies regarding the show have included an April Fools ' Day prank played on its viewers in 1998 , its depiction of the Virgin Mary in the season nine ( 2005 ) finale " Bloody Mary " which angered several Catholics , its depiction of Steve Irwin with a stingray barb stuck in his chest in the episode " Hell on Earth 2006 " , which originally aired less than two months after Irwin was killed in the same fashion , and Comedy Central 's censorship of the depiction of Muhammad in the season 10 episode " Cartoon Wars Part II " in the wake of the Jyllands @-@ Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy . 
 The season nine ( 2005 ) episode " Trapped in the Closet " denounces Scientology as nothing more than " a big fat global scam " , while freely divulging church information that Scientology normally only reveals to members who make significant monetary contributions to the church . The episode also ambiguously parodies the rumors involving the sexual orientation of Scientologist Tom Cruise , who allegedly demanded any further reruns of the episode be canceled . Isaac Hayes , a Scientologist , later quit South Park because of his objection to the episode . 
 The season fourteen episodes " 200 " and " 201 " were mired in controversy for satirizing issues surrounding the depiction of the Islamic prophet , Muhammad . The website for the organization Revolution Muslim , a New York @-@ based radical Muslim organization , posted an entry that included a warning to creators Parker and Stone that they risk violent retribution for their depictions of Muhammad . It said that they " will probably wind up like Theo van Gogh for airing this show " . The posting provided the addresses to Comedy Central in New York and the production company in Los Angeles . The author of the post , Zachary Adam Chesser ( who prefers to be called Abu Talhah al @-@ Amrikee ) , said it was meant to serve as a warning to Parker and Stone , not a threat , and that providing the addresses was meant to give people the opportunity to protest . Despite al @-@ Amrikee 's claims that the website entry was a warning , several media outlets and observers interpreted it as a threat . Support for the episode has come in the form of Everybody Draw Mohammed Day , a movement started on Facebook that encourages people to draw Muhammad on May 20 . The " 200 " episode , which also depicted the Buddha snorting cocaine , prompted the government of Sri Lanka to ban the series outright . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Cultural = = = 
 Commentary made in episodes has been interpreted as statements Parker and Stone are attempting to make to the viewing public , and these opinions have been subject to much critical analysis in the media and literary world within the framework of popular philosophical , theological , social , and political concepts . Since South Park debuted , college students have written term papers and doctoral theses analyzing the show , while Brooklyn College offers a course called " South Park and Political Correctness " . 
 Soon after one of Kenny 's trademark deaths on the show , other characters would typically shout " Oh my God , they killed Kenny ! " . The exclamation quickly became a popular catchphrase , while the running gag of Kenny 's recurring deaths are one of the more recognized hallmarks among viewers of modern television . Cartman 's exclamations of " Respect my <unk> @-@ tah ! " and " Screw you guys ... I 'm going home ! " became catchphrases as well , and during the show 's earlier seasons , were highly popular in the lexicon of viewers . Cartman 's eccentric intonation of " Hey ! " was included in the 2002 edition of The Oxford Dictionary of Catchphrases . 
 In the season two episode " Chef Aid " , attorney Johnnie Cochran uses what 's called in the show the Chewbacca defense , which is a legal strategy that involves addressing plot holes related to Chewbacca in the film Return of the Jedi rather than discussing the trial at hand during a closing argument in a deliberate attempt to confuse jurors into thinking there is reasonable doubt . The term " Chewbacca defense " has been documented as being used by criminologists , forensic scientists , and political commentators in their various discussions of similar methods used in legal cases and public forums . 
 Another season two episode , " Gnomes " , revolves around a group of " underpants gnomes " who , as their name suggests , run a corporation stealing people 's underpants . When asked about their business model , various gnomes reply that theirs is a three @-@ step process : Phase 1 is " collect underpants " . Phase 3 is " profit " . However , the gnomes are unable to explain what is to occur between the first and final steps , and " Phase 2 " is accompanied by a large question mark on their corporate flow chart . Using " ? ? ? ? " and " <unk> ! " as the last two steps in a process ( usually jokingly ) has become a widely popular Internet meme because of this . Especially in the context of politics and economics , " underpants gnomes " has been used by some commentators to characterize a conspicuous gap of logic or planning . 
 When Sophie <unk> of the University of Strasbourg discovered a mutated gene that causes an adult fruit fly to die within two days after it is infected with certain bacteria , she named the gene <unk> in honor of Kenny . 
 = = = Political = = = 
 While some conservatives have condemned the show for its vulgarity , a growing population of people who hold center @-@ right political beliefs , including teenagers and young adults , have embraced the show for its tendency to mock liberal viewpoints and lampoon liberal celebrities and icons . Political commentator Andrew Sullivan dubbed the group South Park Republicans , or South Park conservatives . Sullivan classified the group as " extremely skeptical of political correctness but also are socially liberal on many issues " , though he says the phrase applied to them is meant to be more of a casual indication of beliefs than a strong partisan label . Brian C. Anderson describes the group as " generally characterized by holding strong libertarian beliefs and rejecting more conservative social policy " , and notes that although the show makes " wicked fun of conservatives " , it is " at the forefront of a conservative revolt against liberal media . " 
 Parker and Stone downplay the show 's alignment with any particular political affiliation , and deny having a political agenda when creating an episode . The two claim the show 's higher ratio of instances lampooning liberal orthodoxies stems simply from their preference to make fun of liberals more than conservatives . While Stone has been quoted saying , " I hate conservatives , but I really fucking hate liberals " , Stone and Parker have explained that their drive to lampoon a given target comes first from the target 's insistence on telling other people how to behave . The duo explains that they perceive liberals as having both delusions of entitlement to remain free from satire , and a propensity to enforce political correctness while patronizing the citizens of Middle America . Parker and Stone are uncomfortable with the idea of themselves or South Park being applied with any kind of partisan classification . Parker said he rejects the " South Park Republican " and " South Park conservative " labels as a serious notion , feeling that either tag implies that one only adheres to strictly conservative or liberal viewpoints . Canadian columnist Jaime J. Weinman observes that the most die @-@ hard conservatives who identified themselves as " South Park Republicans " began turning away from the label when the show ridiculed Republicans in the season nine ( 2005 ) episode " Best Friends Forever . " 
 = = Film = = 
 In 1999 , less than two years after the series first aired , a feature @-@ length film was released . The film , a musical comedy , was directed by Parker , who co @-@ wrote the script with Stone and Pam Brady . The film was generally well received by critics , and earned a combined US $ 83 @.@ 1 million at the domestic and foreign box office . The film satirizes the controversy surrounding the show itself and gained a spot in the 2001 edition of Guinness World Records for " Most Swearing in an Animated Film " . The song " Blame Canada " from the film 's soundtrack earned song co @-@ writers Parker and Marc Shaiman an Academy Award nomination for Best Music , Original Song . 
 Parker and Stone said in a 2008 interview that a theatrically released sequel would most likely be what concludes the series . In 2011 , when asked on the official South Park website whether a sequel would be made , they said " the first South Park movie was so potent , we 're all still recovering from the blow . Unfortunately , at the current moment , there are no plans for a second South Park movie . But you never know what the future may bring , crazier things have happened ... " In 2011 , Time called South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut the sixth greatest animated feature of all @-@ time . In 2013 , Warner Bros. Entertainment relinquished to Paramount Pictures its rights to co @-@ finance a potential future South Park film during their negotiations to co @-@ finance the Christopher Nolan science fiction film Interstellar . Previous efforts to create a second South Park film were complicated due to both studios retaining certain rights to the property . 
 = = Media and merchandise = = 
 = = = Shorts = = = 
 As a tribute to the Dead Parrot sketch , a short that features Cartman attempting to return a dead Kenny to a shop run by Kyle aired during a 1999 BBC television special commemorating the 30th anniversary of Monty Python 's Flying Circus . South Park parodied Scientology in a short that aired as part of the 2000 MTV Movie Awards . The short was entitled " The Gauntlet " and also poked fun at John Travolta , a Scientologist . The four main characters were featured in the documentary film The Aristocrats , listening to Cartman tell his version of the film 's titular joke . Short clips of Cartman introducing the starting lineup for the University of Colorado football team were featured during ABC 's coverage of the 2007 matchup between the University of Colorado and the University of Nebraska . In 2008 , Parker , as Cartman , gave answers to a Proust Questionnaire conducted by Julie <unk> of NPR . The Snakes & Arrows Tour for Rush in 2007 used an intro from Cartman , Stan , Kyle , and Kenny preceding " Tom Sawyer " . As Parker , Stone and producer Frank Agnone are Los Angeles Kings fans , special South Park pre @-@ game videos have been featured at Kings home games at Staples Center , and the club even sent the Stanley Cup to visit South Park Studios after winning the 2012 finals . Parker and Stone have also created Denver Broncos and Denver Nuggets @-@ themed shorts , featuring Cartman , for home games at Pepsi Center . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Chef Aid : The South Park Album , a compilation of original songs from the show , characters performing cover songs , and tracks performed by guest artists was released in 1998 , while Mr. Hankey 's Christmas Classics , a compilation of songs performed by the characters in the episode of the same name as well as other Christmas @-@ themed songs was released in 1999 , as was the soundtrack to the feature film . The song " Chocolate Salty Balls " ( performed by Hayes as Chef ) was released as a single in the UK in 1998 to support the Chef Aid : The South Park Album and became a number one hit . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Following the early success of the series , three video games based on the series were released by Acclaim Entertainment . A first @-@ person shooter simply titled South Park was released in 1998 for the PC , Nintendo 64 , and PlayStation . This was followed in 1999 by South Park : Chef 's Luv Shack , a party video game featuring quizzes and mini @-@ games , on the Dreamcast , PlayStation , Nintendo 64 , and PC . In 2000 , South Park Rally , a racing game , was released on the Dreamcast , PlayStation , Nintendo 64 , and PC . Parker and Stone had little to do with the development of these games , apart from providing voice acting , and have publicly criticized Acclaim and the quality of the South Park games they produced . 
 There was a South Park game for the Game Boy Color in development at Acclaim but it was cancelled by Parker and Stone because they thought the game wasn 't right for the system as the main <unk> was kids . Parker and Stone have the prototype cartridge of the game , making it the first South Park video game ever made . Only one screenshot was published in Nintendo Power issue 114 in 1998 . 
 Another South Park game was in development for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , and GameCube in 2004 but was cancelled for unknown reasons . A prototype of the game was found in an Xbox development kit in 2015 . 
 In 2010 , the decision was made to form a small group called South Park Digital Studios , which would , among other things , work on creating new South Park games , that would involve the studio and the show 's creators more heavily . The first such title is South Park Let 's Go Tower Defense Play ! , a tower defense game developed by <unk> , which was released in 2009 for the Xbox Live Arcade service on the Xbox 360 console . Another Xbox Live Arcade game , South Park : Tenorman 's Revenge , is a platformer which was released in the spring of 2012 . South Park : The Stick of Truth is a role @-@ playing video game that was written by Parker and Stone , and was originally scheduled to be released on March 5 , 2013 for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 consoles , and Microsoft Windows ; the game was eventually released on March 4 , 2014 to positive reviews . A sequel to The Stick of Truth has been announced and will be titled South Park : The Fractured But Whole . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Merchandising related to the show is an industry which generates several million dollars a year . In 1998 , the top @-@ selling specialty T @-@ shirt in the United States was based on South Park , and US $ 30 million in T @-@ shirt sales was reached during the show 's first season . 
 A South Park pinball machine was released in 1999 by Sega Pinball . The companies Fun 4 All , Mezco Toyz , and Mirage have produced various South Park action figures , collectibles , and plush dolls . 
 Comedy Central entered into an agreement with Frito @-@ Lay to sell 1 @.@ 5 million bags of Cheesy <unk> , Cartman 's favorite snack from the show , at Walmart until the premiere of the second half of the fifteenth season on October 5 , 2011 . 
 = Betty Williams ( Coronation Street ) = 
 Elizabeth " Betty " Williams ( née Preston , previously Turpin ) was a long @-@ standing fictional character from the British ITV soap opera Coronation Street , portrayed by former music hall star Betty Driver . Driver was cast as Betty in 1969 , after first auditioning for the role of Hilda Ogden . The character arrived in Coronation Street to help her sister Maggie Cooke run the corner shop , and has since had a number of storylines which have seen her become twice widowed , and mother to an illegitimate son . Working as a barmaid in the soap 's Rovers Return Inn , Betty created a signature dish , known as Betty 's hotpot . 
 In 1995 , a real @-@ life range of hotpots and pies based on the dish were launched by Hollands Pies , and in 2007 , the world 's largest Lancashire hotpot was created , based on Betty 's recipe . Driver died in October 2011 and Betty was subsequently written out , with the character dying off @-@ screen of illness in April 2012 . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Betty Driver , who had been performing since she was 8 years old , retired from acting in her late forties to run hotels in Cheshire and Derbyshire . It was here that she was spotted by one of her customers , producer of Coronation Street , Harry Kershaw , who persuaded her to audition for the role of Hilda Ogden in 1964 ; she eventually had to turn the role down as she was tied into an advertising contract with Procter & Gamble and they refused to release her . The part of Hilda eventually went to Jean Alexander . Driver has commented , " Harry Kershaw , producer of Coronation Street , persuaded me to audition for Hilda Ogden – just think I could have been wearing curlers for 30 years . " In 1969 , she was cast as the new character , Betty Turpin . Commenting on her casting in 1999 , Driver said , " [ Kershaw ] said , ' Betty , how would you like to pull pints for us on television ? ' , and that was it . I suppose I expected I 'd be there for perhaps a few months . But it just went on and on and , well , they 've never managed to get rid of me . " 
 Following her first appearance in 1969 , Driver remained in the role of Betty continuously . She suggested in 1999 that if she gave up she would die " within a month from sheer boredom " . In a 2006 interview she laughed off the notion of retirement , saying : " From day one on The Street everyone has been very kind to me . In fact , I 'm godmother to Bill Roache 's son . So as long as they want me , I 'm happy to stay . The Street is like home and they really are my family . " She confirmed her intention to remain on the show in 2010 , when the character celebrated her 90th birthday . In May 2010 , the News of the World reported that Driver had decided to retire , just prior to the actress 's 90th birthday . Driver was distressed by the rumour , and assured producer Phil Collinson of her intention to remain with the soap , and was told that Betty was very much a part of plans for the series ' upcoming 50th anniversary celebrations . Driver died on 15 October 2011 , having appeared in over 2 @,@ 800 episodes of Coronation Street . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Betty was born at 6 Tile Street , Weatherfield on 4 February 1920 to Harold and Margaret Preston . During World War II , she had an affair with serviceman Ted Farrell ( Gerald Sim ) , resulting in a son , Gordon ( Bill Kenwright ; Geoffrey <unk> ) . Ted left her to return to his family and Gordon was adopted by Betty 's sister Maggie ( Irene Sutcliffe ) and her husband Les Clegg ( John Sharp ) . Betty celebrated the end of the war with her sweetheart Billy Williams ( Frank Mills ) , to whom she had lost her virginity . The two lost touch , and in 1949 , Betty married policeman Cyril Turpin ( William Moore ) . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Betty and her husband Cyril move to Coronation Street in June 1969 , helping her sister Maggie to run the local corner shop following the breakup of Maggie 's marriage to Les Clegg . Maggie , however , resents Betty 's interference and persuades landlord Jack Walker ( Arthur Leslie ) to give Betty a job as a barmaid at The Rovers Return Inn public house . Betty clashes with the landlady Annie ( Doris Speed ) , who fears that Jack may find her attractive , and fires Betty as a result . Betty takes a job in a rival pub , and returns only when Annie apologises . Betty becomes close friends with fellow barmaid Bet Lynch ( Julie Goodyear ) , who on occasion lodges with her , uses Betty as a chaperone on dates , and frequently seeks her advice in running her life . 
 Cyril 's employment as a policeman causes Betty problems when Keith Lucas ( David Webb ) , a man he has previously arrested , begins stalking her . She initially refrains from telling Cyril , fearing that he will get into trouble . When Cyril finds out , he attacks Lucas with a piece of lead piping and has to leave the police force . Betty has a breakdown when Cyril dies of a heart attack in 1974 , leaving her only £ 859 . The same year the truth about her illegitimate son is revealed , and when the community discovers this , Betty finds it difficult to face them . She busies herself by taking in lodgers , and acquiring a ginger cat named Marmaduke for extra companionship . Betty builds a relationship with Gordon , though he upsets her occasionally , particularly when he neglects to invite her to his wedding . 
 Betty is mugged in 1982 by Raymond Attwood ( Joe <unk> ) from Ken Barlow 's ( William Roache ) youth club ; she ends up in hospital with a broken arm . This leads to a reunion with Ted , the man who fathered Gordon , though he is unaware of his son 's existence . Ted visits Betty in hospital after reading about her mugging in a newspaper . Betty <unk> over whether to tell Ted about Gordon , but decides against it , preferring not to stir up the past . 
 On the fiftieth anniversary of VE Day in 1995 , Betty is reunited with her wartime sweetheart Billy . The two marry several months later , and Gordon gives his mother away . They live happily together until Billy also dies of a heart attack in 1997 . Betty becomes famous in Weatherfield for her hotpots , which come under scrutiny in the early 1990s when it is believed that they are contaminated . She is cleared of all wrongdoing when it is discovered that beer , not food , is responsible for a spate of stomach upsets . Betty acts as lady <unk> alongside mayor Alf Roberts ( Bryan Mosley ) when his wife Audrey ( Sue Nicholls ) has no interest in fulfilling her civic duties . This includes accompanying him to receive his OBE from the Queen , much to Audrey 's chagrin . 
 In 1999 , Betty celebrates 30 years of working at The Rovers Return with a party attended by all the regulars . She considers retiring in 2002 and briefly moves to Wimbledon to be with Gordon and his wife Caroline ( Elaine Donnelly ; Sarah Thurstan ) . Feeling that Caroline does not want her there , Betty considers moving into a retirement home , however is convinced to stay in Weatherfield by her close friend Emily Bishop ( Eileen Derbyshire ) . Around the time of Betty 's fortieth anniversary at the Rovers Return , she is sacked by new manager Poppy Morales ( <unk> Haque ) after clashing with her on several occasions . Landlord Steve McDonald ( Simon Gregson ) eventually tires of Poppy 's poor treatment of the staff and fires her . Betty is re @-@ instated , and plays the fairy godmother in the 2009 Rovers Return Christmas pantomime performance of Cinderella . In early February 2010 , Betty has a party in The Rovers celebrating both her 90th birthday and the fact that she is the oldest barmaid in Weatherfield ; however it backfires when 91 @-@ year @-@ old Enid Crump ( June Broughton ) crashes the party and claims she is the oldest barmaid not Betty . Later Enid becomes sick after Steve serves her a 3 @-@ month old hotpot . Betty and Steve are left terrified when they realise that the hotpot could kill her , but she later recovers . During the Tram Crash of December 2010 Betty comforts Claire Peacock ( Julia Haworth ) after her husband Ashley ( Steven Arnold ) is tragically crushed to death by the rubble . 
 Betty is last seen in May 2011 , trying in vain to stop David ( Jack P. Shepherd ) and Kylie Platt ( Paula Lane ) from coming behind the bar to speak with Becky . Although Betty is mentioned and referred to by various characters since , her subsequent absence was not explained until in February 2012 , when Audrey asks Stella Price ( Michelle Collins ) how Betty is , to which Stella replies that Betty is " still a bit under the weather " . On 16 April 2012 Rita and Emily arrange to visit a convalescing Betty and go to meet Gordon , who has agreed to drive them there . However , when Gordon does arrive , he brings with him the unexpected news that Betty has died , peacefully in her sleep the night before . The residents of the street all gather in the Rovers Return and hold an impromptu memorial to Betty , with all of her old friends reminiscing about her . Gordon , with some persuasion from Emily decides to have his mother buried in Weatherfield after initially contemplating London . It is later revealed that Annie Walker left The Rovers Return to Betty in her will however Betty never acted on this , Gordon assured landlady Stella Price that he is not interested in the pub and it will remain in her possession . Despite being one of the street 's longest serving characters , her funeral was held off @-@ screen . After the wake and lock @-@ up , Stella hung a photo of Betty on the wall over The Rovers Return , for all to see and remember her . This photo was sadly destroyed during the 2013 Rovers Return fire , started by Karl Munro but , following the refurbishment , Rita managed to obtain an identical copy which remains hanging on the wall in the same place . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 In his 1998 book The Women of Coronation Street , Daran Little describes Betty as an archetypal mother figure . He compares her to one of Coronation Street 's original characters Minnie Caldwell ( Margot Bryant ) , as she is " warm and comforting [ ... ] loves cats and has had her share of lodgers " ; however , Little notes that " while Minnie wandered through life in a haze , Betty is sharp @-@ witted , blessed with insight and wisdom " . Discussing her evolving characterisation , Little writes : " She hasn 't always been the incarnation of lovable joviality : when she arrived in the Street in 1969 , she was loud , brash and a vicious @-@ tongued gossip . " 
 Betty 's two passions in life are darts and food . Playing darts brings out her competitive side , and she enjoys beating her male customers . Cyril frequently protests when Betty attempts to diet , as he prefers her " homely and comfortable " figure . Ultimately , Betty stops trying to lose weight , stating : " I had to chose [ sic ? ] between losing a few pounds or losing my marital partner . If my Cyril had wanted to marry a skinny rabbit he 'd have married one . " Betty breaks down when Cyril dies from a heart attack , with Little noting that : " Cyril had been the stabilizing force in Betty 's life , and without him she relied heavily on her job and friends at the Rovers – she couldn 't face life alone at home " . Little has observed that Betty " has a finely tuned sense of right and wrong and has never been afraid to stand up for her beliefs " , citing Betty 's shock at being mugged in 1982 , and calling the NSPCC to report a female neighbour whose children were left outside until nightfall while their mother entertained her boyfriend . 
 In 2010 , Driver discussed her character , saying , " Coronation Street characters tend to fit into one of two camps . Those who have drama after drama and those who muddle through life , often in the background , as sturdy and dependable as the famous cobbles . Betty falls into the latter group . There have been moments of drama , intrigue and even romance – but it has been her presence behind the bar , cutting up pieces of lamb and chunks of potato , that has endeared her to the viewers . " When asked about Betty 's " sharp tongue " , Driver suggested , " Not really sharp . [ Betty 's ] just straightforward . [ She 's ] not nasty to anybody but [ she doesn 't ] suffer fools gladly . " 
 = = = Barmaid of The Rovers Return = = = 
 Betty was the longest @-@ serving barmaid of the soap 's public house , The Rovers Return . She first served behind the bar in 1969 and had been shown to work there for 42 years , as of 2011 . There have been brief breaks however , as storylines have led to the character being fired or quitting her post . She was fired by Annie Walker ( Doris Speed ) , who accused her of theft , and she quit her post in 1995 when Jack ( Bill Tarmey ) and Vera Duckworth ( Liz Dawn ) took over as landlords . In the summer of 2009 , Betty was sacked again temporarily by manager Poppy Morales . A Coronation Street insider reassured The Sun that Betty was not being written out of the show , however , stating : " She ’ ll be here for a long time to come – she ’ ll just be on the other side of the bar for a change " . In a storyline that aired in February 2010 , Betty – at 90 years old – was named Manchester 's Oldest Barmaid . In a plot twist , a 91 @-@ year @-@ old rival came forward , resulting in Betty fearing she killed her , when the rival consumes a two @-@ month @-@ old hotpot . 
 = = Reception = = 
 ITV describe Betty as a " linchpin " of the soap opera , stating that : " She ’ s as much a part of Coronation Street as the cobble stones . " Former executive producer , Brian Park , suggested in 1997 that characters such as Betty " are essential ingredients . They 're like the big clock on the mantelpiece . " Park elaborated on his opinion of Betty when he left the serial as producer in 1998 , saying , " I don 't mean it disrespectfully but [ ... ] people like Betty Driver , who plays Betty Williams [ ... ] are what I call the mantelpiece ornaments . She 'll probably never hold down a major storyline but she 's part of the weave . " 
 The character is one of the longest @-@ serving in British soap , coming third behind Ken Barlow and Emily Bishop in a 1998 survey assessing character episode appearances in Coronation Street 's history . In 1999 , when Betty was celebrating 30 years on @-@ screen , Alison Boshoff of the Daily Mail praised the character 's never changing style : " for 30 years , one favourite fixture of Coronation Street has remained exactly the same [ ... ] barmaid Betty Turpin . With her neatly @-@ set hair , comfortable , bustling manner , and brilliant smile , she has been dispensing homespun advice – and , of course , those celebrated hotpots – at the Rovers Return for more than a generation . " Commenting on her 30th anniversary with the show , Betty Driver said , " It is just amazing that I 've been here for 30 years . I suppose I have never really counted up the time I 've been with the show , because I still enjoy it so much and am always looking forward rather than back . Really , it has been a wonderful experience and I feel very glad I was able to stick around for so long . " 
 In 2007 , Coronation Street bosses told The Sun newspaper that there were no plans to retire the character of Betty , despite actress Betty Driver being 87 at the time , the oldest cast member in the soap . The character was described as " highly valued " , with executive producer Kieran Roberts saying , " She is still going strong and enjoying the role . Betty is one of the Street ’ s great traditional characters who seem to have been there forever . It ’ s always been our aim to keep a great mix of contemporary stories with older , more traditional characters . Comedy and tragedy combined with very clever writing has always been a trademark of the Street . " Actor Rob James @-@ Collier , who played Liam Connor in the soap , has deemed Betty to be one of Coronation Street 's two best characters , alongside Jack Duckworth ( Bill Tarmey ) . He explained : " Betty Driver , who plays Betty can have no more than a couple of lines in a scene , but she ’ ll steal it off all the other actors with just a comedy reaction . It ’ s simple , and also fantastic . " 
 Driver was awarded a lifetime achievement award at The British Soap Awards in May 2010 , to honour her role as Betty who had , at that time , featured in Coronation Street for 41 years . Due to illness , Driver was unable to collect the award in person , but she recorded a video message thanking everyone at ITV . 
 = = = Betty 's hotpot = = = 
 During her time on Coronation Street , the character has become synonymous with her signature dish at the Rovers Return Inn , Betty 's hotpot . ITV have described the dish as " the stuff of legends " , and in 1995 , pie manufacturer Holland 's Pies launched a real @-@ life range of hotpots and pies based on the dish , called " Betty 's Kitchen " . The idea for the range originated with the firm 's marketing director , Dilys Day , who explained : " I was brought up on hotpot and Coronation Street . So when I joined Holland 's a year ago , it seemed right to put the two together with Betty 's hotpot . " Day added that : " We are all very excited about Betty 's Kitchen products . Holland 's is a strong northern brand , with mass market appeal and wholesome , honest values - the same can be said for The Street . " 
 In his book Marketing Communication , Richard J. <unk> used the product range as an example of a company capitalising on a form of product placement or " stealth advertising " , writing that " Viewers don 't realize that they are , in effect , watching an advertisement " . Betty Driver said of the range 's launch : " Betty Turpin 's hotpots have become something of an institution at the Rover 's and she 's very proud of her reputation for good , wholesome food . I think it is a lovely idea that people will be able to buy them in supermarkets now . " Driver discussed her astonishment at the general level of interest in her character 's hotpots , disclosing : " I was on a cruise on the QE2 a few weeks ago , and everyone was asking me about it . Then one day , they served hot pot on the menu and everyone thought it was mine ! " 
 In 2007 , Liverpool Daily Post editor Larry Neild was selected to join Liverpool 's ' Health is Wealth ' commission , researching the effects of food deprivation on poor health , after writing a scathing column in which he suggested that the commission ’ s chairman , Sue Woodward , chief executive of ITV Granada , should set a good example in Coronation Street by banning Betty ’ s hotpot . In October of the same year , allegedly the world ’ s biggest Lancashire hotpot was created , based on Betty ’ s traditional hotpot recipe from Coronation Street . The hotpot was cooked in a specially crafted 12 ft by 7 ft tin , weighing 200 kilos . 2008 saw Betty 's hotpot come under scrutiny in the soap , after Street resident Jerry Morton suffered a heart attack . Jerry 's ex @-@ wife Teresa Bryant blamed the fatty meat in Betty 's hotpots for hardening his arteries , and local butcher Ashley Peacock suggested that ostrich meat may be an up @-@ and @-@ coming new alternative , much to Betty 's outrage . Despite her character 's culinary skill , Driver claims she " couldn 't cook a hotpot to save [ her ] life " . 
 = = In other media = = 
 In 1998 , a straight to video , Coronation Street spin @-@ off film was released , featuring Betty . It was entitled The Women Of Coronation Street and featured clips of the show 's most famous females . The video hailed the brief return of Coronation Street favourite Hilda Ogden , who had not been seen in the soap since 1987 ; Betty travelled to meet her at her new home . A spokesperson for Granada Television commented , " It shows what happens when Betty [ Williams ] goes up to visit Hilda Ogden at her home in Derbyshire . She used to do cleaning work for a doctor and when he died , he left her the house in gratitude . It 'll be a souvenir fans want to keep . " 
 = A Moral Reckoning = 
 A Moral Reckoning : The Role of the Catholic Church in the Holocaust and Its <unk> Duty of Repair is a 2003 book by Daniel Jonah Goldhagen , previously the author or Hitler 's Willing Executioners ( 1996 ) . Goldhagen examines the Roman Catholic Church ’ s role in the Holocaust , and offers a review of scholarship in English addressing what he argues is antisemitism throughout the history of the Church , which he claims contributed substantially to the persecution of the Jews during World War II . 
 Goldhagen recommends several significant steps which might be taken by the Church to make reparation for its alleged role . A Moral Reckoning received mixed reviews and was the subject of considerable controversy regarding allegations of inaccuracies and anti @-@ Catholic bias . 
 = = Background = = 
 Goldhagen , the son of a Holocaust survivor , first engaged in serious academic discourse concerning the Holocaust following a lecture he attended as a student of Harvard University in 1983 . He gained prominence in the field with the publication of 1996 's Hitler 's Willing Executioners , which met acclaim and controversy , particularly in Germany . The Journal for German and International Politics awarded him the Democracy Prize in 1997 . In awarding the prize for the first time since 1990 , the Journal wrote " Because of the penetrating quality and the moral power of his presentation , Daniel Goldhagen has greatly stirred the consciousness of the German public . " 
 Invited by The New Republic to review several books concerning Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust . Goldhagen was inspired to write a review of the literature concerning the question of the " culture of antisemitism " in the Catholic Church prior to Vatican II and its impact on the Holocaust . His impressions first appeared as a lengthy essay in the January 21 , 2002 edition of The New Republic entitled " What Would Jesus Have Done ? Pope Pius XII , the Catholic Church , and the Holocaust " before their publication by Knopf in extended book form as A Moral Reckoning . 
 = = Overview = = 
 In the New York Times , book reviewer Geoffrey Wheatcroft said that A Moral Reckoning ( 2003 ) presents an indictment of the Roman Catholic Church comparable to Goldhagen ’ s indictment of Germany in Hitler ’ s Willing Executioners ( 1996 ) , saying that “ both as an international institution under the leadership of Pope Pius XII ( 1939 – 58 ) , and at national levels in many European countries , the Church was deeply implicated in the appalling genocide . . . . Just as Germans had been carefully taught to hate the Jews , to the point that they could readily torment and kill them , so had Catholics ” ; that author Goldhagen “ sees a deep vein of Jew @-@ hatred ingrained within Catholic tradition ; and he does not think that there was any difference of kind , between that old religious Jew @-@ hatred and the murderous racial antisemitism of the twentieth century ” . 
 In a 2003 , in The Atlantic magazine , interviewer Jennie Rothenberg <unk> quoted Goldhagen saying that “ moral issues ” are the “ principal substance ” of A Moral Reckoning , that his concern was a “ consideration of culpability and repair ” . In a letter to the editor of The New York Times , Goldhagen said that “ the book ’ s real content ” is in “ setting forth general principles for moral repair from which I derive concrete proposals for the Church ” . Donald Dietrich , author of God and Humanity in Auschwitz : Jewish @-@ Christian Relations and Sanctioned Murder , and a Boston College professor of Theology specializing in Holocaust studies , said that Goldhagen “ asks the Catholic Church a question : ‘ What must a religion of love and goodness do to confront its history of hatred and harm , to make amends with its victims , and to right itself so that it is no longer the source of hatred and harm that , whatever its past , it would no longer endorse ? ’ He has attempted to analyze the moral culpability of Catholics and their leaders , to judge the actors , and to discern how today ’ s Catholics can make material , political and moral restitution ” . 
 Goldhagen 's book suggests that the Church owes financial reparation and support to Jews and the State of Israel and should change its doctrine and the accepted Biblical canon to excise statements he labels as antisemitic and to indicate that " The Jews ' way to God is as legitimate as the Christian way " . Failing this , the author proposes disclaimers in every Christian Bible to annotate antisemitic passages and acknowledge them as having led to injury against Jews . 
 = = Legal controversy = = 
 In 2002 , the book 's German publisher — Siedler Verlag , a sister company of Random House — was sued by the archdiocese of Munich as a result of the misidentification of a photograph , falsely asserting the presence of Michael Cardinal von Faulhaber , whom Rabbi David G. Dalin calls " a famous opponent of the Nazis " , at a Nazi rally . The picture actually depicted Apostolic Nuncio to Germany Cesare Orsenigo participating in a May Day labor parade in Munich — not a Nazi rally in Berlin . 
 In October 2002 , the district court of Munich required the publisher to withdraw the book or correct the copies , but in spite of the disclosure of the error in Germany , the book was released in English by Knopf with the error intact . A representative of the archdiocese said with regards to the mislabeled photograph that " The implication is that Cardinal Faulhaber was an associate of the Nazis . When one writes about these things , one should be more precise about the truth " . 
 Goldhagen , who acknowledged that the photo wrongly identified the figure and location , described the lawsuit as a crude diversionary tactic to displace focus from the real issues . Goldhagen stated that the photograph was misidentified by the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum , from which the picture was obtained . Religious commentator and former priest Paul Collins characterized the mislabeling of the photograph as inexcusable , while The New York Times reported that most historians agreed that " a single mislabeled photo in a 346 @-@ page book is a minor error " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Although A Moral Reckoning was favorably reviewed in The Spectator , Kirkus Reviews , The San Francisco Chronicle , and given a generally favorable overview ahead of an interview in The Atlantic , it was also subject to substantial criticism , even among some of those reviewers who found aspects of the work praiseworthy . The International Social Science Review , which described the book as a " seminal work " and a " valuable introduction to and synthesis of the literature on church and state during the Holocaust " , also indicated that the message of the book is " diluted by stylistic problems " . New York Times reviewer Geoffrey Wheatcroft praised Goldhagen 's assembly of " an impressive body of evidence " but criticized his repetitiveness , his " misinterpreting the record " and his use of it to promote a particular view , which Wheatcroft deems appropriate for an advocate but reprehensible in a historian . Dietrich , whose review lauded Goldhagen for asking " many of the proper seminal questions " , mirrored Wheatcroft 's concerns about repetitiveness , misunderstandings and polemics , specifically suggesting that " [ r ] <unk> must be sure to also review the footnotes since in many cases he contextually and theologically nuances his book ’ s claims only there " . 
 John Cornwell , author of Hitler ’ s Pope : The Secret History of Pius XII ( 1999 ) , praised Daniel Goldhagen ’ s “ excellent job in exposing the propagandistic hagiography of recent defenders of Pius XII , especially their tendency to confuse diplomatic eulogy with historical fact ” , but said that Goldhagen errs in identifying a key Vatican figure an antisemite , a misrepresentation he thinks “ can only provide ammunition for the Pius XII lobby ” . The journalist <unk> noted that Goldhagen “ does not cushion his criticisms of the Church in diplomatic language ” , that “ even philosophy professor John K. Roth , who favorably reviewed A Moral Reckoning in The Los Angeles Times , said that the adjectives “ unpretentious . . . indecisive . . . moderate . . . patient ” do not come to mind when reading Goldhagen . Another book review in The New York Times said that A Moral Reckoning is an “ impressive and disturbing bill of indictment against ” the Roman Catholic Church , yet its imbalanced perspective results in “ turning history into a kind of cudgel ” . 
 In summer of 2002 , before its publication , Ronald Rychlak , author of Hitler , the War , and the Pope , decried it as factually incorrect , releasing a lengthy catalog of corrections to Goldhagen 's essay " What Would Jesus Have Done ? " After the book 's publication , Rychlak published a review in the journal Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions , again pointing out factual errors , and criticizing the book 's tone and conclusions . Following the book 's publication , Rabbi Dalin and Joseph Bottum , later co @-@ authors along with William <unk> of The Pius War : Responses to the Critics of Pius XII , in separate articles for The Weekly Standard denounced it as failing " to meet even the minimum standards of scholarship " and " filled with factual errors " . In his review , Paul Collins indicated that the purpose of the book was undermined by poor editing , incoherence and redundancy . Mark <unk> of National Review , who described himself as an admirer of Goldhagen 's first book , called A Moral Reckoning " a 352 @-@ page exercise in intellectual bad manners " and " a spree of intellectual <unk> " . 
 In reply to the charge of historical inaccuracy , Daniel Goldhagen said that the “ central contours ” of A Moral Reckoning : The Role of the Catholic Church in the Holocaust and its <unk> Duty of Repair ( 2002 ) are accurate , because the book ’ s title and first page communicate its purpose of moral analysis , not historical analysis . He stated that he has invited to no avail European Church representatives to present their own historical account in discussing morality and reparation . 
 Opponents labelled Goldhagen as a “ anti @-@ Catholic ” , as promoting an anti @-@ Catholic agenda . Bottum wrote that its “ errors of fact combine to create a set of historical theses about the Nazis and the Catholic Church so tendentious that not even Pius XII ’ s most determined <unk> have dared to assert them . And , in Goldhagen ’ s final chapters , the bad historical theses unite to form a complete anti @-@ Catholicism the likes of which we haven ’ t seen since the elderly H.G. Wells decided Catholicism was the root of all evil ” . In the Catholic News Service , Eugene J. Fisher , the Associate Director of the Secretariat for Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops , said that Goldhagen avoided original research , as “ such methodological and factual considerations would definitely get in the way of the demonic portrait of the Church that he seeks to paint ” . 
 In the book The New Anti @-@ Catholicism : The Last Acceptable Prejudice , Philip Jenkins said that A Moral Reckoning , along with anti @-@ Catholic conspiracy theories and other “ anti @-@ Church historical polemic ” , belongs to the pseudohistory category of books about anti @-@ Catholic “ mythic history ” , historical manipulation , and national demonization , such as the Black Legend about Spain , said that publishers publish such books because the sell many copies , not because they mean to “ destroy or <unk> Catholicism ” . Furthermore , Catholic League for Religious and Civil Rights president William A. Donohue , said that Daniel Goldhagen “ hasn ’ t a clue about Catholicism ” , that he “ separates himself ” from other critics of Pope Pius XII “ by demanding that the Catholic Church implode : he wants the Church to <unk> its teachings , liturgy , and practices to such an extent that no one would recognize a trace of Catholicism in this new construction . That is why Goldhagen is not simply against Pope Pius XII : he is an inveterate anti @-@ Catholic bigot ” . Moreover , Rabbi Dalin accused Goldhagen of engaging in a “ misuse of the Holocaust to advance [ his ] . . . anti @-@ Catholic agenda ” . 
 = = Partial publication history = = 
 Goldhagen , Daniel Jonah ( October 29 , 2002 ) . A Moral Reckoning . Alfred A. <unk> p . 384 . ISBN 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 1st edition hardcover . 
 Goldhagen , Daniel Jonah ( November 3 , 2002 ) . A Moral Reckoning . Little , <unk> p . 384 . ISBN 0 @-@ 349 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Hardcover . 
 Goldhagen , Daniel Jonah ( December 11 , 2003 ) . A Moral Reckoning . <unk> p . 496 . ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . Paperback . 
 Goldhagen , Daniel Jonah ( December 30 , 2003 ) . A Moral Reckoning . Vintage Books. p . 416 . ISBN 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . Paperback . 
 = Saskatchewan Highway 1 = 
 Highway 1 is the Saskatchewan section of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway mainland route . The total distance of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway in Saskatchewan is 651 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 404 @.@ 6 mi ) . The highway traverses Saskatchewan from the western border with Alberta , from Highway 1 , to the Manitoba border where it continues as PTH 1 . The Trans – Canada Highway Act was passed on December 10 , 1949 . The Saskatchewan segment was completed August 21 , 1957 . The speed limit along the majority of the route is 110 kilometres per hour ( 70 – mph ) with urban area thoroughfares slowing to a speed of 90 – 100 kilometres per hour ( 55 – 65 mph ) . Portions of the highway — the section through Swift Current , an 8 @-@ kilometer section east of Moose Jaw , and the Regina Ring Road — are controlled @-@ access . Highway 1 serves as a major east @-@ west transport route for commercial traffic . It is the main link between southern Saskatchewan 's largest cities , and also serves as the province 's main link to the neighbouring provinces of Alberta ( to the west ) and Manitoba ( to the east ) . 
 The four @-@ lane divided highway passes through three major urban centres of Saskatchewan , Regina , Moose Jaw and Swift Current . A site in the Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network , an internationally acclaimed shorebird conservation strategy , is at the village of Chaplin approximately equal distance between Swift Current and Moose Jaw . Located southwest of the Trans – Canada is the Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park , which features Fort Walsh and the highest elevation of Saskatchewan . Highway 1 traverses ranch lands , the Missouri Coteau topographical area , and rolling prairie agricultural plains . 
 The highway generally runs west to east along the route , following parallel with the transcontinental Canadian Pacific Railway route . The Trans – Canada Highway traverses historical settlement areas . The transcontinental railroad of 1885 brought settlers to southern Saskatchewan . Commemorative historical sites along the Trans – Canada Highway mark the historical changes of the 72 years since the CPR came through . 
 On November 9 , 2011 , the section between Moose Jaw and Regina was designated " Saskatchewan 's Highway of Heroes " to honour province 's soldiers who died in service 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Minister of Mines and Resources held the first Federal @-@ Provincial Conference regarding the Trans @-@ Canada Highway in December , 1948 . With consent from all provinces , the Trans – Canada Highway Act was passed on December 10 , 1949 . Following this a second Federal @-@ Provincial Conference was held to bring together the final details for the agreement . The Highway Act aims for the completion of the Trans – Canada Highway route by December , 1956 . The third Federal @-@ Provincial Conference hold April 25 , 1950 saw Ontario , Manitoba , British Columbia , Prince Edward Island , Saskatchewan and Alberta sign the agreement which provided federal funding for the proposed transcontinental highway . The shortest and most practical routes could be chosen by each province respectively , given that provinces adjacent to one another agree on the meeting locations . The transcontinental hard @-@ surfaced two lane highway was to have pavement widths of 22 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) and 24 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) ; shoulder widths , low gradients and curvature ; bridge clearances and sight distances ; few railway grade crossings ; and be able to bear load capacities of 9 tons an axle . As of 1950 , 4 @,@ 119 mi ( 6 @,@ 629 km ) have been agreed to . By 1955 , the The Trans – Canada Highway program had only seen 4 @,@ 580 mi ( 7 @,@ 371 km ) of highway completed in areas outside of Quebec . 1 @,@ 523 mi ( 2 @,@ 451 @.@ 0 km ) of the paved 2 @,@ 853 miles ( 4 @,@ 591 @.@ 5 km ) of the Canadian highway Trans – Canada highway system had been completed by November 1 , 1955 to Trans – Canada Highway standards . Premier T.C. Douglas presided over the opening ceremonies on August 21 , 1957 , opening the 650 km ( 403 @.@ 9 mi ) Saskatchewan segment of the Trans – Canada Highway 
 The Special Projects Branch of the Department of Resources and Development administers the Trans – Canada highway Act checking specifications , and prior construction . The contributions from the Dominion Government to the provinces may be up to 50 per cent of the cost of construction approved by the Governor in council . The actual construction is controlled by each Provincial Highway Department respectively . The estimated length of mileage for Saskatchewan is 461 mi ( 741 @.@ 9 km ) of the total 4 @,@ 933 mi ( 7 @,@ 939 km ) . 
 1957 saw the Saskatchewan portion of the Trans – Canada Highway come to completion , the first province to finish their section in Canada . The year 1962 saw the entire Canadian 7 @,@ 821 km ( 4 @,@ 860 mi ) highway completed which came to a total expenditure of $ 1 @.@ 4 billion ( about $ 18 @.@ 26 billion today ) . The last of the highway between Moosomin and <unk> was twinned and opened on November 6 , 2008 providing a completely twinned corridor . The total cost of twinning was $ 217 million with the Canadian government contributing $ 59 million . 
 = = History = = 
 An Indian trail used by fur traders , and Red River carts pulling settlers effects was the first path between Moosomin and Fort Ellice , Manitoba . The transcontinental CPR paralleled this trail when coming through in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 Provincial Highway 4 , the precursor of the Trans – Canada Saskatchewan Highway 1 followed the surveyed grade of the transcontinental CPR between the Alberta and Manitoba border . Travel along Provincial Highway 4 before the 1940s would have been travelling on the square following the township road allowances , barbed wire fencing and rail lines . As the surveyed township roads were the easiest to travel , the first highway was designed on 90 degree right angle corners as the distance traversed the prairie along range roads and township roads . Two horse then eight horse scrapers maintained these early dirt roads . 
 One of the problems that came about was when the Manitoba survey met the Saskatchewan survey . The Manitoba survey allowed for 100 feet ( 30 m ) road allowances placed east and west every 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . This system was followed west of Manitoba until just north of Indian Head . Whereas , the Saskatchewan survey conducted in 1887 , allowed for 66 feet ( 20 m ) road allowances and placed roads east and west every 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . The two surveys needed a 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) correction which took years to smooth out . 
 Agriculture is Saskatchewan 's main industry and taking grain to elevators was first accomplished by horse and cart , to be replaced around World War I by truck travel . Long haul trucking flourished between 1950 and 1970 , and the trans – Canada was completed across Canada by 1970 . Since the 1970s , 17 times the number of grain trucks and 95 per cent of goods transported now are hauled by truck across the Saskatchewan . 
 = = Speed limits = = 
 From the Alberta border ( eastbound from Medicine Hat and Calgary , Highway 1 is a four – lane divided highway with a speed limit of 110 kilometre per hour ( 70 mph ) . ( Short stretches through the infrequent urban areas are at 90 – 100 kilometre per hour ( 55 – 65 mph ) though ] . Moose Jaw has 4 lane traffic bypassing the main portion of the city with a strictly enforced 80 Kilometer per hour speed limit with photo radar . At Regina , the highway meets the city in the south and has two official courses : through the city along Albert Street north to Victoria Avenue , then east , or on the Trans – Canada Bypass around the southeastern portion of the city . The bypass section is a controlled @-@ access highway and is often called the Ring Road . Traffic continuing east along the Trans – Canada Highway exits at Victoria Avenue . After Regina , Highway 1 continues onward to Brandon and Winnipeg . 
 = = Communities = = 
 = = = Alberta to Swift Current = = = 
 Travelling west along the highway on the Alberta side , Highway 1 reaches Medicine Hat , Brooks , and Calgary . Travelling east , the highway begins near Walsh , Alberta and crosses into Saskatchewan entering into the Rural Municipality ( R.M. ) of Maple Creek which was established December 10 , 1917 . ( A rural municipality ( R.M. ) was an elected governing system providing essential services such as police , fire , health , education and infrastructure services for rural residents . Historically , community residents could pay taxes or supply a couple days per quarter section labour constructing roads , bridges , and <unk> instead of paying taxes . ) Maple Creek , a town of 2 @,@ 198 residents ( 2006 census ) , was established in 1883 and is located 8 kilometres south of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway 1 via Highway 21 . 
 The next R.M. is Piapot No 110 and a ghost town of <unk> an early ranching area of Saskatchewan . <unk> served residents between 1911 and 1952 . Piapot No 110 first provided infrastructure improvements for this rural area in 1913 and is now an administrative division for a rural population of 392 residents . The small village of Piapot has a southerly access to Highway 1 also via Highway 614 . 
 The village of Tompkins , and the town of Gull Lake are among the communities of R.M. of Gull Lake No 139 . Both Tompkins with its 173 residents and Gull Lake serving 965 residents have their own municipal government . Gull Lake is an older community establishing its post office April 1 , 1889 . The south Saskatchewan region , an early ranching area was home to the 76 Ranch . The ranch house , constructed in 1888 , is now the Gull Lake School Division office . Within Gull Lake No 139 , which was created in 1913 , are several wind turbine generators which can be seen when traversing the Trans – Canada Highway . 
 In 1913 the road system consisted of miles of prairie trails . The roads gradually improved with the assistance of jointly funded Provincial and Municipal road programs such as the Grid Road program , the Main Farm Access program , and the Super Grid system which led to the eventual formation of Municipal Maintenance Areas . The RM 's of Gull Lake , Carmichael , and Webb formed Maintenance Area No. 1 , the first in the Province . 
 A neighbouring village of Webb with its population of 44 is situated within the next R.M. of Webb No 138 just 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south of Highway 1 . Webb No 138 incorporated on December 13 , 1909 providing road construction and maintenance . The post office was set up in Webb on March 1 , 1908 . 
 = = = Swift Current to Moose Jaw = = = 
 Swift Current No 137 becomes the next R.M. to travel through and here the unincorporated areas of Beverley and Java are the next communities along the route . Both of these communities are enumerated as a part of RM bringing its population to 1 @,@ 587 residents . December 12 , 1910 saw the incorporation of the RM of Swift Current No 137 . The highway runs through three cities on the way from Alberta to Manitoba , of which Swift Current is the first . Swift Current was first established in the North West Territories in 1883 and has risen to a population of 14 @,@ 946 . 
 The original route of this highway was via Chaplin Street through Swift Current . The Trans @-@ Canada became a four lane expressway in 1968 , and the new route went past Swift Current to the north . Motels , shopping malls and fast food enterprises located along the highway route . Subdivisions and neighbourhoods now extend past the highway , so again highway 1 traverses Swift Current . 
 Excelsior No 166 R.M. is the next rural governing body out of Swift Current which encompasses the community of Waldeck directly on Highway 1 at the junction of Saskatchewan Highway 628 . Rush Lake is 4 kilometres north of the highway . 1903 first saw Rush Lake become established , soon followed in 1906 by Waldeck , and 1909 for the RM in this area . 
 The town of Herbert with its post office established in 1904 has 742 residents now . Herbert once renowned as having ‘ The World ’ s <unk> Wheat Lands ’ is at the junction of the Trans – Canada and Saskatchewan Highway 612 . Morse , as well as <unk> are unincorporated areas which adds their populations to the 435 residents of R.M. Morse No 165 . Morse is immediately north of Highway 1 at the intersection with Highway 644 . The Morse Museum and Cultural Center celebrates pioneer history in a 1912 brick school house . Saskatchewan 's third biggest grain marketing point in Saskatchewan as of 1912 , continued on this route by setting a record for shipping 2 @-@ 1 / 4 million bushels of wheat in 1915 . Morse has erected large cattails for their roadside attraction . <unk> is at the western edge of the separation of the east and west bound lanes of the Trans – Canada . The western route is about 15 @.@ 3 km ( 9 @.@ 5 mi ) in length , and the eastern route is about 14 @.@ 7 km ( 9 @.@ 1 mi ) long , before the highway comes together again . 
 Uren is the first community arrived at within Chaplin No 164 . Uren bustled between 1911 and 1961 . Chaplin , at the intersection of Route 1 and Highways 19 and 58 , was established in 1907 . It is an unincorporated area which adds its population to the 138 residents ( 2006 census ) of Chaplin No 164 . An American Avocet as well as Piping Plover are large statues built by the roadside commemorating the world famous bird sanctuary at Chaplin , Saskatchewan . Valjean , and Secretan are also too small to have their own municipal governments and they are located along the highway proper . Valjean supported a post office between 1912 and 1968 , whereas Secretan 's post office survived from 1911 to 1970 . 
 <unk> No 163 established in 1909 features the communities of Parkbeg as well as Mortlach . Parkbeg , an unincorporated area , had a post office established in the North West Territories in 1896 . Parkbeg is now located on Trans – Canada 1 east , a segment which is 16 @.@ 5 kilometres in length . The Trans – Canada west is 13 @.@ 3 mi ( 21 @.@ 4 km ) long and is about 2 km ( 1 mi ) north of Parkbeg . Mortlach , a village of 254 people , is about 0 @.@ 8 mi ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) south of the highway and established its post office just months before Saskatchewan became a province in 1905 . Four major pipelines , TransCanada , Conoco , South Saskatchewan Pipeline , and Trans Gas find their home in <unk> RM . 
 There is only one community along the highway within R.M. Caron No 162 , which is Caronport . The village of Caronport , 919 residents in 2006 , did not receive a post office until 1947 , but the RM was serving the area since 1912 . Local Improvement District ( L.I.D. ) # 9 started making area improvements as early as 1904 . 
 = = = Moose Jaw to Regina = = = 
 Moose Jaw , also called " Little Chicago " , is a city of 32 @,@ 132 along the Trans – Canada . Capone 's Car , Moose Family and Mac the Moose are all large roadside attractions of Moose Jaw . Moose Jaw Trolley Company ( 1912 ) is still an operating electric cable trolleys offering tours of Moose Jaw . Temple Gardens Mineral Spa Resort , Tunnels of Moose Jaw , and History of Transportation Western Development Museum. are major sites of interest of this city . The juncture of the Moose Jaw River and Thunder Creek produced the best source of water for steam engines , and Moose Jaw became the CPR divisional point . <unk> Inland Grain Terminal operated by Saskatchewan Wheat Pool . These large capacity concrete grain terminals are replacing the smaller grain elevators which were numerous along the highway , sentinels of most communities along the route . Improved technology for harvest , transport and road construction have made the large inland terminals more viable economically . The rural governing body around Moose Jaw is Moose Jaw No. 161 which serves 1 @,@ 228 residents ( 2006 census ) which includes the Moose Jaw , Canadian Forces Base . Meat @-@ processing plants , salt , potash , urea fertilizer , anhydrous ammonia and ethanol producers abound in this area with easy transport access to the Trans – Canada Highway . Belle Plaine , an unincorporated area , is within Pense No 160 . The RM serves only 490 residents as of 2006 . 
 = = = Regina to Manitoba = = = 
 Sherwood No 159 is the R.M. of the western perimeter around the capital city of Regina . Regina , Saskatchewan 's capital city is the second largest city of the province of Saskatchewan with the 2006 census counting its population at 179 @,@ 246 people . Sherwood R.M. provides essential services to 1 @,@ 075 residents . As Regina expands , it annexes land from Sherwood No 159 . 
 <unk> No 158 is the R.M. east of Regina comprising White City , as well as Balgonie along the highway proper . <unk> No 158 serves 3 @,@ 611 residents . As Regina grows eastward , it annexes land from this RM . White City a town of 1 @,@ 113 residents could also be considered a census subdivision of Regina . Balgonie an unincorporated area first established its post office in 1883 . It is now situated at the intersections of Saskatchewan Highway 46 , 364 , 10 , and the Trans – Canada . 
 St. Joseph 's is a hamlet on Highway 1 and is a part of South Qu 'appelle No 157 , the next R.M. along the way . The town of Qu 'Appelle ( 624 residents in 2006 ) had historic beginnings with fur trading posts in this area , and is located within this <unk> .. Qu 'Appelle was first named Troy , and was an administrative centre of the North West Territories . 
 Originally roadwork was done by horsepower , and the municipality owned its horses and equipment . It was found that roadwork under the supervision of a councilor cost half as much as that under a road commission system . There were problems with labor . One cold November payday the whole crew quit , with not one left to even feed the horses . In 1909 a foreman shot one of his crew ; the [ Indian Head ] council minutes make no further comment . 
 Indian Head , a town with a population of 1 @,@ 634 , is within Indian Head No 156 along with the ghost town of Dingley and the town <unk> . <unk> has a population of 98 . Indian Head has erected a large sculpture of an Indian Head at the side of the road . 
 Indian Head features the historical Bell Farm which was a large farming enterprise of 53 @,@ 000 acres ( 214 @.@ 5 km2 ) . Pioneer homesteaders in the early 20th century farmed quarter section homesteads which were 160 acres ( 0 @.@ 6 km2 ) in size . This was a 1 / 2 mile by 1 / 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km by 0 @.@ 8 km ) farm . 
 Wolseley , a town of 782 , is within the area of Wolseley No 155 . The town of Wolseley is home to heritage properties such as the Provincial Court House building was constructed in 1893 and is the oldest surviving Court House building in the province . The Town Hall / Opera House , built in 1906 is a classic building and is used for all sorts of community events . A 1904 Queen Anne revival @-@ style home is now the Grenfell ' Adare ' Museum . This home built by Mr. Edward Fitzgerald was built on a large property which has been annexed by Grenfell . 
 <unk> No 154 contains the urban communities of Grenfell , <unk> and Broadview . Grenfell has a population of 947 , and Broadview 611 . Grenfell is home to a 14 @,@ 700 tonne inland concrete terminal as well as a large grain elevator located at the CPR line . <unk> , an unincorporated area , is the only municipality served by the RM . The town of Broadview was an 1882 Canadian Pacific Railway divisional point . The Broadview Museum houses heritage of Broadview and area . 
 The town of Whitewood , 869 residents in 2006 , was first established as Whitewood Station , North West Territories in 1883 . Dr. Rudolph Meyer led a group of French Counts to the area of Whitewood in the 1880s to develop a community similar to the communities for nobility in Europe . Merchant 's Bank Heritage Center is a heritage building of Whitewood which celebrates its link to the French Counts of St. Hubert . The next RM along the way is Willowdale No. 153 which nestles Percival , and Burrows within its population . Burrows is located at the junction of Highway 637 . 
 <unk> , an incorporated town , located within the Martin , 339 rural residents . 
 Next along the way are Moosomin , Saskatchewan , <unk> , and Fleming , Saskatchewan all within the Moosomin No 121 R.M. The town of Moosomin , Saskatchewan hosts 2 @,@ 257 residents at the junction of Saskatchewan Highway 8 , 1 , and 709 . 
 The building of these roads is under the personal supervision of the rural councillors of the R.M. The Provincial Government each year makes a substantial grant to the Municipality for permanent trunk road building . 
 The Trans – Canada highway across Saskatchewan finally finishes up before the Manitoba @-@ Saskatchewan border at Moosomin No. 121 . 
 = = Geophysical features = = 
 Highway 1 travels through geographical sites of interest as well as conservation areas . The highway begins in a mixed grassland ecoregion known as Maple Creek Plain . The Great Sand Hills are north of Highway 1 and the Cypress Hills region is south of the highway . The Cypress Hills Interprovincial Park features Fort Walsh and the highest elevation of Saskatchewan . Cypress Hills is accessed just 62 kilometres south west of Highway 1 . This area is known for its rolling with some steep hills and ravines . 
 Piapot Creek , Bear Creek and Skull Creek are near the Bench also known as the Cypress Hills plateau . After leaving the Maple Creek Plain , there is the Gull Lake Plain . Oil producing wells dot the landscape along with clumps of trees , sand hills , prairie grasses and wind turbines producing wind energy . 
 Swift Current was originally founded at Riviere Au Courant which translates in English to Swift Current . The Swift Current Plateau is a prairie grasslands area . The Chaplin Plain is the next grassland ecoregion , and Highway 1 is just to the north of Chaplin Lake which is situated on a huge bed of salt , producing a saline lake . The Western Hemispheric Shorebird Reserve a large shorebird conservation area is located on Chaplin Lake , and is renowned internationally . This area between Swift Current to Moose Jaw is considered to be part of the Missouri Coteau topographical area ( extending south to the United States ) . 
 The area to the south of Parkbeg is termed the Coteau Hills . Besant Regional Park and Campground is located west of Caronport . The Dirt Hills , a grasslands ecoregion are west of Moose Jaw . The city of Moose Jaw arose at the junction of Moose Jaw River and Thunder Creek . The <unk> Valley ( administered by the <unk> Valley Authority ) has been developed with trails , playgrounds , and picnic areas . Nicole Flats Nature Area ( Buffalo Pound Provincial Park ) is a preserved feature of the area . Both Moose Jaw and Regina are situated upon moist mixed grassland ecoregions , specifically called the Regina Plain . Regina is located south of the junction of the Wascana and Qu 'Appelle Rivers , and the area is now called Wascana Lake . Aspen parkland prairie is east of Regina . The Moose Mountain upland ecoregion is east of Regina and south of the Qu 'Appelle River . 
 Fairly Lake is located within the town of Wolseley . The lake was created because the CPR dammed up Wolf Creek to provide water for steam locomotives . Grenfell Regional Park is located west of Grenfell . 
 Echo Valley , and <unk> Point are two neighbouring provincial parks near Broadview . Kipling Plain gives rise to the topographical feature called the Squirrel Hills and further to the east the Wood Hills . Moosomin Regional Park , is located to the south of the Trans – Canada highway in the Pipestone Valley on the shores of Moosomin Lake . The Melville Plain is the remaining ecoregion along the Trans – Canada highway before the Manitoba border . 
 = = Plans = = 
 Pinkie Road is a proposed 4 lane twinned highway connector road linking two National Highway System routes as a part of the Asia @-@ Pacific Gateway and Corridor Initiative ( <unk> ) . Highway 1 and Saskatchewan Highway 11 will be linked by this new route west of Regina . 
 = = Intersections from west to east = = 
 = = Books = = 
 Prairie Memories . Webb History Book Committee . Webb , Saskatchewan : Webb History Book Committee , 1982 . 
 = Tropical Depression Fourteen ( 1987 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Fourteen was the last tropical depression of the 1987 Atlantic hurricane season and was the third most destructive storm of the year . The depression formed on October 31 , 1987 in the Caribbean Sea , heading along a northward path into the southern Gulf of Mexico and into Florida until the system was absorbed on November 4 . The path and damage from the depression followed a similar path to Hurricane Floyd earlier in October . The depression peaked in intensity with wind speeds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) on November 1 with a minimal barometric pressure reading of 1004 millibars ( 29 @.@ 65 inHg ) . However , certain barometric readings have considered that the depression may have become a tropical storm . 
 The depression in the time affected several cities and parishes in Jamaica and Cuba , along with causing significant rainfall in southern Florida . Jamaica was the area hardest hit by the depression , claiming the lives of six people and causing about $ 1 @.@ 802 million ( 1987 USD , $ 3 million in 2009 USD ) in damage . The depression caused floods that washed out villages , roads and bridges and caused dozens of landslides on the island . The island also had several rivers overflow including the Rio Minho and Rio <unk> . The damage caused by the tropical depression was comparable to previous flood in June 1986 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Prior to the formation of Tropical Depression Fourteen , the southern Caribbean Sea was under a large area of low pressure . On October 30 , satellite imagery showed that the area of pressure was beginning to form into a tropical disturbance . A reconnaissance aircraft was scheduled for the next morning to investigate the forming system , but by 1400 UTC on October 31 , the National Hurricane Center in Miami , Florida had upgraded the system to a tropical depression based on the imagery and surface data . At this time , the specialists at the Hurricane Center believed that this was its most developed stage of its lifetime . 
 The depression began a movement to the northwest upon formation and on the night of October 31 , the depression ran into a newly @-@ forming upper @-@ level low near the Yucatan Peninsula . The interaction with the upper @-@ level low caused shearing in the depression , and broke apart the previous low @-@ level circulation that was developing . By the morning of November 1 , the depression was nothing more than a swirl of low @-@ level clouds near the center of circulation . After this , the depression could no longer attain the circulation it had previously developed . During the period of November 2 and 3 , the depression moved to the northeast , crossing over the islands of Jamaica , Cayman and Cuba and then entering the southern parts of the Gulf of Mexico . 
 On occasion , the convection of the system would flare up , and in the early morning hours of November 3 , the Naval Air Station at Boca Chica , Florida reported winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , which would mean the depression may have attained tropical storm status . A similar report was filed at the Air Force Station at Cudjoe Key . After another reconnaissance flight was sent out to study the system , and recorded that surface area temperatures had dropped , the flight @-@ level winds had reached 92 mph ( 147 km / h ) and the surface area pressure had reached 998 millibars ( 29 @.@ 47 inHg ) . In the evening and overnight hours of November 3 , the tropical depression continued to the northeast , making landfall in Florida at a location near Tampa Bay . The depression crossed Florida , weakening significantly , and becoming extratropical . After emerging from land in the Atlantic Ocean on November 5 , the depression had become a low pressure area once again and was last spotted that day near the Carolina Capes . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The flash flood warnings released in relation to Tropical Depression Fourteen were centered in the area of Jamaica , who would later received rainfall in excess of 9 inches ( 230 mm ) as the center of the depression moved across the island . In the United States , the National Hurricane Center issued two tropical storm warnings in Florida . The first was from the middle and lower islands of the Florida Keys to the area of Dry Tortugas on November 1 . The warning lasted only 24 hours , with the warning ending on November 2 . The second issued tropical storm warning was from the area of Fort Myers Beach to Cedar Key on November 3 . This also lasted only 24 hours and was discontinued on November 3 . Forecasters also suggested on November 2 that boaters should avoid the area in or around Key Largo . 
 Wind gusts from Tropical Depression Fourteen exceeded 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) near the Cudjoe Key Air Force Base on November 3 . The Naval Air Station at Boca Chica reported gusts around 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) and sustained winds of about 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) on November 2 . The highest recorded winds over Cuba reached 25 mph ( 30 km / h ) in the capital city of Havana . There were no gusts reported in Cuba however . In Jamaica , gusts to 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) were reported in the city of Kingston and sustained winds of about 45 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Ships also reported tropical storm force winds , reaching as high as 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) with seas of 32 @.@ 5 feet ( 9 @.@ 9 m ) . 
 As the depression was moving to the west of the island of Jamaica , it caused significant rainfall on several parts of the island . Over a three @-@ day period from October 31 to November 2 , the rainfall reached as high as 10 @.@ 21 inches ( 259 mm ) at the capital city of Kingston , with a daily high of 6 @.@ 38 inches ( 162 mm ) on November 1 . The significant rainfall caused major damage and issues on the island , with an estimated 1 @,@ 000 + people being displaced from their homes and being placed into government shelters . Several residential communities were totally underwater from the rainfall , with local roads being washed away from landslides and floodwater , but these were restored quickly . The government of Jamaica also reported that three bridges were washed away from the heavy rain and resulting floods . According to the government , the country received $ 587 @,@ 500 ( 1987 USD ) of damage to the highways and streets , $ 11 @,@ 000 ( 1987 USD ) to the utilities around the island , $ 836 @,@ 000 ( 1987 USD ) to the agriculture system and about $ 372 @,@ 000 to the health system . The total damage reached $ 1 @.@ 802 million ( 1987 USD , $ 3 million in 2009 USD ) on the island of Jamaica alone . There were also six recorded fatalities from the system . 
 In Cuba , the reported rainfall amounts reached about 4 @.@ 75 inches ( 121 mm ) in the community of Bahia Honda , along with 2 @.@ 03 inches ( 52 mm ) in the capital of Havana , and 2 @.@ 75 inches ( 70 mm ) in the community of Saua La Grande . Although by the time the depression had reached the United States was undeveloped , the remains caused significant rainfall in several states in southeastern United States , with a peak of 10 @.@ 23 inches ( 260 mm ) at the Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge in Florida . The city of Miami reported rainfall totals of 4 @.@ 42 inches ( 112 mm ) and 5 @.@ 90 inches ( 150 mm ) in the community of <unk> . Rainfalls above 1 inch ( 25 mm ) were reported in eastern Georgia , southern South Carolina , eastern Mississippi and eastern Alabama . Rainfalls in other areas went unrecorded . Outside the damage in Jamaica , the damage to Cuba and the United States were minimal , with no other reported casualties . 
 = Niels Bohr = 
 Niels Henrik David Bohr ( Danish : [ <unk> ˈb ̥ <unk> ̯ ˀ ] ; 7 October 1885 – 18 November 1962 ) was a Danish physicist who made foundational contributions to understanding atomic structure and quantum theory , for which he received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922 . Bohr was also a philosopher and a promoter of scientific research . 
 Bohr developed the Bohr model of the atom , in which he proposed that energy levels of electrons are discrete and that the electrons revolve in stable orbits around the atomic nucleus but can jump from one energy level ( or orbit ) to another . Although the Bohr model has been supplanted by other models , its underlying principles remain valid . He conceived the principle of complementarity : that items could be separately analysed in terms of contradictory properties , like behaving as a wave or a stream of particles . The notion of complementarity dominated Bohr 's thinking in both science and philosophy . 
 Bohr founded the Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen , now known as the Niels Bohr Institute , which opened in 1920 . Bohr mentored and collaborated with physicists including Hans Kramers , Oskar Klein , George de Hevesy and Werner Heisenberg . He predicted the existence of a new zirconium @-@ like element , which was named hafnium , after the Latin name for Copenhagen , where it was discovered . Later , the element bohrium was named after him . 
 During the 1930s , Bohr helped refugees from Nazism . After Denmark was occupied by the Germans , he had a famous meeting with Heisenberg , who had become the head of the German nuclear weapon project . In September 1943 , word reached Bohr that he was about to be arrested by the Germans , and he fled to Sweden . From there , he was flown to Britain , where he joined the British Tube Alloys nuclear weapons project , and was part of the British mission to the Manhattan Project . After the war , Bohr called for international cooperation on nuclear energy . He was involved with the establishment of CERN and the Research Establishment Risø of the Danish Atomic Energy Commission , and became the first chairman of the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics in 1957 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bohr was born in Copenhagen , Denmark , on 7 October 1885 , the second of three children of Christian Bohr , a professor of physiology at the University of Copenhagen , and Ellen Adler Bohr , who came from a wealthy Danish Jewish family prominent in banking and parliamentary circles . He had an elder sister , Jenny , and a younger brother Harald . Jenny became a teacher , while Harald became a mathematician and Olympic footballer who played for the Danish national team at the 1908 Summer Olympics in London . Bohr was a passionate footballer as well , and the two brothers played several matches for the Copenhagen @-@ based <unk> Boldklub ( Academic Football Club ) , with Bohr as goalkeeper . 
 Bohr was educated at <unk> Latin School , starting when he was seven . In 1903 , Bohr enrolled as an undergraduate at Copenhagen University . His major was physics , which he studied under Professor Christian Christiansen , the university 's only professor of physics at that time . He also studied astronomy and mathematics under Professor Thorvald Thiele , and philosophy under Professor Harald Høffding , a friend of his father . 
 In 1905 , a gold medal competition was sponsored by the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters to investigate a method for measuring the surface tension of liquids that had been proposed by Lord Rayleigh in 1879 . This involved measuring the frequency of oscillation of the radius of a water jet . Bohr conducted a series of experiments using his father 's laboratory in the university ; the university itself had no physics laboratory . To complete his experiments , he had to make his own glassware , creating test tubes with the required elliptical cross @-@ sections . He went beyond the original task , incorporating improvements into both Rayleigh 's theory and his method , by taking into account the viscosity of the water , and by working with finite amplitudes instead of just infinitesimal ones . His essay , which he submitted at the last minute , won the prize . He later submitted an improved version of the paper to the Royal Society in London for publication in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society . 
 Harald became the first of the two Bohr brothers to earn a master 's degree , which he earned for mathematics in April 1909 . Niels took another nine months to earn his . Students had to submit a thesis on a subject assigned by their supervisor . Bohr 's supervisor was Christiansen , and the topic he chose was the electron theory of metals . Bohr subsequently elaborated his master 's thesis into his much @-@ larger Doctor of Philosophy ( <unk> <unk> . ) thesis . He surveyed the literature on the subject , settling on a model postulated by Paul Drude and elaborated by Hendrik Lorentz , in which the electrons in a metal are considered to behave like a gas . Bohr extended Lorentz 's model , but was still unable to account for phenomena like the Hall effect , and concluded that electron theory could not fully explain the magnetic properties of metals . The thesis was accepted in April 1911 , and Bohr conducted his formal defence on 13 May . Harald had received his doctorate the previous year . Bohr 's thesis was groundbreaking , but attracted little interest outside Scandinavia because it was written in Danish , a Copenhagen University requirement at the time . In 1921 , the Dutch physicist <unk> Johanna van Leeuwen would independently derive a theorem from Bohr 's thesis that is today known as the Bohr – van Leeuwen theorem . 
 In 1910 , Bohr met Margrethe Nørlund , the sister of the mathematician Niels Erik Nørlund . Bohr resigned his membership in the Church of Denmark on 16 April 1912 , and he and Margrethe were married in a civil ceremony at the town hall in Slagelse on 1 August . Years later , his brother Harald similarly left the church before getting married . Bohr and Margrethe had six sons . The oldest , Christian , died in a boating accident in 1934 , and another , Harald , died from childhood meningitis . Aage Bohr became a successful physicist , and in 1975 was awarded the Nobel Prize in physics , like his father . Hans became a physician ; Erik , a chemical engineer ; and Ernest , a lawyer . Like his uncle Harald , Ernest Bohr became an Olympic athlete , playing field hockey for Denmark at the 1948 Summer Olympics in London . 
 = = Physics = = 
 = = = Bohr model = = = 
 In September 1911 , Bohr , supported by a fellowship from the Carlsberg Foundation , travelled to England . At the time , it was where most of the theoretical work on the structure of atoms and molecules was being done . He met J. J. Thomson of the Cavendish Laboratory and Trinity College , Cambridge . He attended lectures on electromagnetism given by James Jeans and Joseph Larmor , and did some research on cathode rays , but failed to impress Thomson . He had more success with younger physicists like the Australian William Lawrence Bragg , and New Zealand 's Ernest Rutherford , whose 1911 Rutherford model of the atom had challenged Thomson 's 1904 plum pudding model . Bohr received an invitation from Rutherford to conduct post @-@ doctoral work at Victoria University of Manchester , where Bohr met George de Hevesy and Charles Galton Darwin ( whom Bohr referred to as " the grandson of the real Darwin " ) . 
 Bohr returned to Denmark in July 1912 for his wedding , and travelled around England and Scotland on his honeymoon . On his return , he became a <unk> at the University of Copenhagen , giving lectures on thermodynamics . Martin Knudsen put Bohr 's name forward for a docent , which was approved in July 1913 , and Bohr then began teaching medical students . His three papers , which later became famous as " the trilogy " , were published in Philosophical Magazine in July , September and November of that year . He adapted Rutherford 's nuclear structure to Max Planck 's quantum theory and so created his Bohr model of the atom . 
 Planetary models of atoms were not new , but Bohr 's treatment was . Taking the 1912 paper by Darwin on the role of electrons in the interaction of alpha particles with a nucleus as his starting point , he advanced the theory of electrons travelling in orbits around the atom 's nucleus , with the chemical properties of each element being largely determined by the number of electrons in the outer orbits of its atoms . He introduced the idea that an electron could drop from a higher @-@ energy orbit to a lower one , in the process emitting a quantum of discrete energy . This became a basis for what is now known as the old quantum theory . 
 In 1885 , Johann Balmer had come up with his Balmer series to describe the visible spectral lines of a hydrogen atoms : 
 <formula> 
 where λ is the wavelength of the absorbed or emitted light and RH is the Rydberg constant . Balmer 's formula was corroborated by the discovery of additional spectral lines , but for thirty years , no one could explain why it worked . In the first paper of his trilogy , Bohr was able to derive it from his model : 
 <formula> 
 where me is the electron 's mass , e is its charge , h is Planck 's constant and Z is the atom 's atomic number ( 1 for hydrogen ) . 
 The model 's first hurdle was the Pickering series , lines which did not fit Balmer 's formula . When challenged on this by Alfred Fowler , Bohr replied that they were caused by ionised helium , helium atoms with only one electron . The Bohr model was found to work for such ions . Many older physicists , like Thomson , Rayleigh and Hendrik Lorentz , did not like the trilogy , but the younger generation , including Rutherford , David Hilbert , Albert Einstein , Enrico Fermi , Max Born and Arnold Sommerfeld saw it as a breakthrough . The trilogy 's acceptance was entirely due to its ability to explain phenomena which stymied other models , and to predict results that were subsequently verified by experiments . Today , the Bohr model of the atom has been superseded , but is still the best known model of the atom , as it often appears in high school physics and chemistry texts . 
 Bohr did not enjoy teaching medical students . He decided to return to Manchester , where Rutherford had offered him a job as a reader in place of Darwin , whose tenure had expired . Bohr accepted . He took a leave of absence from the University of Copenhagen , which he started by taking a holiday in Tyrol with his brother Harald and aunt Hanna Adler . There , he visited the University of Göttingen and the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich , where he met Sommerfeld and conducted seminars on the trilogy . The First World War broke out while they were in Tyrol , greatly complicating the trip back to Denmark and Bohr 's subsequent voyage with Margrethe to England , where he arrived in October 1914 . They stayed until July 1916 , by which time he had been appointed to the Chair of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen , a position created especially for him . His <unk> was abolished at the same time , so he still had to teach physics to medical students . New professors were formally introduced to King Christian X , who expressed his delight at meeting such a famous football player . 
 = = = Institute of Physics = = = 
 In April 1917 , Bohr began a campaign to establish an Institute of Theoretical Physics . He gained the support of the Danish government and the Carlsberg Foundation , and sizeable contributions were also made by industry and private donors , many of them Jewish . Legislation establishing the Institute was passed in November 1918 . Now known as the Niels Bohr Institute , it opened its doors on 3 March 1921 with Bohr as its director . His family moved into an apartment on the first floor . Bohr 's institute served as a focal point for researchers into quantum mechanics and related subjects in the 1920s and 1930s , when most of the world 's best known theoretical physicists spent some time in his company . Early arrivals included Hans Kramers from the Netherlands , Oskar Klein from Sweden , George de Hevesy from Hungary , Wojciech <unk> from Poland and Svein Rosseland from Norway . Bohr became widely appreciated as their congenial host and eminent colleague . Klein and Rosseland produced the Institute 's first paper even before it opened . 
 The Bohr model worked well for hydrogen , but could not explain more complex elements . By 1919 , Bohr was moving away from the idea that electrons orbited the nucleus , and he developed heuristics to describe them . The rare earth elements posed a particular classification problem for chemists , because they were so chemically similar . An important development came in 1924 with Wolfgang Pauli 's discovery of the Pauli exclusion principle , which put Bohr 's models on a firm theoretical footing . Bohr was then able to declare that the as @-@ yet @-@ undiscovered element 72 was not a rare earth element , but an element with chemical properties similar to those of zirconium . He was immediately challenged by the French chemist Georges Urbain , who claimed to have discovered a rare earth element 72 , which he called " celtium " . At the Institute in Copenhagen , Dirk Coster and George de Hevesy took up the challenge of proving Bohr right and Urbain wrong . Starting with a clear idea of the chemical properties of the unknown element greatly simplified the search process . They went through samples from Copenhagen 's Museum of Mineralogy looking for a zirconium @-@ like element , and soon found it . The element , which they named hafnium , Hafnia being the Latin name for Copenhagen , turned out to be more common than gold . 
 In 1922 , Bohr was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics " for his services in the investigation of the structure of atoms and of the radiation emanating from them " . The award thus recognised both the Trilogy and his early leading work in the emerging field of quantum mechanics . For his Nobel lecture , Bohr gave his audience a comprehensive survey of what was then known about the structure of the atom , including the correspondence principle , which he had formulated . This states that the behaviour of systems described by quantum theory reproduces classical physics in the limit of large quantum numbers . 
 The discovery of Compton scattering by Arthur Holly Compton in 1923 convinced most physicists that light was composed of photons , and that energy and momentum were conserved in collisions between electrons and photons . In 1924 , Bohr , Kramers and John C. Slater , an American physicist working at the Institute in Copenhagen , proposed the Bohr – Kramers – Slater theory ( BKS ) . It was more a programme than a full physical theory , as the ideas it developed were not worked out quantitatively . BKS theory became the final attempt at understanding the interaction of matter and electromagnetic radiation on the basis of the old quantum theory , in which quantum phenomena were treated by imposing quantum restrictions on a classical wave description of the electromagnetic field . 
 Modelling atomic behaviour under incident electromagnetic radiation using " virtual oscillators " at the absorption and emission frequencies , rather than the ( different ) apparent frequencies of the Bohr orbits , led Max Born , Werner Heisenberg and Kramers to explore different mathematical models . They led to the development of matrix mechanics , the first form of modern quantum mechanics . The BKS theory also generated discussion of , and renewed attention to , difficulties in the foundations of the old quantum theory . The most provocative element of BKS – that momentum and energy would not necessarily be conserved in each interaction , but only statistically – was soon shown to be in conflict with experiments conducted by Walther Bothe and Hans Geiger . In light of these results , Bohr informed Darwin , " there is nothing else to do than to give our revolutionary efforts as honourable a funeral as possible . " 
 = = = Quantum mechanics = = = 
 The introduction of spin by George Uhlenbeck and Samuel Goudsmit in November 1925 was a milestone . The next month , Bohr travelled to Leiden to attend celebrations of the 50th anniversary of Hendrick Lorentz receiving his doctorate . When his train stopped in Hamburg , he was met by Wolfgang Pauli and Otto Stern , who asked for his opinion of the spin theory . Bohr pointed out that he had concerns about the interaction between electrons and magnetic fields . When he arrived in Leiden , Paul Ehrenfest and Albert Einstein informed Bohr that Einstein had resolved this problem using relativity . Bohr then had Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit incorporate this into their paper . Thus , when he met Werner Heisenberg and Pascual Jordan in Göttingen on the way back , he had become , in his own words , " a prophet of the electron magnet gospel " . 
 Heisenberg first came to Copenhagen in 1924 , then returned to Göttingen in June 1925 , shortly thereafter developing the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics . When he showed his results to Max Born in Göttingen , Born realised that they could best be expressed using matrices . This work attracted the attention of the British physicist Paul Dirac , who came to Copenhagen for six months in September 1926 . Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger also visited in 1926 . His attempt at explaining quantum physics in classical terms using wave mechanics impressed Bohr , who believed it contributed " so much to mathematical clarity and simplicity that it represents a gigantic advance over all previous forms of quantum mechanics " . 
 When Kramers left the Institute in 1926 to take up a chair as professor of theoretical physics at the Utrecht University , Bohr arranged for Heisenberg to return and take Kramers 's place as a <unk> at the University of Copenhagen . Heisenberg worked in Copenhagen as a university lecturer and assistant to Bohr from 1926 to 1927 . 
 Bohr became convinced that light behaved like both waves and particles , and in 1927 , experiments confirmed the de Broglie hypothesis that matter ( like electrons ) also behaved like waves . He conceived the philosophical principle of complementarity : that items could have apparently mutually exclusive properties , such as being a wave or a stream of particles , depending on the experimental framework . He felt that it was not fully understood by professional philosophers . 
 In Copenhagen in 1927 Heisenberg developed his uncertainty principle , which Bohr embraced . In a paper he presented at the Volta Conference at Como in September 1927 , he demonstrated that the uncertainty principle could be derived from classical arguments , without quantum terminology or matrices . Einstein preferred the determinism of classical physics over the probabilistic new quantum physics to which he himself had contributed . Philosophical issues that arose from the novel aspects of quantum mechanics became widely celebrated subjects of discussion . Einstein and Bohr had good @-@ natured arguments over such issues throughout their lives . 
 In 1914 , Carl Jacobsen , the heir to Carlsberg breweries , bequeathed his mansion to be used for life by the Dane who had made the most prominent contribution to science , literature or the arts , as an honorary residence ( Danish : <unk> ) . Harald Høffding had been the first occupant , and upon his death in July 1931 , the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters gave Bohr occupancy . He and his family moved there in 1932 . He was elected president of the Academy on 17 March 1939 . 
 By 1929 , the phenomenon of beta decay prompted Bohr to again suggest that the law of conservation of energy be abandoned , but Enrico Fermi 's hypothetical neutrino and the subsequent 1932 discovery of the neutron provided another explanation . This prompted Bohr to create a new theory of the compound nucleus in 1936 , which explained how neutrons could be captured by the nucleus . In this model , the nucleus could be deformed like a drop of liquid . He worked on this with a new collaborator , the Danish physicist Fritz <unk> , who died suddenly in 1938 . 
 The discovery of nuclear fission by Otto Hahn in December 1938 ( and its theoretical explanation by Lise Meitner ) generated intense interest among physicists . Bohr brought the news to the United States where he opened the Fifth Washington Conference on Theoretical Physics with Fermi on 26 January 1939 . When Bohr told George Placzek that this resolved all the mysteries of transuranic elements , Placzek told him that one remained : the neutron capture energies of uranium did not match those of its decay . Bohr thought about it for a few minutes and then announced to Placzek , Léon Rosenfeld and John Wheeler that " I have understood everything . " Based on his liquid drop model of the nucleus , Bohr concluded that it was the uranium @-@ 235 isotope and not the more abundant uranium @-@ 238 that was primarily responsible for fission with thermal neutrons . In April 1940 , John R. Dunning demonstrated that Bohr was correct . In the meantime , Bohr and Wheeler developed a theoretical treatment which they published in a September 1939 paper on " The Mechanism of Nuclear Fission " . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 Bohr read the 19th @-@ century Danish Christian existentialist philosopher , Søren Kierkegaard . Richard Rhodes argued in The Making of the Atomic Bomb that Bohr was influenced by Kierkegaard through Høffding . In 1909 , Bohr sent his brother Kierkegaard 's Stages on Life 's Way as a birthday gift . In the enclosed letter , Bohr wrote , " It is the only thing I have to send home ; but I do not believe that it would be very easy to find anything better ... I even think it is one of the most delightful things I have ever read . " Bohr enjoyed Kierkegaard 's language and literary style , but mentioned that he had some disagreement with Kierkegaard 's philosophy . Some of Bohr 's biographers suggested that this disagreement stemmed from Kierkegaard 's advocacy of Christianity , while Bohr was an atheist . 
 There has been some dispute over the extent to which Kierkegaard influenced Bohr 's philosophy and science . David <unk> argued that Kierkegaard had minimal influence over Bohr 's work , taking Bohr 's statement about disagreeing with Kierkegaard at face value , while Jan Faye argued that one can disagree with the content of a theory while accepting its general premises and structure . 
 = = Nazism and Second World War = = 
 The rise of Nazism in Germany prompted many scholars to flee their countries , either because they were Jewish or because they were political opponents of the Nazi regime . In 1933 , the Rockefeller Foundation created a fund to help support refugee academics , and Bohr discussed this programme with the President of the Rockefeller Foundation , Max Mason , in May 1933 during a visit to the United States . Bohr offered the refugees temporary jobs at the Institute , provided them with financial support , arranged for them to be awarded fellowships from the Rockefeller Foundation , and ultimately found them places at institutions around the world . Those that he helped included Guido Beck , Felix Bloch , James Franck , George de Hevesy , Otto Frisch , Hilde Levi , Lise Meitner , George Placzek , Eugene <unk> , Stefan <unk> , Erich Ernst Schneider , Edward Teller , Arthur von Hippel and Victor Weisskopf . 
 In April 1940 , early in the Second World War , Nazi Germany invaded and occupied Denmark . To prevent the Germans from discovering Max von Laue 's and James Franck 's gold Nobel medals , Bohr had de Hevesy dissolve them in aqua regia . In this form , they were stored on a shelf at the Institute until after the war , when the gold was precipitated and the medals re @-@ struck by the Nobel Foundation . Bohr kept the Institute running , but all the foreign scholars departed . 
 = = = Meeting with Heisenberg = = = 
 Bohr was aware of the possibility of using uranium @-@ 235 to construct an atomic bomb , referring to it in lectures in Britain and Denmark shortly before and after the war started , but he did not believe that it was technically feasible to extract a sufficient quantity of uranium @-@ 235 . In September 1941 , Heisenberg , who had become head of the German nuclear energy project , visited Bohr in Copenhagen . During this meeting the two men took a private moment outside , the content of which has caused much speculation , as both gave differing accounts . According to Heisenberg , he began to address nuclear energy , morality and the war , to which Bohr seems to have reacted by terminating the conversation abruptly while not giving Heisenberg hints about his own opinions . Ivan <unk> , one of Heisenberg 's students and friends , claimed that the main subject of the meeting was Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker , who had proposed trying to persuade Bohr to mediate peace between Britain and Germany . 
 In 1957 , Heisenberg wrote to Robert Jungk , who was then working on the book Brighter than a Thousand Suns : A Personal History of the Atomic Scientists . Heisenberg explained that he had visited Copenhagen to communicate to Bohr the views of several German scientists , that production of a nuclear weapon was possible with great efforts , and this raised enormous responsibilities on the world 's scientists on both sides . When Bohr saw Jungk 's depiction in the Danish translation of the book , he drafted ( but never sent ) a letter to Heisenberg , stating that he never understood the purpose of Heisenberg 's visit , was shocked by Heisenberg 's opinion that Germany would win the war , and that atomic weapons could be decisive . 
 Michael Frayn 's 1998 play Copenhagen explores what might have happened at the 1941 meeting between Heisenberg and Bohr . A BBC television film version of the play was first screened on 26 September 2002 , with Stephen Rea as Bohr , and Daniel Craig as Heisenberg . The same meeting had previously been dramatised by the BBC 's Horizon science documentary series in 1992 , with Anthony Bate as Bohr , and Philip Anthony as Heisenberg . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 In September 1943 , word reached Bohr and his brother Harald that the Nazis considered their family to be Jewish , since their mother , Ellen Adler Bohr , had been a Jew , and that they were therefore in danger of being arrested . The Danish resistance helped Bohr and his wife escape by sea to Sweden on 29 September . The next day , Bohr persuaded King Gustaf V of Sweden to make public Sweden 's willingness to provide asylum to Jewish refugees . On 2 October 1943 , Swedish radio broadcast that Sweden was ready to offer asylum , and the mass rescue of the Danish Jews by their countrymen followed swiftly thereafter . Some historians claim that Bohr 's actions led directly to the mass rescue , while others say that , though Bohr did all that he could for his countrymen , his actions were not a decisive influence on the wider events . Eventually , over 7 @,@ 000 Danish Jews escaped to Sweden . 
 When the news of Bohr 's escape reached Britain , Lord Cherwell sent a telegram to Bohr asking him to come to Britain . Bohr arrived in Scotland on 6 October in a de Havilland Mosquito operated by the British Overseas Airways Corporation ( BOAC ) . The Mosquitos were unarmed high @-@ speed bomber aircraft that had been converted to carry small , valuable cargoes or important passengers . By flying at high speed and high altitude , they could cross German @-@ occupied Norway , and yet avoid German fighters . Bohr , equipped with parachute , flying suit and oxygen mask , spent the three @-@ hour flight lying on a mattress in the aircraft 's bomb bay . During the flight , Bohr did not wear his flying helmet as it was too small , and consequently did not hear the pilot 's intercom instruction to turn on his oxygen supply when the aircraft climbed to high altitude to overfly Norway . He passed out from oxygen starvation and only revived when the aircraft descended to lower altitude over the North Sea . Bohr 's son Aage followed his father to Britain on another flight a week later , and became his personal assistant . 
 Bohr was warmly received by James Chadwick and Sir John Anderson , but for security reasons Bohr was kept out of sight . He was given an apartment at St James 's Palace and an office with the British Tube Alloys nuclear weapons development team . Bohr was astonished at the amount of progress that had been made . Chadwick arranged for Bohr to visit the United States as a Tube Alloys consultant , with Aage as his assistant . On 8 December 1943 , Bohr arrived in Washington , D.C. , where he met with the director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . He visited Einstein and Pauli at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton , New Jersey , and went to Los Alamos in New Mexico , where the nuclear weapons were being designed . For security reasons , he went under the name of " Nicholas Baker " in the United States , while Aage became " James Baker " . In May 1944 the Danish resistance newspaper De <unk> Danske reported that they had learned that ' the famous son of Denmark Professor Niels Bohr ' in October the previous year had fled his country via Sweden to London and from there travelled to Moscow from where he could be assumed to support the war effort . 
 Bohr did not remain at Los Alamos , but paid a series of extended visits over the course of the next two years . Robert Oppenheimer credited Bohr with acting " as a scientific father figure to the younger men " , most notably Richard Feynman . Bohr is quoted as saying , " They didn 't need my help in making the atom bomb . " Oppenheimer gave Bohr credit for an important contribution to the work on modulated neutron initiators . " This device remained a stubborn puzzle , " Oppenheimer noted , " but in early February 1945 Niels Bohr clarified what had to be done . " 
 Bohr recognised early that nuclear weapons would change international relations . In April 1944 , he received a letter from Peter Kapitza , written some months before when Bohr was in Sweden , inviting him to come to the Soviet Union . The letter convinced Bohr that the Soviets were aware of the Anglo @-@ American project , and would strive to catch up . He sent Kapitza a non @-@ committal response , which he showed to the authorities in Britain before posting . Bohr met Churchill on 16 May 1944 , but found that " we did not speak the same language " . Churchill disagreed with the idea of openness towards the Russians to the point that he wrote in a letter : " It seems to me Bohr ought to be confined or at any rate made to see that he is very near the edge of mortal crimes . " 
 Oppenheimer suggested that Bohr visit President Franklin D. Roosevelt to convince him that the Manhattan Project should be shared with the Soviets in the hope of speeding up its results . Bohr 's friend , Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter , informed President Roosevelt about Bohr 's opinions , and a meeting between them took place on 26 August 1944 . Roosevelt suggested that Bohr return to the United Kingdom to try to win British approval . When Churchill and Roosevelt met at Hyde Park on 19 September 1944 , they rejected the idea of informing the world about the project , and the aide @-@ mémoire of their conversation contained a rider that " enquiries should be made regarding the activities of Professor Bohr and steps taken to ensure that he is responsible for no leakage of information , particularly to the Russians " . 
 In June 1950 , Bohr addressed an " Open Letter " to the United Nations calling for international cooperation on nuclear energy . In the 1950s , after the Soviet Union 's first nuclear weapon test , the International Atomic Energy Agency was created along the lines of Bohr 's suggestion . In 1957 he received the first ever Atoms for Peace Award . 
 = = Later years = = 
 With the war now ended , Bohr returned to Copenhagen on 25 August 1945 , and was re @-@ elected President of the Royal Danish Academy of Arts and Sciences on 21 September . At a memorial meeting of the Academy on 17 October 1947 for King Christian X , who had died in April , the new king , Frederick IX , announced that he was conferring the Order of the Elephant on Bohr . This award was normally awarded only to royalty and heads of state , but the king said that it honoured not just Bohr personally , but Danish science . Bohr designed his own coat of arms which featured a taijitu ( symbol of yin and yang ) and a motto in Latin : <unk> sunt <unk> , " opposites are complementary " . 
 The Second World War demonstrated that science , and physics in particular , now required considerable financial and material resources . To avoid a brain drain to the United States , twelve European countries banded together to create CERN , a research organisation along the lines of the national laboratories in the United States , designed to undertake Big Science projects beyond the resources of any one of them alone . Questions soon arose regarding the best location for the facilities . Bohr and Kramers felt that the Institute in Copenhagen would be the ideal site . Pierre Auger , who organised the preliminary discussions , disagreed ; he felt that both Bohr and his Institute were past their prime , and that Bohr 's presence would overshadow others . After a long debate , Bohr pledged his support to CERN in February 1952 , and Geneva was chosen as the site in October . The CERN Theory Group was based in Copenhagen until their new accommodation in Geneva was ready in 1957 . Victor Weisskopf , who later became the Director General of CERN , summed up Bohr 's role , saying that " there were other personalities who started and conceived the idea of CERN . The enthusiasm and ideas of the other people would not have been enough , however , if a man of his stature had not supported it . " 
 Meanwhile , Scandinavian countries formed the Nordic Institute for Theoretical Physics in 1957 , with Bohr as its chairman . He was also involved with the founding of the Research Establishment Risø of the Danish Atomic Energy Commission , and served as its first chairman from February 1956 . 
 Bohr died of heart failure at his home in Carlsberg on 18 November 1962 . He was cremated , and his ashes were buried in the family plot in the <unk> Cemetery in the Nørrebro section of Copenhagen , along with those of his parents , his brother Harald , and his son Christian . Years later , his wife 's ashes were also interred there . On 7 October 1965 , on what would have been his 80th birthday , the Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen was officially renamed to what it had been called unofficially for many years : the Niels Bohr Institute . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Bohr received numerous honours and accolades . In addition to the Nobel Prize , he received the Hughes Medal in 1921 , the Matteucci Medal in 1923 , the Franklin Medal in 1926 , the Copley Medal in 1938 , the Order of the Elephant in 1947 , the Atoms for Peace Award in 1957 and the Sonning Prize in 1961 . In 1923 he became foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . The Bohr model 's semicentennial was commemorated in Denmark on 21 November 1963 with a postage stamp depicting Bohr , the hydrogen atom and the formula for the difference of any two hydrogen energy levels : <formula> . Several other countries have also issued postage stamps depicting Bohr . In 1997 , the Danish National Bank began circulating the 500 @-@ krone banknote with the portrait of Bohr smoking a pipe . An asteroid , <unk> Bohr , was named after him , as was the Bohr lunar crater , and bohrium , the chemical element with atomic number 107 . 
 = Eureka : A Prose Poem = 
 Eureka ( 1848 ) is a lengthy non @-@ fiction work by American author Edgar Allan Poe ( 1809 – 1849 ) which he subtitled " A Prose Poem " , though it has also been subtitled as " An Essay on the Material and Spiritual Universe " . Adapted from a lecture he had presented , Eureka describes Poe 's intuitive conception of the nature of the universe with no antecedent scientific work done to reach his conclusions . He also discusses man 's relationship with God , whom he compares to an author . It is dedicated to the German naturalist and explorer Alexander von Humboldt ( 1769 – 1859 ) . Though it is generally considered a literary work , some of Poe 's ideas anticipate 20th century scientific discoveries and theories . Indeed a critical analysis of the scientific content of Eureka reveals a non @-@ causal correspondence with modern cosmology due to the assumption of an evolving Universe , but excludes the anachronistic anticipation of relativistic concepts such as black holes . 
 Eureka was received poorly in Poe 's day and generally described as absurd , even by friends . Modern critics continue to debate the significance of Eureka and some doubt its seriousness , in part because of Poe 's many incorrect assumptions and his comedic descriptions of well @-@ known historical minds . It is presented as a poem , and many compare it with his fiction work , especially science fiction stories such as " The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar " . His attempts at discovering the truth also follow his own tradition of " ratiocination " , a term used in his detective fiction tales . Poe 's suggestion that the soul continues to thrive even after death also parallels with works in which characters reappear from beyond the grave such as " Ligeia " . The essay is oddly transcendental , considering Poe 's disdain for that movement . He considered it his greatest work and claimed it was more important than the discovery of gravity . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Eureka is Poe 's last major work and his longest non @-@ fiction work at nearly 40 @,@ 000 words in length . The work has its origins in a lecture Poe presented on February 3 , 1848 , titled " On The Cosmography of the Universe " at the Society Library in New York . He had expected an audience of hundreds ; only 60 attended and were confused by the topic . Poe had hoped the profits from the lecture would cover expenses for the production of his new journal The Stylus . 
 Eureka is Poe 's attempt at explaining the universe , using his general proposition " Because Nothing was , therefore All Things are " . In it , Poe discusses man 's relationship to God and the universe or , as he offers at the beginning : " I design to speak of the Physical , Metaphysical and Mathematical – of the Material and Spiritual Universe : of its Essence , its Origin , its Creation , its Present Condition and its Destiny " . In keeping with this design , Poe concludes " that space and duration are one " and that matter and spirit are made of the same essence . Poe suggests that people have a natural tendency to believe in themselves as infinite with nothing greater than their soul — such thoughts stem from man 's residual feelings from when each shared an original identity with God . Ultimately individual consciousnesses will collapse back into a similar single mass , a " final <unk> " where the " myriads of individual <unk> become blended " . Likewise , Poe saw the universe itself as infinitely expanding and collapsing like a divine heartbeat which constantly <unk> itself , also implying a sort of <unk> . In fact , because the soul is a part of this constant throbbing , after dying , all people , in essence , become God . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Eureka presents themes and sentiments similar to some of those in Poe 's fiction work , including attempts at breaking beyond the obstacle of death and specifically characters who return from death in stories like " The Fall of the House of Usher " and " Ligeia " . Similar to his theories on a good short story , Poe believes the universe is a self @-@ contained , closed system . In coming to his conclusions , Poe uses ratiocination as a literary device , through his character C. Auguste Dupin , as if Poe himself were a detective solving the mystery of the universe . Eureka , then , is the culmination of Poe 's interest in capturing truth through language , an extension of his interest in cryptography . 
 Eureka seems to continue the science fiction traditions he used in works like " MS. Found in a Bottle " and " The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar " . He further emphasizes the connection between his theory and fiction by saying that the universe itself is a written work : " The Universe is a plot of God " , Poe says , and " the plots of God are perfect " . Even so , Poe admits the difficulty in explaining these theories comes in part from the limitations of language , often apologizing for or explaining his use of " common " or " vulgar " terms . 
 Poe 's decision to refer to the piece as a " prose poem " goes against some of his own " rules " of poetry which he laid out in " The Philosophy of Composition " and " The Poetic Principle " . In particular , Poe called the ideal poem short , at most 100 lines , and utilizing the " most poetical topic in the world " : the death of a beautiful woman . Poe himself suggested that the work be judged only as a work of art , not of science , possibly dismissing the seriousness of Eureka . Though he is using mathematical and scientific terms , he may really be talking about aesthetics and suggesting there is a close connection between science and art . This is an ironic sentiment when compared to his message in the poem " To Science " where he shows a distaste for modern science encroaching on spirituality and the artist 's imagination . Poe also discusses several astronomy @-@ related topics in Eureka , including the speed of the stars , the diameters of planets and distance between them , the weight of Earth , and the orbit of the newly discovered " <unk> 's planet " ( later named Neptune ) . 
 The work ventures into transcendentalism , relying strongly on intuition , a movement and practice he had despised . Though he criticized the transcendental movement for what he referred to as incoherent mysticism , Eureka is more mystical than most transcendental works . Eureka has also been compared to the theories of Mary Baker Eddy , founder of Christian Science and Joseph Smith , founder of the Latter Day Saint movement . 
 The essay is written in a progressive manner that anticipates its audience . For example , Poe uses more metaphors further into the work in the belief that the reader becomes more interested . Poe 's voice crescendos throughout , starting as the modest seeker of truth , moving on to the satirist of logic , and finally ending as the master scholar . 
 = = = Allusions = = = 
 " Eureka " - The title itself references the famed remark made by Archimedes , meaning , " I have found it . " Archimedes used the term after taking a bath and discovering the concept of displacement . 
 Epicurus - Poe refers to the Ancient Greek philosopher with the term " Epicurean atoms " . Epicurus believed that reality is composed solely of atoms , or indivisible units of mass , and void . It has been suggested that Poe 's exultation of the " false scientist " Epicurus is an indication that Eureka is really a satire . 
 Aristotle - Poe refers to the famous student of Plato as " Aries <unk> " , whom he claims is Turkish and whose ideas come out of his nose like sneezes . 
 Francis Bacon - The name " Hog " is a reference to the English philosopher and originator of the Baconian method . 
 Euclid - Referred to as " <unk> " , a student of Aries <unk> . 
 Immanuel Kant - Poe describes Kant as the " Dutchman " who originated transcendentalism . 
 The comical presentation of these well @-@ known historical theorists , including the puns on their names , suggests Poe intended Eureka to be a burlesque . Alternatively , his criticism of these men indicate Poe 's need to challenge their conclusions before making his own . 
 = = Influence and significance = = 
 Eureka has been read in many ways , in part because Poe 's sincerity in the work is questionable . It has been considered prophetically scientific , intuitively romantic , and even <unk> ironic . Lacking scientific proof , Poe said it was not his goal to prove what he says to be true , but to convince through suggestion . 
 Though modern critics have dismissed Eureka for having no scientific worth or merit , Poe 's work presages modern science with his own concept of the Big Bang . He postulated that the universe began from a single originating particle or singularity , willed by a " Divine Volition " . This " primordial particle " , initiated by God , divides into all the particles of the universe . These particles seek one another because of their originating unity ( gravity ) resulting in the end of the universe as a single particle . Poe also expresses a cosmological theory that anticipated black holes and the Big Crunch theory as well as the first plausible solution to Olbers ' paradox ( the night sky is dark despite the vast number of stars in the universe ) . In 1987 astronomer Edward Robert Harrison published a book , Darkness at Night , on this paradox . This book clarified why lack of energy explains the paradox , and lays out how Harrison discovered that Poe 's Eureka anticipated this conclusion . 
 Many of Poe 's conclusions , however , are speculative due to his rejection of analytic logic and emphasis on intuition and inspiration . Further , Eureka contains many scientific errors . In particular , Poe 's suggestions opposed Newtonian principles regarding the density and rotation of planets . He also says that Johannes Kepler came to his conclusions not through science but through guesswork . For this reason , it has been suggested that what Poe demands is true in Eureka is not actually about this universe , but a parallel fictitious one Poe creates . If this is the case , as interpreted by poet Richard Wilbur , Poe is criticizing this world , suggesting it has fallen away from God by elevating scientific reason above poetic intuition . 
 More modern critics also suggest Eureka is a sign of Poe 's declining mental health at the end of his life . Astrophysicist Arthur Stanley Eddington disputed this notion , declaring that " Eureka is not a work of dotage or disordered mind " . In the text , Poe wrote that he was aware he might be considered a madman . The lecture on which the essay was based was delivered only a few days after the anniversary of the death of his wife Virginia , suggesting a connection between the event and his new theories . Poe seems to dismiss death in Eureka , thereby ignoring his own anxiety over the problem of death . 
 Some modern critics believe Eureka is the key to deciphering meaning in all Poe 's fiction , that all his works involve similar theories . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Response to Eureka was overwhelmingly unfavorable . Poe 's friend Marie Louise Shew , who had helped his wife Virginia on her death @-@ bed , broke off their friendship because it offended her religious beliefs . 
 After the publication of Eureka , a vehement anonymous censure was published in the Literary Review . This was believed by Poe to have been written by John Henry Hopkins , Jr . ( 1820 – 1889 ) , a young theological student , who had previously criticized the work as pantheistic and " a damnable heresy " that " conscience would compel him to denounce " . Literary critic George Edward Woodberry in 1885 thought the essay was based on a crude understanding of the science a student learns in school " rendered ridiculous " by absurdity and the density of his ignorance . Thomas Dunn English , a writer , lawyer , and doctor who frequently criticized Poe , wrote a news article for the John @-@ Donkey with the headline , " Great Literary Crash " . The article explained that a shelf of books crashed because someone had " imprudently " stacked an edition of Eureka on it and that it was a miracle that the whole building did not fall down because of it . 
 The lecture upon which Eureka was based also received negative reviews . Poe 's friend Evert A. Duyckinck wrote to his brother that the lecture bored him to death and that it was " full of a ludicrous dryness of scientific phrase — a mountainous piece of absurdity . " A local newspaper called it " hyperbolic nonsense " . though one publication , the Courier and Enquirer , called it " a nobler effort than any other Mr. Poe has yet given the world " . Audience members said it was not persuasive or simply too long . Even so , Poe considered Eureka to be his masterpiece . He believed the work would immortalize him because it would be proven to be true . In the Preface , Poe said : " It is as a Poem only that I wish this work to be judged after I am dead . " 
 After its publication he wrote to his aunt Maria Clemm saying , " I have no desire to live since I have done Eureka . I could accomplish nothing more . " He confided in a friend that he believed his contemporary generation was unable to understand it but that it would be appreciated , if ever , two thousand years later . 
 Some critics , however , responded favorably to Eureka . French writer Paul Valéry praised it for both its poetic and scientific merit , calling it an abstract poem based on mathematical foundations . Albert Einstein in a letter written in 1934 , noted that Eureka was eine schöne <unk> eines <unk> <unk> <unk> ( a beautiful achievement of an unusually independent mind ) . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Eureka was published in a small hardcover edition in March 1848 by Wiley & Putnam priced at 75 cents . Poe persuaded George Palmer Putnam , who had previously taken a chance on Poe by printing his only novel The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket in England , to publish Eureka after claiming this work was more important than Isaac Newton 's discovery of gravity . Putnam paid Poe fourteen dollars for the work . Poe suggested an initial printing of at least one million copies ; Putnam settled on 750 , of which 500 were sold that year . Other accounts say that Poe requested 50 @,@ 000 copies , and 500 were printed . Poe was given in advance the full payment of $ 14 from the publisher . 
 = Digital terrestrial television in Australia = 
 Digital terrestrial television in Australia commenced on 1 January 2001 in Sydney , Melbourne , Brisbane , Adelaide and Perth using DVB @-@ T standards . The phase out of analog PAL transmissions began in 2010 and was completed by 10 December 2013 . 
 Digital terrestrial television brought a number of enhancements over the previous analog television , primarily higher @-@ quality picture and sound , as well as datacasting and multi @-@ view services such as video program guides , high definition , and now @-@ and @-@ next program information . There are a number of additional channels , datacasting , as well as high definition services , available to digital terrestrial television viewers in Australia . Digital @-@ only content is subject to availability and differs greatly in various television markets . 
 Although approximately 96 % of the population had access to at least one digital service , take up was initially sluggish , with only 28 % of Australia 's 7 @.@ 8 million households having adopted free @-@ to @-@ air digital television by March 2007 . However , by August 2010 , 75 % of Australian households had made the switch . Analog transmissions began to be phased out in 2010 , and ceased to be available nationwide by the end of 2013 . 
 From 2009 , the free @-@ to @-@ air digital television platform has been promoted under the Freeview brand name . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Planning for digital terrestrial television in Australia can be traced back to 1993 , when a group of specialists was drawn from the then @-@ Australian Broadcasting Authority , Department of Transport and Communications , in addition to broadcasters and manufacturers . The ABA Specialist Group was intended to bring together studies taking place in a number of Australian forums and investigate potential options and policies relating to digital television . 
 In 1995 the group released a report , Digital Terrestrial Broadcasting in Australia , containing the preliminary conclusions of the group . It found that premature regulation of the new platform might stifle the market @-@ driven development of the service , that it should be based upon existing standards , and should not restrict the ability of broadcasters to tailor local content . It was too early at the time to make decisions relating to what standard should be used , when transmissions should commence , and whether analog television should be phased out . 
 The final report , of the same name , was released in 1997 . It recommended that Australia should adopt a single system following detailed trials of potential systems , that it should be implemented with high definition capabilities from the outset , that each licensed commercial or public service should have access to a full 7 MHz channel for its services , and that the eventual termination of analog PAL services should be driven by market factors and subject to regular review . The year 2000 was highlighted as a potential target date for the commencement of permanent digital terrestrial broadcasting . 
 = = = = Response = = = = 
 The Australian Broadcasting Authority 's response , titled Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting , recommended that the Australian Government support the early introduction of digital broadcasting as a free @-@ to @-@ air service with the loan of a 7 MHz channel for each broadcaster , in order to enable high @-@ definition television from the outset . The Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations supported this , as well as freedom for its members to launch multi @-@ channel services . At the same time , the Australian Subscription Television and Radio Association , questioned the commercial viability of HDTV , was opposed to the idea of multi @-@ channeling , and argued for a competitive system that would allow the entry of new players . 
 The Australian Broadcasting Corporation stated that it wished to run up to four multichannels at different times of the day or alternatively offer an HDTV service . It claimed that up to $ 100 million would be needed to prepare for these services , half of which would need to be government @-@ funded . Other interested parties , such as internet service provider <unk> argued for the provision of spectrum for interactive services , while Telstra , shareholder in the subscription television provider Foxtel , supported ASTRA 's argument for a competitive bidding process for digital spectrum . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 On 24 March 1998 , Minister for Communications , the Information Economy and the Arts , Senator Richard Alston , announced the government 's decisions for the introduction of digital television . The plan allowed commercial and public broadcasters 7 MHz of spectrum free of charge for 8 years to simulcast services in both digital and analog , after which it was to be returned to the Commonwealth . Digital terrestrial television was to commence on 1 January 2001 in metropolitan areas , with expansion to regional areas to have been completed by the start of 2004 . 
 Following this , commercial broadcasters would be required to provide minimum levels of high definition content , would be required to pay fees if they chose to provide datacast services and would be prohibited from using their spectrum for <unk> of subscription services . In addition , the prohibition on new free @-@ to @-@ air broadcasters would be extended until December 2008 . 
 Amendments were subsequently made to the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 and the <unk> Act 1992 , which set out ownership and programming conditions for broadcasting licences ( administered by the ABA ) and regulated the usage of spectrum , respectively . 
 On 18 June 1998 , the Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting Selection Panel announced the choice of the European DVB @-@ T system for digital terrestrial television . The panel was a group of representatives from the country 's public , commercial and regional broadcasters , the Department of Communications , the Information Economy and the Arts , as well as the Australian Broadcasting Authority . 
 = = = Launch = = = 
 When digital television launched on 1 January 2001 , the majority of households did not know of or were unable to buy a set top box in order to receive the signal . Digital Broadcasting Australia was established in late 2000 to help make the transition to digital television as seamless for consumers as possible . It included representatives from free @-@ to @-@ air broadcasters , manufacturers , suppliers , and retailers and was intended to provide information about commencement dates , coverage , and the functionality and availability of equipment . 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Additional channels = = = 
 The Australian Broadcasting Corporation launched the ABC Kids Channel and Fly TV in August 2001 . The two multichannels , available only through digital means , showed a range of programming targeted at children and teenage viewers . Similarly , the Special Broadcasting Service launched the SBS World News Channel in 2002 , a digital @-@ only service offering a number of foreign @-@ language news programmes seen in its morning <unk> timeslot . 
 Funding issues meant that in May 2003 the Australian Broadcasting Corporation closed ABC Kids and Fly TV . In the same year , Tasmanian Digital Television became the first digital @-@ only commercial station to be launched in the country , under Section 38A of the Broadcasting Services Act . The new station was a joint venture between existing commercial networks Southern Cross Broadcasting and WIN Television . Tasmanian Digital Television , affiliated to Network Ten , was initially available only in Hobart , before expanding to Launceston and , by early 2009 , the remainder of the state . The introduction of this fifth channel resulted in significantly higher digital television <unk> in Tasmania than other parts of the country . 
 ABC2 , the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 's second attempt at a digital @-@ only channel launched on 7 March 2005 . The service showed a range of repeated news , current affairs , children 's and educational programs originally shown on ABC1 as well as a number of original programs launched later on , such as Australia Wide , Short and Curly and Late Night Legends . 
 In the other market areas where there are only 1 or 2 broadcasters , digital @-@ only stations were created that transmit programming from the unrepresented broadcaster ( s ) in that area . These digital @-@ only stations are owned by joint @-@ venture , or by the sole broadcaster , depending on the area . 
 During September 2007 , the three commercial networks announced the introduction of high @-@ definition only channels later that year , becoming the first new commercial television channels to launch in metropolitan areas of Australia since 1988 . The Seven Network 's 7HD was the first to launch on 15 October and became available through Prime Television on 29 October . This was followed by the launch of Ten HD on 16 December . The majority of the programming on the high @-@ definition channels was simulcast from the parent channel . 
 From 2009 , commercial broadcasters were allowed to transmit an alternate standard definition channel . On 26 March 2009 , Channel Ten launched One , its SD multichannel as a 24 @-@ hour sports channel . One is also broadcast on Ten 's HD channel , replacing Ten HD . Nine later launched GO ! , as a general entertainment channel skewed towards younger viewers in August 2009 . Seven introduced 7Two on 1 November 2009 . 
 In July 2010 ABC launched its proposed news channel , ABC News 24 . In addition , the Seven and Nine networks launched their third channels in September 2010 : 7mate from Seven and channel GEM from Nine . Network Ten launched their third channel , Eleven , in early 2011 . 
 In November 2015 , Nine launched their fourth channel , 9Life , along with a relaunch of 9HD . In February 2016 , Seven launched their fourth channel , <unk> . 
 In March 2016 , Ten relaunched their HD channel , Ten HD . In May 2016 , Seven relaunched their HD channel , 7HD . 
 = = = Amateur digital television = = = 
 <unk> is an experimental Amateur Television repeater located on Mt Dandenong to the east of Melbourne . In late September 2009 the former single analog channel was converted to a 2 channel digital system . The output of the transmitter is on 446 @.@ 5 MHz which can be received on some set top boxes and digital televisions . Both channels are transmitted in standard definition . 
 Amateur Radio Operators are restricted in terms of the content they may transmit in that the transmission of entertainment is not allowed . However , Amateur Radio Operators are nonetheless able to transmit a wide range of educational material related to amateur radio & electronics . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A number of broadcasters , primarily commercial networks , have provided a number of digital @-@ only datacast or <unk> services on separate channels - in particular during major sporting events . The Seven Network , for instance , provided two additional channels as part of its coverage of the 2003 Rugby World Cup - one providing alternate commentary , the other with statistics and game information . Seven also ran a similar service during its coverage ot the 2004 Summer Olympics showing news headlines , a medal tally , and event results . Similarly in 2005 for the Melbourne Cup , Australian Open , Australian Open Golf , and the One Day International series from the United Kingdom , the Seven Network provided a multi @-@ view datacast service . As well as this , the Nine Network and NBN Television both provided a multi @-@ view service with additional text information during Pompeii : The Last Day . 
 Digital Forty Four , a trial datacasting service , began in Sydney in 2003 . The service included at launch an electronic program guide , ABC News , Sport and Weather datacast service , the Australian Christian Channel , shopping channel Expo and a number of federal parliament audio streams . The service , licensed by the Australian Communications and Media Authority , ceased broadcasting at midnight on the night of 30 April 2010 . 
 Three metropolitan networks once provided video program guide datacast channels in addition to their standard and high definition channels . During ABC2 , ABC3 and ABC HD 's downtime , the ABC shows program information and weather , with music from ABC <unk> radio . 
 Other channels were launched , such as <unk> , <unk> tv , Extra , Gold , <unk> , Spree TV , Aspire TV and Fresh Ideas TV . 
 = = = High @-@ definition = = = 
 At a minimum , all digital television broadcasters in Australia provide a 576i standard @-@ definition service , in addition to high definition . The <unk> format is also considered a HDTV format , as it has higher vertical resolution through the use of progressive scanning . When Australia started DVB @-@ T in 2001 several networks broadcast high @-@ definition in a <unk> format as this could give better quality on 50 Hz scanning CRT TVs and was not as demanding on MPEG @-@ 2 @-@ bit @-@ rate . Since many modern television sets have an interlace to progressive scan conversion there is little difference in picture quality . MPEG @-@ 2 encoders have also improved so the more conventional 720p and 1080i formats are now used . 
 WIN Television in South Australia and Griffith , as well as Southern Cross in Port Pirie are the only stations that broadcast in digital but do not provide a high @-@ definition service . This is due to multiple services using the same digital frequency : WIN Television , WIN Ten and WIN Nine in SA , WIN Television and Prime in Griffith or GTS / BKN , SC10 , <unk> and <unk> in Port Pirie . 
 All other commercial stations have 1080i high definition services which , since 2015 , simulcast their main channel from standard definition . Prior to this , HD broadcasts are shown as a multichannel providing some differing content from the main SD channel . For instance , ABC Television has a 720p high definition service , which used to run as ABC @-@ HD ( simulcasting ABC1 ) , but now operates as ABC News 24 . Currently , SBS Television , the Nine Network and its regional station NBN Television , Network Ten , and WIN Television broadcast a 1080i high definition simulcast of their respective main channel . The Seven Network also has a relaunched HD channel , yet it isn 't implemented as the primary channel 's HD simulcast across all metropolitan stations to allow the games of the Australian Football League be broadcast in HD . Only the Melbourne and Adelaide stations received its channel on its purpose ; Sydney , Perth and Brisbane stations , meanwhile , continues to air digital multichannel 7mate in high definition through 7HD , with the former downgraded to standard definition by default . 
 Quotas on high definition content — a minimum of 1040 hours per year — were imposed by the Australian government in July 2003 on broadcasters in Sydney , Melbourne , Brisbane , Adelaide and Perth . The same requirement was extended in April 2005 to stations in Darwin , regional New South Wales and regional Queensland , and in January 2006 in Mildura . As of 13 July 2007 commercial television networks in Australia were permitted to provide a separate standard definition and high definition channel . As of January 2009 , they were permitted 2 standard definition channels in addition to the high definition channel — the networks planned to launch these via Freeview ( Australia ) . However , in August 2015 , the government finally lifted the SD Primary Channel mandate , allowing broadcasters to simulcast their respective main channel programmes in high definition . 
 = = Transition to digital television = = 
 The transition from analog to digital television was co @-@ ordinated by the Digital Switchover Taskforce operating under the federal Department of Broadband , Communications and the Digital Economy . 
 Until the switch @-@ off in the respective areas , free @-@ to @-@ air broadcasts were simulcast , along with digital @-@ only channels like ABC2 . Cable television networks began simulcasting in 2004 and analog cable services were switched off in April 2007 . 
 = = = Freeview = = = 
 In November 2008 , all free @-@ to @-@ air broadcasters ( both metropolitan and regional ) joined to launch the Freeview brand name as a consistent marketing platform for digital broadcasting to compete against subscription television in Australia , with the actual Freeview service commencing in March 2009 . 
 = = = Government labelling scheme = = = 
 In April 2009 , the government released a new labelling scheme for digital television devices , to help people buy the correct equipment in the transition from analog to digital television . Televisions had the following labels : 
 Digital TV Capable - for analog TVs which required a set top box 
 Digital TV Ready ( Standard Definition ) - for TVs able to receive SD broadcasts 
 Digital TV Ready ( High Definition ) - for TVs able to receive HD broadcasts 
 The government labelling standards were in addition to the Freeview labelling standards endorsed by the major commercial and public broadcasters and which contributed to confusion between Freeview and government digital TV standards . Freeview devices had to meet the High Definition Digital TV Ready standard . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Perth community station Access 31 's closure was partially blamed on viewers and revenue lost to increasing digital television viewership . The analog @-@ only station had been campaigning with other community television stations for support from the Federal Government that allowed them access to the digital broadcast spectrum . On 4 November 2009 Communications Minister Stephen Conroy approved a Digital TV only licence for West TV in Perth , which allows them to broadcast as a digital @-@ only community television station as a replacement for the now defunct Access 31 . Digital services were available in most areas , however parts of Western Australia and Central Australia had yet to begin transmissions in 2007 . 
 = = = Household assistance scheme = = = 
 To aid the digital television switchover , households receiving government assistance payments were eligible to have a set @-@ top @-@ box provided free of charge to convert to digital television . In addition to set top boxes , the assistance included any necessary cabling or antenna upgrades needed to achieve a reliable digital signal . 
 = = Analog switchoff = = 
 In October 2008 , the Digital Switchover Taskforce announced the timetable for analog @-@ switchoff , as follows 
 = Yield ( album ) = 
 Yield is the fifth studio album by the American alternative rock band Pearl Jam , released on February 3 , 1998 . Following a short promotional tour for its previous album , No Code ( 1996 ) , Pearl Jam recorded Yield throughout 1997 at Studio Litho and Studio X in Seattle , Washington . The album was proclaimed as a return to the band 's early , straightforward rock sound , and marked a more collaborative effort from the band as opposed to relying heavily on frontman Eddie Vedder to compose the songs . The lyrics deal with contemplative themes , albeit seen in a more positive manner compared to the band 's earlier work . 
 Yield received positive reviews and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 . While like No Code the album soon began dropping down the charts , Yield eventually outsold its predecessor . The band did more promotion for the album compared to No Code , including a return to full @-@ scale touring and the release of a music video for the song " Do the Evolution " . The record has been certified platinum by the RIAA in the United States . The album is Pearl Jam 's last release with drummer Jack Irons , who left the band during the album 's promotional tour . 
 = = Recording = = 
 For its fifth album , Pearl Jam again worked with producer Brendan O 'Brien , whom the band had worked with on its previous three records . Yield was recorded throughout 1997 in Seattle , Washington at Studio X and Studio Litho , the latter of which is owned by guitarist Stone Gossard . The album was then mixed by O 'Brien at his mixing facility at Southern Tracks in Atlanta , Georgia . The album would be the last collaboration with O 'Brien for several years . They would not work with the producer again until he was brought on board in 2008 to remix their debut album Ten and to produce 2009 's Backspacer . 
 Compared with Vitalogy and No Code , Yield represented more of a team effort between all members of the group . Lead vocalist Eddie Vedder had made the final decisions for the albums Vitalogy and No Code ; however , at the end of the No Code recording sessions , Vedder suggested to bassist Jeff Ament that it would be better for the other members to write and bring in more complete songs so Vedder would be under less pressure to finish the songs . Ament said that " everybody took that to heart , " and O 'Brien added that most of the songs came to the studio finished . Ament also said that Vedder 's reaction to the rest of the band 's new material kept " everybody energized about their place in the band . " Vedder worked with the other band members on their own material before work was started on his . Guitarist Mike McCready noticed a change in Vedder 's attitude during the recording of Yield , stating , " I used to be afraid of him and not want to confront him on things ... We talk more now , and hang out ... He seems very , very centered now . " 
 Vedder said that the band was able to " team up " and have a " partnership " while the album was being recorded . The band spent a large amount of time rehearsing the songs to get the best takes possible . Gossard commented that there was more " contouring " and " honing " of demo material than on previous records . Regarding the recording sessions , drummer Jack Irons said , " We didn 't put any time limit on it . It was like , ' When this record 's done , we call it a record . ' We took out time to come up with ideal sounds and feel for every song , so that each had its own identity . We would cut a track and go back and listen to it and openly discuss it . " Ament stated that " Yield was a <unk> record to make . And so much of it was Ed kind of sitting back . " He added that " everybody really got a little bit of their say on the record ... because of that , everybody feels like they 're an integral part of the band . " The band discussed the album 's production on the documentary Single Video Theory . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Overall , Yield resembles the straightforward rock approach of the band 's early work . Gossard said , " The songs were a little bit more structured . I don 't know if it was poppier , but it seemed more professional . " O 'Brien noted that during the Yield sessions , the band made a conscious effort to create more accessible songs . Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly stated that the band has " turned in an intermittently affecting album that veers between fiery garage rock and rootsy , acoustic @-@ based ruminations . Perhaps mindful of their position as the last alt @-@ rock ambassadors with any degree of clout , they 've come up with their most cohesive album since their 1991 debut , Ten . " " Given to Fly " , the album 's first single , was noted for its similarity to Led Zeppelin 's " Going to California " from the 1971 album , Led Zeppelin IV . 
 Lyrically , Yield continued with the more contemplative type of writing found on No Code . Vedder said that while " in the past we got really angry and we cried out against many things in our songs " , he considered that when " you become an adult you have to express your energy in a different way , more calm . " This led to songs that while not eschewing " the bad side of life " , ended up " facing it from a more positive point of view , looking for a way to solve it . In the past we said : what a shit , this stinks , that sucks , everything sucks ... Now it 's time to say : stop , let 's look for a solution , let 's be positive . " Several songs on the album were inspired by literary works , including Mikhail Bulgakov 's novel The Master and Margarita ( " Pilate " ) , Daniel Quinn 's novel Ishmael ( " Do the Evolution " ) , and the writings of Charles Bukowski ( " In Hiding " ) . Gossard wrote the lyrics for the songs " No Way " and " All Those Yesterdays " , and Ament , making his first lyrical contributions to a Pearl Jam album , wrote the lyrics for the songs " Pilate " and " Low Light " . Ament said , " [ to ] watch Eddie put his heart into singing lyrics that I wrote , was an experience I can 't put into words . " 
 Gossard said " No Way " expresses the idea that people just need to live " and quit trying to prove something . " According to Vedder , " Given to Fly " is about " rising above anybody 's comments about what you do and still giving your love away , " " Do the Evolution " is about " someone who 's drunk with technology , who thinks they 're the controlling living being on this planet , " " MFC " takes place in a car and is about " getting the fuck out of a problem , " and " In Hiding " is about " taking a fast from life . " Ament said that " Pilate " concerned a question he was asking himself , dealing with a recurring dream Ament had with being old sitting with his dog on the porch , while " Low Light " was the answer , and that it deals with " a kind of gratefulness at finding that place of calm and peace at my center and getting a glimpse of the person I could choose to be . " 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The album 's cover art shows an empty road underneath a bright blue sky with a yield sign on the right @-@ hand side of the road . The front cover art image was taken from a photograph of a road outside Billings , Montana , while the inside cover depicts the yield sign in the middle of the ocean . The cover of the cassette version mirrored the image . A yield sign is hidden in every picture of the liner notes booklet . At the 1999 Grammy Awards , Yield received a nomination for Best Recording Package . Ament said that the cover came from the idea on " how cool to have a yield sign where there 's nothing to yield to " , and the place was a road on the way to his Montana home which he considered perfect for the photo . 
 The album title is rooted in the idea of " yielding to nature , " a theme central to Daniel Quinn 's novel Ishmael . The band members read the book while working on the album . Regarding the title , McCready said , " I think the title Yield has to do with maybe being more comfortable within ourselves , with this band .... we 're all a little bit older and a little more relaxed and maybe just kind of yielding to those anxieties and not trying to fight it so much ... That 's what it kind of feels to me – yielding , letting something else happen and going with it . " Vedder said , " Let 's say that hypothetically speaking , the title does mean something ... You can fight so much , and then you have to think , ' What are the real battles ? ' ' What 's really important ? ' You get to a certain point , and it 's really hard to remember what music is and to remember what drives you . " 
 The indie rock band BOAT parodied the album 's cover art , among several others , on its 2011 release Dress Like Your Idols . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Yield was released on February 3 , 1998 , on CD , vinyl , cassette and MiniDisc . Epic promoted the album more than No Code , with marketing vice @-@ president Steve Barnett claiming it was the first time since debut album Ten that the label " had the lead time to do the job right . " The album leaked on the internet in December 1997 as Syracuse , New York radio station <unk> @-@ FM played an advance copy of the record , leading fans who taped the broadcast to release the tracks online . Two singles were released from Yield . The lead single " Given to Fly " entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 21 , reached number three on the Modern Rock charts , and spent a total of six weeks at number one on the Mainstream Rock charts . The album 's other commercially released single , " Wishlist " , charted on the Hot 100 at number 47 . Album tracks " In Hiding " and " Do the Evolution " also charted on the rock charts . The band hired comic book artist Todd McFarlane to create an animated video for " Do the Evolution " . It was the band 's first music video since 1992 . At the 1999 Grammy Awards , " Do the Evolution " received a nomination for Best Hard Rock Performance and its music video received a nomination for Best Music Video , Short Form . 
 Yield sold 358 @,@ 000 copies during its first week of release , and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 album chart . It was held off the top spot by the Titanic soundtrack . Yield became Pearl Jam 's first album not to peak at number one on the Billboard charts since Ten in 1991 . However , Yield has been certified platinum by the RIAA , and eventually outsold its predecessor No Code with 1 @.@ 9 million copies in the United States as of 2013 according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Yield received mostly positive reviews from music critics , being proclaimed as a return to the band 's early , straightforward rock sound . Rolling Stone staff writer Rob Sheffield gave Yield four out of five stars , saying that " before , the band 's best songs were the change @-@ of @-@ pace ballads ... Yield marks the first time Pearl Jam have managed to sustain that mood for a whole album . " He added that " Vedder is singing more frankly than ever about his life as an adult , " and that the album " shows that Pearl Jam have made the most out of growing up in public . " Spin gave the album eight out of ten stars . The review said that Pearl Jam have " come back with an album full of gracefully ambivalent anthems . All commodities should be this unstable , and have this much blood pumping through them . " In his review for The Village Voice , critic Robert Christgau gave the album an A- , saying , " Like nobody less than Nirvana ... they voice the arena @-@ rock <unk> more vulnerably and articulately than any Englishman standing . Rarely if ever has a Jesus complex seemed so modest . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times stated that the band " applies its introspection to spiritual possibilities and its guitars to chomping , snarling , exuberant riffs . " He said " the songs sound bolder and more confident , even when they invoke private crises . " Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B , saying that " the overall tone is less pretentious than in the past , reflecting a looser , even marginally whimsical , worldview . " Holly Bailey of Pitchfork Media called it " the most lyrically powerful album Pearl Jam have ever produced , " and stated that " Yield proves that Pearl Jam , and even rock music , is still alive and kicking . " NME gave Yield a score of seven out of ten . In the review , it is stated , " Here 's where Pearl Jam put on their diverse boots and stomp across their bluesy roots , careering through various styles and pop @-@ <unk> strops . " 
 However , AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album two and a half out of five stars , saying that it " emphasizes the relative lack of exceptional material . " Writing for Select in March 1998 , Eddy Lawrence concluded that Yield is an abandonment of the " anthemic qualities " present in Pearl Jam 's previous work , claiming , in relation to the band 's grunge roots , that the album " makes you realise how ' 60s fans felt watching the first generation of rock heroes die . " He went on to state that " Yield 's <unk> represent no leap forward for the band as a whole , and the oft @-@ times mildly diverting tunes are , ironically , less challenging than their strong @-@ willed early output . " 
 = = Tour = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in Oceania and North America in 1998 . Both were met with financial success , and the Australian shows in Melbourne sold out in just 17 minutes . After finishing the Australian concerts , Irons left the band due to dissatisfaction with touring . Pearl Jam 's sound engineer Brett <unk> stated , " We went and did Hawaii and Australia with Jack . When we came back , Jack wasn 't in a position to carry on . He made that decision more or less by himself . He can be a really great drummer but he had difficulty on tour putting out the energy for the length of shows they were doing . I don 't know if he thought they 'd put things on hold for him . " He was replaced on an initially temporary basis with former Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron . Cameron said , " I got a phone call out of the blue , from Mr. Ed Ved , Stoney and Kelly . I was ambushed . It was really short notice . He called and said ' hey what are you doing this summer ? ' " Cameron learned over 80 songs in two weeks . Regarding his entrance , Cameron stated that " The guys made me feel real welcome and it wasn 't a struggle to get it musically , but my style was a little bit different , I think , than what they were used to . And they 've been through so many different drummers , I don 't even know if they knew what they wanted . So , I just kind of played the way I played and then eventually we kind of figured out what worked best for the band . " 
 Pearl Jam 's summer tour of North America marked the band ’ s return to full @-@ scale touring and the use of Ticketmaster , to which the band had previously protested . Pearl Jam once again began using it in order to " better accommodate concertgoers . " The band still kept Ticketmaster venues at a minimum , stadiums in particular as manager Kelly Curtis joked that unlike U2 , " the band doesn 't have a lemon " . The first leg of the tour focused on the West Coast of the United States and the Midwest , and then the band moved to the East Coast for the tour 's second <unk> and after it was completed the band released its first live album , Live on Two Legs , which featured select performances from the tour . McCready stated that the band released the live album due to the strength of Pearl Jam 's shows on the tour . 
 On October 20 , 2014 at the BMO Harris Bradley Center in Milwaukee , during the Lightning Bolt Tour , Pearl Jam played the entire album in order as part of their set . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder , except where noted . 
 ^ I Contains a sample of " Happy When I 'm Crying " , a song written by Irons and released on Pearl Jam 's 1997 fan club Christmas single . 
 ^ II " All Those Yesterdays " contains the hidden track " Hummus " at 5 : 04 . 
 = = = Outtakes = = = 
 The album 's singles featured two B @-@ sides from the Yield recording sessions that were not included on the album : " Leatherman " , about the eponymous 19th century vagabond was a B @-@ side on the " Given to Fly " single , and " U " was featured on the " Wishlist " single , being later re @-@ recorded for the 2003 Lost Dogs collection of rarities . " Whale Song " , sung by Irons , was also recorded during the Yield sessions and was eventually included on the 1999 Music for Our Mother Ocean , Vol . 3 compilation as well as Lost Dogs . " Happy When I 'm Crying " was recorded around this time and was released on the band 's 1997 fan club Christmas single . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Khalil al @-@ Wazir = 
 Khalil Ibrahim al @-@ Wazir ( Arabic : <unk> إبراهيم <unk> , also known by his kunya Abu Jihad أبو <unk> — " father of struggle " ; October 10 , 1935 – April 16 , 1988 ) was a Palestinian leader and co @-@ founder of the secular nationalist party Fatah . As a top aide of Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) Chairman Yasser Arafat , al @-@ Wazir had considerable influence in Fatah 's military activities , eventually becoming the commander of Fatah 's armed wing al @-@ Assifa . 
 Al @-@ Wazir became a refugee when his family was expelled from Ramla during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War , and began leading a minor fedayeen force in the Gaza Strip . In the early 1960s he established connections for Fatah with Communist regimes and prominent third @-@ world leaders . He opened Fatah 's first bureau in Algeria . He played an important role in the 1970 – 71 Black September clashes in Jordan , by supplying besieged Palestinian fighters with weapons and aid . Following the PLO 's defeat by the Jordanian Army , al @-@ Wazir joined the PLO in Lebanon . 
 Prior to and during Israel 's 1982 invasion of Lebanon , al @-@ Wazir planned numerous attacks inside Israel against both civilian and military targets . He prepared Beirut 's defense against incoming Israeli forces . Nonetheless , the Israeli military prevailed and al @-@ Wazir was exiled from Lebanon with the rest of the Fatah leadership . He settled in Amman for a two @-@ year period and was then exiled to Tunis in 1986 . From his base there , he started to organize youth committees in the Palestinian territories ; these eventually became the backbone of the Palestinian forces in the First Intifada . However , he did not live to command the uprising . On April 16 , 1988 , he was assassinated at his home in Tunis , by Israeli commandos . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Khalil al @-@ Wazir was born in 1935 to Muslim parents in the city of Ramla , Palestine , then under British Mandatory rule . His father , Ibrahim al @-@ Wazir , worked as a grocer in the city . Al @-@ Wazir and his family were expelled in July 1948 , along with another 50 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 Palestinians from Lydda and Ramla , following Israel 's capture of the area during the 1948 Arab @-@ Israeli War . They settled in the Bureij refugee camp in the Gaza Strip , where al @-@ Wazir attended a secondary school run by UNRWA . While in high school , he began organizing a small group of fedayeen to harass Israelis at military posts near the Gaza Strip and the Sinai Peninsula . 
 In 1954 he came into contact with Yasser Arafat in Gaza ; al @-@ Wazir would become Arafat 's right @-@ hand man later in his life . During his time in Gaza , al @-@ Wazir became a member of the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood , and was briefly imprisoned for his membership with the organization , as it was prohibited in Egypt . In 1956 , a few months after his release from prison , he received military training in Cairo . He also studied architectural engineering at the University of Alexandria , but he did not graduate . Al @-@ Wazir was detained once again in 1957 for leading raids against Israel and was exiled to Saudi Arabia , finding work as a schoolteacher . He continued to teach after moving to Kuwait in 1959 . 
 = = Formation of Fatah = = 
 Al @-@ Wazir used his time in Kuwait to further his ties with Arafat and other fellow Palestinian exiles he had met in Egypt . He and his comrades founded Fatah , a secular Palestinian nationalist guerrilla and political organization , sometime between 1959 – 60 . He moved to Beirut after being put in charge of editing the newly formed organization 's monthly magazine <unk> , Nida ' al @-@ Hayat ( " Our Palestine , the Call to Life " ) , as he was " the only one with a flair for writing . " 
 He settled in Algeria in 1962 , after a delegation of Fatah leaders , including Arafat and Farouk <unk> , were invited there by Algerian President Ahmed Ben Bella . Al @-@ Wazir remained there , opened a Fatah office and military training camp in Algiers and was included in an Algerian @-@ Fatah delegation to Beijing in 1964 . During his visit , he presented Fatah 's ideas to various leaders of the People 's Republic of China , including premier Zhou Enlai , and thus inaugurated Fatah 's good relationship with China . He also toured other East Asian countries , establishing relations with North Korea and the Viet Cong . Al @-@ Wazir supposedly " charmed Che Guevara " during Guevara 's speech in Algiers . With his guerrilla credentials and his contacts with arms @-@ supplying nations , he was assigned the role of recruiting and training fighters , thus establishing Fatah 's armed wing al @-@ Assifa ( the Storm ) . While in Algiers , he recruited Abu Ali Iyad who became his deputy and one of the high @-@ ranking commanders of al @-@ Assifa in Syria and Jordan . 
 = = = Syria and post @-@ Six @-@ Day War = = = 
 Al @-@ Wazir and the Fatah leadership settled in Damascus , Syria in 1965 , in order take advantage of the large number of Palestine Liberation Army ( PLA ) members there . On May 9 , 1966 , he and Arafat were detained by Syrian police loyal to air marshal Hafez al @-@ Assad after an incident where a pro @-@ Syrian Palestinian leader , Yusuf Orabi was thrown out of the window of a three @-@ story building and killed . Al @-@ Wazir and Arafat were either considering uniting Fatah with Orabi 's faction — the Revolutionary Front for the Liberation of Palestine — or winning Orabi 's support against Arafat 's rivals within the Fatah leadership . An argument occurred , eventually leading to Orabi 's murder ; however , al @-@ Wazir and Arafat had already left the scene shortly before the incident . According to Aburish , Orabi and Assad were " close friends " and Assad appointed a panel to investigate what happened . The panel found both Arafat and al @-@ Wazir guilty , but Salah Jadid , then Deputy Secretary @-@ General of the President of Syria , pardoned them . 
 After the defeat of a coalition of Arab states in the 1967 Six @-@ Day War , major Palestinian guerrilla organizations that participated in the war or were sponsored by any of the involved Arab states , such as the Arab Nationalist Movement led by George Habash and the Palestine Liberation Army of Ahmad Shukeiri , lost considerable influence among the Palestinian population . This made Fatah the dominant faction of the Palestine Liberation Organization ( PLO ) . They gained 33 of 105 seats in the Palestinian National Council ( PNC ) ( the most seats allocated to any guerrilla group ) , thus strengthening al @-@ Wazir 's position . During the Battle of Karameh , in March 1968 , he and Salah Khalaf held important command positions among Fatah fighters against the Israeli Defense Forces ( IDF ) , which developed his credentials as a military strategist . This eventually led to him staking command of al @-@ Assifa , holding major positions in the PNC , and the Supreme Military Council of the PLO . He was also put in charge of guerrilla warfare operations in both the occupied Palestinian territories and Israel proper . 
 = = Black September and the Lebanon War = = 
 During the Black September clashes in Jordan , al @-@ Wazir supplied the encircled Palestinian forces in Jerash and Ajlun with arms and aid , but the conflict was decided in Jordan 's favor . After Arafat and thousands of Fatah fighters retreated to Lebanon , al @-@ Wazir negotiated an agreement between King Hussein and the PLO 's leading organizer , calling for better Palestinian conduct in Jordan . Then , along with the other PLO leaders , he relocated to Beirut . 
 Al @-@ Wazir did not play a major role in the Lebanese Civil War ; he confined himself primarily to strengthening the Lebanese National Movement , the PLO 's main ally in the conflict . During the fall of the Tel al @-@ Zaatar camp to the Lebanese Front , al @-@ Wazir blamed himself for not organizing a rescue effort . 
 During his time in Lebanon , al @-@ Wazir was responsible for coordinating high @-@ profile operations . He allegedly planned the Savoy Operation in 1975 , in which eight Fatah militants raided and took hostages in the Savoy hotel in Tel Aviv , killing eight of them , as well as three Israeli soldiers . The Coastal Road massacre , in March 1978 , was also planned by al @-@ Wazir . In this attack , six Fatah members hijacked a bus and killed 35 Israeli civilians . 
 When Israel besieged Beirut in 1982 , al @-@ Wazir , disagreed with the PLO 's leftist members and Salah Khalaf ; he proposed that the PLO pull out of Beirut . Nevertheless , al @-@ Wazir and his aide Abu al @-@ Walid planned Beirut 's defense and helped direct PLO forces against the IDF . PLO forces were eventually defeated and then expelled from Lebanon , with most of the leadership relocating to Tunis , although al @-@ Wazir and 264 other PLO members were received by King Hussein of Jordan . 
 = = Establishing a movement in the Palestinian territories = = 
 Dissatisfied at the decisive defeat of Palestinian forces during the 1982 Lebanon War , al @-@ Wazir concentrated on establishing a solid Fatah base in the Palestinian territories . In 1982 , he began to sponsor youth committees in the territories . These organizations would grow and initiate the First Intifada in December 1987 ( the word Intifada in Arabic , literally translated as " shaking off " , is generally used to describe an uprising or revolt ) . 
 The Intifada began as an uprising of Palestinian youth against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip . On June 7 , 1986 , about a year before the Intifada started , al @-@ Wazir was deported from Amman to Baghdad , eventually moving to Tunisia days after King Hussein declared that efforts in establishing a joint strategy for the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict between Jordan and the PLO were over . 
 The first stage of the Intifada was a response to an incident at the Erez checkpoint , where an Israeli military vehicle hit a group of Palestinian laborers , killing four of them . However , within weeks , following persistent requests by al @-@ Wazir , the PLO attempted to direct the uprising , which lasted until 1991 , or 1993 , according to various authorities . Al @-@ Wazir had been assigned by Arafat the responsibility of the Palestinian territories within the PLO command . According to author Said Aburish , he had " impressive knowledge of local conditions " in the Israeli @-@ occupied territories , apparently knowing " every village , school , and large family in Gaza and the West Bank " . He provided the uprising with financial backing and logistical support , thus becoming its " brain in exile . " Al @-@ Wazir activated every cell he had set up in the territories since the late 1970s in an effort to militarily back the stone @-@ throwers who formed the backbone of the Palestinian revolt . He also used the opportunity to reform the PLO . According to author <unk> Sayigh , al @-@ Wazir believed that the Intifada should not have been sacrificed to Arafat solely for use as a diplomatic or political tool . 
 = = Assassination = = 
 Al @-@ Wazir was assassinated in his home in Tunis at 2 a.m. UTC on April 16 , 1988 at the age of 52 . He was shot at close range multiple times in the presence of his wife and son Nidal . Al @-@ Wazir was assassinated by an Israeli commando team , reportedly ferried from Israel by boat , aided ashore by Mossad intelligence operatives , and using the IDs of Lebanese fisherman who had been kidnapped to gain access to the PLO compound . Israel accused al @-@ Wazir of escalating the violence of the Intifada , which was ongoing at the time of his assassination . Specifically , he was believed to be the architect of the triple bomb attack at a shopping mall . He was buried in the Yarmouk refugee camp in Damascus on April 21 ; Arafat led the funeral procession . 
 In 1997 , the Maariv newspaper reported on the assassination of al @-@ Wazir . The report claimed that Ehud Barak led a seaborne command center on a navy missile boat off the shore of Tunis that oversaw al @-@ Wazir 's assassination . Up until 1 November 2012 , Israel however did not take official responsibility for his killing and government spokesman Moshe Fogel and aides to Barak declined to comment on the issue . According to the report , Barak , who was then a deputy military chief , coordinated the planning by the Mossad , as well as the army 's intelligence branch , the air force , navy and the elite Sayeret Matkal commando unit . Mossad intelligence agents watched al @-@ Wazir 's home for months before the raid . The Washington Post reported on 21 April that the Israeli cabinet approved al @-@ Wazir 's assassination on 13 April and that it was coordinated between the Mossad and the IDF . 
 In 2013 , Israel unofficially confirmed that it was responsible for his assassination , after an interview by Israeli correspondent Ronen Bergman of Nahum Lev , the Sayeret Matkal officer who led the raid , was cleared for publication - its release had been blocked by military censors for more than a decade . In that interview , Lev gave Bergman a detailed account of the operation . 
 The United States Department of State condemned his killing as an " act of political assassination " , and the UN Security Council approved Resolution 611 condemning " the aggression perpetrated against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Tunisia " , without specifically mentioning Israel . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Al @-@ Wazir married his cousin Intissar al @-@ Wazir in 1962 and had five children with her . They had three sons , named Jihad , Bassem and Nidal , and two daughters , named Iman and Hanan al @-@ Wazir . Intissar and her children returned to Gaza following the Oslo Accords between Israel and the PLO and in 1996 she became the first female minister in the Palestinian National Authority . His son Jihad al @-@ Wazir is currently the Governor of the Palestinian Monetary Authority . 
 After Hamas ' takeover of the Gaza Strip in 2007 , looters raided al @-@ Wazir 's home , reportedly stealing his personal belongings . Intissar al @-@ Wazir said that the looting " occurred in broad daylight and under the watchful eye of Hamas militiamen . " 
 = Herne Hill railway station = 
 Herne Hill railway station is in the London Borough of Lambeth , South London , England , on the boundary between London fare zones 2 and 3 . Train services are provided by Thameslink to London Blackfriars , Farringdon , St. Pancras International and Luton Airport on the Thameslink route and by Southeastern to London Victoria ( via Brixton ) and Orpington on the Chatham Main Line . 
 The station building on Railton Road was opened in 1862 by the London , Chatham and Dover Railway . Initial service was only to Victoria , but by 1869 services ran to the City of London , King 's Cross , Kingston via Wimbledon , and Kent , including express trains to Dover Harbour for continental Europe . The arrival of the railways transformed Herne Hill from a wealthy suburb with large residential estates into a densely populated urban area . 
 = = Description = = 
 Herne Hill railway station sits at the bottom of the hill that gives the area its name and is close to Brockwell Park . The section of Railton Road outside the station is mixed usage for pedestrians and vehicles . 
 The Chatham Main Line and Sutton Loop railway lines through Herne Hill are elevated above road level on a brick viaduct that runs north – south . The station 's 1862 Gothic , polychrome brick building is on the western side of the viaduct , with access the station also from the east via a foot tunnel from Milkwood Road . The building houses a ticket office and newsagent , and was Grade II listed in 1998 : the listing notes the station 's arched doorways , Welsh slate roof and decorative brickwork . It was described by Cherry and Pevsner as a " handsome group " and featured on the cover of a book about London 's railway architecture . 
 The four tracks are served by two island platforms ; northbound trains call at the western platform and southbound trains the eastern platform , providing cross @-@ platform interchange between the two routes . 
 There are flat junctions at each end of the station : Herne Hill North Junction , where the lines to Loughborough Junction and Brixton diverge ; and Herne Hill South Junction , where the lines to West Dulwich and Tulse Hill diverge . Thameslink and Southeastern services cross each other 's paths at the junctions , constraining capacity on both routes . The station also has a turnback siding on its eastern side , adjacent to Milkwood Road . 
 = = History = = 
 The area now known as Herne Hill had been a rural part of the Manor of <unk> since the 13th century . Two tributaries of the River Effra met at the undeveloped site of the future station ; it was known as Island Green until the 18th century . 
 In 1783 a timber merchant , Samuel Sanders , bought Herne Hill from the Manor . Sanders granted leases for large plots of land to wealthy families – John Ruskin spent his childhood at an estate on Herne Hill . The Effra was covered over in the 1820s ; and the area had become an upper @-@ class suburb by the mid @-@ 19th century ( a contemporary author referred to the hill as " the Elysium " for merchants ) . The opening of the railway station , which provided convenient and cheap access to central London , started the urbanisation of Herne Hill . All of the large estates were eventually cleared to make way for many smaller houses . An 1870 railway travel guide noted the population of Herne Hill was 701 ; the contemporaneous development of new residential streets would increase the population by 3 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 A railway line through Herne Hill was proposed in 1852 by the Mid Kent and London and South Western Junction Railways Company . No construction work was undertaken at that time and the company had ceased to exist by 1860 . 
 In the late 1850s , the East Kent Railway had ambitions to run passenger trains between Kent and London , but it did not own any railway lines in inner London . It reached an agreement with the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway ( LB & SCR ) in 1858 to use its West End and Crystal Palace line to access Battersea and ( from 1860 ) Victoria . This arrangement incurred costly access fees , but it was necessary until the company obtained Parliamentary authority to build in London . 
 On 6 August 1860 , the Metropolitan Extensions Act granted the London , Chatham and Dover Railway ( LCDR ; the successor to the East Kent company ) the powers to build three inner London lines : Beckenham Junction to Herne Hill ( 4 miles 21 chains or 6 @.@ 9 kilometres ) ; Herne Hill to Farringdon ( 4 mi 32 chains or 7 @.@ 1 km ) ; and Herne Hill to Battersea to connect with the lines into Victoria ( 2 mi 65 chains or 4 @.@ 5 km ) . The route from Beckenham Junction to Battersea closely resembled that of the 1852 proposal , going via Clapham , Brixton , Herne Hill , Dulwich and Sydenham . 
 Herne Hill station and the first section to be completed , from Victoria to Herne Hill via Stewarts Lane and Brixton , opened on 25 August 1862 . The station was designed by architect John Taylor and railway engineers Joseph Cubitt and J.T. Turner . The building was intended to impress : it had tea rooms offering <unk> , decorative brickwork and a tower ( which also served the practical function of concealing the water tank for steam locomotives ) . The Building News described the station in 1863 as " spacious and convenient ... and of the very best quality " . It also stated that " an unusual amount of decorative taste has been displayed " in the station 's construction ; even the viaduct was praised as " one of the most ornamental pieces of work we have ever seen attempted on a railway " for its fine brickwork . The station 's design prompted the journal to write a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ word editorial bemoaning the comparatively poor architectural quality of other contemporary civil engineering projects . An architectural critic later noted the station was " eulogised " by journals upon its opening and that its architecture was still seen as exemplary at the end of the 19th century . 
 There were initially two platforms , up and down . The up platform was accessed from the upper floor of the station building via a stairway outside the building . The station 's original signal box , elevated above the railway viaduct at the junction between Norwood Road and Half Moon Lane , was a prominent feature in Herne Hill for many years . 
 The land for the station was compulsorily purchased from the estate of Thomas Vyse ( died 1861 ) , manufacturer of straw hats and owner of the Abbey , an estate at 70 Herne Hill ; the station and much of the viaduct were built on part of the Abbey 's grounds . A new road ( Station Road ) was built from the junction of Norwood Road and Half Moon Lane , Herne Hill 's main thoroughfare , to the station . 
 The line from Beckenham Junction reached Herne Hill from the south in July 1863 , connecting the station to the LCDR 's lines in Kent , and finally allowing the LCDR to avoid using the LB & SCR 's tracks to access Victoria from Kent . On 6 October 1863 , the City Branch opened from Herne Hill as far as Elephant & Castle , via Camberwell and Walworth Road ( the platforms at Loughborough Junction , now the closest station to Herne Hill , opened in 1872 ) . By June 1864 , the City Branch had been extended to Blackfriars Bridge railway station ( on the south bank of the River Thames ) via Borough Road . Blackfriars Railway Bridge was then built across the Thames and a terminus for trains from the south opened at Ludgate Hill on 1 June 1865 . 
 Snow Hill tunnel opened on 1 January 1866 , enabling trains from Herne Hill to reach Farringdon and completing the Metropolitan Extension . Later that year , the LCDR completed work to widen the railway viaduct between Herne Hill and Blackfriars Bridge , which included doubling the number of lines north of Loughborough Junction from two to four . In 1868 , the LB & SCR opened a suburban line from London Bridge to Sutton via Tulse Hill . A 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) extension from Tulse Hill to Herne Hill opened on 1 January 1869 . 
 = = = Early services = = = 
 From July 1863 , LCDR trains between Victoria and Kent ran through Herne Hill , and to continental Europe via a connecting steamboat from Dover Harbour to Calais ; these boat trains left Victoria and Ludgate Hill simultaneously and were joined at Herne Hill . Express journeys from Herne Hill to Dover , a distance of 74 mi ( 119 @.@ 1 km ) , took 1 hour 36 minutes , at an average speed of 46 @.@ 25 mph ( 74 @.@ 4 km / h ) . Services to London were split at Herne Hill to give passengers easier access to the City of London and beyond ; the LCDR began operating direct services to King 's Cross and Barnet ( now High Barnet tube station ) from Herne Hill when Snow Hill tunnel opened . 
 A popular workmen 's train ( one penny per journey ) ran between Ludgate Hill and Victoria via Herne Hill from 1865 . Trains left from both termini at 04 : 55 and returned at 18 : 15 . The LCDR was compelled to operate this service by Parliament to compensate for the large number of working @-@ class homes destroyed in Camberwell during the construction of the City Branch . Regular one @-@ way fares to Ludgate Hill were <unk> , sixpence and fourpence for first , second and third class respectively ( or return for one shilling , <unk> and <unk> respectively ) , with journey times of 15 minutes on express trains and 26 minutes when calling at all stops . 
 Both the Great Northern Railway ( GNR ) and the London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) helped fund the Metropolitan Extensions ( £ 320 @,@ 000 and £ 310 @,@ 000 respectively ; £ 27 @,@ 110 @,@ 000 and £ 26 @,@ 260 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) in return for the right to use the LCDR 's tracks . The GNR ran trains between Hatfield and Herne Hill from August 1866 until March 1868 ( when the trains were diverted to Victoria via Loughborough Junction ) ; this was a busy all @-@ stops service , with 15 trains leaving Hatfield and 14 leaving Herne Hill every day . The LSWR began running trains between Ludgate Hill and Wimbledon via Herne Hill when the Tulse Hill extension was completed . Some of these services went as far as Kingston until the mid @-@ 1890s . 
 = = = Changes from 1870 to 1923 = = = 
 By 1870 , a track had been added to the east of the station and two sidings had been added to the west ; one of the western sidings was a bay platform for passenger trains , which was accessed from the platform adjoining the upper floor . Interlocking signalling was in use at Herne Hill by 1880 . 
 The LCDR enlarged the station in 1884 to meet growing demand : the viaduct was widened to allow for the construction of a second island platform and two lines to the east ( the easternmost line was used only for freight ) ; and the foot tunnel under the viaduct was opened . In 1885 , the LCDR decided to use Blackfriars Bridge railway station solely as a goods yard but lacked the space to sort wagons at the site . It purchased 14 acres ( 5 @.@ 7 ha ) of land between Herne Hill and Loughborough Junction for this purpose . The Herne Hill Sorting Sidings had some 35 sidings , the longest of which was 940 ft ( 286 @.@ 5 m ) . A stationmaster 's house was built at 239 Railton Road in the mid @-@ 1880s as the site offered a good view of the station ( it is now privately owned ) . In 1888 , Railton Road was extended to the Norwood Road / Half Moon Lane junction and Station Road ceased to exist . 
 At the beginning of 1899 , the LCDR and the neighbouring South Eastern Railway ( SER ) combined their operations as the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) , jointly owned by the two railways . The SECR ran the trains , but the lines and stations continued to be owned by the LCDR or SER . 
 In 1900 , it was suggested in The Contemporary Review that the City Branch should be replaced with an electric deep @-@ level railway ( i.e. a ' tube ' line ) between Herne Hill and Farringdon in order to remove Blackfriars Railway Bridge , which the author considered to be a blight on the Thames . 
 A late @-@ night service from Ludgate Hill ( departing 01 : 15 ) to Beckenham Junction via Herne Hill began in 1910 . The intention was to satisfy journalists on Fleet Street who regularly complained in print about the poor quality of service on the line ; those working on the morning papers often worked beyond midnight and missed the last train . 
 Services to Farringdon from Herne Hill were discontinued in 1916 with the closure of Snow Hill tunnel to passengers , and trains from the south terminated at Holborn Viaduct . The LCDR amalgamated with the LB & SCR , SER and several other railways to form the Southern Railway at the start of 1923 . 
 = = = Modernisation = = = 
 Work began on electrifying the former LCDR suburban routes in 1924 . Herne Hill station was extensively remodelled as part of these works : the eastern island platform was lengthened ; the original island platform was demolished and replaced by one further west , allowing two tracks to be laid between the island platforms ; the western sidings were removed ; and the upper floor was closed to passengers . 
 On 12 July 1925 , a 660 @-@ volt third @-@ rail system came into operation on both routes through Herne Hill , from Victoria to Orpington on the Chatham Main Line and along the entire length of the City Branch . Electric trains ran every 20 minutes on both routes during the day and were kept overnight at the sorting sidings north of the station . 
 The distinctive signal box overlooking Norwood Road and a similar signal box at the northern end of the station were demolished in 1956 and replaced by a single signal box adjacent to the north junction . The replacement signal box was in use from June 1956 until December 1981 , when its functions were transferred to Victoria ; the building still exists and is used by railway staff . The signalling at Herne Hill was upgraded from <unk> to colour lights on 8 March 1959 as part of the Kent Coast electrification plan . 
 By 1959 , the pattern of commuter services at Herne Hill had taken the shape it held into the 21st century : all @-@ stops trains from Victoria to Orpington and from the City of London to Wimbledon and Sutton ( but , unlike the modern Sutton Loop , via West Croydon ) . However , there was a decline in the number of electric trains on the Chatham Main Line through Herne Hill in the years after the war . Immediately after electrification in 1925 , six trains used the route between Herne Hill and Shortlands in each direction during every off @-@ peak hour . By 1960 , it had dropped to two trains in each direction . 
 The Herne Hill Sorting Sidings closed on 1 August 1966 and the freight line to the east of the station was taken out of service . Nothing of the sidings remains : residential accommodation has been built along Shakespeare Road ( on the western sidings ) and commercial premises have been built along Milkwood Road ( on the eastern sidings ) . 
 = = = From 1988 = = = 
 In 1988 , Snow Hill tunnel re @-@ opened and the former LCDR City Branch formed the basis of the new Thameslink route . Network Rail began a major upgrade of the route in 2009 . A key objective of the Thameslink Programme was allowing more trains to travel between central London and Brighton , which was prevented by a bottleneck between London Bridge and Blackfriars on a viaduct through the historic Borough Market . Network Rail initially suggested widening the viaduct and demolishing part of the market , but the public backlash against this plan prompted Network Rail to consider permanently routing all Thameslink trains to / from Brighton via Herne Hill , avoiding London Bridge and the market . This would have required the grade separation of the two lines through Herne Hill , which would have been achieved by constructing a new viaduct immediately to the east of the existing viaduct and using a fly @-@ over to connect the southern end of the new viaduct to the line between Tulse Hill and North Dulwich ( taking the tracks over the Chatham Main Line and towards Tulse Hill ) . This proposal was rejected in 2004 because of its environmental impact on Herne Hill and the larger number of interchanges offered on the London Bridge route ; the Borough Market viaduct was widened instead . From December 2008 to May 2012 , Thameslink trains serving Herne Hill did not run most weekends or after 22 : 30 every week @-@ night because of construction work on the Thameslink route through central London as part of the Thameslink Programme . 
 During the initial planning in the late 1980s for High Speed 1 , British Rail considered building the line to serve a low @-@ level station at King 's Cross via south London . An option for this route was via Herne Hill , which would have required quadrupling the tracks on the Chatham Main Line between Shortlands and Herne Hill and on the City Branch to Loughborough Junction ; it was estimated that this would have led to the loss of 90 – 180 homes in Lambeth . Although both a different route and London terminus for HS1 were eventually chosen ( St Pancras via East London ) , Eurostar services linking London Waterloo to Brussels and Paris passed through Herne Hill without stopping from 1994 until the completion of HS1 in November 2007 . This marked the end of rail services to the continent via Herne Hill , which had been started by the LCDR in 1863 when the line between Victoria and Dover via Herne Hill was completed . 
 The upper floor of the station , which had not been used by passengers since 1925 , was converted into 3 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 278 @.@ 7 m2 ) of office space in 1991 and rented as ' Tower House ' ( after the station 's distinctive tower ) . The disused freight line to the east of the station was partly reopened in 2009 as a siding for use by Thameslink trains to compensate for the loss of sidings when the Moorgate Thameslink branch was closed . The line 's connection to the south junction was severed during these works . The station had become fully accessible by 2010 : lifts were installed to provide step @-@ free access to the platforms in 2008 and a unisex disabled @-@ accessible toilet was opened on the southbound platforms in 2010 . 
 = = = Accidents and disruption = = = 
 Trains through Herne Hill were affected by World War II . Trains on the City Branch were reduced from September 1939 to once every 30 minutes during the week and hourly at weekends ; and the line was cut twice during the Blitz . On the second occasion , the railway bridge over Hinton Road ( immediately south of Loughborough Junction ) was destroyed . The route between Holborn Viaduct and Herne Hill was disrupted by 62 incidents during the war . 
 On 6 November 1947 , a steam train approaching from West Dulwich passed a signal at danger in heavy fog and crashed into an electric train crossing the station 's south junction towards Tulse Hill . One passenger on the electric train was killed and nine others were hospitalised . 
 A minor accident occurred on 30 June 1957 . A light engine travelling towards Tulse Hill was waiting to cross the south junction when it was struck from behind by an express passenger train from Victoria that had passed a signal at danger . The driver of the light engine and two passengers from the express were hospitalised but quickly discharged . 
 A second fatal collision occurred at the sorting sidings , just north of the station , on 1 April 1960 in fog that reduced visibility to 60 ft ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) . A steam locomotive was waiting on the southbound track outside Herne Hill for a proceed signal when the signalman cleared an electric passenger train behind the steam locomotive to proceed down the same track . The steam locomotive was struck from behind , destroying it and killing the electric train 's driver . 
 = = Future = = 
 = = = Services = = = 
 The route through the station will be busier from December 2014 to 2018 as Thameslink trains serving London Bridge will be diverted via Herne Hill – an additional four trains per hour in both directions . This is due to the redevelopment of London Bridge that will temporarily close it to Bedford @-@ Brighton trains . The additional trains will not call at Herne Hill ; they will run fast between London Blackfriars and East Croydon . It would not be possible for the 12 @-@ car peak trains to call at Herne Hill as the platforms are too short and it would not be viable to use selective door operation as the carriages not on the platforms would foul the junctions . 
 Network Rail , in its July 2011 London & South East route utilisation strategy , recommended that all services from Herne Hill towards Blackfriars should terminate in the bay platforms at Blackfriars after London Bridge 's redevelopment is completed in 2018 and the diverted Thameslink trains return there . Passengers from Herne Hill would then have had to change at Blackfriars to travel further north . Network Rail made this recommendation because more services will be using the route between St Pancras and London Bridge from 2018 ; sending trains from Herne Hill to the terminating platforms on the western side of Blackfriars ( instead of the through tracks on the eastern side of the station ) would have removed the need for them to cross in front of trains to / from Denmark Hill and trains to / from London Bridge at junctions south of Blackfriars . 
 In January 2013 , the Department for Transport ( DfT ) announced that trains serving the Sutton Loop Line ( also known as the Wimbledon Loop ) will continue to travel across London after 2018 . The number of trains calling at Herne Hill on the route will remain unchanged , with four trains per hour . The DfT has also decided the Sutton / Wimbledon Loop will remain part of the Thameslink franchise until at least late 2020 ; as such , the route will eventually be served by the new Thameslink trains . 
 In the longer term , Network Rail has forecast that by 2031 there will be 900 more passengers attempting to travel on the route between Herne Hill and Blackfriars during the busiest peak hour every weekday than can be accommodated on the trains . It is anticipated that eight @-@ car trains with higher capacity ( similar to the Class 378 trains used on inner London metro routes ) will eventually be required to address this shortfall . 
 = = = Station infrastructure = = = 
 The route from Victoria to Orpington via Herne Hill is projected to be amongst the most congested and overcrowded in South East London by 2026 . Network Rail is considering grade @-@ separating the two lines passing through Herne Hill so that trains would not cross each other 's paths at the station 's junctions ; this restricts the number of services that can pass through the station . A 2008 route utilisation strategy for South London concluded that this improvement will not be required before 2020 but recommended safeguarding the required land . Grade @-@ separation is supported by Southeastern and First Capital Connect believed it should be given more consideration , but Network Rail has stated that it would be difficult to carry out the work because the station is on a viaduct and surrounded by buildings . The 2011 route utilisation strategy , which examined options for congestion relief at Herne Hill before 2031 , did not suggest grade @-@ separation as an option in the 2011 – 2031 period . 
 This project would also enable the platforms at Herne Hill to be lengthened to accommodate 12 @-@ car trains as the current northern junction , which prevents them from being extended , would be removed . However , longer trains could not be used on the Sutton / Wimbledon Loop without also rebuilding Tulse Hill and Elephant & Castle . 
 The congestion within the station itself has been noted by Network Rail and it is keeping the situation under review . Transport for London ( TfL ) has recommended that specific improvement works ( new entrance doors , removal of interior wall , wider stairs to platforms and second station entrance ) be carried out between 2014 and 2019 . 
 TfL has also suggested there may be potential for the turnback siding adjacent to Milkwood Road to be converted for passenger use . This would require substantial changes to the station as there is no direct access to the platforms from Milkwood Road and the current subway for accessing the platforms does not extend east of the southbound platform . 
 = = = Incorporation into London Overground = = = 
 The Mayor of London published a long @-@ term vision for the London Overground in February 2012 . It recommends that all London suburban rail services should eventually be devolved to TfL and that suburban services currently provided by Southeastern be devolved before 2020 to demonstrate the benefits of this approach . Southeastern 's suburban services include the route between Victoria and Orpington via Herne Hill . TfL had announced that it would bid in late 2012 to have more involvement in these services after the expiration of Southeastern 's franchise in early 2014 , but the DfT announced in March 2013 that Southeastern 's franchise was being extended until mid @-@ 2018 . 
 = = = Victoria line extension = = = 
 TfL has considered extending the Victoria line to Herne Hill to provide faster turnaround at the southern end of the line . The extension is not a priority for TfL as it has a weaker business case than other infrastructure projects . 
 = = Service pattern = = 
 The station is managed by Southeastern train operating company . The off @-@ peak service pattern as of January 2015 in trains per hour ( tph ) is : 
 2 to Luton via London Blackfriars 
 2 to St Albans via London Blackfriars 
 4 to London Victoria via Brixton 
 4 to Orpington via Beckenham Junction 
 2 to Sutton via Wimbledon 
 2 to Sutton via Mitcham Junction 
 On Sundays , northbound Sutton / Wimbledon Loop trains alternate between terminating at Blackfriars and Luton . Late @-@ night Sutton / Wimbledon Loop services ( 21 : 57 onwards ) run to Bedford from Monday @-@ Saturday and terminate at Blackfriars on Sunday . 
 = = Connections = = 
 London Buses routes 3 , 37 , 68 , 196 , 201 , 322 , 468 and 690 and night routes N3 and N68 serve the station . 
