 = Parthian Empire = 
 The Parthian Empire ( / <unk> / ; 247 BC – 224 AD ) , also known as the Arsacid Empire ( / <unk> / ) , was a major Iranian political and cultural power in ancient Iran and Iraq . Its latter name comes from Arsaces I of Parthia who , as leader of the Parni tribe , founded it in the mid @-@ 3rd century BC when he conquered the region of Parthia in Iran 's northeast , then a satrapy ( province ) in rebellion against the Seleucid Empire . Mithridates I of Parthia ( r. c . 171 – 138 BC ) greatly expanded the empire by seizing Media and Mesopotamia from the Seleucids . At its height , the Parthian Empire stretched from the northern reaches of the Euphrates , in what is now central @-@ eastern Turkey , to eastern Iran . The empire , located on the Silk Road trade route between the Roman Empire in the Mediterranean Basin and the Han Empire of China , became a center of trade and commerce . 
 The Parthians largely adopted the art , architecture , religious beliefs , and royal insignia of their culturally heterogeneous empire , which encompassed Persian , Hellenistic , and regional cultures . For about the first half of its existence , the Arsacid court adopted elements of Greek culture , though it eventually saw a gradual revival of Iranian traditions . The Arsacid rulers were titled the " King of Kings " , as a claim to be the heirs to the Achaemenid Empire ; indeed , they accepted many local kings as vassals where the Achaemenids would have had centrally appointed , albeit largely autonomous , satraps . The court did appoint a small number of satraps , largely outside Iran , but these satrapies were smaller and less powerful than the Achaemenid potentates . With the expansion of Arsacid power , the seat of central government shifted from Nisa to Ctesiphon along the Tigris ( south of modern Baghdad , Iraq ) , although several other sites also served as capitals . 
 The earliest enemies of the Parthians were the Seleucids in the west and the Scythians in the east . However , as Parthia expanded westward , they came into conflict with the Kingdom of Armenia , and eventually the late Roman Republic . Rome and Parthia competed with each other to establish the kings of Armenia as their subordinate clients . The Parthians soundly defeated Marcus Licinius Crassus at the Battle of Carrhae in 53 BC , and in 40 – 39 BC , Parthian forces captured the whole of the Levant except Tyre from the Romans . However , Mark Antony led a counterattack against Parthia , although his successes were generally achieved in his absence , under the leadership of his lieutenant Ventidius . Also , various Roman emperors or their appointed generals invaded Mesopotamia in the course of the several Roman @-@ Parthian Wars which ensued during the next few centuries . The Romans captured the cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon on multiple occasions during these conflicts , but were never able to hold on to them . 
 Frequent civil wars between Parthian contenders to the throne proved more dangerous to the Empire 's stability than foreign invasion , and Parthian power evaporated when Ardashir I , ruler of Estakhr in Fars , revolted against the Arsacids and killed their last ruler , Artabanus V , in 224 AD . Ardashir established the Sassanid Empire , which ruled Iran and much of the Near East until the Muslim conquests of the 7th century AD , although the Arsacid dynasty lived on through the Arsacid Dynasty of Armenia , the Arsacid dynasty of Iberia , and the Arsacid Dynasty of Caucasian Albania ; all eponymous branches of the Parthian Arsacids . 
 Native Parthian sources , written in Parthian , Greek and other languages , are scarce when compared to Sassanid and even earlier Achaemenid sources . Aside from scattered cuneiform tablets , fragmentary ostraca , rock inscriptions , drachma coins , and the chance survival of some parchment documents , much of Parthian history is only known through external sources . These include mainly Greek and Roman histories , but also Chinese histories , prompted by the market for Chinese goods in Parthia . Parthian artwork is viewed by historians as a valid source for understanding aspects of society and culture that are otherwise absent in textual sources . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and establishment = = = 
 Before Arsaces I of Parthia founded the Arsacid Dynasty , he was chieftain of the Parni , an ancient Central @-@ Asian tribe of Iranian peoples and one of several nomadic tribes within the confederation of the <unk> . The Parni most likely spoke an eastern Iranian language , in contrast to the northwestern Iranian language spoken at the time in Parthia . The latter was a northeastern province , first under the Achaemenid , and then the Seleucid empires . After conquering the region , the Parni adopted Parthian as the official court language , speaking it alongside Middle Persian , Aramaic , Greek , Babylonian , Sogdian and other languages in the multilingual territories they would conquer . 
 Why the Arsacid court retroactively chose 247 BC as the first year of the Arsacid era is uncertain . <unk> Bivar concludes that this was the year the Seleucids lost control of Parthia to <unk> , the appointed satrap who rebelled against them . Hence , Arsaces I " backdated his regnal years " to the moment when Seleucid control over Parthia ceased . However , Vesta <unk> Curtis asserts that this was simply the year Arsaces was made chief of the Parni tribe . Homa Katouzian and Gene Ralph <unk> claim it was the year Arsaces conquered Parthia and expelled the Seleucid authorities , yet Curtis and Maria Brosius state that <unk> was not overthrown by the Arsacids until 238 BC . 
 It is unclear who immediately succeeded Arsaces I. Bivar and Katouzian affirm that it was his brother Tiridates I of Parthia , who in turn was succeeded by his son Arsaces II of Parthia in 211 BC . Yet Curtis and Brosius state that Arsaces II was the immediate successor of Arsaces I , with Curtis claiming the succession took place in 211 BC , and Brosius in 217 BC . Bivar insists that 138 BC , the last regnal year of Mithridates I , is " the first precisely established regnal date of Parthian history . " Due to these and other discrepancies , Bivar outlines two distinct royal chronologies accepted by historians . Later on , some of the Parthian Kings would claim Achaemenid descent . The claim has recently received support from numismatic and other written evidence suggesting that both Achaemenid and Parthian kings suffered from the hereditary disease neurofibromatosis . 
 For a time , Arsaces consolidated his position in Parthia and Hyrcania by taking advantage of the invasion of Seleucid territory in the west by Ptolemy III <unk> ( r . 246 – 222 BC ) of Egypt . This conflict with Ptolemy , the Third Syrian War ( 246 – 241 BC ) , also allowed Diodotus I to rebel and form the Greco @-@ Bactrian Kingdom in Central Asia . The latter 's successor , Diodotus II , formed an alliance with Arsaces against the Seleucids , but Arsaces was temporarily driven from Parthia by the forces of Seleucus II <unk> ( r . 246 – 225 BC ) . After spending some time in exile among the nomadic <unk> tribe , Arsaces led a counterattack and recaptured Parthia . Seleucus II 's successor , Antiochus III the Great ( r . 222 – 187 BC ) , was unable to immediately retaliate because his troops were engaged in putting down the rebellion of <unk> in Media . 
 Antiochus III launched a massive campaign to retake Parthia and Bactria in 210 or 209 BC . He was unsuccessful , but did negotiate a peace settlement with Arsaces II . The latter was granted the title of king ( Greek : basileus ) in return for his submission to Antiochus III as his superior . The Seleucids were unable to further intervene in Parthian affairs following increasing encroachment by the Roman Republic and the Seleucid defeat at Magnesia in 190 BC . <unk> of Parthia ( r. c . 191 – 176 BC ) succeeded Arsaces II , and Phraates I of Parthia ( r. c . 176 – 171 BC ) eventually ascended the throne . Phraates I ruled Parthia without further Seleucid interference . 
 = = = Expansion and consolidation = = = 
 Phraates I is recorded as expanding Parthia 's control past the Gates of Alexander and occupied Apamea <unk> , the locations of which are unknown . Yet the greatest expansion of Parthian power and territory took place during the reign of his brother and successor Mithridates I of Parthia ( r. c . 171 – 138 BC ) , whom Katouzian compares to Cyrus the Great ( d . 530 BC ) , founder of the Achaemenid Empire . 
 Relations between Parthia and Greco @-@ Bactria deteriorated after the death of Diodotus II , when Mithridates ' forces captured two eparchies of the latter kingdom , then under <unk> I ( r. c . 170 – 145 BC ) . Turning his sights on the Seleucid realm , Mithridates invaded Media and occupied Ecbatana in 148 or 147 BC ; the region had been destabilized by a recent Seleucid suppression of a rebellion there led by <unk> . This victory was followed by the Parthian conquest of Babylonia in Mesopotamia , where Mithridates had coins minted at Seleucia in 141 BC and held an official investiture ceremony . While Mithridates retired to Hyrcania , his forces subdued the kingdoms of Elymais and Characene and occupied Susa . By this time , Parthian authority extended as far east as the Indus River . 
 Whereas Hecatompylos had served as the first Parthian capital , Mithridates established royal residences at Seleucia , Ecbatana , Ctesiphon and his newly founded city , <unk> ( Nisa , Turkmenistan ) , where the tombs of the Arsacid kings were built and maintained . Ecbatana became the main summertime residence for the Arsacid royalty . Ctesiphon may not have become the official capital until the reign of Gotarzes I of Parthia ( r. c . 90 – 80 BC ) . It became the site of the royal coronation ceremony and the representational city of the Arsacids , according to Brosius . 
 The Seleucids were unable to retaliate immediately as general Diodotus Tryphon led a rebellion at the capital Antioch in 142 BC . However , by 140 BC Demetrius II Nicator was able to launch a counter @-@ invasion against the Parthians in Mesopotamia . Despite early successes , the Seleucids were defeated and Demetrius himself was captured by Parthian forces and taken to Hyrcania . There Mithridates treated his captive with great hospitality ; he even married his daughter <unk> of Parthia to Demetrius . 
 Antiochus VII Sidetes ( r . 138 – 129 BC ) , a brother of Demetrius , assumed the Seleucid throne and married the latter 's wife Cleopatra Thea . After defeating Diodotus Tryphon , Antiochus initiated a campaign in 130 BC to retake Mesopotamia , now under the rule of Phraates II of Parthia ( r. c . 138 – 128 BC ) . The Parthian general <unk> was defeated along the Great Zab , followed by a local uprising where the Parthian governor of Babylonia was killed . Antiochus conquered Babylonia and occupied Susa , where he minted coins . After advancing his army into Media , the Parthians pushed for peace , which Antiochus refused to accept unless the Arsacids relinquished all lands to him except Parthia proper , paid heavy tribute , and released Demetrius from captivity . Arsaces released Demetrius and sent him to Syria , but refused the other demands . By Spring 129 BC , the Medes were in open revolt against Antiochus , whose army had exhausted the resources of the countryside during winter . While attempting to put down the revolts , the main Parthian force swept into the region and killed Antiochus in battle . His body was sent back to Syria in a silver coffin ; his son Seleucus was made a Parthian hostage and a daughter joined Phraates ' harem . 
 While the Parthians regained the territories lost in the west , another threat arose in the east . In 177 – 176 BC the nomadic confederation of the Xiongnu dislodged the nomadic Yuezhi from their homelands in what is now Gansu province in Northwest China ; the Yuezhi then migrated west into Bactria and displaced the Saka ( Scythian ) tribes . The Saka were forced to move further west , where they invaded the Parthian Empire 's northeastern borders . Mithridates was thus forced to retire to Hyrcania after his conquest of Mesopotamia . 
 Some of the Saka were enlisted in Phraates ' forces against Antiochus . However , they arrived too late to engage in the conflict . When Phraates refused to pay their wages , the Saka revolted , which he tried to put down with the aid of former Seleucid soldiers , yet they too abandoned Phraates and joined sides with the Saka . Phraates II marched against this combined force , but he was killed in battle . The Roman historian Justin reports that his successor Artabanus I of Parthia ( r. c . 128 – 124 BC ) shared a similar fate fighting nomads in the east . He claims Artabanus was killed by the <unk> ( identified as the Yuezhi ) , although Bivar believes Justin conflated them with the Saka . Mithridates II of Parthia ( r. c . 124 – 90 BC ) later recovered the lands lost to the Saka in Sistan . 
 Following the Seleucid withdrawal from Mesopotamia , the Parthian governor of Babylonia , <unk> , was ordered by the Arsacid court to conquer Characene , then ruled by Hyspaosines from Charax <unk> . When this failed , Hyspaosines invaded Babylonia in 127 BC and occupied Seleucia . Yet by 122 BC , Mithridates II forced Hyspaosines out of Babylonia and made the kings of Characene vassals under Parthian suzerainty . After Mithridates extended Parthian control further west , occupying Dura @-@ Europos in 113 BC , he became embroiled in a conflict with the Kingdom of Armenia . His forces defeated and deposed Artavasdes I of Armenia in 97 BC , taking his son Tigranes hostage , who would later become Tigranes II " the Great " of Armenia ( r. c . 95 – 55 BC ) . 
 The Indo @-@ Parthian Kingdom , located in modern @-@ day Afghanistan and Pakistan made an alliance with the Parthian Empire in the 1st century BC . Bivar claims that these two states considered each other political equals . After the Greek philosopher Apollonius of Tyana visited the court of Vardanes I of Parthia ( r. c . 40 – 47 AD ) in 42 AD , Vardanes provided him with the protection of a caravan as he traveled to Indo @-@ Parthia . When Apollonius reached Indo @-@ Parthia 's capital Taxila , his caravan leader read Vardanes ' official letter , perhaps written in Parthian , to an Indian official who treated Apollonius with great hospitality . 
 Following the diplomatic venture of Zhang Qian into Central Asia during the reign of Emperor Wu of Han ( r . 141 – 87 BC ) , the Han Empire of China sent a delegation to Mithridates II 's court in 121 BC . The Han embassy opened official trade relations with Parthia via the Silk Road yet did not achieve a desired military alliance against the confederation of the Xiongnu . The Parthian Empire was enriched by taxing the Eurasian caravan trade in silk , the most highly priced luxury good imported by the Romans . Pearls were also a highly valued import from China , while the Chinese purchased Parthian spices , perfumes , and fruits . Exotic animals were also given as gifts from the Arsacid to Han courts ; in 87 AD Pacorus II of Parthia sent lions and Persian gazelles to Emperor Zhang of Han ( r . 75 – 88 AD ) . Besides silk , Parthian goods purchased by Roman merchants included iron from India , spices , and fine leather . Caravans traveling through the Parthian Empire brought West Asian and sometimes Roman luxury glasswares to China . 
 = = = Rome and Armenia = = = 
 The Yuezhi Kushan Empire in northern India largely guaranteed the security of Parthia 's eastern border . Thus , from the mid @-@ 1st century BC onwards , the Arsacid court focused on securing the western border , primarily against Rome . A year following Mithridates II 's subjugation of Armenia , Lucius Cornelius Sulla , the Roman proconsul of Cilicia , convened with the Parthian diplomat <unk> at the Euphrates river . The two agreed that the river would serve as the border between Parthia and Rome , although several historians have argued that Sulla only had authority to communicate these terms back to Rome . 
 Despite this agreement , in 93 or 92 BC Parthia fought a war in Syria against the tribal leader <unk> and her Seleucid ally Antiochus X <unk> ( r . 95 – 92 ? BC ) , killing the latter . When one of the last Seleucid monarchs , Demetrius III <unk> , attempted to besiege Beroea ( modern Aleppo ) , Parthia sent military aid to the inhabitants and Demetrius was defeated . 
 Following the rule of Mithridates II , Gotarzes I ruled Babylonia , while Orodes I ( r. c . 90 – 80 BC ) ruled Parthia separately . This system of split monarchy weakened Parthia , allowing Tigranes II of Armenia to annex Parthian territory in western Mesopotamia . This land would not be restored to Parthia until the reign of Sanatruces of Parthia ( r. c . 78 – 71 BC ) . Following the outbreak of the Third Mithridatic War , Mithridates VI of Pontus ( r . 119 – 63 BC ) , an ally of Tigranes II of Armenia , requested aid from Parthia against Rome , but Sanatruces refused help . When the Roman commander Lucullus marched against the Armenian capital Tigranocerta in 69 BC , Mithridates VI and Tigranes II requested the aid of Phraates III of Parthia ( r. c . 71 – 58 ) . Phraates did not send aid either , and after the fall of Tigranocerta he reaffirmed with Lucullus the Euphrates as the boundary between Parthia and Rome . 
 Tigranes the Younger , son of Tigranes II of Armenia , failed to usurp the Armenian throne from his father . He fled to Phraates III and convinced him to march against Armenia 's new capital at <unk> . When this siege failed , Tigranes the Younger once again fled , this time to the Roman commander Pompey . He promised Pompey that he would act as a guide through Armenia , but , when Tigranes II submitted to Rome as a client king , Tigranes the Younger was brought to Rome as a hostage . Phraates demanded Pompey return Tigranes the Younger to him , but Pompey refused . In retaliation , Phraates launched an invasion into <unk> ( southeastern Turkey ) where , according to two conflicting Roman accounts , the Roman consul Lucius Afranius forced the Parthians out by either military or diplomatic means . 
 Phraates III was assassinated by his sons Orodes II of Parthia and Mithridates III of Parthia , after which Orodes turned on Mithridates , forcing him to flee from Media to Roman Syria . Aulus Gabinius , the Roman proconsul of Syria , marched in support of Mithridates to the Euphrates , but had to turn back to aid Ptolemy XII <unk> ( r . 80 – 58 ; 55 – 51 BC ) against a rebellion in Egypt . Despite losing his Roman support , Mithridates managed to conquer Babylonia , and minted coins at Seleucia until 54 BC . In that year , Orodes ' general , known only as Surena after his noble family 's clan name , recaptured Seleucia , and Mithridates was executed . 
 Marcus Licinius Crassus , one of the triumvirs who was now proconsul of Syria , launched an invasion into Parthia in 53 BC in belated support of Mithridates . As his army marched to Carrhae ( modern Harran , southeastern Turkey ) , Orodes II invaded Armenia , cutting off support from Rome 's ally Artavasdes II of Armenia ( r . 53 – 34 BC ) . Orodes persuaded Artavasdes to a marriage alliance between the crown prince Pacorus I of Parthia ( d . 38 BC ) and Artavasdes ' sister . 
 Surena , with an army entirely on horseback , rode to meet Crassus . Surena 's 1 @,@ 000 cataphracts , armed with lances , and 9 @,@ 000 horse archers were outnumbered roughly four to one by Crassus ' army , comprising seven Roman legions and auxiliaries including mounted Gauls and light infantry . Despite outnumbering Surena 's forces , Crassus had just taken his men on a long march and was unfamiliar with the desert terrain and conditions he faced . Arranging his infantry in a large square formation , Crassus deployed his cavalry against Parthian forces . The Roman cavalry did not hold a candle to Surena 's forces , and Crassus 's infantry soon found themselves trying to withstand the iron rain of Parthian missiles . Hoping to withstand the siege , the Roman 's hunkered down , but Surena used a baggage train of about 1 @,@ 000 camels , the Parthian horse archers were given constant supplies of arrows . They employed the " Parthian shot " tactic , where the horsemen would fake a retreat , only to turn and fire upon their opponents . This tactic , combined with the use of heavy composite bows on flat plain devastated Crassus ' infantry . With some 20 @,@ 000 Romans dead , approximately 10 @,@ 000 captured , and roughly another 10 @,@ 000 escaping west , Crassus fled into the Armenian countryside . At the head of his army , Surena approached Crassus , offering a parley , which Crassus accepted . However , he was killed when one of his junior officers , suspecting a trap , attempted to stop him from riding into Surena 's camp . 
 Crassus ' defeat at Carrhae was one of the worst military defeats of Roman history . Parthia 's victory cemented its reputation as a formidable if not equal power with Rome . With his camp followers , war captives , and precious Roman booty , Surena traveled some 700 km ( 430 mi ) back to Seleucia where his victory was celebrated . However , fearing his ambitions even for the Arsacid throne , Orodes had Surena executed shortly thereafter . 
 Emboldened by the victory over Crassus , the Parthians attempted to capture Roman @-@ held territories in Western Asia . Crown prince Pacorus I and his commander <unk> raided Syria as far as Antioch in 51 BC , but were repulsed by Gaius Cassius Longinus , who ambushed and killed <unk> . The Arsacids sided with Pompey in his civil war against Julius Caesar and even sent troops to support the anti @-@ Caesarian forces at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC . Quintus Labienus , a general loyal to Cassius and Brutus , sided with Parthia against the Second Triumvirate in 40 BC ; the following year he invaded Syria alongside Pacorus I. The triumvir Mark Antony was unable to lead the Roman defense against Parthia due to his departure to Italy , where he amassed his forces to confront his rival Octavian and eventually conducted negotiations with him at Brundisium . After Syria was occupied by Pacorus ' army , Labienus split from the main Parthian force to invade Anatolia while Pacorus and his commander <unk> invaded the Roman Levant . They subdued all settlements along the Mediterranean coast as far south as Ptolemais ( modern Acre , Israel ) , with the lone exception of Tyre . In Judea , the pro @-@ Roman Jewish forces of high priest Hyrcanus II , <unk> , and Herod were defeated by the Parthians and their Jewish ally Antigonus II Mattathias ( r . 40 – 37 BC ) ; the latter was made king of Judea while Herod fled to his fort at Masada . 
 Despite these successes , the Parthians were soon driven out of the Levant by a Roman counteroffensive . Publius Ventidius Bassus , an officer under Mark Antony , defeated and then executed Labienus at the Battle of the Cilician Gates ( in modern Mersin Province , Turkey ) in 39 BC . Shortly afterward , a Parthian force in Syria led by general <unk> was defeated by Ventidius at the Battle of Amanus Pass . As a result , Pacorus I temporarily withdrew from Syria . When he returned in the spring of 38 BC , he faced Ventidius at the Battle of Mount <unk> , northeast of Antioch . Pacorus was killed during the battle , and his forces retreated across the Euphrates . His death spurred a succession crisis in which Orodes II chose Phraates IV of Parthia ( r. c . 38 – 2 BC ) as his new heir . 
 Upon assuming the throne , Phraates IV eliminated rival claimants by killing and exiling his own brothers . One of them , Monaeses , fled to Antony and convinced him to invade Parthia . Antony defeated Parthia 's Judaean ally Antigonus in 37 BC , installing Herod as a client king in his place . The following year , when Antony marched to Erzurum , Artavasdes II of Armenia once again switched alliances by sending Antony additional troops . Antony invaded Media Atropatene ( modern Iranian Azerbaijan ) , then ruled by Parthia 's ally Artavasdes I of Media Atropatene , with the intention of seizing the capital <unk> , the location of which is now unknown . However , Phraates IV ambushed Antony 's rear detachment , destroying a giant battering ram meant for the siege of <unk> ; after this , Artavasdes abandoned Antony 's forces . The Parthians pursued and harassed Antony 's army as they fled to Armenia . Eventually , the greatly weakened force reached Syria . After this , Antony lured Artavasdes II into a trap with the promise of a marriage alliance . He was taken captive in 34 BC , sent back to Rome , and executed . Antony attempted to strike an alliance with Artavasdes I of Media Atropatene , whose relations with Phraates IV had recently soured . This was abandoned when Antony and his forces withdrew from Armenia in 33 BC ; they escaped a Parthian invasion while Antony 's rival Octavian attacked his forces to the west . Following Antony 's suicide in Egypt , the Parthian ally <unk> II reassumed the throne of Armenia . 
 = = = Peace with Rome , court intrigue and contact with Chinese generals = = = 
 Following the defeat of Antony at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC , Octavian consolidated his political power and in 27 BC was named Augustus by the Roman Senate , becoming the first Roman emperor . Around this time , Tiridates II of Parthia briefly overthrew Phraates IV , who was able to quickly reestablish his rule with the aid of Scythian nomads . Tiridates fled to the Romans , taking one of Phraates ' sons with him . In negotiations conducted in 20 BC , Phraates arranged for the release of his kidnapped son . In return , the Romans received the lost legionary standards taken at Carrhae in 53 BC , as well as any surviving prisoners of war . The Parthians viewed this exchange as a small price to pay to regain the prince . Augustus hailed the return of the standards as a political victory over Parthia ; this propaganda was celebrated in the minting of new coins , the building of a new temple to house the standards , and even in fine art such as the breastplate scene on his statue Augustus of Prima Porta . 
 Along with the prince , Augustus also gave Phraates IV an Italian slave @-@ girl , who later became Queen Musa of Parthia . To ensure that her child Phraataces would inherit the throne without incident , Musa convinced Phraates IV to give his other sons to Augustus as hostages . Again , Augustus used this as propaganda depicting the submission of Parthia to Rome , listing it as a great accomplishment in his Res Gestae Divi Augusti . When Phraataces took the throne as Phraates V of Parthia ( r. c . 2 BC – 4 AD ) , Musa married her own son and ruled alongside him . The Parthian nobility , disapproving of both the incestuous relationship and the notion of a king with non @-@ Arsacid blood , forced the pair into exile in Roman territory . Phraates ' successor Orodes III of Parthia lasted just two years on the throne , and was followed by Vonones I of Parthia , who had adopted many Roman mannerisms during time in Rome . The Parthian nobility , angered by Vonones ' sympathies for the Romans , backed a rival claimant , Artabanus III of Parthia ( r. c . 10 – 38 AD ) , who eventually defeated Vonones and drove him into exile in Roman Syria . 
 During the reign of Artabanus III , two Jewish commoners and brothers , Anilai and <unk> from Nehardea ( near modern Fallujah , Iraq ) , led a revolt against the Parthian governor of Babylonia . After defeating the latter , the two were granted the right to govern the region by Artabanus III , who feared further rebellion elsewhere . Anilai 's Parthian wife poisoned <unk> out of fear he would attack Anilai over his marriage to a gentile . Following this , Anilai became embroiled in an armed conflict with a son @-@ in @-@ law of Artabanus , who eventually defeated him . With the Jewish regime removed , the native Babylonians began to harass the local Jewish community , forcing them to emigrate to Seleucia . When that city rebelled against Parthian rule in 35 – 36 AD , the Jews were expelled again , this time by the local Greeks and Aramaeans . The exiled Jews fled to Ctesiphon , Nehardea , and Nisibis . 
 Although at peace with Parthia , Rome still interfered in its affairs . The Roman emperor Tiberius ( r . 14 – 37 AD ) became involved in a plot by Pharasmanes I of Iberia to place his brother Mithridates on the throne of Armenia by assassinating the Parthian ally King Arsaces of Armenia . Artabanus III tried and failed to restore Parthian control of Armenia , prompting an aristocratic revolt that forced him to flee to Scythia . The Romans released a hostage prince , Tiridates III of Parthia , to rule the region as an ally of Rome . Shortly before his death , Artabanus managed to force Tiridates from the throne using troops from Hyrcania . After Artabanus ' death in 38 AD , a long civil war ensued between the rightful successor Vardanes I of Parthia and his brother Gotarzes II of Parthia . After Vardanes was assassinated during a hunting expedition , the Parthian nobility appealed to Roman emperor Claudius ( r . 41 – 54 AD ) in 49 AD to release the hostage prince <unk> to challenge Gotarzes . This backfired when <unk> was betrayed by the governor of Edessa and <unk> bar <unk> of Adiabene ; he was captured and sent to Gotarzes , where he was allowed to live after having his ears mutilated , an act that disqualified him from inheriting the throne . 
 In 97 AD , the Chinese general Ban Chao , the Protector @-@ General of the Western Regions , sent his emissary Gan Ying on a diplomatic mission to reach the Roman Empire . Gan visited the court of Pacorus II of Parthia at Hecatompylos before departing towards Rome . He traveled as far west as the Persian Gulf , where Parthian authorities convinced him that an arduous sea voyage around the Arabian Peninsula was the only means to reach Rome . Discouraged by this , Gan Ying returned to the Han court and provided Emperor He of Han ( r . 88 – 105 AD ) with a detailed report on the Roman Empire based on oral accounts of his Parthian hosts . William Watson speculates that the Parthians would have been relieved at the failed efforts by the Han Empire to open diplomatic relations with Rome , especially after Ban Chao 's military victories against the Xiongnu in eastern Central Asia . However , Chinese records maintain that a Roman embassy , perhaps only a group of Roman merchants , arrived at the Han capital Luoyang in 166 AD , during the reigns of Marcus Aurelius ( r . 161 – 180 AD ) and Emperor Huan of Han ( r . 146 – 168 AD ) . 
 = = = Continuation of Roman hostilities and Parthian decline = = = 
 After the Iberian king Pharasmanes I had his son Rhadamistus ( r . 51 – 55 AD ) invade Armenia to depose the Roman client king Mithridates , Vologeses I of Parthia ( r. c . 51 – 77 AD ) planned to invade and place his brother , the later Tiridates I of Armenia , on the throne . Rhadamistus was eventually driven from power , and , beginning with the reign of Tiridates , Parthia would retain firm control over Armenia — with brief interruptions — through the Arsacid Dynasty of Armenia . Even after the fall of the Parthian Empire , the Arsacid line lived on through the Armenian kings . However , not only did the Arsacid line continue through the Armenians , it as well continued through the Georgian kings with the Arsacid dynasty of Iberia , and for many centuries afterwards in Caucasian Albania through the Arsacid Dynasty of Caucasian Albania . 
 When Vardanes II of Parthia rebelled against his father Vologeses I in 55 AD , Vologeses withdrew his forces from Armenia . Rome quickly attempted to fill the political vacuum left behind . In the Roman – Parthian War of 58 – 63 AD , the commander Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo achieved some military successes against the Parthians while installing Tigranes VI of Armenia as a Roman client . However , Corbulo 's successor Lucius Caesennius Paetus was soundly defeated by Parthian forces and fled Armenia . Following a peace treaty , Tiridates I traveled to Naples and Rome in 63 AD . At both sites the Roman emperor Nero ( r . 54 – 68 AD ) ceremoniously crowned him king of Armenia by placing the royal diadem on his head . 
 A long period of peace between Parthia and Rome ensued , with only the invasion of Alans into Parthia 's eastern territories around 72 AD mentioned by Roman historians . Whereas Augustus and Nero had chosen a cautious military policy when confronting Parthia , later Roman emperors invaded and attempted to conquer the eastern Fertile Crescent , the heart of the Parthian Empire along the Tigris and Euphrates . The heightened aggression can be explained in part by Rome 's military reforms . To match Parthia 's strength in missile troops and mounted warriors , the Romans at first used foreign allies ( especially Nabataeans ) , but later established a permanent auxilia force to complement their heavy legionary infantry . The Romans eventually maintained regiments of horse archers ( <unk> ) and even mail @-@ armored cataphracts in their eastern provinces . Yet the Romans had no discernible grand strategy in dealing with Parthia and gained very little territory from these invasions . The primary motivations for war were the advancement of the personal glory and political position of the emperor , as well as defending Roman honor against perceived slights such as Parthian interference in the affairs of Rome 's client states . 
 Hostilities between Rome and Parthia were renewed when Osroes I of Parthia ( r. c . 109 – 128 AD ) deposed the Armenian king Tiridates and replaced him with <unk> , son of Pacorus II , without consulting Rome . The Roman emperor Trajan ( r . 98 – 117 AD ) had the next Parthian nominee for the throne , <unk> , killed in 114 AD , instead making Armenia a Roman province . His forces , led by <unk> Quietus , also captured Nisibis ; its occupation was essential to securing all the major routes across the northern Mesopotamian plain . The following year , Trajan invaded Mesopotamia and met little resistance from only <unk> of Adiabene , since Osroes was engaged in a civil war to the east with Vologases III of Parthia . Trajan spent the winter of 115 – 116 at Antioch , but resumed his campaign in the spring . Marching down the Euphrates , he captured Dura @-@ Europos , the capital Ctesiphon and Seleucia , and even subjugated Characene , where he watched ships depart to India from the Persian Gulf . 
 In the last months of 116 AD , Trajan captured the Persian city of Susa . When Sanatruces II of Parthia gathered forces in eastern Parthia to challenge the Romans , his cousin Parthamaspates of Parthia betrayed and killed him : Trajan crowned him the new king of Parthia . Never again would the Roman Empire advance so far to the east . 
 On Trajan 's return north , the Babylonian settlements revolted against the Roman garrisons . Trajan was forced to retreat from Mesopotamia in 117 AD , overseeing a failed siege of Hatra during his withdrawal . His retreat was — in his intentions — temporary , because he wanted to renew the attack on Parthia in 118 AD and " make the subjection of the Parthians a reality , " but Trajan died suddenly in August 117 AD . 
 During his campaign , Trajan was granted the title <unk> by the Senate and coins were minted proclaiming the conquest of Parthia . However , only the 4th @-@ century AD historians Eutropius and Festus allege that he attempted to establish a Roman province in lower Mesopotamia . 
 Trajan 's successor Hadrian ( r . 117 – 138 AD ) reaffirmed the Roman @-@ Parthian border at the Euphrates , choosing not to invade Mesopotamia due to Rome 's now limited military resources . Parthamaspates fled after the Parthians revolted against him , yet the Romans made him king of Osroene . Osroes I died during his conflict with Vologases III , the latter succeeded by Vologases IV of Parthia ( r. c . 147 – 191 AD ) who ushered in a period of peace and stability . However , the Roman – Parthian War of 161 – 166 AD began when Vologases invaded Armenia and Syria , retaking Edessa . Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius ( r . 161 – 180 AD ) had co @-@ ruler Lucius Verus ( r . 161 – 169 AD ) guard Syria while Marcus Statius Priscus invaded Armenia in 163 AD , followed by the invasion of Mesopotamia by Avidius Cassius in 164 AD . 
 The Romans captured and burnt Seleucia and Ctesiphon to the ground , yet they were forced to retreat once the Roman soldiers contracted a deadly disease ( possibly smallpox ) that soon ravaged the Roman world . Although they withdrew , from this point forward the city of Dura @-@ Europos remained in Roman hands . 
 When Roman emperor Septimius Severus ( r . 193 – 211 AD ) invaded Mesopotamia in 197 AD during the reign of Vologases V of Parthia ( r. c . 191 – 208 AD ) , the Romans once again marched down the Euphrates and captured Seleucia and Ctesiphon . After assuming the title <unk> Maximus , he retreated in late 198 AD , failing as Trajan once did to capture Hatra during a siege . 
 Around 212 AD , soon after Vologases VI of Parthia ( r. c . 208 – 222 AD ) took the throne , his brother Artabanus V of Parthia ( d . 224 AD ) rebelled against him and gained control over a greater part of the empire . Meanwhile , the Roman emperor Caracalla ( r . 211 – 217 AD ) deposed the kings of Osroene and Armenia to make them Roman provinces once more . He marched into Mesopotamia under the pretext of marrying one of Artabanus ' daughters , but — because the marriage was not allowed — made war on Parthia and conquered Arbil east of the Tigris river . 
 Caracalla was assassinated the next year on the road to Carrhae by his soldiers . After this debacle , the Parthians made a settlement with Macrinus ( r . 217 – 218 ) where the Romans paid Parthia over two @-@ hundred million denarii with additional gifts . 
 But the Parthian Empire , weakened by internal strife and wars with Rome , was soon to be followed by the Sassanid Empire . Indeed , shortly afterward , Ardashir I , the local Iranian ruler of Persis ( modern Fars Province , Iran ) from Estakhr began subjugating the surrounding territories in defiance of Arsacid rule . He confronted Artabanus V at the Battle of <unk> on 28 April 224 AD , perhaps at a site near Isfahan , defeating him and establishing the Sassanid Empire . There is evidence , however , that suggests Vologases VI continued to mint coins at Seleucia as late as 228 AD . 
 The Sasanians would not only assume Parthia 's legacy as Rome 's Persian nemesis , but they would also attempt to restore the boundaries of the Achaemenid Empire by briefly conquering the Levant , Anatolia , and Egypt from the Eastern Roman Empire during the reign of Khosrau II ( r . 590 – 628 AD ) . However , they would lose these territories to Heraclius — the last Roman emperor before the Arab conquests . Nevertheless , for a period of more than 400 years , they succeeded the Parthian realm as Rome 's principal rival . 
 = = = Native and external sources = = = 
 Local and foreign written accounts , as well as non @-@ textual artifacts have been used to reconstruct Parthian history . Although the Parthian court maintained records , the Parthians had no formal study of history ; the earliest universal history of Iran , the <unk> @-@ <unk> , was not compiled until the reign of the last Sassanid ruler Yazdegerd III ( r . 632 – 651 AD ) . Indigenous sources on Parthian history remain scarce , with fewer of them available than for any other period of Iranian history . Most contemporary written records on Parthia contain Greek as well as Parthian and Aramaic inscriptions . The Parthian language was written in a distinct script derived from the Imperial Aramaic chancellery script of the Achaemenids , and later developed into the Pahlavi writing system . 
 The most valuable indigenous sources for reconstructing an accurate chronology of Arsacid rulers are the metal drachma coins issued by each ruler . These represent a " transition from non @-@ textual to textual remains , " according to historian Geo <unk> . Other Parthian sources used for reconstructing chronology include cuneiform astronomical tablets and <unk> discovered in Babylonia . Indigenous textual sources also include stone inscriptions , parchment and papyri documents , and pottery ostraca . For example , at the early Parthian capital of <unk> / Nisa in Turkmenistan , large caches of pottery ostraca have been found yielding information on the sale and storage of items like wine . Along with parchment documents found at sites like Dura @-@ Europos , these also provide valuable information on Parthian governmental administration , covering issues such as taxation , military titles , and provincial organization . 
 The Greek and Latin histories , which represent the majority of materials covering Parthian history , are not considered entirely reliable since they were written from the perspective of rivals and wartime enemies . These external sources generally concern major military and political events , and often ignore social and cultural aspects of Parthian history . The Romans usually depicted the Parthians as fierce warriors but also as a culturally refined people ; recipes for Parthian dishes in the cookbook Apicius exemplifies their admiration for Parthian cuisine . Apollodorus of <unk> and Arrian wrote histories focusing on Parthia , which are now lost and survive only as quoted extracts in other histories . Isidore of Charax , who lived during the reign of Augustus , provides an account of Parthian territories , perhaps from a Parthian government survey . To a lesser extent , people and events of Parthian history were also included in the histories of Justin , Strabo , Diodorus Siculus , Plutarch , Cassius Dio , Appian , Josephus , Pliny the Elder , and Herodian . 
 Parthian history can also be reconstructed via the Chinese historical records of events . In contrast to Greek and Roman histories , the early Chinese histories maintained a more neutral view when describing Parthia , although the habit of Chinese chroniclers to copy material for their accounts from older works ( of undetermined origin ) makes it difficult to establish a chronological order of events . The Chinese called Parthia <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ) , perhaps after the Greek name for the Parthian city Antiochia in <unk> ( Greek : <unk> της <unk> ) . However , this could also have been a transliteration of " Arsaces " , after the dynasty 's eponymous founder . The works and historical authors include the Shiji ( also known as the Records of the Grand Historian ) by Sima Qian , the Han shu ( Book of Han ) by Ban Biao , Ban Gu , and Ban Zhao , and the Hou Han shu ( Book of Later Han ) by Fan Ye . They provide information on the nomadic migrations leading up to the early Saka invasion of Parthia and valuable political and geographical information . For example , the Shiji ( ch . 123 ) describes diplomatic exchanges , exotic gifts given by Mithridates II to the Han court , types of agricultural crops grown in Parthia , production of wine using grapes , itinerant merchants , and the size and location of Parthian territory . The Shiji also mentions that the Parthians kept records by " writing horizontally on strips of leather , " that is , parchment . 
 = = Government and administration = = 
 = = = Central authority and semi @-@ autonomous kings = = = 
 Compared with the earlier Achaemenid Empire , the Parthian government was notably decentralized . An indigenous historical source reveals that territories overseen by the central government were organized in a similar manner to the Seleucid Empire . They both had a threefold division for their provincial hierarchies : the Parthian <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , similar to the Seleucid satrapy , eparchy , and <unk> . The Parthian Empire also contained several subordinate semi @-@ autonomous kingdoms , including the states of Caucasian Iberia , Armenia , Atropatene , <unk> , Adiabene , Edessa , Hatra , <unk> , Elymais , and Persis . The state rulers governed their own territories and minted their own coinage distinct from the royal coinage produced at the imperial mints . This was not unlike the earlier Achaemenid Empire , which also had some city @-@ states , and even distant satrapies who were semi @-@ independent but " recognised the supremacy of the king , paid tribute and provided military support " , according to Brosius . However , the satraps of Parthian times governed smaller territories , and perhaps had less prestige and influence than their Achaemenid predecessors . During the Seleucid period , the trend of local ruling dynasties with semi @-@ autonomous rule , and sometimes outright rebellious rule , became commonplace , a fact reflected in the later Parthian style of governance . 
 = = = Nobility = = = 
 The King of Kings headed the Parthian government . He maintained polygamous relations , and was usually succeeded by his first @-@ born son . Like the Ptolemies of Egypt , there is also record of Arsacid kings marrying their nieces and perhaps even half @-@ sisters ; Queen Musa married her own son , though this was an extreme and isolated case . Brosius provides an extract from a letter written in Greek by King Artabanus II in 21 AD , which addresses the governor ( titled " archon " ) and citizens of the city of Susa . Specific government offices of Preferred Friend , Bodyguard and Treasurer are mentioned and the document also proves that " while there were local jurisdictions and proceedings to appointment to high office , the king could intervene on behalf of an individual , review a case and amend the local ruling if he considered it appropriate . " 
 The hereditary titles of the hierarchic nobility recorded during the reign of the first Sassanid monarch Ardashir I most likely reflect the titles already in use during the Parthian era . There were three distinct tiers of nobility , the highest being the regional kings directly below the King of Kings , the second being those related to the King of Kings only through marriage , and the lowest order being heads of local clans and small territories . 
 By the 1st century AD , the Parthian nobility had assumed great power and influence in the succession and deposition of Arsacid kings . Some of the nobility functioned as court advisers to the king , as well as holy priests . Of the great noble Parthian families listed at the beginning of the Sasanian period , only two are explicitly mentioned in earlier Parthian documents : the House of Suren and the House of Karen . The historian Plutarch noted that members of the Suren family , the first among the nobility , were given the privilege of crowning each new Arsacid King of Kings during their coronations . Later on , some of the Parthian kings would claim Achaemenid descent . This has recently been corroborated via the possibility of an inherited disease ( neurofibromatosis ) demonstrated by the physical descriptions of rulers and from evidence of familial disease on ancient coinage . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The Parthians , like their neighbors to the north on the steppes ( the Scythians ) , were able to succeed in battle often due to their use of horse archers . Capable of shooting in virtually any direction while riding at speed , these archers could inflict heavy damage while maintaining a position of relative safety themselves . Even when fleeing , the archers could turn and fire backward at their enemies , a practice from which the term " Parthian Shot " emerged . The term has come to be used for sharp words dealt while taking leave ; one can easily see that the negative connotations of this phrase suggest a Roman origin , as they would have been the ones getting hit by those shots . 
 The Parthian Empire had no standing army , yet were able to quickly recruit troops in the event of local crises . There was a permanent armed guard attached to the person of the king , comprising nobles , serfs and mercenaries , but this royal retinue was small . Garrisons were also permanently maintained at border forts ; Parthian inscriptions reveal some of the military titles granted to the commanders of these locations . Military forces could also be used in diplomatic gestures . For example , when Chinese envoys visited Parthia in the late 2nd century BC , the Shiji maintains that 20 @,@ 000 horsemen were sent to the eastern borders to serve as escorts for the embassy , although this figure is perhaps an exaggeration . 
 The main striking force of the Parthian army was its cataphracts , heavy cavalry with man and horse decked in mailed armor . The cataphracts were equipped with a lance for charging into enemy lines , but were not equipped with bows and arrows which were restricted to horse archers . Due to the cost of their equipment and armor , cataphracts were recruited from among the aristocratic class who , in return for their services , demanded a measure of autonomy at the local level from the Arsacid kings . The light cavalry was recruited from among the commoner class and acted as horse archers ; they wore a simple tunic and trousers into battle . They used composite bows and were able to shoot at enemies while riding and facing away from them ; this technique , known as the Parthian shot , was a highly effective tactic . The heavy and light cavalry of Parthia proved to be a decisive factor in the Battle of Carrhae where a Parthian force defeated a much larger Roman army under Crassus . Light infantry units , composed of levied commoners and mercenaries , were used to disperse enemy troops after cavalry charges . 
 The size of the Parthian army is unknown , as is the size of the empire 's overall population . However , archaeological excavations in former Parthian urban centers reveal settlements which could have sustained large populations and hence a great resource in manpower . Dense population centers in regions like Babylonia were no doubt attractive to the Romans , whose armies could afford to live off the land . 
 = = = Currency = = = 
 Usually made of silver , the Greek drachma coin , including the tetradrachm , was the standard currency used throughout the Parthian Empire . The Arsacids maintained royal mints at the cities of Hecatompylos , Seleucia , and Ecbatana . They most likely operated a mint at Mithridatkert / Nisa as well . From the empire 's inception until its collapse , drachmas produced throughout the Parthian period rarely weighed less than 3 @.@ 5 g or more than 4 @.@ 2 g . The first Parthian tetradrachms , weighing in principle around 16 g with some variation , appear after Mithridates I conquered Mesopotamia and were minted exclusively at Seleucia . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Hellenism and the Iranian revival = = = 
 Although Greek culture of the Seleucids was widely adopted by peoples of the Near East during the Hellenistic period , the Parthian era witnessed an Iranian cultural revival in religion , the arts , and even clothing fashions . Conscious of both the Hellenistic and Persian cultural roots of their kingship , the Arsacid rulers styled themselves after the Persian King of Kings and affirmed that they were also philhellenes ( " friends of the Greeks " ) . The word " <unk> " was inscribed on Parthian coins until the reign of Artabanus II . The discontinuation of this phrase signified the revival of Iranian culture in Parthia . Vologases I was the first Arsacid ruler to have the Parthian script and language appear on his minted coins alongside the now almost illegible Greek . However , the use of Greek @-@ alphabet legends on Parthian coins remained until the collapse of the empire . 
 Greek cultural influence did not disappear from the Parthian Empire , however , and there is evidence that the Arsacids enjoyed Greek theatre . When the head of Crassus was brought to Orodes II , he , alongside Armenian king Artavasdes II , were busy watching a performance of The Bacchae by the playwright Euripides ( c . 480 – 406 BC ) . The producer of the play decided to use Crassus ' actual severed head in place of the stage @-@ prop head of Pentheus . 
 On his coins , Arsaces I is depicted in apparel similar to Achaemenid satraps . According to A. Shahbazi , Arsaces " deliberately diverges from Seleucid coins to emphasize his nationalistic and royal aspirations , and he calls himself <unk> / Karny ( Greek : <unk> ) , a title already borne by Achaemenid supreme generals , such as Cyrus the Younger . " In line with Achaemenid traditions , rock @-@ relief images of Arsacid rulers were carved at Mount Behistun , where Darius I of Persia ( r . 522 – 486 BC ) made royal inscriptions . Moreover , the Arsacids claimed familial descent from Artaxerxes II of Persia ( r . 404 – 358 BC ) as a means to bolster their legitimacy in ruling over former Achaemenid territories , i.e. as being " legitimate successors of glorious kings " of ancient Iran . Artabanus III named one of his sons Darius and laid claim to Cyrus ' heritage . The Arsacid kings chose typical Zoroastrian names for themselves and some from the " heroic background " of the Avesta , according to V.G. <unk> . The Parthians also adopted the use of the Babylonian calendar with names from the Achaemenid Iranian calendar , replacing the Macedonian calendar of the Seleucids . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The Parthian Empire , being culturally and politically heterogeneous , had a variety of religious systems and beliefs , the most widespread being those dedicated to Greek and Iranian cults . Aside from a minority of Jews and early Christians , most Parthians were polytheistic . Greek and Iranian deities were often blended together as one . For example , Zeus was often equated with Ahura Mazda , Hades with Angra Mainyu , Aphrodite and Hera with Anahita , Apollo with Mithra , and Hermes with Shamash . Aside from the main gods and goddesses , each ethnic group and city had their own designated deities . As with Seleucid rulers , Parthian art indicates that the Arsacid kings viewed themselves as gods ; this cult of the ruler was perhaps the most widespread . 
 The extent of Arsacid <unk> of Zoroastrianism is debated in modern scholarship . The followers of Zoroaster would have found the bloody sacrifices of some Parthian @-@ era Iranian cults to be unacceptable . However , there is evidence that Vologeses I encouraged the presence of Zoroastrian magi priests at court and sponsored the compilation of sacred Zoroastrian texts which later formed the Avesta . The Sassanid court would later adopt Zoroastrianism as the official state religion of the empire . 
 Although Mani ( 216 – 276 AD ) , the founding prophet of Manichaeism , did not proclaim his first religious revelation until 228 / 229 AD , Bivar asserts that his new faith contained " elements of <unk> belief , Iranian cosmogony , and even echoes of Christianity ... [ it ] may be regarded as a typical reflection of the mixed religious doctrines of the late Arsacid period , which the Zoroastrian orthodoxy of the Sasanians was soon to sweep away . " 
 There is scant archaeological evidence for the spread of Buddhism from the Kushan Empire into Iran proper . However , it is known from Chinese sources that An Shigao ( fl . 2nd century AD ) , a Parthian nobleman and Buddhist monk , traveled to Luoyang in Han China as a Buddhist missionary and translated several Buddhist canons into Chinese . 
 = = = Art and architecture = = = 
 Parthian art can be divided into three geo @-@ historical phases : the art of Parthia proper ; the art of the Iranian plateau ; and the art of Parthian Mesopotamia . The first genuine Parthian art , found at Mithridatkert / Nisa , combined elements of Greek and Iranian art in line with Achaemenid and Seleucid traditions . In the second phase , Parthian art found inspiration in Achaemenid art , as exemplified by the investiture relief of Mithridates II at Mount Behistun . The third phase occurred gradually after the Parthian conquest of Mesopotamia . 
 Common motifs of the Parthian period include scenes of royal hunting expeditions and the investiture of Arsacid kings . Use of these motifs extended to include portrayals of local rulers . Common art mediums were rock @-@ reliefs , frescos , and even graffiti . Geometric and stylized plant patterns were also used on stucco and plaster walls . The common motif of the Sassanid period showing two horsemen engaged in combat with lances first appeared in the Parthian reliefs at Mount Behistun . 
 In portraiture the Parthians favored and emphasized frontality , meaning the person depicted by painting , sculpture , or raised @-@ relief on coins faced the viewer directly instead of showing his or her profile . Although frontality in portraiture was already an old artistic technique by the Parthian period , Daniel Schlumberger explains the innovation of Parthian frontality : 
 <unk> frontality ' , as we are now accustomed to call it , deeply differs both from ancient Near Eastern and from Greek frontality , though it is , no doubt , an offspring of the latter . For both in Oriental art and in Greek art , frontality was an exceptional treatment : in Oriental art it was a treatment strictly reserved for a small number of traditional characters of cult and myth ; in Greek art it was an option resorted to only for definite reasons , when demanded by the subject , and , on the whole , seldom made use of . With Parthian art , on the contrary , frontality becomes the normal treatment of the figure . For the Parthians frontality is really nothing but the habit of showing , in relief and in painting , all figures full @-@ face , even at the expense ( as it seems to us moderns ) of clearness and intelligibility . So systematic is this use that it amounts to a complete banishment de facto of the side @-@ view and of all intermediate attitudes . This singular state of things seems to have become established in the course of the 1st century A.D. 
 Parthian art , with its distinct use of frontality in portraiture , was lost and abandoned with the profound cultural and political changes brought by the Sassanid Empire . However , even after the Roman occupation of Dura @-@ Europos in 165 AD , the use of Parthian frontality in portraiture continued to flourish there . This is exemplified by the early 3rd @-@ century AD wall murals of the Dura @-@ Europos synagogue , a temple in the same city dedicated to Palmyrene gods , and the local <unk> . 
 Parthian architecture adopted elements of Achaemenid and Greek architecture , but remained distinct from the two . The style is first attested at Mithridatkert / Nisa . The Round Hall of Nisa is similar to Hellenistic palaces , but different in that it forms a circle and vault inside a square space . However , the artwork of Nisa , including marble statues and the carved scenes on ivory <unk> vessels , is unquestionably influenced by Greek art . 
 A signature feature of Parthian architecture was the iwan , an audience hall supported by arches or barrel vaults and open on one side . Use of the barrel vault replaced the Hellenic use of columns to support roofs . Although the iwan was known during the Achaemenid period and earlier in smaller and subterranean structures , it was the Parthians who first built them on a monumental scale . The earliest Parthian iwans are found at Seleucia , built in the early 1st century AD . Monumental iwans are also commonly found in the ancient temples of Hatra and perhaps modeled on the Parthian style . The largest Parthian iwans at that site have a span of 15 m ( 50 ft ) . 
 = = = Clothing and apparel = = = 
 The typical Parthian riding outfit is exemplified by the famous bronze statue of a Parthian nobleman found at Shami , Elymais . Standing 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 ft ) , the figure wears a V @-@ shaped jacket , a V @-@ shaped tunic fastened in place with a belt , loose @-@ fitting and many @-@ folded trousers held by garters , and a diadem or band over his coiffed , bobbed hair . His outfit is commonly seen in relief images of Parthian coins by the mid @-@ 1st century BC . 
 Examples of clothing in Parthian inspired sculptures have been found in excavations at Hatra , in northwestern Iraq . Statues erected there feature the typical Parthian shirt ( <unk> ) , combined with trousers and made with fine , ornamented materials . The aristocratic elite of Hatra adopted the bobbed hairstyles , headdresses , and belted tunics worn by the nobility belonging to the central Arsacid court . The trouser @-@ suit was even worn by the Arsacid kings , as shown on the reverse images of coins . The Parthian trouser @-@ suit was also adopted in Palmyra , Syria , along with the use of Parthian frontality in art . 
 Parthian sculptures depict wealthy women wearing long @-@ sleeved robes over a dress , with necklaces , earrings , bracelets , and headdresses bedecked in jewelry . Their many @-@ folded dresses were fastened by a brooch at one shoulder . Their headdresses also featured a veil which was draped backwards . 
 As seen in Parthian coinage , the headdresses worn by the Parthian kings changed over time . The earliest Arsacid coins show rulers wearing the soft cap with cheek flaps , known as the <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) . This may have derived from an Achaemenid @-@ era satrapal headdress and the pointy hats depicted in the Achaemenid reliefs at Behistun and Persepolis . The earliest coins of Mithridates I show him wearing the soft cap , yet coins from the latter part of his reign show him for the first time wearing the royal Hellenistic diadem . Mithridates II was the first to be shown wearing the Parthian tiara , embroidered with pearls and jewels , a headdress commonly worn in the late Parthian period and by Sassanid monarchs . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 As culturally and religiously tolerant the Parthians were , they adopted Greek as their official language , while Aramaic remained the lingua franca in the empire . The native Parthian language , Middle Persian , and Akkadian were also used . 
 = = = Writing and literature = = = 
 It is known that during the Parthian period the court minstrel ( <unk> ) recited poetic oral literature accompanied by music . However , their stories , composed in verse form , were not written down until the subsequent Sasanian period . In fact , there is no known Parthian @-@ language literature that survives in original form , since it was written down in the following centuries . It is believed that such stories as the romantic tale Vis and <unk> and epic cycle of the <unk> dynasty were part of the corpus of oral literature from Parthian times , although compiled much later . Although literature of the Parthian language was not committed to written form , there is evidence that the Arsacids acknowledged and respected written Greek literature . 
 = = = Kurdish and Parthian relation = = = 
 Some linguists see the Kurdish language as the contemporary equivalent of the Parthian language . Professor <unk> <unk> recognized the Kurdish language as a derivation of the Parthian language . Professor David Neil MacKenzie classified the Kurdish language as a neo Northwestern @-@ Iranian language and Parthian as an old Northwestern @-@ Iranian language . 
 = = Chronological table of Parthian kings = = 
 = Steam ( software ) = 
 Steam is a digital distribution platform developed by Valve Corporation offering digital rights management ( DRM ) , multiplayer gaming and social networking services . Steam provides the user with installation and automatic updating of games on multiple computers , and community features such as friends lists and groups , cloud saving , and in @-@ game voice and chat functionality . The software provides a freely available application programming interface ( API ) called Steamworks , which developers can use to integrate many of Steam 's functions into their products , including networking , matchmaking , in @-@ game achievements , micro @-@ transactions , and support for user @-@ created content through Steam Workshop . 
 Though initially developed for use on Microsoft Windows , versions for OS X and Linux operating systems were later released . Applications whose main functions are chatting and shopping have also been released for iOS and Android mobile devices . The Steam website also replicates much of the storefront and social network features of the stand @-@ alone application . 
 As of September 2015 , there are 6 @,@ 464 Windows games , 2 @,@ 323 OS X games , and 1 @,@ 500 Linux games available on Steam . The service has over 125 million registered accounts . Steam has had as many as 12 @.@ 5 million concurrent users as of November 2015 . The Steam platform is considered to be the largest digital distribution platform for PC gaming ; in November 2009 , Stardock estimated it at 70 % and then later , in October 2013 , it was estimated by Screen Digest that 75 % of games bought online were downloaded through Steam . In 2015 , users purchased titles through Steam or through Steam keys from third @-@ party vendors totaling around $ 3 @.@ 5 billion representing 15 % of the global PC game sales for the year , based on estimations made by the tracking website Steam Spy . The success of the Steam platform has led to the development of a line of Steam Machine micro @-@ consoles and personal computers meeting minimum specifications , and SteamOS , a Linux @-@ based operating system built around the Steam client . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Initial release = = = 
 Before implementing Steam , Valve Corporation had problems updating its online games , such as Counter @-@ Strike ; providing patches would result in most of the online user base disconnecting for several days . Valve decided to create a platform that would update games automatically and implement stronger anti @-@ piracy and anti @-@ cheat measures . Valve also recognized , through user polls at the time of its announcement in 2002 , that at least 75 % of their users had access to high @-@ speed Internet connections , which would only grow with planned Internet expansion in the following years , and recognized that they could deliver game content faster to players than through retail channels . Valve approached several companies , including Microsoft , Yahoo ! , and RealNetworks to build a client with these features , but were declined . 
 Steam 's development began in 2002 . Working titles for the product included " Grid " and " Gazelle " . It was first revealed to the public on March 22 , 2002 , at the Game Developers Conference , where it was presented purely as a distribution network . To demonstrate the ease of integrating Steam with a game , Relic Entertainment created a special version of Impossible Creatures . However , the game was not released on Steam until 2015 . Valve partnered with several companies , including AT & T , Acer , and GameSpy Industries . The first mod released on the system was Day of Defeat . 
 The Steam client was first made available for public beta testing in January 2003 during the beta period for Counter @-@ Strike 1 @.@ 6 , for which it was mandatory to install and use . At the time , Steam 's primary function was streamlining the patch process common in online computer games . Steam was an optional component for all other games . 80 @,@ 000 – 300 @,@ 000 gamers tested the system when it was in its beta period . The system and website choked under the strain of thousands of users simultaneously attempting to play the latest version of Counter @-@ Strike . In 2004 , the World Opponent Network was shut down and replaced by Steam . The online features of games which required World Opponent Network ceased to work unless they were converted to Steam . 
 Around that time , Valve began negotiating contracts with several publishers and independent developers to release their products , including Rag Doll Kung Fu and <unk> , on Steam . Canadian publisher Strategy First announced in December 2005 that it would partner with Valve for digital distribution of current and future titles . In 2002 , the managing director of Valve , Gabe Newell , said he was offering mod teams a game engine license and distribution over Steam for US $ 995 . Valve 's Half @-@ Life 2 was the first game to require installation of the Steam client to play , even for retail copies . This decision was met with concerns about software ownership , software requirements , and issues with overloaded servers demonstrated previously by the Counter @-@ Strike rollout . During this time users faced multiple issues attempting to play the game . 
 = = = Profitability = = = 
 Beginning with Rag Doll Kung Fu in October 2005 , third @-@ party games became available for purchase and download on Steam , and Valve announced that Steam had become profitable because of some highly successful Valve games . Although digital distribution could not yet match retail volume , profit margins for Valve and developers were far larger on Steam . Large developer @-@ publishers , including id Software , Eidos Interactive , and Capcom , began distributing their games on Steam in 2007 . By May that year , 13 million accounts had been created on the service , and 150 games were for sale on the platform . 
 = = Client functionality = = 
 = = = Software delivery and maintenance = = = 
 Steam 's primary service is to allow its users to download games and other software that they have in their virtual software libraries to their local computers as game cache files ( <unk> ) . Steam provides digital rights management ( DRM ) for software titles by providing " custom executable generation " for executable files that are unique for each user ; this allows the user to install the software on multiple computing devices via Steam or through software backups without limitations . The user is required to be running Steam while connected to the Internet for authentication prior to playing a game or have previously set up Steam in an " offline " mode while connected to the Internet , storing their credentials locally to allow play without an Internet connection . Steam 's DRM is available to software developers through Steamworks ; the service allows developers and publishers to include other forms of DRM and other authentication services than Steam ; for example , some games on Steam require the use of Games for Windows – Live and some titles from publisher Ubisoft require the use of their <unk> gaming service . 
 In September 2008 , Valve added support for Steam Cloud , a service that can automatically store saved game and related custom files on Valve 's servers ; users can access this data from any machine running the Steam client . Games must use the appropriate features of Steamworks for Steam Cloud to work . Users can disable this feature on a per @-@ game and per @-@ account basis . In May 2012 , the service added the ability for users to manage their game libraries from remote clients , including computers and mobile devices ; users can instruct Steam to download and install games they own through this service if their Steam client is currently active and running . Some games sold through retail channels can be redeemed as titles for users ' libraries within Steam by entering a product code within the software . For games that incorporate Steamworks , users can buy redemption codes from other vendors and redeem these in the Steam client to add the title to their libraries . Steam also offers a framework for selling and distributing downloadable content ( DLC ) for games . 
 In September 2013 , Steam introduced the ability to share most games with family members and close friends by authorizing machines to access one 's library . Authorized players can install the game locally and play it separately from the owning account . Users can access their saved games and achievements providing the main owner is not playing . When the main player initiates a game while a shared account is using it , the shared account user is allowed a few minutes to either save their progress and close the game or purchase the game for his or her own account . Within Family View , introduced in January 2014 , parents can adjust settings for their children 's tied accounts , limiting the functionality and accessibility to the Steam client and purchased titles . 
 In accordance with its Acceptable Use Policy , Valve retains the right to block and unblock customers ' access to their games and Steam services when Valve 's Anti @-@ Cheat ( VAC ) software determines that the user is cheating in multiplayer games , selling accounts to others or trading games to exploit regional price differences . Blocking such users initially removed access to his or her other games , leading to some users with high @-@ value accounts losing access because of minor infractions of the <unk> . Valve later changed its policy to be similar to that of Electronic Arts ' Origin platform , in which blocked users can still access their games but are heavily restricted , limited to playing in offline mode and unable to participate in Steam Community features . Customers also lose access to their games and Steam account if they refuse to accept changes to Steam 's end user license agreements ; this occurred in August 2012 . In April 2015 , Valve added Game Bans to its service , allowing developers to set bans on players for their games but enacted and enforced at the Steam level , allowing developers to police their own gaming communities in customizable manner . 
 = = = Storefront features = = = 
 The Steam client includes a digital storefront called the Steam Store through which users can purchase computer games . Once the game is bought , a software license is permanently attached to the user 's Steam account , allowing him or her to download the software on any compatible device . Game licenses can be given to other accounts under certain conditions . Content is delivered from an international network of servers using a proprietary file transfer protocol . Steam sells its products in US and Canadian dollars , euros , pounds sterling , Brazilian reais , Russian rubles , Indonesian rupiah and Indian rupees depending on the user 's location . From December 2010 , the client supports the <unk> payment system , which is popular in many European , Middle Eastern , and Asian countries . Starting in April 2016 , Steam began accepting payments in <unk> , valued based on the user 's geolocation , with transactions handled by <unk> . The Steam storefront validates the user 's region ; the purchase of titles may be restricted to specific regions because of release dates , game classification , or agreements with publishers . Since 2010 , the Steam Translation Server project offers Steam users to assist with the translation of the Steam client , storefront , and a selected library of Steam games for twenty @-@ seven languages . Steam also allows users to purchase downloadable content for games , and for some specific game titles such as Team Fortress 2 , the ability to purchase in @-@ game inventory items . In February 2015 , Steam began to open similar options for in @-@ game item purchases for third @-@ party games . 
 The Steam store also enables users to redeem store product keys to add software from their library . The keys are sold by third @-@ party providers such as Humble Bundle ( in which a portion of the sale is given back to the publisher or distributor ) , distributed as part of a physical release to redeem the game , or given to a user as part of promotions , often used to deliver Kickstarter and other crowd funding rewards . There has been a grey market around Steam keys , where less reputable buyers purchase a large number of Steam keys for a game when it is offered for a low cost , and then resell these keys to users or other third @-@ party sites at a higher price , generating profit for themselves . This has caused some of these third @-@ party sites , like <unk> , to be embroiled in this grey market . It is possible for publishers to have Valve to track down where specific keys have been used and cancel them , removing the product from the user 's libraries , leaving the user to seek any recourse with the third @-@ party they purchased from . Other legitimate storefronts , like Humble Bundle , have set a minimum price that must be spent to obtain Steam keys as to discourage mass purchases that would enter the grey market . 
 In 2013 , Steam began to accept player reviews of games . Other users can subsequently rate these reviews as helpful , humorous , or otherwise unhelpful , which are then used to highlight the most useful reviews on the game 's Steam store page . Steam will also aggregate these reviews and enable users to sort products based on this feedback while browsing the store . In May 2016 , Steam further broke out these aggregations between all reviews overall and those made more recently in the last 30 days , a change Valve acknowledges to how game updates , particularly those in Early Access , can alter the impression of a game to users . 
 During mid @-@ 2011 , Valve began to offer free @-@ to @-@ play games , such as Global Agenda , Spiral Knights and Champions Online ; this offer was linked to the company 's move to make Team Fortress 2 a free @-@ to @-@ play title . Valve included support via Steamworks for microtransactions for in @-@ game items in these titles through Steam 's purchasing channels , in a similar manner to the in @-@ game store for Team Fortress 2 . Later that year , Valve added the ability to trade in @-@ game items and " unopened " game gifts between users . Steam Coupons , which was introduced in December 2011 , provides single @-@ use coupons that provide a discount to the cost of items . Steam Coupons can be provided to users by developers and publishers ; users can trade these coupons between friends in a similar fashion to gifts and in @-@ game items . Steam Market , a feature introduced in beta in December 2012 that would allow users to sell virtual items to others via Steam Wallet funds , further extended the idea . Valve levies a transaction fee of 15 % on such sales and game publishers that use Steam Market pay a transaction fee . For example , Team Fortress 2 — the first game supported at the beta phase — incurred both fees . Full support for other games was expected to be available in early 2013 . In April 2013 , Valve added subscription @-@ based game support to Steam ; the first game to use this service was <unk> Unholy Wars . 
 In October 2012 , Steam introduced non @-@ gaming applications , which will be sold through the service . Creativity and productivity applications can access the core functions of the Steamworks API , allowing them to use Steam 's simplified installation and updating process , and incorporate features including cloud saving and Steam Workshop . Developers of non @-@ gaming software may submit their applications to the Steam Greenlight service to judge interest for later inclusion on the Steam storefront . The Steam store allows game soundtracks to be purchased to be played via Steam Music or integrated with the user 's other media players . Valve has also added the ability for publishers to rent and sell digital movies via the service , with initially most being video game documentaries . Following Warner Bros. Entertainment offering the Mad Max films alongside the September 2015 release of the 2015 video game based on the series , Lionsgate entered into agreement with Valve to rent over one hundred feature films from its catalog through Steam starting in April 2016 , with more films to follow later . With the onset of Steam Machines as announced in March 2015 , the Steam storefront also includes the ability to purchase Steam Machine @-@ related hardware via the Steam store . 
 In conjunction with developers and publishers , Valve frequently provides discounted sales on games on a daily and weekly basis , sometimes oriented around a publisher or genre theme , and may allow games to be played for free during the days of these sales . The site had offered a large selection of games at discount during its annual Summer and Holiday sales , including gamification of these sales to incentive users to purchase more games . 
 = = = = Storefront policies = = = = 
 In June 2015 , Valve created a formal process to allow purchasers to request full refunds on games they had purchased on Steam for any reason , with refunds guaranteed within the first two weeks and if the player had not spent more than two hours in the game . Prior to June 2015 , Valve has had a no @-@ refunds policy but in some circumstances it has offered refunds if third @-@ party content fails to work or improperly reports on certain features . For example , the Steam version of From Dust was originally stated to have a single , post @-@ installation online DRM check with its publisher Ubisoft , but the released version of the game required a DRM check with Ubisoft 's servers each time it was used . At the request of Ubisoft , Valve offered refunds to customers who bought the game while Ubisoft worked to release a patch that would remove the DRM check altogether . On The War Z 's release , players found that the game was still in an alpha @-@ build state and lacked many of the features advertised on its Steam store page . Though the developers <unk> Interactive altered the description after launch to reflect the current state of the game software , Valve removed the title from sale and offered refunds to those who had bought it . Valve also removed Earth : Year <unk> from the Early Access program and offered refunds after discovering that the game 's developers had reused assets from other games and used developer tools to erase negative complaints about the title . The lack of a formal refund policy led the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to sue Valve in 2014 for a violations of Australian consumer laws that required stores to offer refunds for faulty or broken products . The Commission won the lawsuit in March 2016 , though recognizing Valve changed its policy in the interim , with fines to be determined at a later date . 
 Valve will remove games if they no longer meet Valve 's business terms for developers . Grand Theft Auto : Vice City was removed from Steam because of a claim from the Recording Industry Association of America over an expired license for one of the songs on the soundtrack . Near the launch of Electronic Arts ' ( EA ) own digital storefront Origin , Valve removed Crysis 2 and Dragon Age II from Steam because the terms of service prevented games from having their own in @-@ game storefront for downloadable content . In the case of Crysis 2 , a " Maximum Edition " that contained all the available downloadable content for the game and removed the in @-@ game storefront was re @-@ added to Steam . Valve will also remove games that are formally stated to be violating copyright or other intellectual property when given such complaints . In June 2016 , Valve removed Orion by Trek Industries when Activision filed a Digital Millennium Copyright Act ( DMCA ) complaint about the game after it was discovered that one of the game 's artists had taken , among other assets , gun models directly from Call of Duty : Black Ops 3 and Call of Duty : Advanced Warfare . Games that are removed can still be downloaded and played by those that have already purchased these titles . 
 = = = Security = = = 
 The popularity of Steam has led to the service 's being attacked by hackers in the past . A notable attempt occurred on November 6 , 2011 , when Valve temporarily closed the community forums , citing potential hacking threats to the service . On November 10 , Valve reported that the hack had compromised one of its customer databases , potentially allowing the perpetrators to access customer information — including encrypted password and credit card details . At that time , Valve was not aware whether the intruders actually accessed this information or discovered the encryption method , but nevertheless warned users to be alert for fraudulent activity . 
 Valve added Steam Guard functionality to the Steam client in March 2011 to protect against the hijacking of accounts via phishing schemes , one of the largest support issues Valve had at the time . Steam Guard was advertised to take advantage of the identity protection provided by Intel 's second @-@ generation Core processors and compatible motherboard hardware , which allows users to lock their account to a specific computer . Once locked , activity by that account on other computers must first be approved by the user on the locked computer . Support APIs for Steam Guard are available to third @-@ party developers through Steamworks . Steam Guard also offers two @-@ factor , risk @-@ based authentication that uses a one @-@ time verification code sent to a verified email address associated with the Steam account ; this was later expanded to include two @-@ factor authentication through the Steam mobile application , known as Steam Guard Mobile Authenticator . If Steam Guard is enabled , the verification code is sent each time the account is used from an unknown machine . 
 By 2015 , between Steam @-@ based game inventories , trading cards , and other virtual goods attached to a user 's account , Valve has stated that the potential monetary value has drawn hackers to try to access user accounts for financial benefit , and continue to encourage users to secure accounts with Steam Guard ; when trading was introduced in 2011 . Valve reported that in December 2015 , around 77 @,@ 000 accounts per month are hijacked , enabling the hijackers to empty out the user 's inventory of items through the trading features . At that time , the company announced that in an effort to improve security , new restrictions would be added in March 2016 under which 15 @-@ day holds will be placed on traded items unless they activate , and authenticate with Steam Guard Mobile Authenticator . 
 <unk> , a commercial vulnerability research firm , published a paper in October 2012 that said the Steam browser protocol was posing a security risk by enabling malicious exploits through a simple user click on a maliciously crafted steam : / / URL in a browser . The report was taken up by various online publications . This was the second serious vulnerability of gaming @-@ related software following a recent problem with Ubisoft 's copy protection system " Uplay " ; the German IT platform " Heise online " recommended strict separation of gaming and sensitive data , for example using a PC dedicated to gaming , gaming from a second Windows installation , or using a computer account with limited rights dedicated to gaming . 
 In July 2015 , a bug in the software allowed anyone to reset the password to any account by using the " forgot password " function of the client . High profile professional gamers and streamers lost access to their accounts . In December 2015 , Steam 's content delivery network was <unk> in response to a DDoS attack , causing cached store pages containing personal information to be temporarily exposed for 34 @,@ 000 users . 
 = = = User interface = = = 
 Since November 2013 , Steam allows for users to review their purchased titles and organize them into categories set by the user and add to favorite lists for quick access . Players can add non @-@ Steam games to their libraries , allowing the game to be easily accessed from the Steam client and providing support where possible for Steam Overlay features . The Steam interface allows for user @-@ defined shortcuts to be added . In this way , third @-@ party modifications and games not purchased through the Steam Store can use Steam features . Valve sponsors and distributes some modifications free @-@ of @-@ charge ; and modifications that use Steamworks can also use VAC , Friends , the server browser , and any Steam features supported by their parent game . For most games launched from Steam , the client provides an in @-@ game overlay that can be accessed by a keystroke . From the overlay , the user can access his or her Steam Community lists and participate in chat , manage selected Steam settings , and access a built @-@ in web browser without having to exit the game . Since the beginning of February 2011 as a beta version , the overlay also allows players to take screenshots of the games in process ; it automatically stores these and allows the player to review , delete , or share them during or after his or her game session . As a full version on February 24 , 2011 , this feature was reimplemented so that users could share screenshots on websites of Facebook , Twitter , and Reddit straight from a user 's screenshot manager . 
 Steam 's " Big Picture " mode was announced in 2011 ; public betas started in September 2012 and were integrated into the software in December 2012 . Big Picture mode is a 10 @-@ foot user interface , which optimizes the Steam display to work on high @-@ definition televisions , allowing the user to control Steam with a gamepad or with a keyboard and mouse . Newell has stated that Big Picture mode is a step towards a dedicated Steam entertainment hardware unit . SteamVR , a virtual reality ( VR ) Big Picture interface , was introduced in beta in January 2014 . The SteamVR mode enables the user to operate the Big Picture mode and play any game in their Steam library with a virtual theater displayed through the VR headset , the equivalent of looking at a 225 @-@ inch television screen , according to Valve . The mode was first introduced in beta for the Oculus Rift headset and later expanded in March 2015 to support the HTC Vive , a VR unit developed jointly with Valve , with the feature to be publicly released shortly after the Vive 's public launch in April 2016 . In @-@ Home Streaming was introduced in May 2014 ; this allows users to stream games installed on one computer to another — regardless of platform — on the same home network . 
 The Steam client , as part of a social network service , allows users to identify friends and join groups using the Steam Community feature . Users can use text chat and peer @-@ to @-@ peer VoIP with other users , identify which games their friends and other group members are playing , and join and invite friends to Steamworks @-@ based multiplayer games that support this feature . Users can participate in forums hosted by Valve to discuss Steam games . Each user has a unique page that shows his or her groups and friends , game library including earned achievements , game <unk> , and other social features ; users can choose to keep this information private . In January 2010 , Valve reported that 10 million of the 25 million active Steam accounts had signed up to Steam Community . In conjunction with the 2012 Steam Summer Sale , user profiles were updated with Badges reflecting the user 's participation in the Steam community and past events . Steam Trading Cards were introduced in beta in May 2013 and were fully supported by June 2013 . By playing specific games , players would earn virtual trading cards , which they could trade with friends and use towards gaining rewards on the service such as game discounts , downloadable content , or in @-@ game items , and customize their user profile page . The Steam client has become an <unk> provider , allowing third @-@ party websites to use a Steam user 's identity without requiring the user to expose his or her Steam credentials . In order to prevent abuse , access to most community features is restricted until a one @-@ time payment of at least US $ 5 is made to Valve . This requirement can be fulfilled by making any purchase of US $ 5 or more on Steam , or by adding at least US $ 5 to the wallet . 
 Through Steamworks , Steam provides a means of server browsing for multiplayer games that use the Steam Community features , allowing users to create lobbies with friends or members of common groups . Steamworks also provides Valve Anti @-@ Cheat ( VAC ) , Valve 's proprietary anti @-@ cheat system ; game servers automatically detect and report users who are using cheats in online , multiplayer games . In August 2012 , Valve added new features — including dedicated hub pages for games that highlight the best user @-@ created content , top forum posts , and screenshots — to the Community area . In December 2012 , a feature called Game Guides , where users can upload text and images detailing games and game strategies in the same manner as GameFAQs was added . Starting in beta in December 2014 and publicly released in January 2015 , the Steam client allows players to broadcast video streams to the public or Steam friends while playing video games . 
 In September 2014 , Steam Music , a built @-@ in music player , was added to the Steam client , allowing users to play through music stored on their computer or to stream from a locally networked computer . 
 = = = Developer features = = = 
 Valve offers Steamworks , an application programming interface ( API ) that provides development and publishing tools to take advantage of Steam client 's features , free @-@ of @-@ charge to game and software developers . Steamworks provides networking and player authentication tools for both server and peer @-@ to @-@ peer multiplayer games , matchmaking services , support for Steam community friends and groups , Steam statistics and achievements , integrated voice communications , and Steam Cloud support , allowing games to integrate with the Steam client . The API also provides anti @-@ cheating devices and digital copy management . Developers of software available on Steam are able to track sales of their titles through the Steam store . In February 2014 , Valve announced that it will allow developers to set up their own sales for their titles independent of any sales that Valve may set for titles . 
 Steam Greenlight , announced in July 2012 and released the following month , is a way for Steam users to help choose which games are added to the service . Developers are able to submit information about their games , as well as early builds or beta versions , for consideration by users . Users can pledge support for these games , and Valve will help to make top @-@ pledged games available on the Steam service . In response to complaints during its first week that finding games to support was made difficult by a flood of inappropriate or false submissions , Valve required developers to pay US $ 100 to list a game on the service to reduce illegitimate submissions . The fee will be donated to the charity Child 's Play . A later modification allowed developers to put conceptual ideas on the Greenlight service to garner interest in potential projects free @-@ of @-@ charge ; votes from such projects are only visible to the developer . Valve also allowed non @-@ gaming software to be voted onto the service through Greenlight . 
 The first game to be released via Steam Greenlight was McPixel . The initial process offered by Steam Greenlight was panned because while developers favored the concept , the rate of games that are eventually approved by Valve is very small . Valve has acknowledged that this is a problem and believes it can improve upon it ; Valve 's Tom Bui said , " we aren 't where we want to be yet " . In January 2013 , Newell stated that Valve recognized that its role in Greenlight has been perceived as a bottleneck , something it plans to eliminate in the future through an open marketplace infrastructure . On the eve of Greenlight 's first anniversary , Valve simultaneously approved 100 titles through the Greenlight process to demonstrate this change of direction . Valve stated in January 2014 that it plans to phase out the Greenlight process in favor of providing developers with easier means to put their games onto the Steam service . The September 2014 " Discovery Update " added tools that would allow existing Steam users to be curators for game recommendations , and sorting functions that presented more popular titles and recommended titles specific to the user , as to allow more games to be introduced on Steam without the need of Steam Greenlight , while providing some means to highlight user @-@ recommended games . 
 Valve added the ability for developers to sell games under an early access model with a special " Early Access " section of the Steam store , starting in March 2013 . This program allows developers to release functional but yet @-@ incomplete products such as beta versions to the service to allow users to buy the titles and help provide testing and feedback towards the final production . Early access also helps to provide funding to the developers to help complete their titles . 
 = = = Steam Workshop = = = 
 The Steam Workshop is a Steam account @-@ based hosting service for videogame user @-@ created content . Depending on the title , new levels , art assets , gameplay modifications , or other content may be published to or installed from the Steam Workshop through an automated , online account @-@ based process . The Workshop was originally used for distribution of new items for Team Fortress 2 ; it was redesigned to extend support for any game , including modifications for The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim , in early 2012 . A May 2012 patch for Portal 2 , enabled by a new map @-@ making tool through the Steam Workshop , introduced the ability to share user @-@ created levels . Independently @-@ developed games , including Dungeons of <unk> , are able to provide Steam Workshop support for user @-@ generated content . Dota 2 became Valve 's third published title available for the Steam Workshop in June 2012 ; its features include customizable accessories , skins , and voice packs . 
 Valve has provided some user @-@ developed Workshop content as paid @-@ for features in Valve @-@ developed games , including Team Fortress 2 and DOTA 2 ; as of January 2015 , over $ 57 million has been paid to content creators using the Workshop . Valve began allowing developers to use these advanced features in January 2015 ; the developer and content generator will share the profits of the sale of these items ; the feature went live in April 2015 , starting with various mods for Skyrim . This feature was pulled a few days afterward following negative user feedback and reports of pricing and copyright misuse . Valve has stated they are still interested in offering this type of functionality in the future , but will review the implementation to avoid these previous mistakes . In November 2015 , the Steam client was updated with the ability for game developers to offer in @-@ game items for direct sale via the store interface . The first game to use the item store was Rust in 2015 . 
 = = = Steam for Schools = = = 
 Steam for Schools is a function @-@ limited version of the Steam client that is available free @-@ of @-@ charge to educational institutions for use in classrooms . It is part of Valve 's initiative to support gamification of learning for classroom instruction ; it was released alongside free versions of Portal 2 and a standalone program called " Puzzle Maker " that allows teachers and students to create and manipulate levels . It features additional authentication security that allows teachers to share and distribute content via a Steam Workshop @-@ type interface but blocks access from students . 
 = = Supported platforms = = 
 Steam was released in 2003 exclusively for the Microsoft Windows operating system but has since been expanded to other platforms . 
 = = = OS X = = = 
 On March 8 , 2010 , Valve announced that Steam was developing a client for OS X. The announcement was preceded by a change in the Steam beta client to support the cross @-@ platform WebKit web browser rendering engine instead of the Trident engine of Internet Explorer . Before this announcement , Valve teased the release by e @-@ mailing several images to Mac community and gaming websites ; the images featured characters from Valve games with Apple logos and parodies of vintage Macintosh advertisements . Valve developed a full video homage to Apple 's 1984 Macintosh commercial to announce the availability of Half @-@ Life 2 and its episodes on the service ; some concept images for the video had previously been used to tease the Mac Steam client . 
 Steam for OS X was originally planned for release in April 2010 ; it was launched worldwide on May 12 , 2010 , following a successful beta period . In addition to the Steam client , several features were made available to developers , allowing them to take advantage of the cross @-@ platform Source engine , and platform and network capabilities using Steamworks . Through SteamPlay , the OS X client allows players who have purchased compatible products in the Windows version to download the Mac versions at no cost , allowing them to continue playing the game on the other platform . Some third @-@ party titles may require the user to re @-@ purchase them to gain access to the cross @-@ platform functionality . The Steam Cloud is cross @-@ platform compatible . Multiplayer games can also be cross @-@ compatible , allowing Windows and Mac players to play with each other . 
 = = = Linux = = = 
 Valve announced in July 2012 that it was developing a Steam client for Linux and modifying the Source engine to work natively on Linux , based on the Ubuntu distribution . This announcement followed months of speculation , primarily from the website <unk> that had discovered evidence of Linux developing in recent builds of Steam and other Valve software . Newell stated that getting Steam and games to work on Linux is a key strategy for Valve ; Newell called the closed nature of Microsoft Windows 8 , " a catastrophe for everyone in the PC space " , and that Linux would maintain " the openness of the platform " . Valve is extending support to any developers that want to bring their games to Linux , by " making it as easy as possible for anybody who 's engaged with us — putting their games on Steam and getting those running on Linux " , according to Newell . 
 The team developing the Linux client had been working for a year before the announcement to validate that such a port would be possible . As of the official announcement , a near @-@ feature @-@ complete Steam client for Linux had been developed and successfully run on Ubuntu . Internal beta testing of the Linux client started in October 2012 ; external beta testing occurred in early November the same year . Open beta clients for Linux were made available in late December 2012 , and the client was officially released in mid @-@ February 2013 . Valve 's Linux group will focus on improving the Steam client and will assure that its selected first Source game , Left 4 Dead 2 , will run at an acceptable frame rate and degree of connectivity with the Windows and OS X versions . From there , it will work on porting other games to Ubuntu and expanding to other Linux distributions . In early August 2012 , Valve said it had successfully completed the Left 4 Dead 2 port . Following Valve 's announcement , Devolver Digital announced that it will port Serious Sam 3 : <unk> with Steamworks support to the Ubuntu Linux distribution . Linux games will also be eligible for SteamPlay availability ; The Cave was announced as one of the first titles to take advantage of this . Versions of Steam working under Fedora and Red Hat Enterprise Linux were released by October 2013 . On June 5 , 2014 , the number of Linux @-@ compatible games on Steam reached 500 while on March 11 , 2015 the number of native games available via Steam for Linux / SteamOS had surpassed 1000 . 
 = = = Consoles = = = 
 At E3 2010 , Newell announced that Steamworks would arrive on the PlayStation 3 with Portal 2 . It would provide automatic updates , community support , downloadable content and other unannounced features . Steamworks made its debut on consoles with Portal 2 's PlayStation 3 release . Several features — including cross @-@ platform play and instant messaging , Steam Cloud for saved games , and the ability for PS3 owners to download Portal 2 from Steam ( Windows and Mac ) at no extra cost — were offered . Valve 's Counter @-@ Strike : Global Offensive also supports Steamworks and cross @-@ platform features on the PlayStation 3 , including using keyboard and mouse controls as an alternative to the gamepad . Valve said it " hope [ s ] to expand upon this foundation with more Steam features and functionality in DLC and future content releases " . 
 The Xbox 360 does not have support for Steamworks . Newell said that they would have liked to bring the service to the console through the game Counter @-@ Strike : Global Offensive , which would have allowed Valve to provide the same feature set that it did for the PlayStation 3 , but later said that cross @-@ platform play would not be present in the final version of the game . Valve attributes the inability to use Steamworks on the Xbox 360 to limitations in the Xbox Live regulations of the ability to deliver patches and new content . Valve 's Erik Johnson stated that Microsoft requires that new content must be certified and validated before distribution , which would limit the usefulness of Steamworks ' delivery approach . 
 = = = Mobile platforms = = = 
 Valve released an official Steam client for iOS and Android devices in late January 2012 , following a short beta period . The application allows players to log in to their accounts to browse the storefront , manage their games , and communicate with friends in the Steam community . The application also incorporates a two @-@ factor authentication system that works with Steam Guard , further enhancing the security of a user 's account . Newell stated that the application was a strong request from Steam users and sees it as a means " to make [ Steam ] richer and more accessible for everyone " . A mobile Steam client for Windows Phone devices was released in June 2016 . 
 = = = Steam Machine = = = 
 Prior to 2013 , industry analysts believed that Valve was developing hardware and tuning features of Steam with apparent use on its own hardware . These computers were pre @-@ emptively dubbed as " Steam Boxes " by the gaming community and expected to be a dedicated machine focused upon Steam functionality and maintaining the core functionality of a traditional video game console . During the week beginning on September 23 , 2013 , Valve unveiled a console operating system called SteamOS built atop the Linux operating system , a console input device called the Steam Controller , and the final concept of the Steam Machine hardware , which were tentatively scheduled to be released in 2014 but now will be released in late 2015 . Unlike other consoles , the Steam Machine has no set hardware ; its technology is implemented at the discretion of the manufacturer and is fully customizable in the same lieu as a personal computer . The Steam client enables users to purchase this hardware directly . 
 = = Market share and impact = = 
 Valve does not release any sales figures for its Steam service ; it only provides the data to companies with games on Steam , which they cannot release without permission because of a non @-@ disclosure agreement with Valve . However , Stardock , the previous owner of competing platform Impulse , estimated that as of 2009 , Steam had a 70 % share of the digital distribution market for video games . In early 2011 , Forbes reported that Steam sales constituted 50 – 70 % of the US $ 4 billion market for downloaded PC games and that Steam offered game producers gross margins of 70 % of purchase price , compared with 30 % at retail . Steam 's success has led to some criticism because of its support of DRM and for being an effective monopoly . Free Software Foundation founder Richard Stallman commented on the issue following the announcement that Steam would come to Linux ; he said that while he supposes that its release can boost GNU / Linux adoption leaving users better off than with Microsoft Windows , he stressed that he sees nothing wrong with commercial software but that the problem is that Steam is unethical for not being free software and that its inclusion in GNU / Linux distributions teaches the users that the point is not freedom and thus works against the software freedom that is his goal . 
 In November 2011 , CD Projekt the developer of The Witcher 2 : Assassins of Kings revealed that Steam was responsible for 200 @,@ 000 ( 80 % ) of the 250 @,@ 000 online sales of the game . Steam was responsible for 58 @.@ 6 % of gross revenue for Defender 's Quest during its first three months of release across six digital distribution platforms — comprising four major digital game distributors and two methods of purchasing and downloading the game directly from the developer . 
 Because Steam is nearly required to play most games for personal computers , its customer service has been highly criticized by its users , with users citing poor response times or lack of response in regards to issues such as being locked out of one 's library or having a non @-@ working game redemption key . In March 2015 , Valve had been given a failing " F " grade from the Better Business Bureau due to a large number of complaints in Valve 's handling of Steam , leading Valve 's Erik Johnson to state that " we don 't feel like our customer service support is where it needs to be right now " . Johnson stated the company plans to better integrate customer support features into the Steam client and be more responsive to such issues . In December 2015 , the French consumer group UFC Que <unk> initiated a lawsuit against Valve for several of their Steam policies that conflict or run afoul of French law . 
 = = = Sector competition = = = 
 From its inception in 2003 through to nearly 2009 , Steam had a mostly uncontested hold over the PC digital distribution market before major competitors emerged with the largest competitors in the past being services like Games for Windows – Live and Impulse , both of which were shut down in 2013 and 2014 , respectively . Sales via the Steam catalog are estimated to be between 50 and 75 percent of the total PC gaming market . Steam ’ s critics often refer to the service as a monopoly , and claim that placing such a percentage of the overall market can be detrimental to the industry as a whole and that sector competition can only yield positive results for the consumer . Several developers also noted that Steam 's influence on the PC gaming market is powerful and one that smaller developers cannot afford to ignore or work with , but believe that Valve 's corporate practices for the service make it a type of " benevolent dictator " , as Valve attempts to make the service as amenable to developers . 
 As Steam has grown in popularity many other competing services have been surfacing trying to emulate their success . The most notable major competitors are Electronic Arts ' ( EA ) Origin service , Ubisoft 's Uplay , Blizzard Entertainment 's Battle.net and GOG.com. Battle.net competes as a publisher exclusive platform , while GOG.com 's catalog includes many of the same titles as Steam but offers them in a DRM @-@ free platform . Upon launch of EA 's Origin in 2011 , several EA @-@ published titles were no longer available for sale , and users feared that future EA titles would be limited to Origin 's service . Newell expressed an interest in EA games returning to the Steam catalog though noted the situation was complicated . Newell stated , " We have to show EA it ’ s a smart decision to have EA games on Steam , and we ’ re going to try to show them that . " Ubisoft still publishes their games on the Steam platform , however most games published since the launch of Uplay require this service to run after launching the game from Steam . 
 = J. R. Celski = 
 J.R. Celski ( / <unk> / , born July 17 , 1990 ) is an American short track speed skater and three @-@ time medalist in the Winter Olympics . Celski holds the World Record in the 500 m ( 39 @.@ 937 ) and is the first person to skate under 40 seconds in this distance . Celski also holds the Junior World Record in the 1000 m with a time of 1 : 25 @.@ 304 . 
 At the 2010 Winter Olympics , Celski won bronze in the 1500 m and the 5000 m relay . Five months before the Olympics , Celski suffered a gruesome injury when he fell during a race and his right skate blade gashed his left thigh and was uncertain if he would be able to skate again . 
 Celski 's breakthrough performance was at the 2009 World Short Track Speed Skating Championships where he won five medals ( two gold , one silver , two bronze ) . Overall , Celski has won three gold medals , four silver medals , and four bronze medals at the World Championships . He also has one bronze medal at the World Team Championships and four medals ( two gold , two bronze ) at the World Junior Championships . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2009 World Junior Championships = = = 
 In the 1500 m , Celski won silver behind Um <unk> @-@ Ho with a time of 2 : 16 @.@ 780 . In his second event , the 500 m , Celski won with a time of 41 @.@ 462 breaking the previous Junior World Record . Celski finished third overall with 58 points . Celski then combined with Eduardo Alvarez , Jonathan <unk> , and Robert Lawrence in the 3000 m relay to finish first with a time of 4 : 06 @.@ 032 . 
 = = = 2009 World Championships = = = 
 In the 1500 m , Celski placed third behind Lee Ho @-@ Suk and Kwak Yoon @-@ Gy with a time of 2 : 14 @.@ 974 . In the 1000 m , Celski placed third behind Lee Ho @-@ Suk and Apolo Ohno with a time of 1 : 26 @.@ 348 . In his third event , the 3000 m , Celski won with a time of 4 : 48 @.@ 444 . Celski finished second overall with 65 points . Celski then combined with Ryan Bedford , Jordan Malone , and Apolo Ohno in the 5000 m relay to finish first with a time of 6 : 51 @.@ 400 . 
 = = = 2010 Winter Olympics = = = 
 = = = = Trials = = = = 
 The U.S. Short Track Speed Skating Olympic Trials were held September 8 – 12 , 2009 in Marquette , Michigan . Celski finished second overall and was leading in points after the first two nights of the trials , but was injured during a crash in the semifinals of the 500 m race where his right skate sliced into his left leg ; he did not skate in the second 1000 m races . His injury required emergency surgery , 60 stitches , and five months of rehabilitation with the help of Eric Heiden . Celski was unsure if he would ever compete again . During the 1000 m time trial , Apolo Ohno , with a personal best of 1 : 24 @.@ 500 , came in second to Celski , who skated a personal best of 1 : 23 @.@ 981 . Celski , along with Ohno , Jordan Malone , Travis Jayner and Simon Cho were the top five finishers at the trials . Afterwards , Ohno said about the nominated team : " This is the strongest team we 've ever had . I feel really good about how we will do in the next Olympics " . 
 = = = = Games = = = = 
 At the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver , Celski won a pair of bronze medals . One in the 1500 m and another in the 5000 m relay . In the 1500 m final , Celski won the bronze medal after 2006 silver medalist Lee Ho @-@ Suk crashed into fellow Korean skater Sung Si @-@ Bak during the final turn of the last lap . Celski was in fifth place leading into the crash and as a result moved into third place . Apolo Ohno moved into second place . Celski was disqualified in the 1000 m semifinals after knocking Canadian skater Francois Hamelin to the ground . The 5000 m relay team for the United States finished with the bronze medal . The team , consisting of Apolo Ohno , Simon Cho , Travis Jayner , Jordan Malone and Celski , was in the fourth position for the majority of the race . With a strong push from Celski with two laps to go , Ohno as the anchor leg was able to pass the Chinese team for third place ; Canada won the gold and South Korea took silver . 
 = = = 2010 World Championships = = = 
 Celski advanced to finals of the 1500 m after winning 1st place in the heats , quarterfinals , and semifinals . During the finals , Celski was in the lead with about five laps to go , but in the last few laps , the three Korean skaters managed to overtake him , sweeping the podium with Kwak Yoon @-@ Gy in 1st . Celski finished in 4th place , in front of teammate Travis Jayner , who came in 6th . The next day , Celski competed in the 500 m . During the semifinals , Celski attempted a pass from fourth to third place , but during his pass , François @-@ Louis Tremblay of Canada , in second place at the time , fell , tripping Celski on his way down . Celski finished the race in 3rd , but was then disqualified , while Tremblay advanced . In the 1000 m , Celski finished third behind Lee Ho @-@ Suk and Kwak Yoon @-@ Gy with a time of 1 : 27 @.@ 515 . In the 3000 m , Celski again placed third behind Lee Ho @-@ Suk and Kwak Yoon @-@ Gy . Celski finished fourth overall with 39 points . Celski then combined with Jordan Malone , Travis Jayner , and Simon Cho in the 5000 m relay to finish second behind South Korea with a time of 6 : 46 @.@ 205 . 
 = = = 2014 Winter Olympics = = = 
 At the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi J.R. <unk> and placed 4th in the Men 's <unk> , 6th in the 500m , and 13th in the <unk> . J.R. earned a Silver medal in the Short Track Men 's 5000m Relay . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 On Tuesday , February 9 , 2010 J.R. appeared on the TV show The Biggest Loser where he introduced a pop @-@ challenge to the contestants of the show . During the segment J.R. offered words of encouragement , and showed the contestants how to use a slide board . 
 On Wednesday , February 5 , 2014 J.R. was featured in a one @-@ hour special on NBC television titled How to Raise an Olympian . The program , hosted by Meredith Vieira , chronicles the journeys of seven U.S. Olympians and features interviews from parents and coaches along with home video and photos from each athlete 's childhood . The event was broadcast on television with <unk> @-@ media components to further each segment . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Celski was born in Monterey , California where his father Robert Celski was serving in the U.S. Army . He was raised in Federal Way , Washington . His father , Robert , is of Polish descent and his mother , Sue , is of Filipino descent . Celski has two older brothers , Chris and David ; David serves as Captain in the United States Army , and Chris is a salesperson at Nordstrom . Celski attended Lakewood High School in Lakewood , California as well as Todd Beamer High School in Federal Way , Washington , graduating from Lakewood with high honors in the Merit Scholars Program . Before switching to speed skating after seeing the 2002 Winter Olympics , Celski was a national champion in @-@ line skater . He missed the minimum age requirement for the 2006 Winter Olympics by 17 days . 
 = Sea otter = 
 The sea otter ( Enhydra lutris ) is a marine mammal native to the coasts of the northern and eastern North Pacific Ocean . Adult sea otters typically weigh between 14 and 45 kg ( 31 and 99 lb ) , making them the heaviest members of the weasel family , but among the smallest marine mammals . Unlike most marine mammals , the sea otter 's primary form of insulation is an exceptionally thick coat of fur , the densest in the animal kingdom . Although it can walk on land , the sea otter lives mostly in the ocean . 
 The sea otter inhabits offshore environments , where it dives to the sea floor to forage . It preys mostly on marine invertebrates such as sea urchins , various molluscs and crustaceans , and some species of fish . Its foraging and eating habits are noteworthy in several respects . First , its use of rocks to dislodge prey and to open shells makes it one of the few mammal species to use tools . In most of its range , it is a keystone species , controlling sea urchin populations which would otherwise inflict extensive damage to kelp forest ecosystems . Its diet includes prey species that are also valued by humans as food , leading to conflicts between sea otters and fisheries . 
 Sea otters , whose numbers were once estimated at 150 @,@ 000 – 300 @,@ 000 , were hunted extensively for their fur between 1741 and 1911 , and the world population fell to 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 individuals living in a fraction of their historic range . A subsequent international ban on hunting , conservation efforts , and reintroduction programs into previously populated areas have contributed to numbers rebounding , and the species now occupies about two @-@ thirds of its former range . The recovery of the sea otter is considered an important success in marine conservation , although populations in the Aleutian Islands and California have recently declined or have plateaued at depressed levels . For these reasons , the sea otter remains classified as an endangered species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first scientific description of the sea otter is contained in the field notes of Georg Steller from 1751 , and the species was described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae of 1758 . Originally named Lutra marina , it underwent numerous name changes before being accepted as Enhydra lutris in 1922 . The generic name Enhydra , derives from the Ancient Greek en / εν " in " and hydra / <unk> " water " , meaning " in the water " , and the Latin word lutris , meaning " otter " . 
 The sea otter was formerly sometimes referred to as the " sea beaver " , being the marine fur @-@ bearer similar in commercial value to the terrestrial beaver . Rodents ( of which the beaver is one ) are not closely related to otters , which are carnivores . It is not to be confused with the marine otter , a rare otter species native to the southern west coast of South America . A number of other otter species , while predominantly living in fresh water , are commonly found in marine coastal habitats . The extinct sea mink of northeast North America is another mustelid that had adapted to a marine environment . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The sea otter is the heaviest ( the giant otter is longer , but significantly slimmer ) member of the family Mustelidae , a diverse group that includes the 13 otter species and terrestrial animals such as weasels , badgers , and minks . It is unique among the mustelids in not making dens or burrows , in having no functional anal scent glands , and in being able to live its entire life without leaving the water . The only member of the genus Enhydra , the sea otter is so different from other mustelid species that , as recently as 1982 , some scientists believed it was more closely related to the earless seals . Genetic analysis indicates the sea otter and its closest extant relatives , which include the African speckle @-@ throated otter , European otter , African <unk> otter and oriental small @-@ clawed otter , shared an ancestor approximately 5 million years ago ( Mya ) . 
 Fossil evidence indicates the Enhydra lineage became isolated in the North Pacific approximately 2 Mya , giving rise to the now @-@ extinct Enhydra <unk> and the modern sea otter , Enhydra lutris . The sea otter evolved initially in northern Hokkaidō and Russia , and then spread east to the Aleutian Islands , mainland Alaska , and down the North American coast . In comparison to cetaceans , sirenians , and pinnipeds , which entered the water approximately 50 , 40 , and 20 Mya , respectively , the sea otter is a relative newcomer to a marine existence . In some respects , though , the sea otter is more fully adapted to water than pinnipeds , which must haul out on land or ice to give birth . 
 One related species has been described , Enhydra <unk> , from the Pleistocene of East Anglia . The holotype , a lower carnassial , was in the Norwich Castle Museum but seems to be lost . Only one more specimen , an extremely worn lower carnassial , is known . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 The three recognized subspecies , which vary in body size and in some skull and dental characteristics , are : 
 The reintroduction effort off the Oregon coast was not successful . However , reintroductions in 1969 and 1970 off the Washington coast were very successful and sea otters have been expanding their range since . They have now entered the Strait of Juan de Fuca and can be found almost as far east as Pillar Point . Individuals have even been seen in the San Juan Islands and northern Puget Sound . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 The sea otter is one of the smallest marine mammal species , but it is the heaviest mustelid . Male sea otters usually weigh 22 to 45 kg ( 49 to 99 lb ) and are 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 ft 11 in to 4 ft 11 in ) in length , though specimens to 54 kg ( 119 lb ) have been recorded . Females are smaller , weighing 14 to 33 kg ( 31 to 73 lb ) and measuring 1 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 4 m ( 3 ft 3 in to 4 ft 7 in ) in length . For its size , the male otter 's baculum is very large , massive and bent upwards , measuring 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in length and 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) at the base . 
 Unlike most other marine mammals , the sea otter has no blubber and relies on its exceptionally thick fur to keep warm . With up to 150 @,@ 000 strands of hair per square centimeter ( nearly one million per sq in ) , its fur is the densest of any animal . The fur consists of long , waterproof guard hairs and short underfur ; the guard hairs keep the dense underfur layer dry . Cold water is kept completely away from the skin and heat loss is limited . The fur is thick year @-@ round , as it is shed and replaced gradually rather than in a distinct molting season . As the ability of the guard hairs to repel water depends on utmost cleanliness , the sea otter has the ability to reach and groom the fur on any part of its body , taking advantage of its loose skin and an unusually supple skeleton . The coloration of the pelage is usually deep brown with silver @-@ gray speckles , but it can range from yellowish or grayish brown to almost black . In adults , the head , throat , and chest are lighter in color than the rest of the body . 
 The sea otter displays numerous adaptations to its marine environment . The nostrils and small ears can close . The hind feet , which provide most of its propulsion in swimming , are long , broadly flattened , and fully webbed . The fifth digit on each hind foot is longest , facilitating swimming while on its back , but making walking difficult . The tail is fairly short , thick , slightly flattened , and muscular . The front paws are short with retractable claws , with tough pads on the palms that enable gripping slippery prey . The bones show <unk> , increasing their density to reduce buoyancy . 
 The sea otter propels itself underwater by moving the rear end of its body , including its tail and hind feet , up and down , and is capable of speeds of up to 9 km / h ( 5 @.@ 6 mph ) . When underwater , its body is long and streamlined , with the short forelimbs pressed closely against the chest . When at the surface , it usually floats on its back and moves by sculling its feet and tail from side to side . At rest , all four limbs can be folded onto the torso to conserve heat , whereas on particularly hot days , the hind feet may be held underwater for cooling . The sea otter 's body is highly buoyant because of its large lung capacity – about 2 @.@ 5 times greater than that of similar @-@ sized land mammals – and the air trapped in its fur . The sea otter walks with a clumsy , rolling gait on land , and can run in a bounding motion . 
 Long , highly sensitive whiskers and front paws help the sea otter find prey by touch when waters are dark or murky . Researchers have noted when they approach in plain view , sea otters react more rapidly when the wind is blowing towards the animals , indicating the sense of smell is more important than sight as a warning sense . Other observations indicate the sea otter 's sense of sight is useful above and below the water , although not as good as that of seals . Its hearing is neither particularly acute nor poor . 
 An adult 's 32 teeth , particularly the molars , are flattened and rounded , designed to crush rather than cut food . Seals and sea otters are the only carnivores with two pairs of lower incisor teeth rather than three ; the adult dental formula is 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 12 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 2 
 The sea otter has a metabolic rate two or three times that of comparatively sized terrestrial mammals . It must eat an estimated 25 to 38 % of its own body weight in food each day to burn the calories necessary to counteract the loss of heat due to the cold water environment . Its digestive efficiency is estimated at 80 to 85 % , and food is digested and passed in as little as three hours . Most of its need for water is met through food , although , in contrast to most other marine mammals , it also drinks seawater . Its relatively large kidneys enable it to derive fresh water from sea water and excrete concentrated urine . 
 A sea otter has two types of fur , the underfur and the guard hair . The shape of these different hair fibers connect to trap air between them . This allows them to maintain their body heat without the blubber other sea mammals use . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The sea otter is diurnal . It has a period of foraging and eating in the morning , starting about an hour before sunrise , then rests or sleeps in mid @-@ day . Foraging resumes for a few hours in the afternoon and subsides before sunset , and a third foraging period may occur around midnight . Females with pups appear to be more inclined to feed at night . Observations of the amount of time a sea otter must spend each day foraging range from 24 to 60 % , apparently depending on the availability of food in the area . 
 Sea otters spend much of their time grooming , which consists of cleaning the fur , untangling knots , removing loose fur , rubbing the fur to squeeze out water and introduce air , and blowing air into the fur . To casual observers , it appears as if the animals are scratching , but they are not known to have lice or other parasites in the fur . When eating , sea otters roll in the water frequently , apparently to wash food scraps from their fur . 
 = = = Foraging = = = 
 The sea otter hunts in short dives , often to the sea floor . Although it can hold its breath for up to five minutes , its dives typically last about one minute and no more than four . It is the only marine animal capable of lifting and turning over rocks , which it often does with its front paws when searching for prey . The sea otter may also pluck snails and other organisms from kelp and dig deep into underwater mud for clams . It is the only marine mammal that catches fish with its forepaws rather than with its teeth . 
 Under each foreleg , the sea otter has a loose pouch of skin that extends across the chest . In this pouch ( preferentially the left one ) , the animal stores collected food to bring to the surface . This pouch also holds a rock , unique to the otter , that is used to break open shellfish and clams . There , the sea otter eats while floating on its back , using its forepaws to tear food apart and bring it to its mouth . It can chew and swallow small mussels with their shells , whereas large mussel shells may be twisted apart . It uses its lower incisor teeth to access the meat in shellfish . To eat large sea urchins , which are mostly covered with spines , the sea otter bites through the underside where the spines are shortest , and licks the soft contents out of the urchin 's shell . 
 The sea otter 's use of rocks when hunting and feeding makes it one of the few mammal species to use tools . To open hard shells , it may pound its prey with both paws against a rock on its chest . To pry an abalone off its rock , it hammers the abalone shell using a large stone , with observed rates of 45 blows in 15 seconds . Releasing an abalone , which can cling to rock with a force equal to 4 @,@ 000 times its own body weight , requires multiple dives . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 Although each adult and independent juvenile forages alone , sea otters tend to rest together in single @-@ sex groups called rafts . A raft typically contains 10 to 100 animals , with male rafts being larger than female ones . The largest raft ever seen contained over 2000 sea otters . To keep from drifting out to sea when resting and eating , sea otters may wrap themselves in kelp . 
 A male sea otter is most likely to mate if he maintains a breeding territory in an area that is also favored by females . As autumn is the peak breeding season in most areas , males typically defend their territory only from spring to autumn . During this time , males patrol the boundaries of their territories to exclude other males , although actual fighting is rare . Adult females move freely between male territories , where they outnumber adult males by an average of five to one . Males that do not have territories tend to congregate in large , male @-@ only groups , and swim through female areas when searching for a mate . 
 The species exhibits a variety of vocal behaviors . The cry of a pup is often compared to that of a seagull . Females coo when they are apparently content ; males may grunt instead . Distressed or frightened adults may whistle , hiss , or in extreme circumstances , scream . 
 Although sea otters can be playful and sociable , they are not considered to be truly social animals . They spend much time alone , and each adult can meet its own needs in terms of hunting , grooming , and defense . 
 = = = Reproduction and lifecycle = = = 
 Sea otters are polygynous : males have multiple female partners . However , temporary pair @-@ bonding occurs for a few days between a female in estrus and her mate . Mating takes place in the water and can be rough , the male biting the female on the muzzle – which often leaves scars on the nose – and sometimes holding her head under water . 
 Births occur year @-@ round , with peaks between May and June in northern populations and between January and March in southern populations . Gestation appears to vary from four to twelve months , as the species is capable of delayed implantation followed by four months of pregnancy . In California , sea otters usually breed every year , about twice as often as those in Alaska . 
 Birth usually takes place in the water and typically produces a single pup weighing 1 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 3 kg ( 3 to 5 lb ) . Twins occur in 2 % of births ; however , usually only one pup survives . At birth , the eyes are open , ten teeth are visible , and the pup has a thick coat of baby fur . Mothers have been observed to lick and fluff a newborn for hours ; after grooming , the pup 's fur retains so much air , the pup floats like a cork and cannot dive . The fluffy baby fur is replaced by adult fur after about 13 weeks . 
 Nursing lasts six to eight months in Californian populations and four to twelve months in Alaska , with the mother beginning to offer bits of prey at one to two months . The milk from a sea otter 's two abdominal nipples is rich in fat and more similar to the milk of other marine mammals than to that of other mustelids . A pup , with guidance from its mother , practices swimming and diving for several weeks before it is able to reach the sea floor . Initially , the objects it retrieves are of little food value , such as brightly colored starfish and pebbles . Juveniles are typically independent at six to eight months , but a mother may be forced to abandon a pup if she cannot find enough food for it ; at the other extreme , a pup may nurse until it is almost adult size . Pup mortality is high , particularly during an individual 's first winter – by one estimate , only 25 % of pups survive their first year . Pups born to experienced mothers have the highest survival rates . 
 Females perform all tasks of feeding and raising offspring , and have occasionally been observed caring for orphaned pups . Much has been written about the level of devotion of sea otter mothers for their pups – a mother gives her infant almost constant attention , cradling it on her chest away from the cold water and attentively grooming its fur . When foraging , she leaves her pup floating on the water , sometimes wrapped in kelp to keep it from floating away ; if the pup is not sleeping , it cries loudly until she returns . Mothers have been known to carry their pups for days after the pups ' deaths . 
 Females become sexually mature at around three or four years of age and males at around five ; however , males often do not successfully breed until a few years later . A captive male sired offspring at age 19 . In the wild , sea otters live to a maximum age of 23 years , with average lifespans of 10 – 15 years for males and 15 – 20 years for females . Several captive individuals have lived past 20 years , and a female at the Seattle Aquarium died at the age of 28 years . Sea otters in the wild often develop worn teeth , which may account for their apparently shorter lifespans . 
 There are several documented cases in which male sea otters have forcibly copulated with juvenile harbor seals , sometimes resulting in death . 
 The forced copulation does not stop with the baby harbor seals , however , as there are documented cases of sea otters raping other animals as well . For instance , a sea otter named " Whiskers " was observed luring a Husky , " Tuk " , into the water , killing it , and raping its dead body . 
 = = Population and distribution = = 
 Sea otters live in coastal waters 15 to 23 meters ( 50 to 75 ft ) deep , and usually stay within a kilometer ( ⅔ mi ) of the shore . They are found most often in areas with protection from the most severe ocean winds , such as rocky coastlines , thick kelp forests , and barrier reefs . Although they are most strongly associated with rocky substrates , sea otters can also live in areas where the sea floor consists primarily of mud , sand , or silt . Their northern range is limited by ice , as sea otters can survive amidst drift ice but not land @-@ fast ice . Individuals generally occupy a home range a few kilometers long , and remain there year @-@ round . 
 The sea otter population is thought to have once been 150 @,@ 000 to 300 @,@ 000 , stretching in an arc across the North Pacific from northern Japan to the central Baja California Peninsula in Mexico . The fur trade that began in the 1740s reduced the sea otter 's numbers to an estimated 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 members in 13 colonies . In about two @-@ thirds of its former range , the species is at varying levels of recovery , with high population densities in some areas and threatened populations in others . Sea otters currently have stable populations in parts of the Russian east coast , Alaska , British Columbia , Washington , and California , with reports of <unk> in Mexico and Japan . Population estimates made between 2004 and 2007 give a worldwide total of approximately 107 @,@ 000 sea otters . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 Currently , the most stable and secure part of the sea otter 's range is Russia . Before the 19th century , around 20 @,@ 000 to 25 @,@ 000 sea otters lived near the Kuril Islands , with more near Kamchatka and the Commander Islands . After the years of the Great Hunt , the population in these areas , currently part of Russia , was only 750 . By 2004 , sea otters had repopulated all of their former habitat in these areas , with an estimated total population of about 27 @,@ 000 . Of these , about 19 @,@ 000 are at the Kurils , 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 500 at Kamchatka and another 5 @,@ 000 to 5 @,@ 500 at the Commander Islands . Growth has slowed slightly , suggesting the numbers are reaching carrying capacity . 
 = = = Alaska = = = 
 Alaska is the heartland of the sea otter 's range . In 1973 , the population in Alaska was estimated at between 100 @,@ 000 and 125 @,@ 000 animals . By 2006 , though , the Alaska population had fallen to an estimated 73 @,@ 000 animals . A massive decline in sea otter populations in the Aleutian Islands accounts for most of the change ; the cause of this decline is not known , although orca predation is suspected . The sea otter population in Prince William Sound was also hit hard by the Exxon Valdez oil spill , which killed thousands of sea otters in 1989 . 
 = = = British Columbia = = = 
 Along the North American coast south of Alaska , the sea otter 's range is discontinuous . A remnant population survived off Vancouver Island into the 20th century , but it died out despite the 1911 international protection treaty , with the last sea otter taken near <unk> in 1929 . From 1969 to 1972 , 89 sea otters were flown or shipped from Alaska to the west coast of Vancouver Island . 
 This population expanded to over 3 @,@ 200 in 2004 , and their range on the island 's west coast expanded from Cape Scott in the north to Barkley Sound to the south . In 1989 , a separate colony was discovered in the central British Columbia coast . It is not known if this colony , which numbered about 300 animals in 2004 , was founded by transplanted otters or by survivors of the fur trade . 
 The status of the sea otters has improved since 2004 with a report of 4 @,@ 700 in 2008 that improved their status to " special concern " in Canada . They currently occupy much of the exposed west coast of Vancouver Island and parts of the central mainland BC coast . 
 = = = Washington = = = 
 In 1969 and 1970 , 59 sea otters were translocated from Amchitka Island to Washington . Annual surveys between 2000 and 2004 have recorded between 504 and 743 individuals , and their range is in the Olympic Peninsula from just south of Destruction Island to Pillar Point . In Washington , sea otters are found almost exclusively on the outer coasts . They can swim as close as six feet off shore along the Olympic coast . Reported sightings of sea otters in the San Juan Islands and Puget Sound almost always turn out to be North American river otters , which are commonly seen along the seashore . However , biologists have confirmed isolated sightings of sea otters in these areas since the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 = = = California = = = 
 The historic population of California sea otters was estimated at 16 @,@ 000 before the fur trade began . California 's sea otters are the descendants of a single colony of about 50 southern sea otters discovered near Bixby Bridge in Big Sur in 1938 . Their principal range has gradually expanded and extends from Pigeon Point in San Mateo County to Santa Barbara County . 
 For southern sea otters to be considered for removal from threatened species listing , the population would have to exceed 3 @,@ 090 for three consecutive years . The most recent ( spring 2014 ) United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) California sea otter survey count is 2 @,@ 944 , almost flat for the last five years . There has been some contraction from the northern ( now Pigeon Point ) and southern limits of the sea otter 's range apparently related to lethal shark bites . The 2013 USGS survey found 2 @,@ 941 California sea otters , a slight increase from 2012 but a portion of the increase is artificial because the count included , for the first time , the SNI population which had recovered to 59 individuals . The California sea otter census in 2012 was 2 @,@ 792 , down from the peak spring 2007 census of 3 @,@ 026 sea otters , but up from the recent low of 2 @,@ 711 in 2010 . 
 In the late 1980s , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( USFWS ) relocated about 140 Californian sea otters to San Nicolas Island ( SNI ) in southern California , in the hope of establishing a reserve population should the mainland be struck by an oil spill . To the surprise of biologists , the San Nicolas sea otters mostly swam back to the mainland . By 2005 , only 30 sea otters remained at San Nicolas , although they were slowly increasing as they thrived on the abundant prey around the island . The plan that authorized the translocation program had predicted the carrying capacity would be reached within five to 10 years . The spring 2014 SNI count was 68 sea otters , continuing a 5 @-@ year positive trend of over 16 % per year . 
 When the FWS implemented the translocation program , it also attempted to implement " zonal management " of the Californian population . To manage the competition between sea otters and fisheries , it declared an " otter @-@ free zone " stretching from Point Conception to the Mexican border . In this zone , only San Nicolas Island was designated as sea otter habitat , and sea otters found elsewhere in the area were supposed to be captured and relocated . These plans were abandoned after many translocated otters died and also as it proved impractical to capture the hundreds of otters which ignored regulations and swam into the zone . However , after engaging in a period of public commentary in 2005 , the Fish and Wildlife Service failed to release a formal decision on the issue . Then , in response to lawsuits filed by <unk> Santa Barbara @-@ based Environmental Defense Center and the Otter Project , on December 19 , 2012 the USFWS declared that the " no otter zone " experiment was a failure , and will protect the otters re @-@ colonizing the coast south of Point Conception as threatened species . 
 Sea otters were once numerous in San Francisco Bay . Historical records revealed the Russian @-@ American Company sneaked Aleuts into San Francisco Bay multiple times , despite the Spanish capturing or shooting them while hunting sea otters in the estuaries of San Jose , San Mateo , San Bruno and around Angel Island . The founder of Fort Ross , Ivan <unk> , finding otters scarce on his second voyage to Bodega Bay in 1812 , sent a party of Aleuts to San Francisco Bay , where they met another Russian party and an American party , and caught 1 @,@ 160 sea otters in three months . By 1817 , sea otters in the area were practically eliminated and the Russians sought permission from the Spanish and the Mexican governments to hunt further and further south of San Francisco . Remnant sea otter populations may have survived in the bay until 1840 , when the Rancho Punta de Quentin was granted to Captain John B. R. Cooper , a sea captain from Boston , by Mexican Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado along with a license to hunt sea otters , reportedly then prevalent at the mouth of Corte Madera Creek . 
 Although the southern sea otter 's range has continuously expanded from the remnant population of about 50 individuals in Big Sur since protection in 1911 , however from 2007 to 2010 , the otter population and its range contracted and since 2010 has made little progress . As of spring 2010 , the northern boundary had moved from about <unk> Creek to a point 2 km southeast of Pigeon Point , and the southern boundary has moved from approximately Coal Oil Point to Gaviota State Park . Recently , a toxin called <unk> , produced by a type of cyanobacteria ( <unk> ) , seems to be concentrated in the shellfish the otters eat , poisoning them . Cyanobacteria are found in stagnant freshwater enriched with nitrogen and phosphorus from septic tank and agricultural fertilizer runoff , and may be flushed into the ocean when <unk> are high in the rainy season . A record number of sea otter carcasses were found on California 's coastline in 2010 , with increased shark attacks an increasing component of the mortality . Great white sharks ( Carcharodon carcharias ) do not consume relatively fat @-@ poor sea otters but shark @-@ bitten carcasses have increased from 8 % in the 1980s to 15 % in the 1990s and to 30 % in 2010 and 2011 . 
 Otters were observed twice in Southern California in 2011 , once near Laguna Beach and once at Zuniga Point Jetty , near San Diego . These are the first documented sightings of otters this far south in 30 years . 
 = = = Oregon = = = 
 The last native sea otter in Oregon was probably shot and killed in 1906 . In 1970 and 1971 , a total of 95 sea otters were transplanted from Amchitka Island , Alaska to the Southern Oregon coast . However , this translocation effort failed and otters soon again disappeared from the state . 
 In 2004 , a lone male sea otter took up residence at Simpson Reef off of Cape Arago for six months . This male is thought to have originated from a colony in Washington , but disappeared after a coastal storm . 
 The most recent sighting of a sea otter off the Oregon coast took place on 18 February 2009 , in <unk> Bay , Oregon . The lone male sea otter could have traveled from either California or Washington . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Sea otters consume over 100 different prey species . In most of its range , the sea otter 's diet consists almost exclusively of marine benthic invertebrates , including sea urchins , fat innkeeper worms , a variety of bivalves such as clams and mussels , abalone , other mollusks , crustaceans , and snails . Its prey ranges in size from tiny limpets and crabs to giant octopuses . Where prey such as sea urchins , clams , and abalone are present in a range of sizes , sea otters tend to select larger items over smaller ones of similar type . In California , they have been noted to ignore <unk> clams smaller than 3 inches ( 7 cm ) across . 
 In a few northern areas , fish are also eaten . In studies performed at Amchitka Island in the 1960s , where the sea otter population was at carrying capacity , 50 % of food found in sea otter stomachs was fish . The fish species were usually bottom @-@ dwelling and sedentary or sluggish forms , such as <unk> <unk> and family <unk> . However , south of Alaska on the North American coast , fish are a negligible or extremely minor part of the sea otter 's diet . Contrary to popular depictions , sea otters rarely eat starfish , and any kelp that is consumed apparently passes through the sea otter 's system undigested . 
 The individuals within a particular area often differ in their foraging methods and prey types , and tend to follow the same patterns as their mothers . The diet of local populations also changes over time , as sea otters can significantly deplete populations of highly preferred prey such as large sea urchins , and prey availability is also affected by other factors such as fishing by humans . Sea otters can thoroughly remove abalone from an area except for specimens in deep rock crevices , however , they never completely wipe out a prey species from an area . A 2007 Californian study demonstrated , in areas where food was relatively scarce , a wider variety of prey was consumed . Surprisingly , though , the diets of individuals were more specialized in these areas than in areas where food was plentiful . 
 = = = As a keystone species = = = 
 Sea otters are a classic example of a keystone species ; their presence affects the ecosystem more profoundly than their size and numbers would suggest . They keep the population of certain benthic ( sea floor ) herbivores , particularly sea urchins , in check . Sea urchins graze on the lower stems of kelp , causing the kelp to drift away and die . Loss of the habitat and nutrients provided by kelp forests leads to profound cascade effects on the marine ecosystem . North Pacific areas that do not have sea otters often turn into urchin barrens , with abundant sea urchins and no kelp forest . 
 Reintroduction of sea otters to British Columbia has led to a dramatic improvement in the health of coastal ecosystems , and similar changes have been observed as sea otter populations recovered in the Aleutian and Commander Islands and the Big Sur coast of California However , some kelp forest ecosystems in California have also thrived without sea otters , with sea urchin populations apparently controlled by other factors . The role of sea otters in maintaining kelp forests has been observed to be more important in areas of open coast than in more protected bays and estuaries . 
 In addition to promoting growth of kelp forests , sea otters can also have a profound effect in rocky areas that tend to be dominated by mussel beds . They remove mussels from rocks , liberating space for competitive species and thereby increasing the diversity of species in the area . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Predation of sea otters does occur , although it is not common . Many predators find the otter , with their pungent scent glands , distasteful . Young predators may kill an otter and not eat it . Leading mammalian predators of this species include orcas and sea lions ; bald eagles also prey on pups by snatching them from the water surface . On land , young sea otters may face attack from bears and coyotes . In California , bites from sharks , particularly great white sharks , have been estimated to cause 10 % of sea otter deaths and are one of the reasons the population has not expanded further north . The great white shark is believed to be their primary predator , and dead sea otters have been found with injuries from shark bites , although there is no evidence that sharks actually eat them . An exhibit at the San Diego Natural History Museum states that cat feces from urban runoff carry Toxoplasma gondii parasites to the ocean and kill sea otters . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Fur trade = = = 
 Sea otters have the thickest fur of any mammal . Their beautiful fur is a main target for many hunters . Archaeological evidence indicates that for thousands of years , indigenous peoples have hunted sea otters for food and fur . Large @-@ scale hunting , part of the Maritime Fur Trade , which would eventually kill approximately one million sea otters , began in the 18th century when hunters and traders began to arrive from all over the world to meet foreign demand for otter pelts , which were one of the world 's most valuable types of fur . 
 In the early 18th century , Russians began to hunt sea otters in the Kuril Islands and sold them to the Chinese at Kyakhta . Russia was also exploring the far northern Pacific at this time , and sent Vitus Bering to map the Arctic coast and find routes from Siberia to North America . In 1741 , on his second North Pacific voyage , Bering was shipwrecked off Bering Island in the Commander Islands , where he and many of his crew died . The surviving crew members , which included naturalist Georg Steller , discovered sea otters on the beaches of the island and spent the winter hunting sea otters and gambling with otter pelts . They returned to Siberia , having killed nearly 1 @,@ 000 sea otters , and were able to command high prices for the pelts . Thus began what is sometimes called the " Great Hunt " , which would continue for another hundred years . The Russians found the sea otter far more valuable than the sable skins that had driven and paid for most of their expansion across Siberia . If the sea otter pelts brought back by Bering 's survivors had been sold at Kyakhta prices they would have paid for one tenth the cost of Bering 's expedition . In 1775 at Okhotsk , sea otter pelts were worth 50 – 80 rubles as opposed to 2 @.@ 5 rubles for sable . 
 Russian fur @-@ hunting expeditions soon depleted the sea otter populations in the Commander Islands , and by 1745 , they began to move on to the Aleutian Islands . The Russians initially traded with the Aleuts inhabitants of these islands for otter pelts , but later enslaved the Aleuts , taking women and children hostage and torturing and killing Aleut men to force them to hunt . Many Aleuts were either murdered by the Russians or died from diseases the hunters had introduced . The Aleut population was reduced , by the Russians ' own estimate , from 20 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 . By the 1760s , the Russians had reached Alaska . In 1799 , Emperor Paul I consolidated the rival fur @-@ hunting companies into the Russian @-@ American Company , granting it an imperial charter and protection , and a monopoly over trade rights and territorial acquisition . Under Aleksandr I , the administration of the merchant @-@ controlled company was transferred to the Imperial Navy , largely due to the alarming reports by naval officers of native abuse ; in 1818 , the indigenous peoples of Alaska were granted civil rights equivalent to a townsman status in the Russian Empire . 
 Other nations joined in the hunt in the south . Along the coasts of what is now Mexico and California , Spanish explorers bought sea otter pelts from Native Americans and sold them in Asia . In 1778 , British explorer Captain James Cook reached Vancouver Island and bought sea otter furs from the First Nations people . When Cook 's ship later stopped at a Chinese port , the pelts rapidly sold at high prices , and were soon known as " soft gold " . As word spread , people from all over Europe and North America began to arrive in the Pacific Northwest to trade for sea otter furs . 
 Russian hunting expanded to the south , initiated by American ship captains , who subcontracted Russian supervisors and Aleut hunters in what are now Washington , Oregon , and California . Between 1803 and 1846 , 72 American ships were involved in the otter hunt in California , harvesting an estimated 40 @,@ 000 skins and tails , compared to only 13 ships of the Russian @-@ American Company , which reported 5 @,@ 696 otter skins taken between 1806 and 1846 . In 1812 , the Russians founded an agricultural settlement at what is now Fort Ross in northern California , as their southern headquarters . Eventually , sea otter populations became so depleted , commercial hunting was no longer viable . It had stopped the Aleutian Islands , by 1808 , as a conservation measure imposed by the Russian @-@ American Company . Further restrictions were ordered by the Company in 1834 . When Russia sold Alaska to the United States in 1867 , the Alaska population had recovered to over 100 @,@ 000 , but Americans resumed hunting and quickly extirpated the sea otter again . Prices rose as the species became rare . During the 1880s , a pelt brought $ 105 to $ 165 in the London market , but by 1903 , a pelt could be worth as much as $ 1 @,@ 125 . In 1911 , Russia , Japan , Great Britain ( for Canada ) and the United States signed the Treaty for the Preservation and Protection of Fur Seals , imposing a moratorium on the harvesting of sea otters . So few remained , perhaps only 1 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 000 individuals in the wild , that many believed the species would become extinct . 
 = = = Recovery and conservation = = = 
 During the 20th century , sea otter numbers rebounded in about two @-@ thirds of their historic range , a recovery that is considered one of the greatest successes in marine conservation . However , the IUCN still lists the sea otter as an endangered species , and describes the significant threats to sea otters as oil pollution , predation by orcas , poaching , and conflicts with fisheries – sea otters can drown if entangled in fishing gear . The hunting of sea otters is no longer legal except for limited harvests by indigenous peoples in the United States . Poaching was a serious concern in the Russian Far East immediately after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 ; however , it has declined significantly with stricter law enforcement and better economic conditions . 
 The most significant threat to sea otters is oil spills . They are particularly vulnerable , as they rely on their fur to keep warm . When their fur is soaked with oil , it loses its ability to retain air , and the animals can quickly die from hypothermia . The liver , kidneys , and lungs of sea otters also become damaged after they inhale oil or ingest it when grooming . The Exxon Valdez oil spill of 24 March 1989 killed thousands of sea otters in Prince William Sound , and as of 2006 , the lingering oil in the area continues to affect the population . Describing the public sympathy for sea otters that developed from media coverage of the event , a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service spokesperson wrote : 
 As a playful , photogenic , innocent bystander , the sea otter epitomized the role of victim ... cute and frolicsome sea otters suddenly in distress , oiled , frightened , and dying , in a losing battle with the oil . 
 The small geographic ranges of the sea otter populations in California , Washington , and British Columbia mean a single major spill could be catastrophic for that state or province . Prevention of oil spills and preparation for the rescue of otters in the event of one are major areas of focus for conservation efforts . Increasing the size and range of sea otter populations would also reduce the risk of an oil spill wiping out a population . However , because of the species ' reputation for depleting shellfish resources , advocates for commercial , recreational , and subsistence shellfish harvesting have often opposed allowing the sea otter 's range to increase , and there have even been instances of fishermen and others illegally killing them . 
 In the Aleutian Islands , a massive and unexpected disappearance of sea otters has occurred in recent decades . In the 1980s , the area was home to an estimated 55 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 sea otters , but the population fell to around 6 @,@ 000 animals by 2000 . The most widely accepted , but still controversial , hypothesis is that killer whales have been eating the otters . The pattern of disappearances is consistent with a rise in predation , but there has been no direct evidence of orcas preying on sea otters to any significant extent . 
 Another area of concern is California , where recovery began to fluctuate or decline in the late 1990s . Unusually high mortality rates amongst adult and subadult otters , particularly females , have been reported . <unk> of dead sea otters indicate diseases , particularly Toxoplasma gondii and <unk> parasite infections , are major causes of sea otter mortality in California . The Toxoplasma gondii parasite , which is often fatal to sea otters , is carried by wild and domestic cats and may be transmitted by domestic cat droppings flushed into the ocean via sewage systems . Although disease has clearly contributed to the deaths of many of California 's sea otters , it is not known why the California population is apparently more affected by disease than populations in other areas . 
 Sea otter habitat is preserved through several protected areas in the United States , Russia and Canada . In marine protected areas , polluting activities such as dumping of waste and oil drilling are typically prohibited . An estimated 1 @,@ 200 sea otters live within the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary , and more than 500 live within the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary . 
 = = = Economic impact = = = 
 Some of the sea otter 's preferred prey species , particularly abalone , clams , and crabs , are also food sources for humans . In some areas , massive declines in shellfish harvests have been blamed on the sea otter , and intense public debate has taken place over how to manage the competition between sea otters and humans for seafood . 
 The debate is complicated because sea otters have sometimes been held responsible for declines of shellfish stocks that were more likely caused by overfishing , disease , pollution , and seismic activity . Shellfish declines have also occurred in many parts of the North American Pacific coast that do not have sea otters , and conservationists sometimes note the existence of large concentrations of shellfish on the coast is a recent development resulting from the fur trade 's near @-@ extirpation of the sea otter . Although many factors affect shellfish stocks , sea otter predation can deplete a fishery to the point where it is no longer commercially viable . Scientists agree that sea otters and abalone fisheries cannot exist in the same area , and the same is likely true for certain other types of shellfish , as well . 
 Many facets of the interaction between sea otters and the human economy are not as immediately felt . Sea otters have been credited with contributing to the kelp harvesting industry via their well @-@ known role in controlling sea urchin populations ; kelp is used in the production of diverse food and pharmaceutical products . Although human divers harvest red sea urchins both for food and to protect the kelp , sea otters hunt more sea urchin species and are more consistently effective in controlling these populations . The health of the kelp forest ecosystem is significant in nurturing populations of fish , including commercially important fish species . In some areas , sea otters are popular tourist attractions , bringing visitors to local hotels , restaurants , and sea otter @-@ watching expeditions . 
 = = = Role in human cultures = = = 
 For many maritime indigenous cultures throughout the North Pacific , especially the Ainu in the Kuril Islands , the <unk> and <unk> of Kamchatka , the Aleut in the Aleutian Islands , the Haida of Haida Gwaii and a host of tribes on the Pacific coast of North America , the sea otter has played an important role as a cultural , as well as material , resource . In these cultures , many of which have strongly animist traditions full of legends and stories in which many aspects of the natural world are associated with spirits , the sea otter was considered particularly kin to humans . The Nuu @-@ chah @-@ nulth , Haida , and other First Nations of coastal British Columbia used the warm and luxurious pelts as chiefs ' regalia . Sea otter pelts were given in <unk> to mark coming @-@ of @-@ age ceremonies , weddings , and funerals . The Aleuts carved sea otter bones for use as ornaments and in games , and used powdered sea otter baculum as a medicine for fever . 
 Among the Ainu , the otter is portrayed as an occasional messenger between humans and the creator . The sea otter is a recurring figure in Ainu folklore . A major Ainu epic , the <unk> <unk> , tells the tale of wars and struggles over a golden sea otter . Versions of a widespread Aleut legend tell of lovers or despairing women who plunge into the sea and become otters . These links have been associated with the many human @-@ like behavioral features of the sea otter , including apparent playfulness , strong mother @-@ pup bonds and tool use , yielding to ready anthropomorphism . The beginning of commercial exploitation had a great impact on the human , as well as animal , populations the Ainu and Aleuts have been displaced or their numbers are dwindling , while the coastal tribes of North America , where the otter is in any case greatly depleted , no longer rely as intimately on sea mammals for survival . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1970s , the beauty and charisma of the species have gained wide appreciation , and the sea otter has become an icon of environmental conservation . The round , expressive face and soft , furry body of the sea otter are depicted in a wide variety of souvenirs , postcards , clothing , and stuffed toys . 
 = = = H1N1 host = = = 
 According to the U.S. Geological Survey and the CDC , northern sea otters , off the coast of Washington state , are infected with the H1N1 flu virus and " may be a newly identified animal host of influenza viruses " . 
 = = = Aquariums and zoos = = = 
 Sea otters can do well in captivity , and are featured in over 40 public aquariums and zoos . The Seattle Aquarium became the first institution to raise sea otters from conception to adulthood with the birth of <unk> in 1979 , followed by three more pups in the early 1980s . In 2007 , a YouTube video of two sea otters holding paws drew 1 @.@ 5 million viewers in two weeks , and had over 20 million views as of January 2015 . Filmed five years previously at the Vancouver Aquarium , it was YouTube 's most popular animal video at the time , although it has since been surpassed . The lighter @-@ colored otter in the video is <unk> , a survivor of the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill . <unk> died in September 2008 , at the age of 20 . Milo , the darker one , died of lymphoma in January , 2012 
 = Texas Recreational Road 11 = 
 Recreational Road 11 ( RE 11 ) is a Recreational Road located in Concho County , in the western portion of the U.S. state of Texas . The highway is approximately 4 @.@ 3 miles ( 6 @.@ 9 km ) in length , and connects a recreational area on the O.H. Ivie Reservoir to Farm to Market Road 1929 ( FM 1929 ) . The roadway travels through mainly rural areas along the coast of the lake . Segments of road first appeared in the location of RE 11 around 1940 . Portions of the highway were designated as part of Ranch to Market Road 2134 ( RM 2134 ) in 1953 , but was removed as part of that highway due to the construction of the O.H. Ivie Reservoir . RE 11 was designated in December 1996 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 RE 11 begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with FM 1929 , to the north of a small farm . The roadway proceeds as a two @-@ lane , paved road , traveling northward through rural areas on a large peninsula on the lake . The road continues north , traveling through scrub land before it intersects the Ray Stoker Jr . Highway , and bends slightly northeast for a short distance . After continuing north , the roadway bends northeast , as it intersects the former route of RM 2134 . The highway intersects a small road leading to a residential community on the lake , before continuing northeast , where it intersects County Road <unk> ( CR <unk> ) , which leads to a small residential area . It turns north and continues for a short distance , after which the highway bends northwest , and proceeds to its northern terminus , a boat @-@ launch ramp on the coast of the lake . The highway is maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation ( TxDOT ) . No portion of the highway is listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 The first segments of road appeared in the location of what would become RE 11 by 1940 . The southern road segment began at an at @-@ grade intersection , near the location of RE 11 , and traveled northward , before traveling slightly westward and terminating at a dead end . The road was graded and drained , and had a gravel surface , with a cattle guard near the middle of it . The northern segment of road traveled near the location of RE 11 . This road was also graded and drained , and had three cattle guards located along its course . By 1951 , a gate had been added to the southern road segment , and the northern segment had several turns straightened and lengthened . On October 28 , 1953 , RM 2134 was designated from <unk> along a road to the northern segment of what would become RE 11 . On August 24 , 1955 , the highway was designated along the northern segment of road , to the Colorado River . The designation was made official on October 1 , 1955 . 
 By 1956 , the surface of RM 2134 had been upgraded to stone , and the northern portion had been additionally straightened . On December 1 , 1957 , FM 2134 was extended northeastward across the Colorado River to the community of Voss . By 1961 , the portion designated as RM 2134 had been upgraded to a bituminous surface , made of asphalt and crushed rock . The other road segment had been upgraded to a metal surface . In addition , a new bridge had been constructed along the RM 2134 portion , and it had been straightened generally along the present location of RE 11 . In 1985 , plans were approved for the construction of the Stacey Reservoir . The construction was finished in 1990 , and the lake was instead named the O.H. Ivie Reservoir . The construction of the lake destroyed a large portion of RM 2134 , and caused the removal of the highway to FM 1929 . RE 11 was designated on its current location on October 31 , 1996 , and was officially approved on December 20 , 1996 . The route remains the most recently designated recreational road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Concho County . 
 = Dudley Clarke = 
 Brigadier Dudley Wrangel Clarke CB , CBE ( 27 April 1899 – 7 May 1974 ) was an officer in the British Army , known as a pioneer of military deception operations during the Second World War . His ideas for combining fictional orders of battle , visual deception and double agents helped define Allied deception strategy during the war , for which he has been referred to as " the greatest British deceiver of WW2 " . Clarke was also instrumental in the founding of three famous military units , namely the British Commandos , the Special Air Service and the US Rangers . 
 Born in Johannesburg and brought up near London , Clarke joined the Royal Artillery as an officer in 1916 , but transferred to the Royal Flying Corps after finding he was too young to fight in France . He spent the First World War learning to fly , first in Reading and then Egypt . Clarke returned to the Royal Artillery in 1919 and had a varied career doing intelligence work in the Middle East . In 1936 he was posted to Palestine , where he helped organise the British repression of the 1936 Arab uprising . During the Second World War , Clarke joined John Dill 's staff and proposed and helped implement , an idea for commando raids into France – an early form of the British Commandos . 
 In 1940 , Archibald Wavell called Clarke to Cairo and placed him in charge of strategic deception . As cover he was employed to set up a regional organisation for MI9 , a British escape and evasion department . The following year Clarke received a war establishment and set up Advanced Headquarters ' A ' Force with a small staff to plan deception operations . Once satisfied with the department 's structure , he pursued intelligence contacts in Turkey and Spain . In late 1941 Clarke was called to London , where his deception work had come to the attention of Allied high command . Shortly afterwards , while in Madrid , he was arrested wearing women 's clothing , in circumstances that remain unclear . He was released and after being questioned by the governor of Gibraltar , allowed to return to Cairo . 
 During Clarke 's absence , deception hierarchy in Middle East Command had become muddled . Colonel Ralph Bagnold had taken over deception planning , pushing ' A ' Force aside . Clarke was sent to El Alamein , where Allied forces were on the retreat , to work on deception plans . Upon his return , Bagnold was sidelined and ' A ' Force reinstated as the primary deception department . Throughout 1942 Clarke implemented Operation Cascade , an order of battle deception which added many fictional units to the Allied formations . Cascade was a success ; by the end of the war the enemy accepted most of the formations as real . From 1942 to 1945 , Clarke continued to organise deception in North Africa and southern Europe . After the war he was asked to record the history of ' A ' Force . He retired in 1947 and lived the rest of his life in relative obscurity . As well as pursuing a literary career that produced two histories and a thriller , he worked for the Conservative Party and was a director of Securicor . He died in London in 1974 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Clarke was born in Johannesburg on 27 April 1899 . His father , Ernest Clarke , grew up in Kingston upon Hull and moved to South Africa in the late 19th century , where he became embroiled in the Jameson Raid . Ernest managed to avoid prison for his part in the raid and , via a co @-@ conspirator , obtained a job at a gold mining company . Once settled , Ernest married Madeline Gardiner , and a short while later , Dudley was born . During the Second Boer War , the Clarke family was trapped in the siege of Ladysmith . Although an infant at the time of the siege , Clarke later tried to claim a campaign medal . Soon afterwards , the family returned to England , moving to Watford , where Clarke 's brother , the screenwriter T. E. B. Clarke , was born in 1907 . 
 From an early age , Clarke wanted a career in the armed forces . In 1912 , he attended Charterhouse School , where he was exposed to the glamorous parties and smart uniforms of the nearby military presence at Aldershot , including the newly formed Royal Flying Corps . 
 = = First World War and inter @-@ war period = = 
 I 've always been a little proud of the fact that , when Britain went to war with Germany on 4th August 1914 , I was already in uniform and under arms ... I was only fifteen and a half and no more than a private in the Charterhouse Contingent of the Officers Training corps 
 Eager to be in active service , Clarke applied to sit the Army Entrance Exam in 1915 , as soon as he had reached the minimum age of sixteen and a half . To his own surprise ( he had petitioned the Charterhouse headmaster for a recommendation , allowing him to bypass the exam , on the expectation of failing ) , he passed and in early 1916 attended the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich . In November 1916 , Clarke was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Royal Artillery . When his regiment deployed to France , Clarke had to stay behind because , aged 17 , he was too young to fight . Frustrated , he applied to join the Royal Flying Corps and transferred to the School of Military Aeronautics in Reading in November 1917 . The following April he was posted to Egypt to complete his flight training , where he stayed until January 1919 . Despite his promotion to the rank of lieutenant , Clarke transferred back to the Royal Artillery on his return to England . 
 After the war , Clarke had a varied military career that began with a posting to Mesopotamia in 1919 . During the Iraqi revolt of 1920 , he helped evacuate Europeans from the region by boat . While on extended leave in Turkey in 1922 , he became involved in the Chanak Crisis , a threatened Turkish attack on British and French troops . Clarke volunteered to help the local British force and was tasked with feeding misinformation to Turkish nationalists – a first taste of the activities that would define his later military career . In 1925 , during another period of leave , Clarke covered the Rif War for the Morning Post . 
 Over the inter @-@ war period , Clarke became involved in the theatre and drama establishments of his postings . In 1923 , he re @-@ formed the Royal Artillery Officers Dramatic Club and was responsible for the Royal Artillery 's display at the 1925 Royal Tournament . In 1933 and 1934 , he wrote and directed two Christmas pantomimes . 
 = = = Palestine = = = 
 In 1936 , Clarke was posted , at his request , to Palestine , just in time to participate in the 1936 Arab uprising . The British presence in Jerusalem was minimal at that time , comprising two regiments of infantry and a motley collection of air and armour under the command of Colonel Jack <unk> . Clarke , as one of only two staff officers , was faced with organising an effective response to guerrilla warfare . He first set to work improving communications between the small Royal Air Force contingent and the army . It was here that he met Tony Simonds , an intelligence officer sent to the region with express orders to set up an intelligence network . Clarke and Simonds worked to feed reliable information to British forces . 
 Toward the end of 1936 , more troops were dispatched to Palestine . Lieutenant General John Dill was placed in command , and Clarke became his chief of staff . In 1937 , Dill was replaced by Major General Archibald Wavell , the commander who would later give Clarke free rein in Middle Eastern deception operations . In the preface to Clarke 's 1948 book , Seven Assignments , Wavell wrote about their time together in Palestine : 
 When I commanded in Palestine in 1937 – 38 , I had on my staff two officers in whom I recognised an original , unorthodox outlook on soldiering ... One was Orde Wingate , the second was Dudley Clarke . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 At the outbreak of the Second World War Clarke was promoted to lieutenant colonel and began working on intelligence tasks . He worked with Wavell in the Middle East to research possible Allied supply lines , undertook two trips to Norway ( in an effort to maintain its neutrality ) , and conducted secret missions in Calais and Ireland . 
 In May 1940 Clarke became a military assistant to General Sir John Dill ( then Chief of the General Staff ) at the War Office . On 30 May 1940 , inspired by childhood recollections of similar Boer forces as well as experiences during the Arab uprising in Palestine , Clarke sketched out an idea for small amphibious raiding parties , called Commandos . On 5 June , while Dill was inspecting the troops evacuated from Dunkirk , Clarke suggested the idea to him , and the prime minister approved the plan on the following day . Clarke , under Brigadier Otto Lunde , was tasked with setting up a new department , <unk> , and began to recruit soldiers for what would later become the British Commandos . The first raid into France , Operation Collar , took place on 24 June 1940 . Clarke obtained permission to accompany the 120 @-@ strong force , but was not allowed to go ashore . The attempt was not a major success , with only one of the four units managing to kill enemy troops . While waiting on the beach for his men to return , Clarke 's boat was apparently spotted by a German patrol . Somehow Clarke was injured in the ear during , he said , an exchange of fire . Ernest Chappell , who was also on the beach , said that the patrol had not opened fire . 
 = = = 1941 : Cairo = = = 
 In Cairo , Archibald Wavell , Clarke 's old commander in Palestine , was commanding the North African campaign . He believed that deception was a key part of warfare . On 13 December he summoned Clarke to Egypt , telling high command he wished to set up " a special section of Intelligence for Deception " . While awaiting Clarke 's arrival , Wavell initiated a successful deception against the Italian forces at Sidi Barrani . Clarke reached Cairo on 18 December , to be greeted by Tony Simonds – another old hand from Palestine . Wavell put Clarke in charge , albeit under great secrecy , of broad strategic deception operations in North Africa . He held this position , under subsequent Mediterranean commanders , for the next five years . 
 On his arrival in Cairo , Clarke began to build a network of useful contacts . He befriended Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Raymund Maunsell , who operated Security Intelligence Middle East ( <unk> ) , the agency in charge of counter @-@ espionage in the region . Maunsell later worked closely with Clarke , helping to feed misinformation to the enemy via double agents . Clarke 's first deception was a scheme to mislead Italian forces into expecting an invasion of Italian Somaliland instead of Eritrea , the real Allied target . Operation Camilla fooled the Italian leadership completely but instead of diverting troops as the British hoped , they withdrew their forces into Eritrea . From this failure Clarke learned a first lesson , one he would teach to many other deception officers during the war : that the key to deception was not to make your enemy think what you wish but to get them to do what you want . 
 Clarke had not forgotten his previous pet scheme : the Commandos . In January 1941 , he met the American Colonel William J. Donovan while the latter was touring the region . Clarke 's description of the 1940 British unit inspired Donovan to emulate the idea . Clarke suggested the name " Rangers " , after the frontier force Rogers ' Rangers in the film Northwest Passage , for Donovan 's unit . In May of the following year the United States Army Rangers were founded . 
 In February , Clarke suffered from an attack of jaundice that put him out of action for about six weeks . He was visited regularly by Maunsell who was , by that time , a firm friend . 
 = = = = ' A ' Force = = = = 
 At first Clarke worked alone and in secret , under the official title " Intelligence Officer ( special duties ) to the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief " . He had neither staff nor official mandate , and worked from a " converted bathroom " at the British Army headquarters , Cairo . His cover role was to establish a regional department for MI9 , the less secret organisation tasked with helping Allied servicemen in escape and evasion tactics . Far from being a token cover , Clarke ran MI9 's Middle East department , in tandem with his deception work , until August 1944 . Clarke 's one @-@ man show in deception was not to last long . 
 In January 1941 Clarke began Operation Abeam , fabricating the existence of a British paratrooper regiment in the region . It would be two years before such troops reached the Mediterranean , but Clarke hoped to play on Italian fears of an airborne assault . He created a fictional 1st Special Air Service Brigade , using faked documents , photographs and reports , which leaked back to the Italians . He even dressed two soldiers in " 1 SAS " uniforms and set them to wander around Cairo , Port Said and Alexandria hinting at missions in Crete or Libya . 
 By March , Clarke had another scheme in the works , a deception cover for Operation Cordite , the 6th Infantry Division invasion of Rhodes . His work interviewing locals about the Greek island could not be associated with the 6th so he adopted the guise of ' A ' Force . The name was intentionally vague , designed to add to the mythology of his fictional airborne unit . Although at first only a cover name , the department soon became real and took control of deception in the region . On 28 March 1941 Clarke requisitioned No. 6 Sharia Kasr @-@ el @-@ <unk> , Cairo – opposite 6th Division HQ and below a brothel – and in April received an official mandate for his department . " Advanced Headquarters ' A ' Force " moved into their new offices on 8 April 1941 and Clarke began to recruit his staff . 
 Clarke 's airborne SAS had another legacy . In May 1941 David Stirling , an injured member of the early 8 Commando , envisioned a new special forces unit consisting of small commando teams intended to operate behind enemy lines . Clarke gave the project his full backing , and the unit was named " L " Detachment , Special Air Service – in part to help solidify the existence of the larger fictional force in the minds of the enemy . Stirling 's force later evolved into the modern @-@ day Special Air Service . Clarke therefore had a hand in the formation of three famed military units . 
 Phantom forces , of which the SAS was only Clarke 's first , played a crucial part in deception operations during the war – including along the Western Front in 1944 – but for the rest of April 1941 he worked hard to build his department . 
 = = = = Consolidating deception = = = = 
 Clarke 's " War Establishment " granted him three officers , several enlisted men and a small array of vehicles . A recruitment drive paid off in the form of highly experienced staff . To help with visual deception he brought in Victor Jones and Jasper Maskelyne . He also recruited a Scots Guards officer , Captain Ogilvie @-@ Grant , to manage the MI9 escape and evasion work , which had been adopted as cover for the whole of ' A ' Force . Finally , the services of Major E. <unk> , originally a member of Maunsell 's <unk> , were obtained for help in creating forged documents ; eventually <unk> 's operation expanded to form a subsection of ' A ' Force devoted to forgeries . 
 With his office organised , Clarke was happy to leave day @-@ to @-@ day management to his staff . He then embarked on a trip to Turkey , where he worked to establish a network of misinformation as well as carry out his MI9 role . There he met two important figures in Turkish intelligence – Brigadier Allan Arnold , the British military attaché , and Commander Vladimir Wolfson , a Royal Navy attaché – and worked with them to open channels of misinformation to the enemy . In Wolfson , Clarke had found an important resource and , in his own words , began " a long and profitable partnership for Deception and MI9 matters in Turkey which was to last for the rest of the war " . Clarke left Istanbul on 16 May , travelling covertly back to Egypt via Syria and Lebanon in order to reconnoitre the ground that British forces would have to invade when entering the country . He arrived in Cairo on 21 May . 
 Despite Clarke and Wavell 's successes in deception , the North African campaign was turning against the Allies . In 1941 Erwin Rommel had taken command of Axis forces and won early victories . Churchill replaced Wavell with Claude Auchinleck . Clarke 's new commander was impressed with Wavell 's setup , so ' A ' Force and the rest of Middle Eastern Command continued to operate as before . 
 = = = = Lisbon and London = = = = 
 Clarke travelled to Lisbon on 22 August 1941 aiming , as with his earlier Turkey trip , to open up lines of deception into Axis forces . He spent around a month in the area , posing as a flamboyant journalist , before being summoned back to London . His successful deception activities in the Middle East had caught the attention of high command , and Clarke was asked to write a paper about his experiences . 
 While in London , Clarke met many of his counterparts on the Western Front . He attended meetings of the Twenty Committee and Chiefs of Staff Committee ( which was chaired by his old commander , John Dill ) . The paper on deception met with approval in the establishment and it was decided that a department similar to ' A ' Force should be created in London . Clarke was offered the job , reporting directly to the Chiefs of Staff and War Cabinet . He declined , citing loyalty to the Middle East , but his decision was in large part due to the greater operational freedom and status he enjoyed in North Africa . The London Controlling Section was formed and , after some disorganisation , prospered under John Bevan , with whom Clarke would later work closely . 
 Pleased with his success in London , Clarke returned to Lisbon on 12 October posing as a journalist for The Times named " <unk> <unk> " . His aim was to carry on the semi @-@ undercover work of spreading rumours and misinformation to the Germans . Later that month , in Madrid , he was arrested while dressed as a woman . Guy Liddell , wartime counter @-@ espionage head at MI5 , said of the incident : " I 'm afraid to say that after his stay in Lisbon as a bogus journalist he has got rather over @-@ confident about his powers as an agent . " Clarke was released , apparently at the behest of a German contact who believed him to be " an important agent who was ready to assist the Germans " , and made his way to Gibraltar . 
 Clarke 's run of bad luck continued . He was ordered back to London to explain the Madrid incident to his superiors but , after setting out on the ship Ariosto , the convoy was torpedoed by a U @-@ boat on 24 October . The Ariosto was one of three ships sunk in the engagement , although he escaped harm and returned to Gibraltar . Rather than attempting another trip to London , Clarke was interviewed by the Governor of Gibraltar , Lord Gort , who judged Clarke 's answers acceptable and concluded that " we can reasonably expect that this escapade and its consequences will have given him sufficient shock to make him more prudent in the immediate future " . It is unclear why Clarke was wearing a dress , but reports of the incident indicated he had been following a lead and gone a little too far in his spy @-@ craft . Photographs of his disguise , obtained from the Spanish police , circulated in London and were viewed mostly with amusement . He was allowed to return to Cairo and reached Egypt on 18 November . Although he escaped disciplinary action over the incident , it was the last time Clarke attempted his own espionage work . 
 = = = 1942 : El Alamein = = = 
 Back in Cairo , Clarke discovered that much had changed during his absence . The recently promoted Colonel Ralph Bagnold had been appointed " Chief Deception Officer " at Middle Eastern HQ and had taken charge of tactical deception . Clarke was annoyed at what he saw as a power grab and at the sudden high profile of deception operations ( Bagnold 's promotion was widely publicised ) . Over the next few months Bagnold secured more and more of the day @-@ to @-@ day management of deception operations leaving ' A ' Force , and Clarke , in a training and advisory capacity . 
 Despite this , Clarke 's services were in high demand as the opening months of 1942 saw Allied forces in North Africa suffering serious defeats . On 2 February Auchinleck dispatched Clarke to Libya with urgent orders to assist in halting the German advances . Before leaving for the Eighth Army headquarters in Gazala , Clarke left a note , which he later described as " begging for the whole question of deception machinery in the Command to be reviewed completely afresh during his absence . " Once on the ground he found a shaken army conducting a hesitant withdrawal , and in urgent need of delaying tactics to slow the German advance . After brainstorming with his team in Cairo , Clarke envisioned Bastion , a deception operation to convince Rommel that his advance on Gazala was heading into a trap . The plan , which involved Victor Jones creating a strong fictional force of 300 tanks on the British right hand flank , was in full swing during February . The operation appears to have had limited effect . Rommel delayed his advance until May , when British forces were routed at the Battle of Gazala and the Germans resumed their push toward Egypt . 
 Upon his return to Cairo , on 15 February , Clarke was pleased to find that Auchinleck had restored ' A ' Force as the sole deception organisation at HQ . Bagnold 's enterprise was entirely sidelined and he moved on to other things . Clarke , who in March was promoted to full colonel , said that Bastion had taught him much : " We learnt more Lessons from it than from almost any other plan and it helped us evolve three important principles . " By the end of March , Clarke considered the much @-@ expanded ' A ' Force , and his theory of deception , to have matured beyond the basic trial and error of the previous years . 
 = = = = Operation Cascade = = = = 
 In March 1942 Clarke had begun to draft ideas for an ambitious order @-@ of @-@ battle deception . He had found that the process of convincing the enemy of the existence of a notional force was long and tedious . Operation Cascade was intended to create the fiction of a much increased Allied force in North Africa , including eight divisions , three new brigades , and even the 1st SAS . At first the plan was intended to deter the Axis from extending an offensive against the USSR southward into the region . 
 After a slow start , in early 1942 , Cascade began to take effect . As early as May , Axis intelligence began to overestimate Allied strength by nearly 30 % . In July the operation expanded . Clarke introduced more and more fictitious divisions and by the end of the year the Germans had accepted many of them as real formations . By 1944 , when the operation was superseded , it had completely fooled the enemy . Cascade was a major success for Clarke ; it supported most of the subsequent major deceptions for the remainder of the war ( by providing established fictional units ) and proved that deception on a grand scale was a realistic strategy . 
 = = = = El Alamein deceptions , August 1942 = = = = 
 In May , before Cascade had become fully operational , Rommel defeated the British Army in Libya . Auchinleck rallied his forces at El Alamein and asked Clarke to draft plans for delaying the Axis advance , giving the Allies time to withdraw . Operation Sentinel was designed to convince Rommel , using camouflage , fakery and radio deception , that substantial British armour sat between him and the retreating Eighth Army . In spite of his success at El Alamein Auchinleck was replaced by Harold Alexander on 8 August , Clarke 's third commander in under two years . Bernard Montgomery was handed control of the Eighth Army and instructed to push Rommel back . Montgomery knew Clarke , having taught him infantry tactics at the Staff College in 1931 , and instructed him to prepare deception plans for the Second Battle of El Alamein . The plan involved major camouflage activity , Operation Bertram , radio deception , Operation Canwell and a disinformation campaign , Operation Treatment . On 9 September Clarke was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) . The citation recognised his efforts in setting up A @-@ Force , but referred to its less clandestine MI9 escape and evasion work . 
 Clarke had his mind on other things besides awards and El Alamein . He delegated much of the ongoing planning to ' A ' Force staff , as the department was now well established . Instead he flew to London and Washington in October to discuss strategic deception for Operation Torch , the forthcoming British @-@ American invasion of the French North African colonies , leaving Charles Richardson ( a planning officer at Eight Army HQ ) and Geoffrey Barkas ( Director of Camouflage , Middle East Command ) to implement Operation Bertram . For the first time deception experts from across the theatres of war worked together . John Bevan of the London Controlling Section hosted an October conference for Clarke , Peter Flemming from India , and representatives from Washington . The meeting agreed on plans for a disinformation campaign , which would attempt to convince German high command that the Allied targets in Africa were Dakar and Sicily ( the far eastern and western limits of the theatre ) . Four days after Montgomery 's success at El Alamein , on 8 November , Allied forces landed in Morocco and Algeria to the surprise of German forces there . On 14 October Clarke , along with Bevan and Flemming , met Churchill to discuss all the Allied deception strategies . 
 = = = 1943 : Barclay = = = 
 1943 would be the peak of deception operations for Clarke and ' A ' Force – in 1944 the focus switched to the Western Front . Until then he was very busy between Operation Barclay and the continuing Cascade . The main Allied push that year was toward Sicily , as decided by high command in January . Barclay was the elaborate deception with which Clarke was tasked , an operation to mislead the Axis into expecting attacks on the far eastern and western extremities of the northern Mediterranean theatre – namely the Balkan Peninsula and southern France . 
 On 15 March Clarke again met Bevan , in Algiers , to discuss strategy for Barclay . Building on Cascade he added the Twelfth Army to his fictional order of battle , and began to make them look like a convincing threat to Crete and the Greek mainland . For this new deception ' A ' Force had strong support from London – in April the famed Operation Mincemeat was used to help bolster Clarke 's deceptive thrust toward Crete . 
 By this point ' A ' Force had much expanded beyond the small flat in Cairo , adding representatives with the army in Sicily and offices in Algiers and Nairobi . Clarke roved around the region acting as overseer of the department 's operations . On 14 October he was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) , the citation ( marked " not for publication " ) praised Clarke 's ongoing work , referring to him as " irreplaceable " . In December 1943 , he was promoted to the rank of brigadier . Although the promotion did not include perks associated with higher ranks ( such as a car and driver ) Clarke used his charisma to obtain them anyway . 
 = = = 1944 : Monty 's double = = = 
 In 1944 the Allies finally focused on France and the Western Front . Bevan and the London Controlling Section were tasked with inventing an elaborate masquerade to cover the Normandy invasion , a vindication of the theory pioneered by Clarke and Wavell : that every real operation should have a complementary deception . 
 The focus on France left Clarke supporting the Allied push through Italy . He noted that " the peculiar circumstances of the Mediterranean Theater made it a sheer impossibility to have a hiatus of more than a week or two duration between Deception Plans . " In quick succession ' A ' Force executed deceptions that included the operations <unk> and Zeppelin . Later that spring Clarke was inspired by a war film , Five Graves to Cairo , to create Operation Copperhead . Bernard Montgomery had recently been moved to England to take command of the ground forces intended for the Normandy invasion . To confuse the Germans , Clarke located a look @-@ alike , pre @-@ war actor Lieutenant M. E. Clifton James , and brought him to the Mediterranean under much ceremony . 
 Through 1944 ' A ' Force was slowly winding down . Clarke was involved in planning Operation Bodyguard , a major cover plan for the Allied landing in Normandy , and he was tasked with executing the ( largely political ) deceptions in the Middle Eastern region . However , by the end of the summer ' A ' Force 's usefulness in operations had reached its end . On 13 October Clarke held a party ( true to form , at a Cairo cinema ) for the remaining members of the department . Command of the remaining tactical deceptions was transferred to Caserta . Clarke , along with a skeleton staff , remained in Egypt to tie up the loose ends of various operations and to begin his history of the department . In April 1945 , Clarke left Cairo for London ; on 18 June he called a meeting of the remaining ' A ' Force members at the Great Central Hotel where the department was disbanded . 
 Clarke was mentioned in despatches on 19 October 1944 , relating to his work setting up ' A ' Force . 
 The planning and implementation of deception measures which have played a major part in the successes achieved in this theatre have been due in large measure to the originality of thought , imagination and initiative displayed by this officer . 
 The citation was announced in The London Gazette on 22 February 1945 . Clarke received a further honour that year , when on 19 June he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) . On 2 April 1946 he was awarded the American Legion of Merit . 
 = = After the war = = 
 Following the end of the war Clarke spent some time writing war histories . Until his retirement from the army in 1947 , with the rank of brigadier , he recorded the history of ' A ' Force . The document was never published and remained classified till the 1970s . His first complete book was published in 1948 . Seven Assignments recorded Clarke 's activities during the early wartime period of 1939 and 1940 ( before the Middle East posting ) . It was not his first attempt at a book . In 1925 Clarke had found a publisher for his coverage for the Rif rebellion , but the work was never finished . 
 Following Seven Assignments Clarke then took a job at Conservative Central Office , as Head of Public Opinion Research , where he worked until 1952 . During this later career he also served as a director of Securicor . In 1952 he resumed his literary career with the publication of The Eleventh at War , a history of the 11th Hussars . The following year he submitted a publisher 's proposal for The Secret War , a full account of deception during the Second World War , but was prevented from writing it by the Official Secrets Act . His final book was fiction , a thriller entitled Golden Arrow , published in 1955 . 
 Clarke lived out his retirement in relative obscurity , despite the belief of his former commander , Field Marshal Harold Alexander , that " he did as much to win the war as any other single officer " . Clarke died on 7 May 1974 , his address at the time was an apartment in Raleigh House , Dolphin Square , London . Most of his war work in military deception remained an obscure secret until the end of the 20th century and the publication of Michael Howard 's 1990 official history , Strategic Deception in the Second World War . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Clarke was widely regarded as an expert in military deception , and viewed by some of his peers as nearly legendary in status . In his 2004 book , The Deceivers , historian Thaddeus Holt identifies Clarke as " the master of the game " , having been immersed in his deception activities for the entire war . Clarke evolved deception , almost from scratch , as a vital part of Allied strategy . The organisation that he and Wavell established proved a model for the other theatres of war , and his successes directly led to the creation of the London Controlling Section in 1941 . He also misled German intelligence for several years – to the extent that they overestimated Allied strength in North Africa by a quarter of a million men . The journalist Nicholas Rankin , writing in 2008 , referred to Clarke as " the greatest British deceiver of WW2 , a special kind of secret servant . " 
 From the start of his Cairo posting Clarke learned the art of deception by trial and error . From mistakes during Camilla he learned to focus on what he wanted the enemy to do rather than on what he wanted them to think . From another early operation ( K @-@ Shell , the spreading of rumours about a new Allied super @-@ shell which eventually petered out after the media picked up the story ) , he learned the value of conducting deception only when there was a clear objective , rather than because it was possible . From Bastion he discovered the difficulty of running a large deception on a short timescale . From these lessons Clarke evolved his principles of deception . 
 Clarke also had a good appreciation of the complex interplay between Operations and intelligence in deception operations . He understood how to manipulate enemy intelligence agencies to build up the story he was trying to sell , and saw the importance of getting Operations , on his own side , to fit into those stories . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Clarke is described as a charismatic , charming and theatrical character with a streak of creativity , a personality reflected in the escapades of his life and career . His self @-@ deprecating humour and work ethic made Clarke a popular figure within the army , where he was considered to have odd " old world " habits and " an uncanny habit of suddenly appearing in a room without anyone having noticed him enter " . Clarke was considered to possess an " original intellect " , and to have odd habits , but was never seen as eccentric ( a trait that was frowned on within the army establishment ) . Despite having middle @-@ class origins , he aspired to the fringes of the upper @-@ class establishment , in his words : " one of those in the inner circle , watching the wheels go round at the hub of the British Empire at some great moment in history . " 
 From his time in Egypt during the First World War , Clarke fell in love with the country and he returned there as often as possible . He had a great respect for the inhabitants , writing that they had " the endearing qualities of humour and fortitude " . Another particular love was film . In Cairo , during the Second World War , he was a regular at the cinema , a location that suited his photographic memory and preference for working at night ; he often conducted meetings there . Films influenced his work in other ways , for instance in the inspiration he took from Northwest Passage to name the US Rangers . 
 Clarke was inventive as well as frugal . While at flight school in Reading , and without any money to fund his recreation , he built " an apparatus composed of a bootlace , a lanyard and some straps off my valise , by which I am enabled to turn out the light without getting out of bed " . 
 The incident in Madrid , and Clarke 's love of theatrics , raised awkward questions about his sexuality . His arrest was somewhat hushed up at the time , which may have raised more questions than it prevented . There is no indication that Clarke was homosexual . He was involved in two bad relationships with women . In 1922 he met a Slavic woman called Nina in Wiesbaden , but she disappeared after Clarke smuggled currency to her friend in Bulgaria . Then in the late 1920s a woman in Sussex , who " meant everything in the world " to him , refused an offer of marriage . He often claimed to hate children and never married . Despite this Clarke was known for having beautiful female acquaintances , to whom his friends referred as " Dudley 's Duchesses " . 
 = = Books = = 
 Clarke , Dudley ( 1948 ) . Seven Assignments . J. Cape . 
 Clarke , Dudley ( 1952 ) . The Eleventh at War : Being the Story of the <unk> Hussars ( Prince Albert 's Own ) Through the Years 1934 – 1945 . M. Joseph . 
 Clarke , Dudley ( 1955 ) . Golden Arrow . 
 = = = News articles = = = 
 Wilkes , David ( 22 May 2013 ) . " The name 's Bond , Jane Bond : Riddle of the WW2 spy arrested in Spain ... dressed as a woman " . The Daily Mail ( London ) . Retrieved 2013 @-@ 05 @-@ 23 . 
 = = = = London Gazette = = = = 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . <unk> . 8 September 1942 . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . <unk> . 12 October 1943 . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . <unk> . 20 February 1945 . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . 1041 . 19 June 1945 . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . 1726 . 2 April 1946 . 
 The London Gazette : ( Supplement ) no . <unk> @.@ p . <unk> . 4 June 1974 . 
 = = = = War record = = = = 
 " Recommendation for Award : Officer of the Order of the British Empire " . The National Archives . 9 September 1942 . 
 " Recommendation for Award : Commander of the Order of the British Empire " . The National Archives . 14 October 1943 . 
 " Recommendation for Award : Mention in Despatches " . The National Archives . 19 October 1944 . 
 = HMS Havant ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Havant was an H @-@ class destroyer originally ordered by the Brazilian Navy with the name Javary in the late 1930s , but was bought by the Royal Navy after the beginning of World War II in September 1939 . The ship was initially assigned to escort duties in the Western Approaches , but was transferred to the Home Fleet when the Norwegian Campaign began in April 1940 . She was only peripherally involved in the campaign as she escorted ships carrying troops that occupied Iceland and the Faeroe Islands as well as convoys to Narvik . Havant was evacuating troops from Dunkirk when she was badly damaged by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers on 1 June and had to be scuttled . 
 = = Description = = 
 Havant displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Havant carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 145 officers and men . 
 The ship was designed for four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear , but ' Y ' gun was removed to compensate for the additional depth charges added . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Havant had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were originally fitted , but this was increased to 3 sets of rails and eight throwers while fitting @-@ out . The ship 's load of depth charges was increased from 20 to 110 as well . 
 = = Service = = 
 Javary was ordered by Brazil on 8 December 1937 from J. Samuel White , Cowes . The ship was laid down on 30 March 1938 and launched on 17 July 1939 . She was purchased by the British on 5 September and renamed HMS Havant . The ship was commissioned on 19 December and arrived at Portland Harbour on 8 January 1940 to begin working up . She made one unsuccessful anti @-@ submarine sweep 4 – 9 February with the destroyers Ardent and Whitshed after she was assigned to the 9th Destroyer Flotilla of the Western Approaches Command at Plymouth . Havant had degaussing equipment fitted and minor repairs were made through March . 
 The ship was en route to Greenock to escort a convoy to Gibraltar on 7 April when she was transferred to the Home Fleet as a result of the impending German invasion of Norway . Along with her sister Hesperus , Havant escorted the heavy cruiser Suffolk on 13 April as the latter ship carried a detachment of Royal Marines to occupy the Faeroe Islands . The ship then escorted convoys to Narvik until 7 May . A week later she escorted the ocean liners Lancastria and Franconia as they carried troops to occupy Iceland . 
 Havant joined the Dunkirk evacuation on 29 May and rescued over 2 @,@ 300 men by 1 June . That morning she had embarked 500 troops and then went alongside the destroyer Ivanhoe , which had been disabled by German dive bombers earlier that morning . The ship loaded all of the troops and wounded from Ivanhoe and sailed for Dover under heavy air attack . Shortly afterwards , Stukas hit Havant with two bombs in her engine room and another exploded beneath her hull . Eight crewmen were killed and 25 were wounded in the attack . At least 25 soldiers were also killed . She was severely damaged and had to be scuttled by the minesweeper HMS Saltash after an attempt to tow her failed . 
 = 2014 – 15 York City F.C. season = 
 The 2014 – 15 season was the 93rd season of competitive association football and 78th season in the Football League played by York City Football Club , a professional football club based in York , North Yorkshire , England . Their seventh @-@ place finish in 2013 – 14 and loss to Fleetwood Town in the play @-@ offs meant it was their third successive season in League Two . The season ran from 1 July 2014 to 30 June 2015 . 
 Nigel Worthington made eight signings in his second summer transfer window as York manager . With the team only one place above the relegation zone by mid @-@ October 2014 , Worthington resigned and was replaced by former Scunthorpe United manager Russ Wilcox . After a six @-@ match unbeaten run from late @-@ March to mid @-@ April 2015 , York ensured survival from relegation before finishing in 18th @-@ position in the 24 @-@ team 2014 – 15 League Two . York were knocked out of the 2014 – 15 FA Cup , League Cup and Football League Trophy in their opening round matches . 
 32 players made at least one appearance in nationally organised first @-@ team competition , and there were 13 different goalscorers . Defender Keith Lowe missed only one of the 50 first @-@ team matches over the season . Jake Hyde finished as leading scorer with 10 goals , of which nine came in league competition and one came in the FA Cup . The winner of the Clubman of the Year award , voted for by the club 's supporters , was Lowe . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ season = = 
 The 2013 – 14 season was Nigel Worthington 's first full season as manager of York City , after leading the team to safety from relegation in 2012 – 13 following his appointment in March 2013 . Having only been above the relegation zone on goal difference come the start of 2014 , the team went on a 17 @-@ match unbeaten run from February onwards . This saw York reach the play @-@ offs with a seventh @-@ place finish in the 2013 – 14 Football League Two table . York were beaten 1 – 0 on aggregate by Fleetwood Town in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , the decisive goal being scored by former York player Matty Blair at Bootham Crescent in the first leg . 
 After 2013 – 14 ended York released Tom Allan , Calvin Andrew , Chris Dickinson , Shaq McDonald , Sander Puri and Adam Reed , with David McGurk retiring from professional football . Ryan Bowman and Lanre Oyebanjo left the club to sign for Torquay United and Crawley Town respectively , but Michael Coulson signed a new contract . Worthington made eight signings before the season kicked @-@ off , those being goalkeeper Jason Mooney from Tranmere Rovers , defenders Femi Ilesanmi from Dagenham & Redbridge , Marvin McCoy from Wycombe Wanderers and Dave Winfield from Shrewsbury Town , midfielders Lindon Meikle from Mansfield Town , Anthony Straker from Southend United and Luke Summerfield from Shrewsbury , and striker Jake Hyde from Barnet . 
 New home and away kits were brought in for the first time in two years . The home kit included red shirts with a white collar and white trims on the sleeves , white shorts and red socks . The away kit comprised light blue shirts with a white collar , a white double @-@ chevron decoration at the top and white sleeves , light blue shirts and light blue socks . Benenden Health continued as shirt sponsors for the third successive season . 
 = = Review = = 
 = = = August = = = 
 York started the season by playing away to Tranmere Rovers , who were new to League Two after being relegated from League One after 2013 – 14 . Keith Lowe gave York the lead with a header from Meikle 's corner in the 67th @-@ minute , before Tranmere equalised through James Rowe in stoppage time as the match ended a 1 – 1 draw . This was followed by a 1 – 0 home defeat to Doncaster Rovers in the first round of the League Cup , after Harry Forrester scored for the League One side in stoppage time . Hyde scored from a Straker corner on his debut to give York the lead over Northampton Town in a home match , before the visitors made the score 1 – 1 in the 90th @-@ minute from a Marc Richards free kick . Cambridge United took a two @-@ goal lead at York , before Hyde scored a header shortly before half time and Wes Fletcher scored a penalty in the 83rd @-@ minute , seeing the match end a 2 – 2 draw . York then played away to Exeter City , who were also without a win this season , and drew 1 – 1 ; Exeter took the lead in the 8th @-@ minute before Lowe equalised with a header from a Summerfield corner in the 82nd @-@ minute . August ended with a fifth successive league draw after York were held 0 – 0 at home by Wycombe Wanderers , who wad won three of their first four league matches . 
 = = = September = = = 
 York were knocked out of the Football League Trophy in the first round after being beaten 2 – 0 away by Barnsley , with the League One team scoring twice in the second half . Their first win of the season came after beating Stevenage 3 – 2 away . Coulson and Fletcher scored in the first half for York before Stevenage levelled the score after the break , and Fletcher scored the winning goal with a 75th @-@ minute penalty . This was followed by York 's first league defeat of the season , losing 2 – 0 away to league leaders Burton Albion . Goalkeeper Michael Ingham made four excellent saves in York 's 0 – 0 draw at home to Luton Town . Danny Parslow was loaned to Conference Premier club Grimsby Town for one month , having failed to appear in the team after recovering from a long @-@ term injury . York played Southend United at home , who took the lead early in the first half before Russell Penn equalised in first half stoppage time . The visitors scored twice during the second half before Winfield scored a consolation goal in the 85th @-@ minute , seeing the match finish a 3 – 2 defeat . York lost the second match in succession for the first time in 2014 – 15 after being beaten 2 – 0 away to Dagenham & Redbridge , the home team scoring in each half through Joss Labadie . Striker Ryan Brunt was signed on a one @-@ month loan from Conference Premier club Bristol Rovers , with York 's existing strikers having failed to score in five of the last seven matches . 
 = = = October = = = 
 York 's run of two straight losses ended after drawing 0 – 0 at home to Portsmouth , in which Brunt missed a header from four yards in the third @-@ minute of stoppage time . Sheffield United 's 19 @-@ year @-@ old striker Diego De Girolamo , an Italy under @-@ 20 international , joined on a one @-@ month youth loan as a result of injuries to Coulson , Fletcher and Hyde . De Girolamo scored seven minutes into his debut away at Newport County with a low finish , but after Penn was sent off for a second bookable offence the home team scored three goals in the second half , York losing the match 3 – 1 . With York one place above the relegation zone Worthington resigned as manager , and was quoted saying " In recent weeks , performances have not been up to my high standards and I take full responsibility for this " . Steve Torpey , who was Worthington 's assistant manager , took over as caretaker manager before Russ Wilcox was appointed as manager two days after Worthington 's departure . Wilcox had been sacked as Scunthorpe United manager a week earlier with them second from bottom in the League One table , having led them to promotion the previous season as League Two runners @-@ up . 
 Wilcox 's first match in charge was a 1 – 0 home defeat to Shrewsbury Town , who scored their goal in the 87th @-@ minute through James Collins , and this result saw York move into the relegation zone in 23rd place . Coulson gave York a 77th @-@ minute lead away to Morecambe with a low shot from the edge of the penalty area , before the home side equalised in stoppage time . Former Australia under @-@ 20 goalkeeper Alex Cisak was signed on a one @-@ month loan from Premier League club Burnley . He debuted in York 's 1 – 1 home draw with Mansfield Town , in which York took the lead in the 20th @-@ minute when De Girolamo turned and scored from close range having been set up by a Penn cross , before the away team equalised during the second half through Daniel Carr . Former Jamaica international striker Deon Burton , who played under Wilcox at Scunthorpe , was signed from the Lincolnshire club on a one @-@ month loan . 
 = = = November = = = 
 York recorded their first victory since early @-@ September 2014 after winning 1 – 0 away against Cheltenham Town , De Girolamo scoring from a Coulson pass in the 43rd @-@ minute . De Girolamo was recalled early from his loan spell by Sheffield United as they wanted him for their two upcoming cup fixtures , after he had scored three times in four York matches . Bournemouth 's Guadeloupe international defender Stéphane Zubar joined on loan until 4 January 2015 , with Parslow being loaned back to Grimsby until the same date . York drew 1 – 1 at home with their divisional rivals AFC Wimbledon in the first round of the FA Cup ; Hyde gave York the lead in the 8th @-@ minute after scoring from Coulson 's low cross , before Andy Frampton equalised for the away team on 22 @-@ minutes . Burton was ruled out for two to three months with a medial ligament injury suffered in this match , resulting in his loan at the club being curtailed . York signed 19 @-@ year @-@ old Middlesbrough defender Brad Halliday on a one @-@ month loan as cover and competition for McCoy . Fellow strugglers Oxford United won 1 – 0 at York , James Roberts scoring from three yards after Danny Hylton flicked on a Brian Howard corner in the 35th @-@ minute , and Wilcox surmised the result saying " The lads are working as hard as they possibly can but I 'm just looking for a little bit more now " . 
 York were knocked out of the FA Cup after losing 3 – 1 away to AFC Wimbledon in a first round replay ; after Fletcher had given York a fifth @-@ minute lead with a 30 yard volley the home side scored three times in the second half . In York 's 3 – 1 away win over bottom @-@ placed Hartlepool United the home team took the lead through Scott Fenwick in the first half , before Lowe scored two headers in the space of two minutes and Hyde scored with a shot from outside the penalty area in the second half . Cisak 's loan was extended , having conceded just three goals in four appearances , while De Girolamo rejoined on a second youth loan , both until 4 January 2015 . Striker Carlton Morris joined on a youth loan from Norwich City until 4 January 2015 , after scoring once in 10 appearances while on loan with League Two rivals Oxford earlier in the season . Hyde scored in the fourth @-@ minute of stoppage time to give York a 1 – 1 draw away to Plymouth Argyle ; his goal came after reacting first to goalkeeper Luke McCormick 's parry of De Girolamo 's header . 
 = = = December = = = 
 York 's first fixture of the month was a 3 – 2 home defeat to AFC Wimbledon , who had not won away since mid @-@ August 2014 , and they took the lead in the first half with a Jake Goodman goal . During the second half De Girolamo equalised with a 15 yard shot , and AFC Wimbledon scored two goals in quick succession through Sean Rigg and Matt Tubbs , before Zubar scored for York from a few yards out to finish the scoring . Halliday made his senior debut in this match , and was named man of the match with an impressive performance at right @-@ back , before his loan was extended until 17 January 2015 . Cameron Murray was loaned to Northern Premier League Premier Division club Frickley Athletic , where he made only one start during a one @-@ month period . York went 2 – 0 down after 62 minutes when playing away against Bury , but fought back to draw 2 – 2 with Hyde scoring a header from a Coulson cross before Summerfield equalised with a 20 yard free kick . York achieved their first home win of the season by beating Accrington Stanley 1 – 0 , meaning the club record of most home consecutive matches without a win , set at 14 in 1981 – 82 , was not equalled . The winning goal was scored in the 35th @-@ minute by Lowe with a header from Coulson 's cross . This was followed by a 3 – 0 away victory over Carlisle United , marking the first time York had achieved successive wins in 2014 – 15 . Josh Carson scored shortly before half @-@ time from Fletcher 's flick on , and in the second half Summerfield scored with a curling shot from 20 yards before Coulson shot into the top corner . 
 = = = January = = = 
 York 's first result of 2015 was a 0 – 0 home draw with Plymouth , and despite playing 70 minutes with 10 men after Zubar was sent off the team created a number of chances . Cisak was recalled by Burnley after his loan expired and York replaced him with Peterborough United 's former Austria under @-@ 21 international goalkeeper Bobby Olejnik , who joined on loan for the rest of the season . After De Girolamo 's loan expired Sheffield United wanted to strengthen their striking options before considering letting him return to York . Morris ' loan was extended for a second month after making four substitute appearances for York , and Parslow had his loan at Grimsby extended to the end of the season . York were beaten 1 – 0 away to league leaders Wycombe and Olejnik made a number of saves on his debut to keep the team in the match . Zubar 's loan was extended until the end of the season ahead of him starting a four @-@ match suspension , before Jarvis was loaned to Conference Premier club Aldershot Town for the rest of the season having not played for York since October 2014 . 
 Halliday 's loan was extended for the rest of the season ahead of his return from a three @-@ match suspension , having establish himself at right @-@ back ahead of McCoy before his sending off against Accrington . Having made only five appearances for York Mooney was loaned to Conference Premier side Alfreton Town for the rest of the season . York entered their home match against Stevenage with the visitors on a five @-@ match unbeaten run , and lost 2 – 0 with the away team scoring in each half . Striker Emile Sinclair was signed on a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract after having his contract at Northampton cancelled , where he had fallen down the pecking order . Walsall 's <unk> Benning was signed on a one @-@ month loan to provide competition for Ilesanmi at left @-@ back . Sinclair scored in the 70th @-@ minute of his debut against Burton with a close range finish , before the away team equalised late in the match through Adam McGurk . Straker joined Scottish Premiership team Motherwell on loan for the rest of the season having played infrequently under Wilcox . York created a number of chances away to Southend before losing 1 – 0 , Shaq Coulthirst scoring an 88th @-@ minute penalty . 
 = = = February = = = 
 Murray 's contract was cancelled to allow him to join Northern Premier League Division One North club Scarborough Athletic . York dropped into the relegation zone in 23rd place after being beaten 2 – 0 at home by fellow strugglers Dagenham & Redbridge , who scored in each half through Jamie Cureton . Having only made appearances as a substitute during two months with York , Morris returned to Norwich after his loan expired . York took a 2 – 0 lead away at Luton , Carson and Sinclair scoring within five minutes of each other early in the second half . However , Hyde was sent off for a tackle on Nathan Doyle before Mark Cullen scored twice for Luton , the match finishing a 2 – 2 draw . Winfield , who had made only five appearances for York , signed for AFC Wimbledon on a one @-@ month loan . York moved out of the relegation zone and above their opponents Tranmere after a 2 – 0 home victory , which was the team 's first win in eight matches . Fletcher scored both goals in each half , the first coming after he met Halliday 's low cross at the back post and the second came after collecting Coulson 's pass , cutting inside and shooting into the far corner . 
 De Girolamo returned to York for a third youth loan spell , this time for the rest of the season , with Wilcox commenting that " it is great to get a player of his calibre back in the building " . York dropped to within a point of the relegation zone after losing 3 – 0 away to Northampton , the home team taking the lead in the fourth @-@ minute through Chris Hackett . Brendan Moloney scored their second goal shortly after half @-@ time , and after Olejnik saved a Marc Richards penalty Northampton finished the scoring through Ivan Toney . York were held by Exeter to a 0 – 0 draw at home , and stayed above the relegation zone on goal difference . 
 = = = March = = = 
 York moved two points above the relegation zone with a 3 – 0 away win over Cambridge , Fletcher giving York the lead on 43 @-@ minutes after collecting a loose ball on the edge of the penalty area and scoring with a powerful shot . Coulson scored soon after the second half began when his deep cross dropped into the far corner of the goal , and Hyde finished the scoring in the 55th @-@ minute when diverting Fletcher 's shot from inside the six @-@ yard box . York went behind away to AFC Wimbledon when <unk> <unk> scored a header in the 19th @-@ minute , before Hyde scored an equaliser after goalkeeper Joe McDonnell dropped Sinclair 's cross in the 43rd @-@ minute . However , Jack Smith scored the winning goal for the home team with a volley in the 90th @-@ minute , meaning the match ended in a 2 – 1 win for AFC Wimbledon . Shaq Coulthirst , who scored Southend 's winning goal against York in January , joined on loan from Tottenham Hotspur for the rest of the season , after Fletcher was ruled out for six weeks with a hamstring injury . York drew 0 – 0 at home to relegation rivals Carlisle , and the team 's best chances came in the 74th @-@ minute when Coulson and Sinclair had shots cleared off the line . Having made nine appearances for York , Benning was recalled by Walsall due to an injury to Andy Taylor . Tom Soares scored early as York were beaten 1 – 0 at home by Bury , resulting in the team only being above the relegation zone on goal difference . 
 De Girolamo left York to join League Two rivals Northampton on loan for the rest of the season , explaining that " Northampton play attractive football and express myself by getting on the ball a lot " . Winfield was recalled from his loan at AFC Wimbledon , having made seven appearances for them , after Zubar injured his thigh during the Bury match . Richard Cresswell was appointed as Wilcox 's first team coach , having previously held a consultancy role at the club since April 2014 . York were held to a 2 – 2 draw away to Accrington ; after Summerfield gave York the lead with a deflected 20 yard shot in the 63rd @-@ minute , Sean Maguire equalised after pouncing on a loose ball 6 minutes later . In the 76th @-@ minute Hyde put York back in the lead with a close @-@ range finish before Josh Windass scored for Accrington with a 20 yard free kick in the 90th @-@ minute . This result meant York were one point above the relegation zone , but just two points from the bottom of the table . Ahead of the transfer deadline for loan signings , York signed two strikers on loan for the rest of the season ; Shaun Miller from Coventry City and Josh O 'Hanlon from Bournemouth . York moved three points above the relegation zone after beating Mansfield 4 – 1 away , Lowe opening the scoring with a header before Coulthirst scored with a low finish . Despite Olejnik being off sent off later in the first half for handling outside the penalty area , Hyde scored with a header shortly after half @-@ time . Matt <unk> pulled one back for Mansfield before Coulthirst finished the scoring in the 89th @-@ minute . 
 = = = April and May = = = 
 Mooney was recalled from his loan at Alfreton as a result of the one @-@ match suspension Olejnik received for his red card . Winfield scored a 73rd @-@ minute header from a Summerfield corner as York beat their relegation rivals Cheltenham 1 – 0 at home . York moved six points of the relegation zone after drawing 0 – 0 away to Oxford . Winfield was sent off in the first half of York 's 1 – 0 home win over relegation @-@ threatened Hartlepool , Summerfield scoring the winning goal during the second half with a deflected 30 yard shot . York ensured their safety from relegation after beating Morecambe 2 – 1 at home , moving 11 points clear of the relegation zone in 18th @-@ place . Morecambe took the lead through Paul Mullin before Zubar converted Summerfield 's corner with a far post header , and Penn scored the winning goal with a long @-@ range strike into the top left @-@ hand corner . 
 York were beaten for the first time in seven matches after losing 1 – 0 away to promotion contenders Shrewsbury , with Mark Ellis scoring their goal in the first half . York 's final home match of the season ended in a 2 – 0 defeat to play @-@ off chasing Newport , who scored twice in the second half with goals scored by David <unk> and Lee Minshull , and Hyde had a penalty saved in between the goals . They finished the season after drawing 1 – 1 away to Portsmouth ; Halliday equalised in the 85th @-@ minute after capitalising on a slip from Dan Butler , 3 minutes after Matt Tubbs had given the home team the lead . York 's final league position in League Two was 18th , their lowest placing since promotion into that division three years ago . At an awards night held at York Racecourse , Lowe was voted by the club 's supporters as the Clubman of the Year for 2014 – 15 . 
 = = Summary and aftermath = = 
 York were in lower mid @-@ table for most of the season , and rose as high as 11th in the table during September 2014 and dropped to 23rd during October and February 2015 . The team had the second lowest number of victories in the League Two season with 11 ; only the two relegated teams , Cheltenham and Tranmere , recorded fewer wins with nine each . For the fourth time in nine seasons , York achieved a better record away than at home in the league . The team won six matches , drew nine and lost eight away , compared to winning five , drawing 10 and losing eight at home . Lowe made the highest number of appearances during the season , appearing in 49 of York 's 50 matches . Hyde was York 's top scorer in the league and in all competitions , with nine league goals and 10 in total . He was the only player to reach double figures , and was followed by Fletcher with seven goals . 
 At the season 's end York released Fletcher , Jarvis , Lewis Montrose and Parslow . Carson , Ingham and Platt signed new contracts with the club . Over the close season York signed goalkeeper Scott Flinders from Hartlepool , defenders Taron Hare and Eddie Nolan from Scunthorpe , George Swan from Wolverhampton Wanderers , David <unk> on loan from Cardiff City and Zubar on loan from Bournemouth , midfielder James Berrett from Yeovil Town , and strikers <unk> Oliver from Crewe Alexandra and Reece Thompson from Frickley . Midfielder Callum <unk> was promoted to the first team squad from the youth team after signing a professional contract with the club . 
 = = Match details = = 
 League positions are sourced by Statto , while the remaining information is referenced individually . 
 = = = Football League Two = = = 
 = = = League table ( part ) = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = League Cup = = = 
 = = = Football League Trophy = = = 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player 's contract with that club had expired before he joined York . 
 = = = Out = = = 
 Brackets around club names denote the player joined that club after his York contract expired . 
 = = = Loan in = = = 
 = = = Loan out = = = 
 = = Appearances and goals = = 
 Source : 
 Numbers in parentheses denote appearances as substitute . 
 Players with names struck through and marked left the club during the playing season . 
 Players with names in italics and marked * were on loan from another club for the whole of their season with York . 
 Players listed with no appearances have been in the matchday squad but only as unused substitutes . 
 Key to positions : GK – Goalkeeper ; DF – Defender ; MF – Midfielder ; FW – Forward 
 = Dorothy Parker = 
 Dorothy Parker ( August 22 , 1893 – June 7 , 1967 ) was an American poet , short story writer , critic , and satirist , best known for her wit , wisecracks and eye for 20th @-@ century urban foibles . 
 From a conflicted and unhappy childhood , Parker rose to acclaim , both for her literary output in publications such as The New Yorker and as a founding member of the Algonquin Round Table . Following the breakup of the circle , Parker traveled to Hollywood to pursue screenwriting . Her successes there , including two Academy Award nominations , were curtailed when her involvement in left @-@ wing politics led to a place on the Hollywood blacklist . 
 <unk> of her own talents , she deplored her reputation as a " <unk> . " Nevertheless , her literary output and reputation for sharp wit have endured . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Also known as Dot or Dottie , Parker was born Dorothy Rothschild to Jacob Henry and Eliza Annie Rothschild ( née Marston ) at 732 Ocean Avenue in Long Branch , New Jersey , where her parents had a summer beach cottage . Dorothy 's mother was of Scottish descent , and her father was of German Jewish descent . Parker wrote in her essay " My Hometown " that her parents got her back to their Manhattan apartment shortly after Labor Day so she could be called a true New Yorker . Her mother died in West End in July 1898 , when Parker was a month shy of turning five . Her father remarried in 1900 to a woman named Eleanor Francis Lewis . Parker hated her father and stepmother , accusing her father of being physically abusive and refusing to call Eleanor either " mother " or " stepmother " , instead referring to her as " the housekeeper " . She grew up on the Upper West Side and attended a Roman Catholic elementary school at the Convent of the Blessed Sacrament on West 79th Street with sister Helen , despite having a Jewish father and Protestant stepmother . ( Mercedes de Acosta was a classmate . ) Parker once joked that she was asked to leave following her characterization of the Immaculate Conception as " spontaneous combustion " . Her stepmother died in 1903 , when Parker was nine . Parker later went to Miss Dana 's School , a finishing school in Morristown , New Jersey . She graduated from Miss Dana 's School in 1911 , at the age of 18 . Following her father 's death in 1913 , she played piano at a dancing school to earn a living while she worked on her verse . 
 She sold her first poem to Vanity Fair magazine in 1914 and some months later was hired as an editorial assistant for another Condé Nast magazine , Vogue . She moved to Vanity Fair as a staff writer after two years at Vogue . 
 In 1917 , she met and married a Wall Street stockbroker , Edwin Pond Parker II ( 1893 – 1933 ) , but they were separated by his army service in World War I. She had ambivalent feelings about her Jewish heritage given the strong antisemitism of that era and joked that she married to escape her name . 
 = = Algonquin Round Table years = = 
 Her career took off while she was writing theatre criticism for Vanity Fair , which she began to do in 1918 as a stand @-@ in for the vacationing P. G. Wodehouse . At the magazine , she met Robert Benchley , who became a close friend , and Robert E. Sherwood . The trio began lunching at the Algonquin Hotel on a near @-@ daily basis and became founding members of the Algonquin Round Table . The Round Table numbered among its members the newspaper columnists Franklin Pierce Adams and Alexander Woollcott . Through their re @-@ printing of her lunchtime remarks and short verses , particularly in Adams ' column " The Conning Tower " , Dorothy began developing a national reputation as a wit . One of her most famous comments was made when the group was informed that famously taciturn former president Calvin Coolidge had died ; Parker remarked , " How could they tell ? " 
 Parker 's caustic wit as a critic initially proved popular , but she was eventually terminated by Vanity Fair in 1920 after her criticisms began to offend powerful producers too often . In solidarity , both Benchley and Sherwood resigned in protest . 
 When Harold Ross founded The New Yorker in 1925 , Parker and Benchley were part of a " board of editors " established by Ross to allay concerns of his investors . Parker 's first piece for the magazine appeared in its second issue . Parker became famous for her short , viciously humorous poems , many about the perceived ludicrousness of her many ( largely unsuccessful ) romantic affairs and others wistfully considering the appeal of suicide . 
 The next 15 years were Parker 's greatest period of productivity and success . In the 1920s alone she published some 300 poems and free verses in Vanity Fair , Vogue , " The Conning Tower " and The New Yorker as well as Life , McCall 's and The New Republic . 
 Parker published her first volume of poetry , Enough Rope , in 1926 . The collection sold 47 @,@ 000 copies and garnered impressive reviews . The Nation described her verse as " caked with a salty humor , rough with splinters of disillusion , and tarred with a bright black authenticity " . Although some critics , notably the New York Times reviewer , dismissed her work as " flapper verse " , the volume helped cement Parker 's reputation for sparkling wit . Parker released two more volumes of verse , Sunset Gun ( 1928 ) and Death and Taxes ( 1931 ) , along with the short story collections <unk> for the Living ( 1930 ) and After Such Pleasures ( 1933 ) . Not So Deep as a Well ( 1936 ) collected much of the material previously published in Rope , Gun and Death and she re @-@ released her fiction with a few new pieces in 1939 under the title Here Lies . 
 She collaborated with playwright Elmer Rice to create Close Harmony , which ran on Broadway in December 1924 . The play was well received in out @-@ of @-@ town previews and was favorably reviewed in New York but closed after a run of just 24 performances . It did , however , become a successful touring production under the title The Lady Next Door . 
 Some of Parker 's most popular work was published in The New Yorker in the form of acerbic book reviews under the byline " Constant Reader " ( her response to the whimsy of A. A. Milne 's The House at Pooh Corner : " <unk> <unk> <unk> up . " ) . Her reviews appeared semi @-@ regularly from 1927 to 1933 , were widely read , and were later published in a collection under the name Constant Reader in 1970 . 
 Her best @-@ known short story , " Big Blonde " , published in The Bookman magazine , was awarded the O. Henry Award as the best short story of 1929 . Her short stories , though often witty , were also spare and incisive , and more bittersweet than comic . 
 She eventually separated from her husband , divorcing in 1928 , and had a number of affairs . Her lovers included reporter @-@ turned @-@ playwright Charles MacArthur and the publisher Seward Collins . Her relationship with MacArthur resulted in a pregnancy , about which Parker is alleged to have remarked , " how like me , to put all my eggs into one bastard . " She had an abortion , and fell into a depression that culminated in her first attempt at suicide . 
 It was toward the end of this period that Parker began to become politically aware and active . What would become a lifelong commitment to activism began in 1927 with the pending executions of Sacco and Vanzetti . Parker travelled to Boston to protest the proceedings . She and fellow Round Tabler Ruth Hale were arrested , and Parker eventually pleaded guilty to a charge of " loitering and sauntering " , paying a $ 5 fine . 
 Parker was claimed to be a patron of Polly Adler bordello or brothel in New York . 
 = = Hollywood = = 
 In 1934 , she married Alan Campbell , an actor with aspirations to become a screenwriter . Like Parker , he was half @-@ Jewish and half @-@ Scottish . He was reputed to be bisexual — indeed , Parker claimed in public that he was " queer as a billy goat " . The pair moved to Hollywood and signed ten @-@ week contracts with Paramount Pictures , with Campbell ( who was also expected to act ) earning $ 250 per week and Parker earning $ 1 @,@ 000 per week . They would eventually earn $ 2 @,@ 000 and in some instances upwards of $ 5 @,@ 000 per week as freelancers for various studios . She and Campbell worked on more than 15 films . 
 In 1936 , she contributed lyrics for the song " I <unk> on the Moon " , with music by Ralph <unk> . The song was introduced in The Big Broadcast of 1936 by Bing Crosby . 
 With Robert Carson and Campbell , she wrote the script for the 1937 film A Star is Born , for which they were nominated for an Academy Award for Best Writing — Screenplay . She wrote additional dialogue for The Little Foxes in 1941 and received another Oscar nomination , with Frank Cavett , for 1947 's Smash @-@ Up , the Story of a Woman , starring Susan Hayward . 
 After the United States entered the Second World War , Parker and Alexander Woollcott collaborated to produce an anthology of her work as part of a series published by Viking Press for servicemen stationed overseas . With an introduction by Somerset Maugham the volume compiled over two dozen of Parker 's short stories along with selected poems from Enough Rope , Sunset Gun , and Death and Taxes . It was released in the United States in 1944 under the title The Portable Dorothy Parker . Parker 's is one of only three of the Portable series ( the other two being William Shakespeare and The Bible ) to remain continuously in print . 
 During the 1930s and 1940s , Parker became an increasingly vocal advocate of causes like civil liberties and civil rights , and a frequent critic of those in authority . She reported on the Loyalist cause in Spain for the Communist magazine The New Masses in 1937 . At the behest of Otto Katz , a covert Soviet Comintern agent and operative of German Communist Party agent Willi <unk> , Parker helped to found the Hollywood Anti @-@ Nazi League in 1936 ( which was suspected by the FBI of being a Communist Party front ) . The Hollywood Anti @-@ Nazi League 's membership eventually grew to some 4 @,@ 000 strong . Its often wealthy members ' contributions ( probably not intended to support Communism ) were , in the words of David <unk> , " able to contribute as much to [ Communist ] Party funds as the whole American working class " . 
 Parker also served as chair of the Joint Anti @-@ Fascist Rescue Committee . She organized Project Rescue Ship to transport Loyalist veterans to Mexico , headed Spanish Children 's Relief and lent her name to many other left @-@ wing causes and organizations . Her former Round Table friends saw less and less of her , with her relationship with Robert Benchley being particularly strained ( although they would reconcile ) . Parker met S. J. Perelman at a party in 1932 , and despite a rocky start ( Perelman called it " a <unk> ordeal " ) — they remained friends for the next 35 years , even becoming neighbors when the <unk> helped Parker and Campbell buy a run @-@ down farm in Bucks County , Pennsylvania . 
 Parker was listed as a Communist by the publication Red Channels in 1950 . The FBI compiled a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ page dossier on her because of her suspected involvement in Communism during the McCarthy era . As a result , she was placed on the Hollywood blacklist by the movie studio bosses . Her final screenplay was The Fan , a 1949 adaptation of Oscar Wilde 's Lady Windermere 's Fan , directed by Otto Preminger . Her marriage to Campbell was tempestuous , with tensions exacerbated by Parker 's increasing alcohol consumption and Campbell 's long @-@ term affair with a married woman while he was in Europe during World War II . They divorced in 1947 , then remarried in 1950 . Parker moved back to New York in 1952 , living at the Volney residential hotel at 23 East 74th Street on the Upper East Side . From 1957 to 1962 , she wrote book reviews for Esquire , though these pieces were increasingly erratic owing to her continued abuse of alcohol . She returned to Hollywood in 1961 and reconciled with Campbell . In the next two years , they worked together on a number of unproduced projects . Campbell committed suicide by drug overdose in 1963 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following Campbell 's death , Parker returned to New York City and the Volney residential hotel . In her later years , she would come to denigrate the group that had brought her such early notoriety , the Algonquin Round Table : 
 These were no giants . Think who was writing in those days — Lardner , Fitzgerald , Faulkner and Hemingway . Those were the real giants . The Round Table was just a lot of people telling jokes and telling each other how good they were . Just a bunch of <unk> showing off , saving their gags for days , waiting for a chance to spring them ... There was no truth in anything they said . It was the terrible day of the wisecrack , so there didn 't have to be any truth ... 
 Parker was heard occasionally on radio , including Information Please ( as a guest ) and Author , Author ( as a regular panelist ) . She wrote for the Columbia Workshop , and both Ilka Chase and Tallulah Bankhead used her material for radio monologues . 
 Parker died on June 7 , 1967 , of a heart attack at the age of 73 . In her will , she bequeathed her estate to Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr . Following King 's death , her estate was passed on to the NAACP . Her executor , Lillian Hellman , bitterly but unsuccessfully contested this disposition . Her ashes remained unclaimed in various places , including her attorney Paul O 'Dwyer 's filing cabinet , for approximately 17 years . 
 = = Posthumous honors = = 
 In 1988 , the NAACP claimed Parker 's remains and designed a memorial garden for them outside their Baltimore headquarters . The plaque reads , 
 Here lie the ashes of Dorothy Parker ( 1893 – 1967 ) humorist , writer , critic . Defender of human and civil rights . For her epitaph she suggested , ' Excuse my dust ' . This memorial garden is dedicated to her noble spirit which celebrated the oneness of humankind and to the bonds of everlasting friendship between black and Jewish people . Dedicated by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . October 28 , 1988 . 
 On August 22 , 1992 , the 99th anniversary of Parker 's birth , the United States Postal Service issued a 29 ¢ U.S. commemorative postage stamp in the Literary Arts series . The Algonquin Round Table , as well as the number of other literary and theatrical greats who lodged there , helped earn the Algonquin Hotel its status as a New York City Historic Landmark . The hotel was so designated in 1987 . In 1996 the hotel was designated a National Literary Landmark by the Friends of Libraries USA based on the contributions of Parker and other members of the Round Table . The organization 's bronze plaque is attached to the front of the hotel . Her birthplace was also designated a National Literary Landmark by Friends of Libraries USA in 2005 and a bronze plaque marks the spot where the home once stood . 
 In 2014 , Parker was elected to the New Jersey Hall of Fame . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Parker was the inspiration for a number of fictional characters in several plays of her day . These included " Lily Malone " in Philip Barry 's Hotel Universe ( 1932 ) , " Mary Hilliard " ( played by Ruth Gordon ) in George Oppenheimer 's Here Today ( 1932 ) , " Paula Wharton " in Gordon 's 1944 play Over Twenty @-@ one ( directed by George S. Kaufman ) , and " Julia Glenn " in the Kaufman @-@ Moss Hart collaboration Merrily We Roll Along ( 1934 ) . Kaufman 's representation of her in Merrily We Roll Along led Parker , once his Round Table compatriot , to despise him . She also appeared as " Daisy Lester " in Charles Brackett 's 1934 novel Entirely Surrounded . She is mentioned in the original introductory lyrics in Cole Porter ' song Just One of Those Things from the 1935 Broadway musical Jubilee which have been retained in the standard interpretation of the song when it became part of the Great American Songbook . 
 Parker appears as a character in the novel The Dorothy Parker Murder Case by George <unk> ( 1984 ) , in a series of " Algonquin Round Table Mysteries " by J.J. Murphy ( 2011 – ) , and in Ellen Meister 's novel Farewell , Dorothy Parker ( 2013 ) . She is the main character in a short story , " Love For Miss Dottie , " by Larry N Mayer , which was selected by Mary <unk> for the collection Best New American Voices 2009 ( Harcourt ) . 
 She has been portrayed on film and television by Dolores Sutton in F. Scott Fitzgerald in Hollywood ( 1976 ) , Rosemary Murphy in Julia ( 1977 ) , Bebe Neuwirth in Dash and Lilly ( 1999 ) and Jennifer Jason Leigh in Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle ( 1994 ) . Neuwirth was nominated for an Emmy Award for her performance , and Leigh received a number of awards and nominations , including a Golden Globe nomination . 
 Parker , along with other figures of the era including Ira Gershwin and George Gershwin , is featured as a character in Act 1 , Scene 12 of the stage musical version of Thoroughly Modern Millie , " Muzzy 's Party Scene " . 
 Television creator Amy Sherman @-@ Palladino named her production company ' Dorothy Parker Drank Here Productions ' in tribute to Parker . 
 <unk> comedian Jen Kirkman portrayed Dorothy Parker in an edition of the Dead Authors Podcast at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater in Los Angeles in 2011 . 
 A one @-@ woman show , Dorothy Parker 's Room Enough For Two starring <unk> Frankel , was produced in July 1993 at the Groundlings Theatre in Hollywood , California . 
 Prince features a song entitled " The Ballad of Dorothy Parker " , on his 1987 album Sign o ' the Times . 
 The Wild Colonials song , " Vicious Circle " from Life As We Know It EP ( 2007 ) is about Dorothy Parker . The chorus lyrics are , " I know how Dorothy Parker felt with someone in her way . " 
 In the 1999 film Girl , Interrupted , the character Lisa recites Parker 's poem " Resume " . 
 The Thrilling Adventure Hour podcast has Dorothy Parker as a recurring character ( as played by Annie Savage ) and member of the Algonquin Four . After being struck by a comet , the group gained powers parodying The Fantastic Four . Parker gained rock @-@ like skin as a self @-@ proclaimed " rock man " , and is the dim @-@ witted muscle of the team . Her catchphrase is " Dorothy Parker smash ! " 
 Tucson actress Lesley Abrams wrote and performed the one @-@ woman show Dorothy Parker 's Last Call in 2009 in Tucson , Arizona at the Winding Road Theater Ensemble and reprised the role at the Live Theatre Workshop in Tucson in 2014 . The play was also selected to be part of the Capital Fringe Festival in DC in 2010 . 
 Her poem " Threnody " was recorded by <unk> <unk> , of ABBA fame . 
 Lyrics taken from her book of poetry Not So Deep as a Well were , with the authorization of the NAACP , used by Canadian singer Myriam Gendron to create a folk album of the same name . 
 = 2015 Chinese Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Chinese Grand Prix ( formally known as the 2015 Formula 1 Chinese Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race that was held on 12 April 2015 at the Shanghai International Circuit in Shanghai , China . The race was the third round of the 2015 season , and marked the twelfth time that the Chinese Grand Prix has been run as a round of the Formula One World Championship . 
 Lewis Hamilton was the defending race winner and went into the weekend with a three @-@ point lead in the world championship over Sebastian Vettel , who had surprised the field by taking victory in the previous round at Malaysia . Hamilton took pole position during Saturday 's qualifying , the 41st of his career and the third in a row . He went on to win the race from his team mate Nico Rosberg . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After Sebastian Vettel 's surprise victory two weeks prior in Malaysia , eyes were on Ferrari whether they would be able to continue their good race pace in China and challenge the Mercedes for the win . As lower track temperatures were expected for the race , a serious competitiveness of Ferrari was cast into doubt , as they had benefited from lower tyre degradation in the heat of Malaysia . All ten teams taking part in the championship participated in the race , with Manor Marussia hoping to finally be able to run both cars continually , after Will Stevens had failed to start in Malaysia . 
 As in 2014 , Pirelli announced they would be supplying teams with the white @-@ banded medium compound tyre as the prime selection and the yellow @-@ banded soft compound as the option selection for the event . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held , two 1 @.@ 5 @-@ hour sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . World champion Lewis Hamilton took a clean sweep and topped the time sheets in all three sessions by a considerable margin . The first session saw Lotus test driver Jolyon Palmer participate in place of regular Romain Grosjean . He finished six tenths of a second behind his team mate Pastor Maldonado and was one of several drivers to have off track experiences during the session . Both Mercedes drivers ran wide on different parts of the track , as did Felipe Massa , who spun his Williams in turn 14 towards the end of the session . Hamilton was over half a second clear of his team mate Nico Rosberg on Friday morning , with the Ferraris more than a second behind . 
 Hamilton continued his strong performance during the second session on Friday afternoon , beating Malaysia winner Sebastian Vettel for the top spot , Vettel finishing almost half a second down . Most teams ran with both dry tyre compounds . Mercedes appeared more dominant on the harder tyres , one second ahead of the rest of the grid . Red Bull continued to struggle with the same brake problems they had endured in Malaysia two weeks before . The left rear brake of Daniil Kvyat started to smoke after a pit stop , leading the team to investigate the matter further . Felipe Massa spun yet again in turn 14 , hitting the barrier with his front wing meaning the session was red @-@ flagged for a while . The session was further disrupted by the appearance of a local man running across the main straight , jumping into pit lane before being stopped by security after entering the Ferrari garage , where he apparently stated he wanted to " try a car " . 
 Hamilton was once again fastest during third practice on Saturday morning , even while suffering from overheating under his seat . The two Mercedes cars were separated by two tenths of a second with the two Ferraris of Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen behind , another half a second down . Red Bull had a slight upturn in fortune , with Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil Kvyat finishing fifth and sixth respectively . McLaren @-@ Honda had another problematic session as Fernando Alonso stopped the car just after starting his installation lap . Team mate Jenson Button was called into the pits as well , citing a similar problem with the engine , but was able to continue later in the session . Felipe Massa experienced smoke in his cockpit both on Friday and Saturday , apparently caused by the new titanium plates underneath the cars which also create sparks when driving over bumps on the track . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . In the session , which started at 15 : 00 local time ( UTC + 8 ) on Saturday afternoon , Lewis Hamilton took the third out of three possible pole positions of the season , narrowly beating his team mate by 0 @.@ 04 seconds . Nico Rosberg was frustrated about the result , lamenting that his team had put unnecessary pressure on him by telling him to go faster during his last warm @-@ up lap , saying " [ w ] e need to look at that as that was not ideal to put me under pressure like that " . 
 Mercedes were the only team to use the medium tyre in the first qualifying session ( Q1 ) , with all other teams using the faster soft tyre . Five drivers were eliminated in Q1 , four of them being the two Manors and the McLarens , all of which had yet failed to go through to Q2 . They were joined by the Force India of Nico Hülkenberg , who was to start 16th on the grid . 
 The second session saw Hamilton post the fastest time , even though his car lost contact to pit lane and his seat overheating once more . He was three tenths clear of his team mate Rosberg , with Sebastian Vettel in third . Daniil Kvyat suffered engine problems and failed to make it into Q3 , as did the second Force India of Sergio Pérez , both Toro Rossos and the Lotus of Pastor Maldonado . 
 During Q3 , contested by the top ten , Hamilton just beat his team mate to pole position , with a time set during his first timed lap . Both Ferraris ran their first lap on used tyres in order to save one set for the race . In their second outing , Vettel was able to get ahead of the two Williams cars of Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas , while team mate Kimi Räikkönen struggled with the handling of his car in the first part of the track to finish sixth on the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 When the race started at 14 : 00 local time ( UTC + 8 ) , Kimi Räikkönen managed to pass both Williams cars on the first lap to move up to fourth , while Nico Rosberg was able to fend off Sebastian Vettel for second . On the second lap , Carlos Sainz , Jr. spun his Toro Rosso and dropped down the order . Nico Hülkenberg became the first retirement on lap ten , when he parked his Force India in the gravel after his gearbox failed . During the pit stops , Ferrari attempted an undercut by pitting Sebastian Vettel early on lap 13 , a strategy in which a car running behind is pitting early in order to use a fast out @-@ lap on fresh tyres to jump ahead of a rival without having to overtake them on track . However this was unsuccessful as Mercedes reacted by pitting Rosberg the following lap , allowing Rosberg to maintain track position over Vettel . On lap 17 , Daniil Kvyat retired from the race when his Red Bull started to smoke . 
 After the first pit stops , the Mercedes drivers had to manage their tyres in order to cover from a possible attack by Ferrari , who had an extra set of fresh tyres saved from qualifying . Rosberg however complained over the radio about Hamilton in front of him driving too slow , which caused him to back into the charging Ferraris . He was unable to risk driving too close behind Hamilton , because dispersed air from the back of the car was accelerating tyre degradation . Hamilton was therefore asked by the team to pick up the pace . 
 The top three began to spread out in the second half of the race , and by lap 54 Lewis Hamilton was leading Rosberg by 10 @.@ 06 seconds , with Vettel a further 12 @.@ 12 seconds behind Rosberg . However , due to Ferrari 's earlier attempt to undercut Rosberg by pitting Vettel early , Räikkönen 's tyres were 4 laps fresher than his teammate 's , and he closed in on Vettel over the final stint . Having emerged from his final pit stop 4 @.@ 84 seconds behind Vettel on lap 35 , Räikkönen had closed the gap to 1 @.@ 37 seconds by lap 54 . However , the chance of a battle between the Ferrari teammates was extinguished after a transmission failure on Max Verstappen 's Toro Rosso , who was stranded on the start / finish @-@ straight , brought out the safety car for the final two laps , meaning that the race ended under safety car conditions . 
 Hamilton crossed the line to win his second race of the season , with Rosberg following him home in 2nd and Vettel completing the podium with 3rd . Pastor Maldonado had an eventful race . On lap 33 , while running in seventh position ahead of teammate Romain Grosjean , he missed the pit entry and lost time , dropping several positions . He then proceeded to spin his car on lap 39 as he attempted to make up for lost time , and on lap 48 he had a collision with Jenson Button following a long battle for position , damaging his car and retiring with rear brake failure a few laps later . The stewards later deemed Button to be at fault for the incident . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 At the podium interview , conducted by former track and field athlete Edwin Moses , race winner Lewis Hamilton acknowledged " a fantastic job by the team " and expressed disappointment over the late safety car , calling it " kind of an anti @-@ climax when you have a good race like that " . During the press conference after the race , Nico Rosberg accused his team mate of deliberately slowing down during the middle stint of the race and compromising his race in the process . Hamilton declared , when asked about the radio message telling him to speed up , that he " wasn 't controlling his [ Nico 's ] race , I was controlling my own race " . Rosberg reacted to that statement by saying : " It 's just now interesting to hear from you , Lewis , that you were just thinking about yourself with the pace in front , and necessarily that was compromising my race . " Hamilton was subsequently backed up by Mercedes non @-@ executive chairman Niki Lauda , who said : " Sure , everyone drives selfish . [ ... ] What do you think these guys are here to do ? I call them egocentric bastards . That is the only way to win and the only way to win the Championship , they are all the same . " 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 – Jenson Button originally finished thirteenth but received a five @-@ second time penalty after the race following a collision with Pastor Maldonado . 
 ^ 2 – Roberto Merhi received a five @-@ second time penalty after the race for failing to stay above the required lap time under the safety car . 
 ^ 3 – Max Verstappen was classified because he completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = SS Dakotan = 
 SS Dakotan was a cargo ship built in 1912 for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company that served as a transport ship in the United States Army Transport Service in World War I , and then was transferred to the Soviet Union under Lend @-@ Lease in World War II before being finally scrapped in 1969 . During World War I , she was taken over by the United States Army as USAT Dakotan . Near the end of that war she was transferred to the United States Navy and commissioned as USS Dakotan ( ID @-@ <unk> ) . During World War II , the ship was transferred to the Soviet Union and renamed SS Zyrianin ( or <unk> in Cyrillic ) . 
 Dakotan was built by the Maryland Steel Company as one of eight sister ships for the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company , and was employed in inter @-@ coastal service via the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and the Panama Canal after it opened . During World War I , as USAT Dakotan , the ship carried cargo and animals to France . Dakotan was in the first American convoy to sail to France after the United States entered the war in April 1917 . In Navy service , USS Dakotan carried cargo to France and returned over 8 @,@ 800 American troops after the Armistice . 
 After her Navy service ended in 1919 , she was returned to her original owners and resumed relatively uneventful cargo service over the next twenty years . Dakotan ran aground off the coast of Mexico in 1923 but was freed and towed to port for repairs . Early in World War II , the ship was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration and transferred to the Soviet Union under the terms of Lend @-@ Lease in December 1942 . Sailing as SS Zyrianin , the ship remained a part of the Soviet merchant fleet into the late 1960s . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 In September 1911 , the American @-@ Hawaiian Steamship Company placed an order with the Maryland Steel Company of Sparrows Point , Maryland , for four new cargo ships — Minnesotan , Dakotan , Pennsylvanian , and Montanan . The contract cost of the ships was set at the construction cost plus an 8 % profit for Maryland Steel , but with a maximum cost of $ 640 @,@ 000 per ship . The construction was financed by Maryland Steel with a credit plan that called for a 5 % down payment in cash with nine monthly installments for the balance . The deal had provisions that allowed some of the nine installments to be converted into longer @-@ term notes or mortgages . The final cost of Dakotan , including financing costs , was $ 66 @.@ 00 per deadweight ton , which totaled just under $ 672 @,@ 000 . 
 Dakotan ( Maryland Steel yard no . 125 ) was the second ship built under the original contract . She was launched on 10 August 1912 , and delivered to American @-@ Hawaiian in November . Dakotan was 6 @,@ 537 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 428 feet 9 inches ( 130 @.@ 68 m ) in length and 53 feet 6 inches ( 16 @.@ 31 m ) abeam . She had a deadweight tonnage of 10 @,@ 175 LT DWT and a storage capacity of 492 @,@ 519 cubic feet ( 13 @,@ 946 @.@ 6 m3 ) . A single steam engine with oil @-@ fired boilers driving a single screw propeller provided her power ; her speed was 15 knots ( 28 km / h ) . The steamer had accommodations for 18 officers , 40 crewmen , and could carry up to 16 passengers . 
 = = Early career = = 
 When Dakotan began sailing for American @-@ Hawaiian , the company shipped cargo from East Coast ports via the Tehuantepec Route to West Coast ports and Hawaii , and vice versa . Shipments on the Tehuantepec Route arrived at Mexican ports — Salina Cruz , Oaxaca , for eastbound cargo , and Coatzacoalcos for westbound cargo — and traversed the Isthmus of Tehuantepec on the Tehuantepec National Railway . Eastbound shipments were primarily sugar and pineapple from Hawaii , while westbound cargoes were general in nature . Dakotan sailed in this service on the east side of North America . 
 At the time of the United States occupation of Veracruz on 21 April 1914 , Dakotan was in port at Coatzacoalcos . There she loaded 127 American refugees from sugar plantations in the area and steamed to Veracruz . As a consequence of the American action , the Huerta @-@ led Mexican government closed the Tehuantepec National Railway to American shipping . 
 In early May , The New York Times reported that Dakotan had sailed to Cristóbal to pick up a cargo of sugar that had been originally slated for transport via Tehuantepec . According to the article , the sugar was to be carried on barges through the still @-@ unopened Panama Canal , then loaded onto Dakotan . There was no indication in the newspaper whether this mission was completed or not , but it is known that American @-@ Hawaii returned to its historic route of sailing cargo around South America via the Straits of Magellan after Tehuantepec was closed but before the canal opened . 
 With the opening of the Panama Canal on 15 August , American @-@ Hawaiian ships switched to using the canal . In early September , American @-@ Hawaiian announced that Dakotan would sail on a route from New York via the canal to San Francisco and on to either Seattle or Tacoma . When landslides closed the canal in October 1915 , all American @-@ Hawaiian ships , including Dakotan , returned to the Straits of Magellan route . 
 In 1916 , Dakotan was one of several American @-@ Hawaiian cargo ships chartered by the DuPont Nitrate Company to carry sodium nitrate from Chile to the United States . Dakotan and the other cargo ships in this South American service would typically deliver loads of coal , gasoline , or steel in exchange for the sodium nitrate . In May , The Christian Science Monitor reported on what may have been a typical delivery for Dakotan . The ship had left <unk> with 91 @,@ 872 bags — about 9 @,@ 000 long tons ( 9 @,@ 100 t ) — of sodium nitrate for use in making explosives , and , after transiting the newly reopened Panama Canal , arrived in Philadelphia . 
 = = World War I = = 
 After the United States declared war on Germany in April 1917 , the United States Army , needing transports to move its men and materiel to France , convened a select committee of shipping executives who pored over registries of American shipping to evaluate transport capabilities . The committee selected Dakotan , her sister ship Montanan , and twelve other American @-@ flagged ships that were sufficiently fast , could carry enough fuel in their bunkers for transatlantic crossings , and , most importantly , were in port or not far at sea . After Dakotan discharged her last load of cargo , she was officially handed over to the Army on 29 May . 
 Before troop transportation began , all of the ships were hastily refitted . Of the fourteen ships , four , including Dakotan and Montanan , were designated to carry animals and cargo ; the other ten were designated to carry human passengers . Ramps and stalls were built on the four ships chosen to carry animals . Gun platforms were installed on each ship before it docked at the Brooklyn Navy Yard , where the guns were put in place . All the ships were manned by merchant officers and crews but carried military personnel : two U.S. Navy officers , Navy gun crews , quartermasters , signalmen , and wireless operators . The senior Navy officer on board would take control if a ship came under attack . 
 The American convoy carrying the first units of the American Expeditionary Force was separated into four groups ; Dakotan was in the fourth group with her sister ship Montanan , Army transports El Occidente and Edward Luckenbach , and accompanied by the group 's escorts : cruiser St. Louis , U.S. Navy transport Hancock , and destroyers Shaw , Ammen , and Flusser . Dakotan departed with her group on the morning of 17 June for Brest , France , steaming at an 11 @-@ knot ( 20 km / h ) pace . A thwarted submarine attack on the first convoy group , and reports of heavy submarine activity off of Brest resulted in a change in the convoy 's destination to Saint @-@ Nazaire . 
 Dakotan departed Saint @-@ Nazaire on 14 July in the company of her convoy mates El Occidente , Montanan , and Edward Luckenbach . Joining the return trip were Army transport Momus , Navy armed collier Cyclops , Navy oiler Kanawha , and cruiser Seattle , the flagship of Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves , the head of the Navy 's Cruiser and Transport Force . 
 Sources do not reveal Dakotan 's movements over the next months , but on 6 September 1917 , the Naval Armed Guardsmen aboard Dakotan shelled a German submarine after its periscope had been sighted . On 29 January 1919 , Dakotan was transferred to the Navy and commissioned the same day , with Lieutenant Commander J. Simmons , USNRF , in command . Outfitted for service as a troop transport to return American servicemen from Europe , Dakotan made five transatlantic roundtrips to France as part of the Navy 's Cruiser and Transport Force between 15 February and 20 July . Eastbound journeys delivered cargo to Saint @-@ Nazaire and Bordeaux for the Army of Occupation ; westbound trips returned soldiers to the United States . Dakotan carried a total of 8 @,@ 812 troops on her five westbound voyages . Dakotan returned from her final voyage on 20 July , was decommissioned at New York on 31 July , and returned to American @-@ Hawaiian the same day . 
 = = Interwar years = = 
 Dakotan resumed cargo service with American @-@ Hawaiian after her return from World War I service . Although the company had abandoned its original Hawaiian sugar routes , Dakotan continued inter @-@ coastal service through the Panama Canal in a relatively uneventful manner over the next twenty years . One incident of note occurred on 20 August 1923 when Dakotan issued distress calls after she ran aground at Cabo San Lázaro on the Pacific coast of Mexico . The Navy transport ship Henderson and the Standard Oil tanker Charles Pratt responded to Dakotan 's calls . Charles Pratt successfully freed Dakotan , which had suffered damage to her rudder post in the accident . The American @-@ Hawaiian ship Nevadan arrived and towed Dakotan to Los Angeles for repairs . 
 In 1933 , two members of Dakotan 's crew had medical emergencies that received news coverage . The first , in February , involved a seaman with an abdominal disorder . He was transferred from the eastbound Dakotan to the Dollar Line ocean liner President Hayes which carried him to Los Angeles to receive medical attention . The second occurred in July when Dakotan 's quartermaster came down with appendicitis near Balboa . Radio calls for assistance brought the U.S. Navy 's Destroyer Division 7 to Dakotan 's aid . The destroyer unit 's medical officer boarded Dakotan and performed an appendectomy on the man , who was too ill to be moved off the ship . 
 = = World War II and later career = = 
 After the United States entered World War II , in 1941 - though most of Europe had been involved since summer 1939 - Dakotan was requisitioned by the War Shipping Administration ( WSA ) , but continued to be operated by American @-@ Hawaiian . In December 1942 , Dakotan was transferred to the Soviet Union under Lend @-@ Lease , and renamed Zyrianin ( <unk> Russian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) . Throughout the rest of the war , Dakotan made at least one trip to the United States , being photographed in port at San Francisco in August 1943 . Near the end of World War II , the WSA offered a payment of $ 670 @,@ 210 to American @-@ Hawaiian for the former Dakotan as part of a $ 7 @.@ 2 million settlement for eleven American @-@ Hawaiian ships that had been requisitioned by the WSA . Zyrianin remained a part of the Soviet merchant fleet through the 1960s , and was listed in Lloyd 's Register until the 1970 – 71 edition . 
 Zyrianin was operated by the Far East Shipping Company ( FESCO ) from 1943 to 1957 . From 1957 , she was operated by the Black Sea Shipping Company . The ship was written off and scrapped at Split , Yugoslavia in 1969 . 
 = Rachel Bilson = 
 Rachel Sarah Bilson ( born August 25 , 1981 ) is an American actress . Bilson grew up in a California show business family , made her television debut in 2003 , and then landed the role of Summer Roberts on the prime @-@ time drama series The O.C. Bilson made her film debut in the 2006 film The Last Kiss and starred in the 2008 action / science fiction film Jumper . From 2011 to 2015 , she starred as Dr. Zoe Hart on The CW 's Hart of Dixie . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bilson was born in Los Angeles , the daughter of Janice <unk> , a sex therapist , and Danny Bilson , a writer , director , and producer . She has an older brother and two younger half @-@ sisters . Her mother is an Italian @-@ American who was raised Catholic , and her father is Jewish . Bilson 's father comes from a show business family : Her paternal grandfather is producer @-@ director Bruce Bilson , she has a producer aunt who worked with Errol Morris on Fog of War , a great @-@ grandfather , George Bilson , born in Leeds , UK , who ran the movie @-@ trailer department at RKO Pictures , and a screenwriter great @-@ grandmother , Hattie , whose credits include Pal , Canine Detective ( 1950 ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 Bilson attended Grossmont College , a community college in a suburb of San Diego , but dropped out after one year , taking her father 's advice to pursue a professional acting career . She then made several appearances in commercials , including advertisements for Subway restaurants , Raisin Bran and Pepto @-@ Bismol . She made her screen acting debut in early 2003 , appearing in one episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer and 8 Simple Rules for Dating My Teenage Daughter . Bilson was subsequently cast in The O.C. , which debuted in August 2003 . Her character , Summer Roberts , was initially intended to appear in only a few episodes , but became a series regular after a successful run , as Bilson 's on @-@ screen romance with Seth Cohen ( Adam Brody ) became a noted aspect of the series . 
 At the 2005 Teen Choice Awards , Bilson collected three awards : " Choice Hottie Female " , " Choice TV Actress ( Drama ) " and " Best <unk> TV Chemistry " ( jointly won with Adam Brody ) . In 2005 , Maxim magazine named her sixth in their annual " Hot 100 List " ; in 2006 , the publication awarded her # 14 . The UK edition of FHM Magazine named her 28th in the 2006 100 Sexiest Women in the World list , while the US Edition Ranked her 77th in 2005 . Bilson was also named one of People magazine 's " 100 Most Beautiful People " in 2006 . Before appearing in Maxim , Bilson had turned down requests to appear <unk> in men 's magazines , specifying that she feels that her body " is sacred " and " not there for the whole world to see . " 
 Bilson 's first film role was in The Last Kiss , a romantic comedy @-@ drama also starring Zach Braff in 2006 . She played a college student who seduces Braff 's character . It was reported that she called for a body double during the sex scenes because she was uncomfortable being nude in front of the camera . One review of the film noted that Bilson played the role with " surprising depth " , although another critic described her role as " Glenn Close in Fatal Attraction as an airhead valley girl with a hot bod " . 
 In September 2006 , Bilson refuted rumors she had been cast to star in a film version of the comic book character Wonder Woman ; In late 2006 , Bilson was cast in the film Doug Liman 's thriller Jumper , as the replacement for actress Teresa Palmer ; the film was released on February 14 , 2008 . She also appeared in a two @-@ episode arc on The O.C. creator Josh Schwartz 's NBC comedy , Chuck , and in the film New York , I Love You , and appeared in the 100th episode of How I Met Your Mother ( " Girls Versus Suits " ) as Ted Mosby 's latest love interest . In September 2008 , she started shooting the indie romantic film Waiting For Forever , directed by James Keach . In September 2009 Rachel appeared as a celebrity guest judge in the third episode of Project Runway ( season 6 ) . 
 Bilson starred in the 2011 indie film L ! fe Happens next to Krysten Ritter and Kate Bosworth . Bilson also launched a shoe range in 2011 . 
 In 2011 , Bilson began starring in the The CW series Hart of Dixie , executive produced by The O.C. creator Josh Schwartz . She played Dr. Zoe Hart , a New Yorker who , after her dreams of becoming a heart surgeon fall apart , accepts an offer to work as a general practitioner in the fictional Gulf Coast town of Bluebell , Alabama . On May 7 , 2015 , the CW officially canceled the show after four seasons . 
 Bilson also filmed a comedy exclusive for the website Funny or Die , titled , " Rachel Bilson 's Deleted Sex Scene " in 2009 . 
 = = Fashion design = = 
 Bilson has been recognized by several media sources as being a " fashion junkie " . She has described herself as having a " vintage " sense of style , and has noted Kate Moss and Diane Keaton as inspirations . She approached DKNY Jeans in late 2007 with a view to design a clothing line with the fashion brand . Together they created Edie Rose . The collection was launched in September 2008 . It consisted of mainly black and white separates with a splash of yellow that could easily work with an existing wardrobe . Her idea was to keep fashionable items accessible to young women by keeping the prices of each piece under $ 100 . An advertising image was released in July 2008 which featured Bilson modelling her Edie Rose collection . She said she wanted to keep her fashion line " as separate as possible from Rachel Bilson the actress . I 'm hoping people will appreciate it for the clothes , not the person behind them . " Much of her fashion collection was lost when her home was burglarized in May 2009 . Bilson 's fashions and sense of style made her the unwitting target of the Bling Ring , who burglarized her home on several occasions . 
 In 2011 , Bilson collaborated with her personal stylist Nicole Chavez , and shoe industry leader Steve Madden , to launch the footwear destination , <unk> , an " online customized shoe shopping experience " . 
 In 2013 Bilson designed a shirt for Invisible Children . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bilson and Adam Brody , her co @-@ star on The O.C. , dated for three years , ending in 2006 . The following year , she met Hayden Christensen on the set of Jumper and they became engaged in 2008 . In mid @-@ 2010 , the couple split up but were dating again a few months later . Bilson and Christensen had their first child , daughter Briar Rose , on October 29 , 2014 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = James L. Brooks = 
 James Lawrence " Jim " Brooks ( born May 9 , 1940 ) is an American director , producer and screenwriter . Growing up in North Bergen , New Jersey , Brooks endured a fractured family life and passed the time by reading and writing . After dropping out of New York University , he got a job as an usher at CBS , going on to write for the CBS News broadcasts . He moved to Los Angeles in 1965 to work on David L. Wolper 's documentaries . After being laid off he met producer Allan Burns who secured him a job as a writer on the series My Mother the Car . 
 Brooks wrote for several shows before being hired as a story editor on My Friend Tony and later created the series Room 222 . Grant Tinker hired Brooks and Burns at MTM Productions to create The Mary Tyler Moore Show in 1970 . The show , one of the first to feature an independent working woman as its lead character , was critically acclaimed and won Brooks several Primetime Emmy Awards . Brooks and Burns then created two successful spin @-@ offs from Mary Tyler Moore in the shape of Rhoda ( a comedy ) and Lou Grant ( a drama ) . Brooks left MTM Productions in 1978 to co @-@ create the sitcom Taxi which , despite winning multiple Emmys , suffered from low ratings and was canceled twice . 
 Brooks moved into feature film work when he wrote and co @-@ produced the 1979 film Starting Over . His next project was the critically acclaimed film Terms of Endearment , which he produced , directed and wrote , winning an Academy Award for all three positions . Basing his next film , Broadcast News , on his journalistic experiences , the film earned him a further two Academy Award nominations . Although his 1994 work I 'll Do Anything was hampered by negative press attention due to the cutting of all of its recorded musical numbers , As Good as It Gets ( co @-@ written with Mark Andrus ) earned further praise . It was seven years until his next film , 2004 's Spanglish . His sixth film , How Do You Know , was released in 2010 . Brooks also produced and mentored Cameron Crowe on Say Anything ... ( 1989 ) and Wes Anderson and Owen Wilson on Bottle Rocket ( 1996 ) . 
 In 1984 , Brooks founded the television and film company , Gracie Films . Although he did not intend to do so , Brooks returned to television in 1987 as the producer of The Tracey Ullman Show . He hired cartoonist Matt Groening to create a series of shorts for the show , which eventually led to The Simpsons in 1989 . The Simpsons won numerous awards and is still running . Brooks also co @-@ produced and co @-@ wrote the 2007 film adaptation of the show , The Simpsons Movie . In total , Brooks has received 47 Emmy nominations , winning 20 of them . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brooks was born James Lawrence Brooks on May 9 , 1940 in Brooklyn , New York , United States , and raised in North Bergen , New Jersey . His parents , Dorothy Helen ( née <unk> ) and Edward M. Brooks , were both salespeople ( his mother sold children 's clothes ; his father furniture ) . The Brooks family was Jewish ; Edward Brooks changed his surname from Bernstein and claimed to be Irish . Brooks ' father abandoned his mother when he found out she was pregnant with him , and lost contact with his son when Brooks was twelve . During the pregnancy , Brooks ' father sent his wife a postcard stating that " If it 's a boy , name him Jim . " His mother died when he was 22 . He has described his early life as " tough " with a " broken home , [ and him being ] poor and sort of lonely , that sort of stuff " , later adding : " My father was sort of in @-@ and @-@ out and my mother worked long hours , so there was no choice but for me to be alone in the apartment a lot . " He has an older sister , Diane , who helped look after him as a child and to whom he dedicated As Good As It Gets . 
 Brooks spent much of his childhood " surviving " and reading numerous comedic and scripted works , as well as writing ; he sent comedic short stories out to publishers and occasionally got positive responses although none were published , and he did not believe he could make a career as a writer . Brooks attended Weehawken High School but was not a high achiever . He was on his high school newspaper team and frequently secured interviews with celebrities including Louis Armstrong . He lists some of his influences as Sid Caesar , Jack Benny , Lenny Bruce , Mike Nichols and Elaine May , as well as writers Paddy Chayefsky and F. Scott Fitzgerald . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 In 1987 , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times described Brooks ' career as " a non @-@ stop crescendo . " Although he dropped out of a New York University public relations course , Brooks ' sister got him a job as a host at CBS in New York City , a job usually requiring a college education , as she was friends with a secretary there . He held it for two and a half years . For two weeks he filled in as a copywriter for CBS News and was given the job permanently when the original employee never returned . Brooks went on to become a writer for the news broadcasts , joining the Writers Guild of America and writing reports on events such as the assassination of President Kennedy . He moved to Los Angeles in 1965 , to write for documentaries being produced by David L. Wolper , something he " still [ hasn 't ] quite figured out how [ he ] got the guts to do , " as his job at CBS was secure and well @-@ paid . He worked as an associate producer on series such as Men in Crisis but after sixth months he was laid off as the company were trying to cut back on expenses . Brooks did occasionally work for Wolper 's company again , including on a National Geographic insect special . 
 Failing to find another job at a news agency , he met producer Allan Burns at a party . Burns got him a job on My Mother the Car where he was hired to rewrite a script after pitching some story ideas . Brooks then went on to write episodes of That Girl , The Andy Griffith Show and My Three Sons before Sheldon Leonard hired him as a story editor on My Friend Tony . In 1969 he created for ABC the series Room 222 , which lasted until 1974 . Room 222 was the second series in American history to feature a black lead character , in this case high school teacher Pete Dixon played by Lloyd Haynes . The network felt the show was sensitive and so attempted to change the pilot story so that Dixon helped a white student rather than a black one , but Brooks prevented it . On the show Brooks worked with Gene Reynolds who taught him the importance of extensive and diligent research , which he conducted at Los Angeles High School for Room 222 , and he used the technique on his subsequent works . Brooks left Room 222 as head writer after one year to work on other pilots and brought Burns in to produce the show . 
 Brooks and Burns were hired by CBS programming executive Grant Tinker to create a series together with MTM Productions for Tinker 's wife Mary Tyler Moore which became The Mary Tyler Moore Show . Drawing on his own background in journalism , Brooks set the show in a newsroom . Initially the show was unpopular with CBS executives who demanded Tinker fire Brooks and Burns . However the show was one of the beneficiaries of network president Fred Silverman 's " rural purge " ; executive Bob Wood also liked the show and moved it into a better timeslot . Brooks and Burns hired all of the show 's staff themselves and eventually ended it of their own accord . The Mary Tyler Moore Show became a critical and commercial success and was the first show to feature an independent @-@ minded , working woman , not reliant on a man , as its lead . Geoff Hammill of the Museum of Broadcast Communications described it as " one of the most acclaimed television programs ever produced " in US television history . During its seven @-@ year period it received high praise from critics and numerous Primetime Emmy Awards including for three years in a row Outstanding Comedy Series . In 2003 , USA Today called it " one of the best shows ever to air on TV " . In 1997 , TV Guide selected a Mary Tyler Moore Show episode as the best TV episode ever and in 1999 , Entertainment Weekly picked Mary 's hat toss in the opening credits as television 's second greatest moment . 
 With Mary Tyler Moore going strong , Brooks produced and wrote the TV film Thursday 's Game , before creating the short @-@ lived series Paul Sand in Friends and Lovers in 1974 . He and Burns moved on to Rhoda , a spin @-@ off of Mary Tyler Moore , taking Valerie Harper 's character Rhoda Morgenstern into her own show . It was well received , lasting four years and earning Brooks several Emmys . The duo 's next project came in 1977 in the shape of Lou Grant , a second Mary Tyler Moore spin @-@ off , which they created along with Tinker . Unlike its source however , the series was a drama starring Edward Asner as Grant . James Brown of the Museum of Broadcast Communications said it " explore [ d ] a knotty issue facing media people in contemporary society , focusing on how investigating and reporting those issues impact on the layers of personalities populating a complex newspaper publishing company . " The show was also critically acclaimed , twice winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series and also a Peabody Award . 
 Brooks left MTM Productions in 1978 and formed the John Charles Walters Company along with David Davis , Stan Daniels and Ed Weinberger . They decided to produce Taxi , a show about a New York taxi company , which unlike the other MTM Productions focused on the " blue @-@ collar male experience " . Brooks and Davis had been inspired by the article " Night @-@ Shifting for the Hip Fleet " by Mark Jacobson , which appeared in the September 22 , 1975 issue of New York magazine . The show began on ABC in 1978 airing on Tuesday nights after Three 's Company which generated high ratings and after two seasons it was moved to Wednesday . Its ratings fell and in 1982 it was canceled ; NBC picked it up , but the ratings remained low and it was dropped after one season . Despite its ratings , it won three consecutive Outstanding Comedy Series Emmys . Brooks ' last TV show produced before he began making films was The Associates ( 1979 – 1980 ) for ABC . Despite positive critical attention , the show was quickly canceled . 
 Alex Simon of Venice Magazine described Brooks as " [ bringing ] realism to the previously overstated world of television comedy . Brooks ' fingerprints can now be seen in shows such as Seinfeld , Friends , Ally McBeal and numerous other shows from the 1980 's and 90 's . " Brooks ' sitcoms were some of the first with a " focus on character " using an ensemble cast in a non @-@ domestic situation . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In 1978 , Brooks began work on feature films . His first project was the 1979 film Starting Over which he wrote and co @-@ produced with Alan J. Pakula . He adapted the screenplay from a novel by Dan Wakefield into a film The Washington Post called " a good @-@ humored , heartening update of traditional romantic comedy " unlike the " drab " novel . 
 Brooks ' next project came in 1983 , when he wrote , produced and directed Terms of Endearment , adapting the screenplay from Larry McMurtry 's novel of the same name . It cost $ 8 @.@ 5 million and took four years to film . Brooks won the Academy Awards for Best Picture , Director and Adapted Screenplay . 
 Brooks was fearful of the attention Oscar success would bring as he would be " deprived of a low profile " , finding it " hard to work with the spotlight shining in your eyes . " He added : " There 's a danger of being seduced into being self @-@ conscious , of being aware of your ' career ' . That can be lethal . " He also grew more concerned of the " threatening " corporate influence into the film industry at the expense of " the idea of the creative spirit " . He channeled this ambivalence into Broadcast News . As a romantic comedy , Brooks felt he could say " something new ... with that form " adding " One of the things you 're supposed to do every once in a while as a filmmaker is capture time and place . I was just glad there was some way to do it in a comedy . " He cast William Hurt , Holly Hunter and Albert Brooks in the three main roles . 
 He wished to set the film in a field he understood and opted for broadcast journalism . After talking with network journalists at the 1984 Republican National Convention , Brooks realised it had " changed so much since I had been near it " , and so " did about a year and a half of solid research , " into the industry . When he began writing the screenplay , Brooks felt he " didn 't like any of the three [ main ] characters " , but decided not to change them and after two months had reversed his original opinion . Brooks stated that this also happens to the audience : " You 're always supposed to arc your characters and you have this change and that 's your dramatic purpose . But what I hope happens in this film is that the audience takes part in the arc . So what happens is that the movie doesn 't select its own hero . It plays differently with each audience . The audience helps create the experience , depending on which character they hook onto . " He did not decide on the ending of the film until the rest of it had been completed . Brooks was nominated for the Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay for Broadcast News . At the 38th Berlin International Film Festival , the film was nominated for the Golden Bear and Holly Hunter won the Silver Bear for Best Actress . 
 His 1994 film I 'll Do Anything , starring Nick Nolte , was conceived and filmed by Brooks as an old @-@ fashioned movie musical and parody of " Hollywood lifestyles and movie clichés " , costing $ 40 million . It featured songs by Carole King , Prince , and Sinéad O 'Connor , among others , with choreography by Twyla Tharp . When preview audience reactions to the music were overwhelmingly negative , all production numbers from the film were cut and Brooks wrote several new scenes , filming them over three days and spending seven weeks editing the film down to two hours . Brooks noted : " Something like this not only tries one 's soul – it threatens one 's soul . " While it was not unusual for Brooks to edit his films substantially after preview screenings on this occasion he was " denied any privacy " because the media reported the negative reviews before its release and " it had to be good enough to counter all this bad publicity . " It was a commercial failure , and Brooks attempted to produce a documentary about it four years later but was scuppered by failing to obtain the rights to Prince 's song . 
 Brooks agreed to produce and direct Old Friends , a screenplay by Mark Andrus . Andrus ' script " needed you to suspend disbelief " but Brooks realised " my style when directing is that I really don 't know how to get people to suspend disbelief . " Brooks spent a year reworking the screenplay : " There were changes made and the emphasis was changed but it 's the product , really , of a very unusual writing team , " and the project became As Good as It Gets , taking a year to produce after funding had been secured . According to The New York Times , Brooks " was constantly experimenting , constantly reshooting , constantly re @-@ editing " the film , changing its ending five times and allowing the actors to improvise the film 's tone . 
 The film garnered more praise than I 'll Do Anything and Brooks was again nominated for the Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay . As Good as It Gets received a total of seven Academy Award nominations , winning two , both for Best Actor for Jack Nicholson and Best Actress for Helen Hunt . Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader labelled it Brooks ' best film , stating " what Brooks manages to do with [ the characters ] as they struggle mightily to connect with one another is funny , painful , beautiful , and basically truthful — a triumph for everyone involved . " It also ranked 140 in Empire 's 2008 list of " The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time " . Brooks cast Jack Nicholson in both Terms of Endearment and As Good as It Gets with the actor taking an Academy Award for each role . 
 Brooks did not direct and write a film again for seven years until 2004 's Spanglish . Filming took six months , ending in June with three days of additional filming in October ; Brooks produced three endings for the film , shooting several scenes in " 15 to 25 takes " as he did not feel the film was tonally complete , although the script did not change much during filming . He opted to cast Adam Sandler in a more dramatic role than his usual goofball comedy parts based on his performance in Punch @-@ Drunk Love and Sandler 's relationship with his family . Describing the length of production , Brooks said : " It 's amazing how much more perverse you are as a writer than as a director . I remember just being so happy that I 'd painted myself into some corners [ while writing ] . I thought that would make it interesting . When I had to wrestle with that as a director , it was a different story . " Brooks 's directing style " drove [ the cast ] bats " , especially Téa Leoni , with Cloris Leachman ( who replaced an ill Anne Bancroft a month into filming ) describing it as " free @-@ falling . You 're not going for some result . It 's just , throw it in the air and see where it lands . " The film was poorly received and was a box @-@ office failure . 
 His next film , entitled How Do You Know , was released December 17 , 2010 ; Brooks produced , directed and wrote it . The film stars Reese Witherspoon as a professional softball player involved in a love triangle . Brooks began work on the film in 2005 , wishing to create a film about a young female athlete . While interviewing numerous women for hundreds of hours in his research for the film he also become interested in " the dilemmas of contemporary business executives , who are sometimes held accountable by the law for corporate behavior of which they may not even be aware . " He created Paul Rudd and Jack Nicholson 's characters for this concept . Filming finished in November 2009 , although Brooks later reshot the film 's opening and ending . The New York Times described it as " perhaps the most closely guarded of Columbia 's movies this year . " Brooks was paid $ 10 million for the project , which cost $ 100 million . The film was negatively received . Patrick Goldstein wrote in the Los Angeles Times that " the characters were stick figures , the jokes were flat , the situations felt scarily insular . " He felt the film showed Brooks had " finally lost his comic mojo " concluding " his films used to have a wonderfully restless , neurotic energy , but How Do You Know feels like it was phoned in from someone resting uncomfortably on his laurels . " Variety 's Peter Debruge also felt the film showed Brooks had lost his " spark " . Richard Corliss of Time was more positive , writing " without being great , it 's still the flat @-@ out finest romantic comedy of the year , " while " Brooks hasn 't lost his gift for dreaming up heroes and heroines who worry amusingly . " 
 Brooks started his own film and television production company , Gracie Films , in 1984 . He produced Big ( 1988 ) and The War of the Roses ( 1989 ) . Brooks mentored Cameron Crowe and was the executive producer of Crowe 's directorial debut Say Anything ... ( 1989 ) and produced his later film Jerry Maguire ( 1996 ) . Brooks also helped Owen Wilson and Wes Anderson after their feature @-@ length script and short film version of Bottle Rocket ( 1996 ) were brought to his attention . Brooks went to Wilson and Anderson 's apartment in Dallas after agreeing to produce the film . Wilson stated : " I think he felt kind of sorry for us " . Despite having " the worst [ script ] reading [ Brooks ] had ever heard " , Brooks kept faith in the project . Brooks produced and directed Brooklyn Laundry , his first theatrical production , in 1990 . It starred Glenn Close , Woody Harrelson and Laura Dern . In 2007 , Brooks appeared — along with Nora Ephron , Carrie Fisher and others in Dreams on Spec , a documentary about screenwriting in Hollywood . 
 = = = Return to television = = = 
 Although Brooks " never meant " to return to television , he was helping Tracey Ullman start The Tracey Ullman Show and when she could not find another producer , he stepped in . On the suggestion of friend and colleague Polly Platt , who gave Brooks the nine panel Life in Hell cartoon entitled " The Los Angeles Way of Death " which hangs outside Brooks ' Gracie Films office , Brooks asked Life in Hell cartoonist Matt Groening to pitch an idea for a series of animated shorts to appear on The Tracey Ullman Show . Groening initially intended to present an animated version of his Life in Hell series . However , when Groening realized that animating Life in Hell would require the rescinding of publication rights for his life 's work , he chose another approach and formulated his version of a dysfunctional family in the lobby of Brooks ' office . After the success of the shorts , the Fox Broadcasting Company in 1989 commissioned a series of half @-@ hour episodes of the show , now called The Simpsons , which Brooks produced alongside Groening and Sam Simon . Brooks negotiated a provision in the contract with the Fox network that prevented Fox from interfering with the show 's content . According to writer Jon Vitti , Brooks contributed more to the episode " Lisa 's Substitute " than to any other in the show 's history . The Simpsons garnered critical and commercial acclaim , winning numerous awards and is still producing original content after 20 years . In a 1998 issue celebrating the 20th century 's greatest achievements in arts and entertainment , Time magazine named The Simpsons the century 's best television series . In 1997 , Brooks was inducted into the Television Hall of Fame . 
 In 1995 , Brooks and Groening were involved in a public dispute over the episode " A Star Is Burns " . Groening felt that the episode was a thirty @-@ minute advertisement for Brooks ' show The Critic ( which had moved to Fox from ABC for its second season ) , and was created by former The Simpsons showrunners Al Jean and Mike Reiss , and whose lead character Jay Sherman appears in the episode . He hoped Brooks would pull the episode because " articles began to appear in several newspapers around the country saying that [ Groening ] created The Critic " , and removed his names from the credits . In response , Brooks said " I am furious with Matt , he 's been going to everybody who wears a suit at Fox and complaining about this . When he voiced his concerns about how to draw The Critic into the Simpsons ' universe he was right and we agreed to his changes . Certainly he 's allowed his opinion , but airing this publicly in the press is going too far . [ ... ] He is a gifted , adorable , cuddly ingrate . But his behavior right now is rotten . " 
 The Critic was short @-@ lived , broadcasting ten episodes on Fox before its cancellation . A total of only 23 episodes were produced , and it returned briefly in 2000 with a series of ten internet broadcast webisodes . The series has since developed a cult following thanks to reruns on Comedy Central and its complete series release on DVD . His early 1990s shows Sibs and Phenom , both produced as part of a multi @-@ show deal with ABC , and the 2001 show What About Joan for the same network , were all similarly short @-@ lived . 
 Brooks co @-@ produced and co @-@ wrote the 2007 feature @-@ length film adaptation of The Simpsons , The Simpsons Movie . He directed the voice cast for the first time since the television show 's early seasons . Dan Castellaneta found the recording sessions " more intense " than recording the television series , and " more emotionally dramatic " . Some scenes , such as Marge 's video message to Homer , were recorded over one hundred times , leaving the voice cast exhausted . Brooks conceived the idea for , co @-@ produced and co @-@ wrote the Maggie @-@ centric short film The Longest Daycare , which played in front of Ice Age : Continental Drift in 2012 . It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Brooks was married twice . He was married to Marianne Catherine Morrissey and has one daughter with her , Amy Lorraine Brooks ; they divorced in 1964 . Marianne Brooks has donated over $ 175 @,@ 000 to Democratic Party candidates . He was married to Holly Beth Holmberg from 1978 to 1999 ; they had three children together , daughter Chloe and sons Cooper and Joseph . He is also a member of Alpha Epsilon Pi . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
