 = Judgment Day ( 2005 ) = 
 Judgment Day ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was the seventh annual event of the same name and took place on May 22 , 2005 , at the Target Center in Minneapolis , Minnesota . It was presented by Clearasil . The event featured wrestlers and other talent that performed on the SmackDown ! program . 
 The main event was an " I Quit " match featuring two wrestlers fighting until one stated " I Quit . " WWE Champion John Cena defeated John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) to retain his championship . Two featured bouts were scheduled on the undercard . In respective standard wrestling matches , Rey Mysterio defeated Eddie Guerrero and Booker T defeated Kurt Angle . 
 Judgment Day grossed over $ 500 @,@ 000 in ticket sales from an attendance of 9 @,@ 500 , and received 220 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . This event helped WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 4 @.@ 7 compared to the previous year . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured seven professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed either a villainous or fan favorite gimmick as they followed a series of events which generally built tension , leading to a wrestling match . The name of a wrestler 's character was not always the person 's birth name , as wrestlers often use a stage name to portray their character . All wrestlers were from the SmackDown ! brand – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees to a different program , the other being Raw . 
 The main event at Judgment Day was between John Cena and John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) over the WWE Championship in an " I Quit " match . The previous month at WrestleMania 21 , Cena defeated JBL to win the WWE Championship . On the April 7 episode of SmackDown ! , authority figure Theodore Long , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , scheduled a series of number one contenders matches , after JBL , Eddie Guerrero , ( Rey Mysterio ) , The Big Show , Booker T , and Kurt Angle all demanded a WWE Championship match . The first match that Long announced was between JBL and Rey Mysterio . Mysterio was disqualified , after Eddie Guerrero interfered and attacked JBL , which resulting in JBL winning the match . The following week on SmackDown ! , Guerrero and Kurt Angle were scheduled for the second contender 's match . Angle advanced to the finals , as he went on to defeat Guerrero . Later during the program , Cena unveiled a spinner version of the WWE championship . Before the unveiling , however , JBL came out wearing the original WWE championship . On the April 21 episode of SmackDown ! , Booker T and Big Show were booked in another contenders match . After the match ended in a double disqualification , Long booked JBL , Angle , Booker T , and Big Show in a standard wrestling match involving four wrestlers , dubbed as a Fatal Four @-@ Way match , for the following week . JBL won the match , after he pinned Angle and having the right to face Cena at Judgment Day with the championship on the line . On the May 5 episode of SmackDown ! , Cena proposed that he would defend the championship against JBL in an " I Quit " match . Two weeks later , on the May 19 episode of SmackDown ! , JBL faced Scotty 2 Hotty , which Scotty 2 Hotty won after JBL was disqualified . After the match , however , JBL attacked Scotty and demanded that he say " I quit . " JBL further the assault , choking him with a leather belt , Scotty said " I quit . " That same night , Cena defeated The Basham Brothers ( Doug and Danny ) in a handicap match , a match consisting of one wrestler or team of wrestlers facing off against a team of wrestlers with numerical superiority such as two against one , or three against two . During the duration of the match , JBL , who was at ringside , yelled at Cena , telling him to say " I quit . " 
 One of the featured preliminary matches was Rey Mysterio versus Eddie Guerrero in a singles match . Two months prior to Judgment Day , at WrestleMania 21 , Rey Mysterio defeated Eddie Guerrero . In the weeks that followed , Guerrero and Mysterio were challenged by MNM ( Joey Mercury , Johnny Nitro , and Melina ) to defend the WWE Tag Team Championship , which Guerrero and Mysterio accepted . MNM defeated Guerrero and Mysterio to win the WWE Tag Team title after Guerrero walked out in the middle of the match . On the April 28 episode of SmackDown ! , Guerrero and Mysterio were given a rematch for the Tag Team championship . During the match , however , Mysterio accidentally performed a flying body press on Guerrero which led to Guerrero abandoning Mysterio , but returned as the fans urged Guerrero to come back . MNM retained the belt after pinning Mysterio for the win . The following week , Teddy Long booked a Street Fight match , a match without disqualifications and where scoring conditions can occur anywhere , between Mysterio and Guerrero 's nephew , Chavo Guerrero . Mysterio came out as the winner of the match . After the match , Mercury and Nitro attacked Mysterio , which prompted Guerrero to come out and clear the ring . Guerrero , however , attacked Mysterio . The assault led to Guerrero lifting Mysterio off the ground and driving Mysterio 's back on the ring steps . This angle saw Guerrero turn into a villain . As a result , the following week , Long promoted a match between Guerrero and Mysterio at Judgment Day . 
 The other featured preliminary match was Kurt Angle versus Booker T in a singles match . On an episode of SmackDown ! , Angle , Booker T , Big Show and JBL took part in a Fatal four @-@ way match to determine the number one contender to the WWE championship , which JBL won . The following week , Angle challenged Booker T to a match at Judgment Day , which Booker accepted . Prior to that , Angle had insulted Booker T 's wife , Sharmell , which led to Booker T attacking and accepting Angle 's challenge . On the May 12 episode of SmackDown ! , Angle admitted he would like to have " perverted sex " with Sharmell . That same night , Angle and Booker T were scheduled in a match , which led to Angle leaving the ring and going backstage to Sharmell . Booker T went backstage and found Sharmell on the floor crying . This led to Angle attacking Booker T from behind and pushing him towards a pair of steel lockers . The following week , Long was scripted to suspend Angle and demanded that Angle apologize for his actions . Angle apologized , but admitted that he actually kissed Sharmell and let her fondle his " private parts " before Booker T made his way to the locker room . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the Judgment Day event aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Nunzio defeated Akio in a match that aired on Sunday Night Heat . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 After Sunday Night Heat , the pay @-@ per @-@ view began with a tag team match where MNM ( Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro ) ( with Melina ) defended the WWE Tag Team Championship against the team of Hardcore Holly and Charlie Haas . The match started off with Nitro and Haas in the ring . Haas took the advantage in the match and was able to tag in Holly . There was back and forth action between the two teams , as all of the superstars were able to participate in the match . Mercury threw Haas upwards in the air , as he fell , Nitro placed him in a facelock and all three fell but Haas ' face hit the mat , a move MNM called the Snapshot . Mercury pinned Haas , which resulted in MNM retaining the WWE Tag Team title . 
 The second wrestling match on the pay @-@ per @-@ view was The Big Show versus Carlito , who was accompanied by Matt Morgan . For the duration of the match , Big Show used his body size to his advantage as he squashed , or easily and quickly performed moves on Carlito . The momentum changed , when Carlito gained control part way through the match . This saw Carlito hit a low blow on Big Show 's groin area . Carlito won the match and gained the successful pinfall after Morgan lifted Big Show on his shoulders and threw him in a spinning motion . 
 The next match was a standard match for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship , in which Paul London defended the title against Chavo Guerrero . After back and forth action between the two , London was able to perform a 450 ° splash , a move in which involves flipping forward to 450 degree from a raised platform and landing on the opponent in the splash position . London then pinned Guerrero to retain the WWE Cruiserweight title . 
 The final preliminary match was Kurt Angle versus Booker T. After Booker T backed Angle into the ring ropes and executed a shoulder charge , Angle began to bleed from the mouth . The match saw exchange offense from both Angle and Booker T. The match came to an end when Angle tried to lift and twist Booker T 90 degrees to slam him down , but Booker T grabbed Angle 's leg and rolled him into a pinfall victory . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The first featured match was for the WWE United States Championship , where Orlando Jordan defended the title against Heidenreich . As the match began , Jordan was able to perform a dropkick sending Heidenreich through the ropes to the outside . Heidenreich , however , would gain the advantage after countering Jordan 's attack from the top rope into a suplex . Afterwards , Jordan drove Heidenreich 's head into the mat and pinned Heidenreich to retain the United States title . 
 The next match was Eddie Guerrero versus Rey Mysterio in a standard match . In the match , Mysterio tried to counter Guerrero 's offense , but Guerrero blocked all of Mysterio 's attempts . Mysterio gained the advantage when he was able to execute a flying headbutt to Guerrero . One part of the match saw Mysterio perform a 619 . Mysterio won the match after Guerrero was disqualified for hitting him with a steel chair . 
 The main event was the " I Quit " match for the WWE Championship , in which John Cena defended his title against John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) . Cena came out on the flatbed of a semi truck with a DJ on a turntable mixing his theme song . During the match , both Cena and JBL were able to get in offense . One part of the match saw Cena backdrop JBL through the announce table after telling him to " kiss my ass . " Shortly after , JBL hit Cena with a steel chair which caused Cena to bleed from his forehead . Later in the match , up the ramp area , Cena threw JBL face first through a television monitor . The match ended when JBL said " I quit " , as Cena prepared to hit him with an exhaust pipe , which came from the semi truck that was at the ramp area . As a result , Cena retained the WWE Championship . Despite the match being over , Cena then hit JBL with the exhaust pipe . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On the June 6 episode of Raw , one of WWE 's primary television programs , John Cena 's SmackDown ! tenure came to an end when he became the first wrestler selected by Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff in the draft lottery , a mock sports draft lottery in which wrestlers switched programs . Cena immediately entered a staged rivalry with Eric Bischoff after when he refused to participate in Bischoff 's " war " against the upcoming Extreme Championship Wrestling reunion show . Cena went on to resume his feud with Christian , as they had an encounter at the Royal Rumble in January . During the feud , Chris Jericho was involved as well , as he protested Bischoff 's actions of scheduling a WWE championship match between Cena and Christian at Vengeance . After defeating Christian and Tyson Tomko in a tag team match , Jericho betrayed Cena . Convinced with the outcome of the events , Bischoff changed the original match between Christian and Cena to a standard wrestling match involving three wrestlers , involving Jericho for the WWE Championship at Vengeance . At the event , Cena retained the WWE Championship . 
 On the June 30 episode of SmackDown ! , a match between six wrestlers for a new top @-@ tier SmackDown ! championship was held . JBL , one of the participants , was victorious in the match , but Theodore Long announced that he was still not the champion . Instead he had won the right to a match against the World Heavyweight champion , Batista , who was SmackDown ! ' s final 2005 draft pick , making the World Heavyweight Championship exclusive to SmackDown ! . The following week , it was announced Batista would meet JBL at The Great American Bash with the World Heavyweight championship on the line . At the Great American Bash , Batista was disqualified for attacking JBL with a chair and JBL was declared the winner . In WWE , a title cannot be won by disqualification , but only by pinfall or submission ( the normal scoring conditions in professional wrestling matches ) . As a result , Batista retained the title . 
 On the June 13 episode of Raw , Kurt Angle 's tenure with SmackDown ! came to an end , as he was also drafted to the Raw brand . There , he immediately continued his feud with Shawn Michaels . At the start of the year , Angle and Michaels both participated in the Royal Rumble match at the January pay @-@ per @-@ view event . During the match , Michaels eliminated Angle . In retaliation , Angle returned to the match and eliminated Michaels and then attacked him outside the ring . The two engaged in a feud , which led to an Interpromotional match at WrestleMania 21 , as Angle was part of the SmackDown ! roster and Michaels belonged to the Raw roster . At WrestleMania 21 , Angle got the win over Michaels by forcing him to submit to an ankle lock submission hold . The same evening Angle was drafted , Michaels challenged Angle to a WrestleMania 21 rematch at Vengeance , in which Angle accepted . At Vengeance , the rematch saw Michaels defeat Angle . 
 The angle between Eddie Guerrero and Rey Mysterio continued . On an episode of SmackDown ! , Guerrero threatened to reveal a secret concerning Mysterio 's son Dominick . This led the families of both Guerrero and Mysterio pleading with Guerrero not to reveal the secret . At the Great American Bash , Mysterio defeated Guerrero in a match where if Guerrero lost , he could not reveal the secret . On the July 28 episode of SmackDown ! , Guerrero , however , revealed the secret , claiming he was Dominick 's scripted biological father . The storyline also went on that Guerrero knew Mysterio was having trouble starting his own family , so Guerrero left Dominick to be raised by Mysterio 's family . In subsequent weeks , Guerrero threatened to take custody of Dominick , drawing up custody papers and having his lawyer present them to Mysterio . This led to a Ladder match , a match where the objective was to climb a ladder and reach an object hanging above the ring , between the two for the custody of Dominick at SummerSlam , which Mysterio won . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Target Center had a maximum capacity of 20 @,@ 000 , which was reduced for the event . This event grossed over $ 500 @,@ 000 from an approximate attendance of 9 @,@ 500 , the maximum allowed . It also received 220 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . Judgment Day helped WWE earn $ 21 @.@ 6 million in revenue from pay @-@ per @-@ view events versus $ 16 @.@ 9 million the previous year , which was later confirmed by Linda McMahon on September 7 , 2005 in a quarterly result . Canadian Online Explorers professional wrestling section rated the event a 5 out of 10 stars . The rating was lower than the Judgment Day event in 2006 , which was said to be an entertaining pay @-@ per @-@ view to watch . The " I Quit " match between John Cena and JBL was rated an eight out of 10 stars . Additionally , the match between Orlando Jordan and Heidenreich was rated a 4 out of 10 stars . 
 The event was released on DVD on June 21 , 2005 by Sony Music Entertainment . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Marc Overmars = 
 Marc Overmars ( Dutch : [ <unk> <unk> ] , born 29 March 1973 ) is a Dutch former footballer who is the director of football at Ajax . Throughout his footballing career , he played as a winger and was renowned for his speed . 
 Overmars was born in <unk> and was passionate about football at an early age . He began his playing career at SV Epe , before joining Go Ahead Eagles ' youth team in 1987 . He secured a place in the first team by the 1990 – 91 season , but joined Willem II in time for the following season . His stay at the club was short ; after 31 appearances he signed for Ajax in 1992 . He established himself as a key member of the team that won three Eredivisie titles from between 1994 and 1996 and the UEFA Champions League in 1995 . In December 1995 , Overmars sustained a cruciate ligament injury which ruled him out of playing for eight months . 
 In 1997 , he joined Arsenal ; his performances at the club were indifferent to begin with and attracted criticism from football pundits and fans alike . By the end of his first season , Overmars became a focal point of Arsenal 's league and cup double success . He scored the winning goal against league rivals Manchester United which set his team on their way to securing the Premier League title and opened the scoring against Newcastle United in the 1998 FA Cup Final . In 2000 , he moved to Barcelona in a deal worth £ 25 million and became the most expensive player in Dutch football history . The club failed to win silverware during his stay and numerous managerial changes made him a peripheral player . A persistent knee injury prompted Overmars to announce his retirement in 2004 , but he reversed his decision in 2008 and went on to play one season for Go Ahead Eagles before retiring again . In 2012 , he was named as Ajax 's director of football . 
 Overmars represented the Netherlands national football team for eleven years . He made his debut in 1993 against Turkey , a match in which he scored in , and was a member of the Netherlands squads for four major tournaments , the 1994 and 1998 FIFA World Cups , and 2000 and 2004 European Championships . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Overmars was born in <unk> , in the province of Gelderland . He grew up on a family farm , with his parents , and assisted his grandfather with the potato harvest each year . There were no machines or tractors , so when the time came to extract the potatoes , his family tied a rope around Overmars ' waist , connected it to a cart and made him run while they pulled the crop out . 
 His father Ben described him as a " clumsy " child , whose main interest was playing football : " He used to come down 24 stairs to breakfast bouncing a ball on his head . " This had an effect on his schoolwork ; Overmars was uninterested in school , but did pass " a couple of <unk> . " Ben did not know whether he made the effort to take his exams just to please him . As a teenager , Overmars did weight @-@ training which improved his speed . He also attributed his pace to his mother who was quick , but " had no time for sports . " 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Overmars began his playing career at local club SV Epe . In 1987 , he joined Go Ahead Eagles at the age of 14 . After making his breakthrough into the first team , he joined Willem II for <unk> . 
 = = = Ajax = = = 
 After one season at Willem II , Overmars signed for Ajax in July 1992 . Both clubs settled on a transfer fee of <unk> million , after Ajax 's initial bid of <unk> million was rejected . Manager Louis van Gaal was very fond of Overmars beforehand and described him as a " multi @-@ functional player " . Overmars ' debut came in a 3 – 0 win against FC Dordrecht on 16 August 1992 . His first goal for Ajax was away to RKC Waalwijk in October and he scored a further seven goals in the 1992 – 93 season . Several teams chose to combat Overmars ' threat with heavy tackles ; he detested this , adding : " I do not fall on purpose , but if they keep kicking , I would sometimes give something back in return . " Ajax finished the campaign third in the league ; their form in the final few months was described as " maddening " by football writer David Winner , as they defeated eventual champions Feyenoord by five goals , but dropped points to " minnows like <unk> Maastricht . " The team lost to Auxerre in the quarter @-@ finals of the UEFA Cup , but did not end the season trophyless – they beat Heerenveen 6 – 2 to win the KNVB Cup . Overmars scored two goals in the final . 
 Ajax began the 1993 – 94 season with a 4 – 0 defeat of Feyenoord to lift the Dutch Supercup ; Overmars scored the team 's fourth goal . In August 1993 , he was awarded the Dutch Golden Shoe , as voted for by Dutch journalists . Overmars was happy with how his career progressed and said it was a " dream " to play for Ajax . Although he featured in 42 matches – five fewer matches than in the previous season , his goal count was much improved . He scored 12 goals in total , all of which came in the Eredivisie . His goals helped Ajax win the league ; the team ended the campaign 25 points clear of second place Feyenoord . 
 Overmars enjoyed further success in the 1994 – 95 season . Ajax retained the league and won the UEFA Champions League , beating Milan in the final . He scored against Bayern Munich at the semi @-@ final stage of the latter competition . In later years Overmars criticised the expansion of the Champions League to include non league champions : " When I won it with Ajax it was only the teams who finished first who took part . It 's not special any more . I think the Champions ' League is just a starter for what they want to do in the future , create a European League . " Overmars ' exposure to European football had prompted him to be a sought @-@ after player in England . He knew of Arsenal 's interest , but was puzzled as to why a move " didn 't work out . " In the summer of 1995 , he was linked with a move to Manchester United , but said : " No thanks I want to stay with Ajax for two more seasons . " 
 In December 1995 , Overmars injured himself during Ajax 's match against De <unk> . Close examination showed the player had torn ligaments on his left knee , which was " completely severed " . He therefore missed the remainder of the 1995 – 96 season and advised Ajax to purchase a new striker to make up their loss . The club however signed left winger Peter Hoekstra in January 1996 . Ajax played a second consecutive Champions League final in May 1996 , but lost to Juventus by a penalty shoot @-@ out . They did however retain the league for a third season . 
 The introduction of the Bosman ruling in 1995 had negative consequences for Ajax in the 1996 – 97 season . The club lost several players , and reinvested poorly according to Winner . Injuries also affected their challenge for honours ; many players were exhausted as a result of Euro 1996 and the short summer break that came with it . Chairman Michael van Praag was determined to keep the club 's players and revealed Overmars had signed a four @-@ year contract in 1996 . He added , " We are not going to allow them to break their contracts so they are not leaving . " On the pitch , Overmars made his return from injury against AZ on 28 August 1996 . He had his least productive season for Ajax , scoring two goals . The club finished the season in fourth position . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Overmars signed for Arsenal in June 1997 . The fee was reported to be between £ 5 million and £ 7 million , with the player on a five @-@ year contract , paid £ 18 @,@ 000 per week . Overmars relished the challenge of playing in England : " I like English football because there is more pace . With my speed and quality I think it will be good for me here . " Arsène Wenger , the manager of Arsenal believed Overmars had his " best years ahead of him " and met his criteria of a player " used to the pressures of playing for a big club and everything that goes with it . " He opined that Arsenal lost the Premier League at home the previous season – " we were maybe the best away team , " and commented on their inability to play expansive football . Wenger felt the signing of Overmars would rectify that problem . 
 Overmars made his competitive debut for Arsenal against Leeds United in a 1 – 1 draw on 9 August 1997 . Two weeks later , he scored his first goal for the club , away to Southampton . Arsenal went to the top of the league table on goal difference in September 1997 , after a 4 – 0 win against West Ham United . Overmars , who scored two goals in the match , had now " run into devastating form " according to Brian Glanville . His impact however waned in the subsequent months and so did Arsenal 's form ; a 3 – 1 defeat to Blackburn Rovers on 13 December 1997 meant the club dropped to fifth place . The turn of the year saw improvement to Overmars ' game , which coincided with " the more general rejuvenation of the whole team . " He scored both of Arsenal 's goals in their win over Leeds United on 11 January 1998 . Overmars up until this point was subject to criticism from commentators and fans . Wenger emphasised that this was his first year in England and there was more to come from him . He said Overmars was a " positive buy " and pointed out that his goalscoring record was " not bad for a winger . " 
 Arsenal caught up with league leaders Manchester United by the time both clubs played each other at Old Trafford in March 1998 . Overmars was a constant threat in the match and scored in the 80th minute . He received the ball from Nicolas Anelka and ran with it , before managing to flick it beyond the goalkeeper , Peter Schmeichel . Arsenal went on to win , which put them six points behind Manchester United , with three games in hand . Overmars afterwards said : " This was a great result for us . But you don 't win the Premier League against Manchester United ; you have to beat the other clubs . " Arsenal overtook Manchester United in April 1998 , and won the league after beating Everton on 3 May 1998 ; Overmars scored two goals in the match . The team later faced Newcastle United in the 1998 FA Cup Final and it was Overmars who scored the opening goal , in the 23rd minute . Anelka 's goal in the second half ensured victory and completed a league and cup double for Arsenal . Wenger praised Overmars after the final : 
 " All Europe thought Overmars was dead because of his damaged knee , but in every important game we have had this season , he has scored . He has got great mental strength . He is a world @-@ class player . " 
 Overmars began the 1998 – 99 season for Arsenal in good form ; he scored against Manchester United in the 1998 FA Charity Shield and in the team 's opening game of the league campaign , at home to Nottingham Forest . Arsenal participated in the Champions League , but their time in the competition was brief . The team did not make it past the group stage , and in the decisive game against Dynamo Kyiv which they lost , Overmars was ruled out with an abdominal injury . In February 1999 , he scored a " controversial " winning goal against Sheffield United in the FA Cup fifth round . Nwankwo Kanu failed to return the ball to the opposition , in order to allow one of their players to receive treatment for an injury . Due to the controversial circumstances in which the game was won , Wenger immediately offered a replay . His proposal was accepted by The Football Association and Arsenal went on to win the replayed match 2 – 1 , where the opening goal was scored by Overmars . Arsenal exited the competition in the semi @-@ final stage against Manchester United , who went on to win the league . 
 In November 1999 , he scored his first hat @-@ trick for Arsenal , at home to Middlesbrough . His performance was lauded by journalist Lynne Truss , who wrote in The Times : " Overmars was in top Jack Russell form , bounding after the ball and prepared to savage anybody who tried to take it away from him . " He twisted his ankle in action for Arsenal against Sheffield Wednesday in January 2000 and was out of action for six weeks . Unlike the previous two seasons , Arsenal never did pose a serious threat to Manchester United , who went on to retain the league in 1999 – 2000 . Overmars had suggested before the campaign that Arsenal were as strong as their rivals , " especially in attack where we now have so many more options . " Arsenal ended the league season strongly , winning eight games in a row between March and May to move from fifth to second place . In April 2000 , Overmars scored the winning goal against Everton and was the standout performer in the game . His final game for Arsenal was the 2000 UEFA Cup Final against Galatasaray , which they lost 4 – 1 on penalties after a goalless draw . 
 In 2008 , Overmars was voted as the twelfth @-@ greatest player in Arsenal 's history by the club 's supporters . 
 = = = Barcelona = = = 
 After the Netherlands ' exit at Euro 2000 , Overmars was asked whether he would stay at Arsenal . He replied : " I really don 't want to talk about it at the moment but you never know . There are some meetings with the club going on , we will talk over the next week . " Lazio and Barcelona were reportedly interested in signing Overmars ; the latter club hastened their efforts once Joan Gaspart was elected as president . Overmars was " flattered " by Barcelona 's interest and said moving to such a club would " excite any player . " Gaspart travelled to London to open negotiations with Arsenal and eventually reached an agreement to sign Overmars and his teammate Emmanuel Petit for a combined fee of around £ 32 million in July 2000 . Overmars cost £ 25 million , making him the most expensive player in Dutch football history . The announcement of his transfer was unconventional ; he publicised it on his personal website before informing the media . His site garnered 250 @,@ 000 hits in one day , highlighting the internet 's " potential for exponential growth " in regards to football . Overmars was delighted with the move , saying : " I can 't wait to pull on the famous shirt and play my first game . " 
 Overmars made his debut for Barcelona against Arsenal in the Amsterdam Tournament in August 2000 . He lasted 45 minutes and was substituted after sustaining an ankle injury . His first competitive start came at home to Málaga on 8 September 2000 . His performance in the match started off well , then faded before coming back in the second half , opined Andrés <unk> in El Mundo Deportivo . He scored his first goal for the club at home to Racing Santander on 23 September 2000 ; it involved him dribbling the ball around the goalkeeper . Barcelona made an indifferent start to the 2000 – 01 season and by February 2001 , journalist Sid Lowe commented it looked improbable that Lorenzo Serra Ferrer would remain as manager of the club . Wenger was touted as his replacement after reportedly meeting with Gaspart . Overmars believed his former manager was going to leave Arsenal and revealed that " Barcelona have asked for lots of information about Wenger . I think something could happen soon . " In the league , Overmars scored the team 's seventh goal in their 7 – 0 win against Athletic Bilbao in March 2001 ; his performance was rated four stars out of five by El Mundo Deportivo . 
 Barcelona exited the semi @-@ final stage of the UEFA Cup to Liverpool in April 2001 . Serra Ferrer was sacked a week later and replaced by Carles Rexach . As the season drew to a close , Overmars turned into an influential player for Barcelona . Lowe labelled him as " Barça 's only decent player in recent weeks " and was surprised he started on the bench against Real Valladolid in June 2001 . When Overmars came on , he scored the equaliser to earn Barcelona a 2 – 2 draw . The team ended the campaign in fourth place after a dramatic 3 – 2 win against Valencia . 
 In the 2001 – 02 season , Barcelona once more finished fourth in the league . Petit left the club to join Chelsea before the season commenced , as he had found his first team opportunities limited . While on international duty with the Netherlands in September 2001 , Overmars suffered a bruised knee and as a result did not play for Barcelona for a month . In November 2001 , he scored Barcelona 's third goal against Liverpool in the Champions League , which came after 29 uninterrupted passes . It was described by the Daily Mirror as " arguably the greatest team goal ever scored . " Compared to the previous season , Overmars was used more sparingly in matches . Rexach had changed the team 's formation to accommodate new signing Javier Saviola and promoted Xavi as a first @-@ team regular . Overmars made an impact as a substitute against Galatasaray in December 2001 ; he set up Saviola twice to earn Barcelona a 2 – 2 draw . Mircea <unk> , the manager of Galatasaray complimented Overmars afterwards : " When we were 2 – 0 up I told my players at half @-@ time to maintain the result , but Overmars is a great player . We did not have a solution to him and it threw our game off balance . " 
 Overmars was subject to transfer speculation in early 2002 because of his limited role in the first team , but he revealed he was happy to stay at Barcelona : " My priority now is that the team wins . Personal issues are not important . I 'm here for whatever you need me . " In the Champions League , he started in the semi @-@ final first leg against Real Madrid ; the team lost 2 – 0 and were defeated 3 – 1 on aggregate . In May 2002 , Rexach was dismissed and replaced by Van Gaal , who was managing the club for a second time . Overmars was wary of the appointment beforehand , saying : " Van Gaal is a good manager , but I do not know if his return would be good for Barcelona . " He underwent surgery on his right knee at the end of the season and was out of action for six months . 
 The 2002 – 03 season saw Barcelona make their worst ever start to a league season ; the club was two points off a relegation spot after defeat to Sevilla in December 2002 . Van Gaal departed the club in January 2003 and following a board meeting , Gaspart resigned as president a month later . Radomir Antić presided as manager for the remainder of the season . He encouraged the team to play with more width and made minimal changes ; for instance he switched Overmars from a left winger to a right one . Overmars tore a muscle in his thigh during a Copa del Rey match against Terrassa in May 2003 and was sidelined for a month . In his final season for Barcelona , the club appointed Frank Rijkaard as manager and elected Joan Laporta as president . The club finished second in the league and were knocked out of the UEFA Cup by Celtic in the fourth round . Overmars made 29 appearances in the first team , three fewer than in the previous campaign . He was prolific in the Copa del Rey , a competition he scored twice in three matches . His performance against Ciudad de Murcia earnt him recognition in El Mundo Deportivo , who wrote " frequent injuries have prevented him from consolidating his [ position ] as indisputable . " Due to a persistent knee injury , he announced his retirement from football in July 2004 and left Barcelona without compensation . 
 = = = Go Ahead Eagles = = = 
 In July 2008 , Overmars played in Jaap Stam 's testimonial match in a team of " former Stam @-@ mates " against Ajax . His performance , which saw him trouble defender George <unk> , earned him invitations from Dutch and German clubs to make his professional comeback . He declined the offers at first , but in August 2008 announced he was to come out of retirement to play again for Go Ahead Eagles . Overmars ' comeback lasted only one season as his knee continued to give him discomfort . 
 = = International career = = 
 Overmars ' first call @-@ up to the Netherlands senior national squad came in February 1993 for a 1994 World Cup qualifier against Turkey . He scored five minutes into his debut , after good play from Wim Jonk . The team went on to win 3 – 1 and Overmars said the goal was good for his confidence . Dick Advocaat , the manager of the Netherlands was complimentary of the debutant 's performance . In April 1993 , Overmars earnt the national team a penalty against England after Des Walker fouled him . Peter van Vossen converted the spot kick to complete a comeback for the Netherlands , who had been 2 – 0 down after 24 minutes . 
 The national team qualified for the 1994 FIFA World Cup in November 1993 . Advocaat selected Overmars for the tournament and he featured in all of the Netherlands ' five matches . Against the Republic of Ireland in the round of 16 , he took advantage of Terry Phelan 's header intended for goalkeeper Packie Bonner and sprinted away to set up Dennis Bergkamp to score . The Netherlands were eliminated in the quarter @-@ finals against Brazil ; Advocaat deployed Overmars as an extra attacker , but for much of the match he played as one of five in midfield . His corner in the 76th minute was met by Aron Winter and levelled the scores at 2 – 2 for a brief period – a goal from Branco resolved the match in favour of Brazil . Overmars ' performances in the competition led him to be named the best young player of the 1994 World Cup . 
 In October 1995 , he scored a hat @-@ trick for the Netherlands in their Euro 1996 qualifier away to Malta . He was pleased with his performance – " things are getting better , " and felt he needed to practise his shooting and inward running technique . Overmars did not participate in the tournament finals as he was recuperating from his knee ligament injury . Sports writer Rob Hughes said the Netherlands draw against Scotland showed why " they sorely miss the speed and balance of Marc Overmars . " The player returned to international action for the 1998 World Cup qualifier against Wales in November 1996 . He believed his best position for the national team was up front , but manager Guus Hiddink wanted him to remain as a winger . 
 Overmars was selected in the squad for the 1998 World Cup , staged in France . Before the tournament began , he scored two goals in a friendly against Paraguay . He was on the scoresheet in the national team 's 5 – 0 win against South Korea in the group stage . As the tournament progressed , Overmars felt the Netherlands were " getting better and better " and believed they could win the World Cup : " Believe me , we can do it . In the past , there has been so much talk about our side and a lot of pressure with people calling us favourites . This time , nobody seemed to expect anything . In fact , people would come up to me in the street and say we were only dark horses to win . " While training before the quarter @-@ final match against Argentina , he sustained an injury which seemingly ruled him out of contention . He did feature late into the game as a substitute , but aggravated his injury . He was subsequently forced to sit out the entire semi @-@ final against Brazil , which the Netherlands lost on penalties . 
 Overmars suffered a minor setback prior to UEFA Euro 2000 with a sore thigh muscle . He however resumed training and was declared fit for the Netherlands opening match against Czech Republic , where he started on the bench . His introduction brought about the only goal of the match – a penalty scored the 89th minute . Ronald de Boer was adjudged to have had his shirt pulled whilst jumping to meet Overmars ' cross . In the quarter @-@ final stage , he scored twice in the team 's 6 – 1 win against Yugoslavia . The Netherlands went on to lose their semi @-@ final to Italy on penalties . Overmars played in eight of the national team 's ten 2002 World Cup qualifiers , but it was an unsuccessful campaign as they failed to qualify for the finals . 
 After a year 's absence from international football due to injury , Overmars was recalled to the Netherlands squad for their friendly against Portugal in April 2003 . Two months later he came on as a substitute against Belarus in a UEFA Euro 2004 qualifier and scored the opening goal of the game . He was selected for the tournament held in Portugal , and was advised by Advocaat not to train more than once a day , so that his body would resist burn out . Overmars only started three matches in Euro 2004 , his final game was the Netherlands loss to Portugal in the semi @-@ final . In all , he played in 86 games for his national side , scoring 17 goals . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Overmars in his prime was described as " the archetypal winger " , whose speed , vision , and dribbling ability meant he was able to get the better of most defenders and score goals . Indeed , pace and acceleration was an important part of his game and reflective of his nicknames " TGV " and " Roadrunner " . Former teammate Petit said his strength lay " ... in pushing the ball beyond his marker and darting past him into space to deliver crosses " . Former defender Gary Neville opined that Overmars was the best winger he came up against in his time at Manchester United , not least because of his versatility . 
 Football pundit Alan Hansen believed Overmars benefited from a " strange feature of the modern English game " – defenders backing off and allowing him to run until he was in a shooting position . Despite his talent , Overmars was also known to be injury @-@ prone throughout his career . 
 = = Post @-@ football career = = 
 In February 2005 , Overmars became a shareholder of Go Ahead Eagles . Two months later he joined the club 's supervisory board to deal with technical matters . Hans de <unk> , chairman of Go Ahead Eagles said he was " more than satisfied " with Overmars ' arrival , adding : " The board needs someone with a solid football background . " 
 In 2011 , Overmars took up a position as youth coach of Ajax for one day per week . At the end of the 2011 – 12 season , Overmars left his post at Go Ahead Eagles . He said : " I have been active on a voluntary basis at the club for seven years . That 's a big time in my life . " The club 's disappointing league form " accelerated " his decision . 
 Overmars became director of football at Ajax in June 2012 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Overmars married his long @-@ term partner Chantal van <unk> in May 2013 . Prior to the wedding the couple had two sons : <unk> and Nick , both of whom are footballers . He is a co @-@ owner of a restaurant in Epe , where he resides . The family business , Overmars <unk> <unk> was founded in the 1990s and continues to invest in , amongst other things , commercial and residential buildings . With his father Ben and brother Edwin , he also runs a car restoration service named " Overmars Classic Cars " . In 2002 , Overmars appeared in the Quote 500 richest Dutch people list for the first time , at number 441 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Ajax 
 Eredivisie : 1993 – 94 , 1994 – 95 , 1995 – 96 
 KNVB Cup : 1992 – 93 
 Johan Cruijff Shield : 1993 
 UEFA Champions League : 1994 – 95 
 European Super Cup : 1995 
 Intercontinental Cup : 1995 
 Arsenal 
 Premier League : 1997 – 98 
 FA Cup : 1997 – 98 
 FA Community Shield : 1998 
 Source : 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Dutch Football Talent of the Year : 1992 
 Dutch Golden Shoe Winner : 1993 
 FIFA World Cup Best Young Player : 1994 
 AFC Ajax Player of the Year : 1996 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 <unk> cup competitions : the KNVB Cup , Football League Cup , FA Cup , Copa del Rey and Supercopa de España . The Dutch Supercup , FA Community Shield and Copa Catalunya are excluded . 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 Source : 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list the Netherlands ' goal tally first . 
 = Román Baldorioty de Castro = 
 Román Baldorioty de Castro ( February 23 , 1822 – September 30 , 1889 ) is noted as one of Puerto Rico 's foremost abolitionists and spokesman for the island 's right to self @-@ determination . He received his primary and secondary education in San Juan . He received a scholarship and moved to Spain , where he continued his studies at the University of Madrid . In 1853 , he returned to Puerto Rico and began working as a professor at the island 's School of Commerce and the Seminario <unk> . Baldorioty de Castro was selected to represent Puerto Rico at the 1867 Universal Fair , which was organized in Paris , France . 
 In 1870 , he was elected as a deputy in the Cortes Generales , the Spanish parliament , where he promoted abolition of slavery . Baldorioty de Castro founded the Partido <unk> in 1887 , but he was only able to work within it for a few months . He was tried and imprisoned in Fort San Felipe del Morro , after being accused of publishing propaganda that affected the Spanish government 's image . He was released after a brief period in jail , but his time in prison affected his health , which contributed to his death on September 30 , 1889 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Baldorioty de Castro was born in Guaynabo to a poor family . His family moved to San Juan when he was young , where he received his primary education as a student of the noted educator , Rafael Cordero . After completing his elementary education , he enrolled in El Seminario Conciliar de <unk> , which at that time was the most organized institution in Puerto Rico . He spent most of his adolescent years studying , and finished with one of the best averages in his class . 
 Baldorioty de Castro was granted a scholarship , which he used for further study in Spain . He collected the money necessary to travel and departed to Spain in the company of three fellow Puerto Ricans , two students and a professor . Before establishing a permanent residence in Madrid , the group traveled to several Spanish provinces , where they visited some of the country 's tourist sites . Among the places visited were locations in Cordoba , Seville , <unk> and Bailén where they met Alberto Lista , an educator from Spain . 
 The three other students ( who traveled with Baldorioty de Castro ) contracted smallpox shortly after beginning their academic studies in the Central University of Madrid . Baldorioty de Castro cared for them , but two of the youths died from complications of the disease . Baldorioty de Castro was offered a chance to return to Puerto Rico but he declined . He continued his studies along with the only survivor and graduated with a degree in physics and mathematical sciences from the university . Dr. José <unk> Padilla together with Román Baldorioty de Castro , founded the Puerto Rican chapter of the Sociedad Económica de los Amigos del País and called it " La Sociedad de Amigos del País de Puerto Rico " ( the Economic Friends of Puerto Rico ) . In 1847 the Sociedad de Amigos del País de Puerto Rico named Baldorioty de Castro the organization 's correspondent in Spain . On March 21 , 1851 he was granted permission to transfer to France to continue his studies . Baldorioty de Castro moved to Paris , where he attended the Central School of Arts . 
 = = Political and professional careers = = 
 In 1853 , after seven years of study , Baldorioty de Castro returned to Puerto Rico and married Isabel Matilde Díaz y Ruiz , the granddaughter of Lieutenant Francisco Díaz , hero of the Battle of San Juan of 1797 . Upon his return , he noticed that there was political tension , because of the differences between the governor in office and the political and educational groups in Puerto Rico . 
 Baldorioty de Castro began promoting the restructuring of the social , political and educational establishments . These contributions led Fernando <unk> , the colony 's incumbent governor to offer him the position of mayor of one of the island 's municipalities ( towns ) . Baldorioty de Castro declined the offer , based on his ideals . At the time , the government displayed no interest in promoting education among the Criollos of the island . Two years earlier , the governor had imposed the <unk> del <unk> , which promoted a more ample labor base by reducing the amount of unemployed citizens . However , this measure was criticized for its elements that were used to increase the wealth of employers . As a consequence , the merits of said law were reconsidered and a group led by Baldorioty de Castro was selected to decide its validity . In 1853 , he became a member of the Liberal Reform Party of Puerto Rico . 
 Besides politics , Baldorioty de Castro also loved teaching . He taught Botany and Maritime Sciences at the School of Commerce , Agriculture and Maritime Studies in San Juan . In January 1854 , the Councilor Seminary selected Baldorioty de Castro as its botany professor . On November of that year , Puerto Rico 's Commerce and <unk> Joint selected him to work as a professor in a Nautical School , where he taught Maritime Studies . 
 The colonial government discovered that there was fertile terrain in the islands of Mona and Monito in 1856 . After the discovery , they selected Baldorioty de Castro as the supervisor of a series of experiments to determine the terrain 's components . 
 In 1857 , the cattle industry in Puerto Rico began having difficulties , when the number of animals diminished significantly . To resolve this problem , the island 's Economic Society formed a commission composed of Baldorioty de Castro , José Julián Acosta and Juan Hernández <unk> . 
 Baldorioty de Castro proposed that geometry classes be included in the curriculum of elementary schools in Puerto Rico , which was accepted by the pertinent authority . On January 2 , 1858 , the Economic Society unanimously named him the Secretary of the Studies Commission . On June 4 , 1860 , the organization named him spokesman of a commission to promote conservation of the island 's natural resources . Later that year , Baldorioty de Castro represented Puerto Rico as a delegate in the Spanish Parliament , serving for five years until 1865 . On September 17 , 1864 , he was certified as an applied mechanics professor and worked for a salary of thirty @-@ five dollars a month . 
 While working in the Spanish Parliament , he made the most of his position and encouraged the abolition of slavery in Puerto Rico and Cuba , and drafting a constitution to guarantee Puerto Ricans more political rights . On November 4 , 1866 , he was named Puerto Rico 's representative to Paris ' 1867 Universal Exposition . He served as a critic and subsequently wrote a review titled <unk> Universal de París en 1967 . Memoria <unk> a la Comisión Provincial de Puerto Rico . After completing his participation in Paris , Baldorioty de Castro returned to Puerto Rico . 
 There were rising tensions between groups that supported the abolition of slavery in the island and the Spanish colonial government . This led to protests and demands by the local Criollo population and influenced several revolutionaries , which led to the Grito de Lares . Baldorioty de Castro did not promote the armed revolution ; instead he choose to debate the several conflicts and issues on diplomatic venues . After the revolution attempts , a new superior provisional government was established in the island . This government promoted a union between the conflicting parties in order to establish reforms in the government 's structure . In line with the proposed solution , Baldorioty de Castro proposed a conciliation of these groups , but the efforts to unify the opposing views was unsuccessful . After this , he traveled to Madrid , under political pressure , and presented the island 's status situation to the respective authorities . 
 He began writing several documents that strongly criticized the colonial government and wrote a report listing the elements that he felt were being used by the administration that were affecting the island 's social and economic aspects . In January 1867 , Baldorioty de Castro received a communication from Puerto Rico 's Superior Instruction Juncture , notifying him that he was selected as a member of the Test Commission , where he was in charge of monitoring tests being issued in physics and the natural sciences . 
 In 1870 , he was named deputy to the Spanish Parliament , after the governor in office had revoked his accreditation as an educator . There he continued to speak about his cause . Baldorioty de Castro became known as " The Father of Puerto Rican Autonomy " . On November 19 , 1872 , Ramon Baldorioty de Castro together with Luis <unk> , Julio Vizcarrondo and the Spanish Minister of Overseas Affairs , Segismundo Moret , presented a proposal for the abolition of slavery . On March 22 , 1873 , the Spanish Government approved the proposal , which became known as the Moret Law . 
 = = Final years and legacy = = 
 Baldorioty de Castro returned to Puerto Rico in 1873 and went to live in the City of Ponce . There , he founded the newspaper El Derecho ( The Law ) . He was also the founder of a weekly paper called La Crónica , in which he expressed his ideas on autonomy for the island . 
 In 1887 , Baldorioty de Castro co @-@ founded , along with José de Diego , the Autonomist Party of Puerto Rico . He named a young and upcoming politician , Antonio R. Barceló , the position of party Secretary . The Autonomist Party of Puerto Rico became one of Puerto Rico 's first political parties . Its credo was that Puerto Rico should pick its own government and should have a representative in the Spanish Parliament . 
 The Spanish government , however , considered Baldorioty de Castro a dangerous person and a dissenter and had him jailed in Fort San Felipe del Morro in San Juan . Although he was not in jail for long and was soon released , his health suffered greatly during this imprisonment . Román Baldorioty de Castro died September 30 , 1889 in Ponce . He is buried in Ponce 's Cementerio Viejo cemetery which was renamed " Panteón Nacional Román Baldorioty de Castro " . 
 The cities of Bayamón , Juana Díaz and San Germán have honored the memory of Baldorioty de Castro by naming plazas after him . Puerto Rico Highway 26 , called the Román Baldorioty de Castro Expressway , is the main highway to the Luis Muñoz Marín International Airport . In Puerto Rico ’ s capital city , where the Baldorioty de Castro Expressway meets the Condado Lagoon in the Miramar neighborhood of Santurce , an obelisk was constructed in the center of the city park surrounding the lagoon . The obelisk is in honor of Baldorioty de Castro . A bronze statue of <unk> de Castro stands at the base of the statue as a gift of the people of Puerto Rico . There are schools named after him in other areas of Puerto Rico . The province of Azua de Compostela , Dominican Republic , honored him by naming one of the capital city 's secondary education institutions after him : Liceo de Estudios <unk> Román Baldorioty de Castro . 
 = Jennifer Brunner = 
 Jennifer Lee Brunner ( born February 5 , 1957 ) is an American politician of the Democratic Party who served as the Ohio Secretary of State ; Brunner was the first woman to serve in this capacity . She took office after sixteen years of Republican control , which included two four @-@ year terms by her predecessor J. Kenneth Blackwell , who oversaw the 2000 and 2004 United States elections . Prior to being elected Secretary of State , Brunner worked in the Ohio Secretary of State ’ s Office and served as a County Judge in Franklin County , Ohio . She also owned her own private practice ; during her private practice career , she focused on election law and campaign finance law . She represented a broad range of candidates , businesses , political parties and committees before the Ohio Elections Commission on quasi @-@ criminal matters . 
 As Secretary of State , Brunner was actively involved in evaluating and adjusting statewide election systems . Her efforts focused on correcting the procedural election difficulties that Ohio was known for . She evaluated voting mechanisms and instituted policy changes . She argued policy regarding same day voting , privacy of social security information , and foreclosure @-@ related voter eligibility . 
 In 2008 , she earned a Profiles in Courage Award for her reform of the voting systems . During the 2008 United States elections , Brunner was involved in several court cases in the Ohio State Supreme Court and United States Supreme Court regarding voter registration , provisional ballots and absentee ballots . 
 On February 17 , 2009 , she announced that she would run for the 2010 United States Senate election in Ohio , coincident with the retirement of incumbent George Voinovich and the end of her term as Secretary of State . Lieutenant Governor Lee Fisher announced his candidacy on the same day and defeated her in the Democratic primary on May 4 , 2010 . 
 Brunner announced on February 18 , 2014 , that she was certified by the Franklin County Board of Elections as the Democratic candidate for the Ohio Tenth District Court of Appeals . Brunner defeated incumbent Judge Amy O 'Grady in the general election . 
 = = Career = = 
 Brunner grew up in Springfield , Ohio . She earned a B.A. in sociology @-@ gerontology , cum laude , from Miami University in 1978 and a J.D. from Capital University Law School with honors in 1982 . Subsequently , Brunner worked in the Ohio Secretary of State ’ s Office as a deputy director and legislative counsel to the Ohio General Assembly during the administration of Sherrod Brown from 1983 – 87 . In four years of service under Brown , Brunner 's responsibilities included working with state legislators on finance @-@ reporting laws for campaign committees and laws for election procedures . 
 = = = Private Practice = = = 
 She then began a statewide law practice where she gained 12 years experience focusing on election law and campaign finance from 1988 – 2000 . She briefly worked for the Franklin County Board of Elections . In 1988 , Brunner represented the Ohio Pesticide <unk> for Responsible Regulation , when the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency held hearings about testing Ohio water supplies for pesticides that were not against federal regulations . She agreed that testing standards should be higher , but felt that such standards should not be mandated . She expressed an interest in public service when a seat on the Columbus City Council became available following the April 29 , 1988 death of John R. Maloney . The list of candidates who applied included at least 20 applicants . 
 Brunner has litigated various ballot propositions . In 1988 , she represented a client who contested the validity of a ballot proposal to halt the sale of alcohol at the Cuyahoga Falls entertainment center . She was treasurer of a citizens group that attacked the financial reports related to a Westerville , Ohio school district tax levy on the November 1988 ballot . Later in 1989 , she represented property owners in a rezoning referendum . Brunner represented Ohioans Against Casino Gambling in its dispute over the wording of the 1990 ballot issue on " games of chances " . 
 Brunner 's private practice was not exclusively about ballot issues . She served as treasurer of Choice ' 90 , a political action committee that ran television commercials about the abortion positions of 1990 Ohio 's gubernatorial candidates ( Anthony J. <unk> Jr . ( D ) and George Voinovich ( R ) ) but that was funded primarily by the Ohio Democratic Party . Brunner represented Ohio Democratic Party Chairman Eugene <unk> in battles with the Ohio Republican Robert Bennett and Canton , Ohio industrialist William R. Timken over the state redistricting following the 1990 Census . Brunner successfully brought a claim by Ohio House of Representatives Seventh District representative Rocco J. Colonna against Brook Park Mayor Thomas Coyne in 1991 for circulating campaign literature containing false statements . 
 Brunner was also involved in a drawn out case involving the rights of Hamilton County bars to serve alcohol in glass containers . The bars she represented were effectively put out of business by neighborhood residents ' passage of an ordinance . Brunner challenged petition signatures on a similar matter in Franklin County . However , the case in Franklin County was dismissed . The Hamilton County plaintiffs were granted a stay preventing the Ohio Liquor Control Commission from receiving the certified May 7 results . This stay allowed their case to be heard . Meanwhile , Brunner won another related case in the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit . The case overturned a state law allowing liquor licenses to be revoked by popular referendum . This ruling bolstered the case of the other four bars she represented . In 1992 , Franklin County Democratic Party chairwoman Fran Ryan approached Brunner about becoming a judge , but Brunner declined . 
 Brunner successfully defended Ohio House of Representatives member C.J. Prentiss when her position on the ballot was challenged in the May 1994 primary . In 1998 , she successfully represented House Rep. <unk> Tavares when her petition signatures were challenged during her candidacy to replace J. Kenneth Blackwell as Ohio Secretary of State . 
 In 1994 , she represented the Delaware County Amphitheater Action Committee , a group that attempted to block the state Liquor Department from issuing a beer permit . When their case was dismissed , they appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court . At the same time , she represented vendors whose liquor licenses were about to be cancelled following a vote where poll workers allegedly acted with bias . Brunner got her clients a September 1994 ruling that the poll workers had , in fact , attempted to influence voters . That same month , she was unable to get a pair of liquor option questions removed from the November 1994 ballot . 
 In 1994 , Brunner also represented neighbors of an adult video store that was being razed to make way for a McDonald 's store in an affluent neighborhood . She obtained a 14 @-@ day restraining order to halt issuance of a zoning certificate and demolition and building permits . The Bexley , OH neighborhood hosts the Ohio Governor 's Mansion and mansions once owned by Hustler publisher Larry Flynt and The Limited chairman Les <unk> . She got citizens to appear before the zoning appeals board to attempt to stop the construction . The Citizens were unsuccessful in convincing the Board of Zoning Appeals to change their earlier decisions . After the citizens were unsuccessful with the zoning board , they pursued remedy in the Franklin County Common Pleas Court . In addition to the court proceedings , the citizens sought the attention of the City Council in attempt to preserve the neighborhood by keeping the video store from being converted into a McDonald 's . On April 7 , 1995 , Brunner gained a verdict for her clients that in the interest of avoiding traffic congestion and pedestrian dangers , the McDonald 's would not be allowed to build . The developer attempted to appeal the decision by obtaining friend @-@ of @-@ the @-@ court briefs from surrounding municipalities . The Franklin County Appeals Court overturned the lower court ruling making way for the construction of the McDonald 's . Brunner 's clients appealed to the Ohio Supreme Court . However , the Supreme Court declined to hear the case . A few other cases against the developers remained in some lower courts . However , these were unsuccessful . After the lower court zoning victory , in May 1995 , she was hired to oppose a 259 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 m2 ) project . 
 In 1995 , Brunner again applied for a vacant seat on the Columbus City Council . That year , Brunner represented the AFL @-@ CIO in their battle against proposed rule changes related to new Ohio campaign finance laws . Also , in 1995 , she was hired to handle several elections law cases . She successfully represented Franklin County Democratic Party Chairman Dennis White in a 1996 case about whether his primary campaign mailings violated Ohio election laws . She also was involved in a residency challenge in 1996 . She represented a Seneca County constituent of then State Representative ( current State Senator ) Karen Gillmor who felt the Franklin County home where Gillmor 's family resides is her true residence . The challenge failed . 
 Brunner was involved in a hanging <unk> controversy when in a 14 @,@ 696 @-@ ballot November 4 , 1997 election in Licking County an income tax issue which had failed by four votes subsequently passed by thirteen on a November 26 automatic recount . Brunner was present for a court @-@ ordered second January 6 recount to evaluate whether <unk> remained hanging by one , two , or three hinges or whether they were sufficiently indented to count . 
 Brunner represented the Save The Doves Committee , an animal rights group that attempted to ban the hunting of mourning doves in Ohio via a ballot initiative . The group had previously attempted to petition the state to have the doves removed from the state game list . Ohio had formerly had a history of protecting mourning doves dating back to 1917 , but hunting them was legalized starting in 1995 . The doves had an Ohio population of 5 million and were legal prey in 38 states . A pro hunting wildlife group , unsuccessfully challenged the committee 's petitions . The actual wording of the ballot issue , which became " No person shall take or hunt a mourning dove , " was contentious . Some found the issue wording confusing because a " Yes " vote meant support for " No hunting " . Television ads opposing the ballot issue also were hotly contested . This issue was the only statewide issue on the 1998 ballot . The ban proposal failed . 
 Brunner represented pro @-@ gambling interests in an off @-@ track betting ballot issue in Stark County . After the Canton City Council allowed a new betting parlor , the Stark County Board of Elections deadlocked along party lines on whether to allow a county @-@ wide referendum against off @-@ track betting . Republican Secretary of State Taft , broke the tie allowing the referendum on September 14 . Brunner appealed the Board 's decision to allow the voters the chance to overrule the city council . 
 In 1998 , she represented the Ohio Democratic Party when they challenged 1998 Ohio gubernatorial election candidate Bob Taft 's ad campaign . On various occasions , during the race she obtained probable cause determinations by the Ohio Elections Commission that there were improprieties in Taft 's television commercials . While the dispute was being resolved , one of Taft 's ads was ordered to be pulled off the air via a restraining order on October 10 . The restraining order was lifted three days later . On October 16 , the Ohio Elections Commission rebuked Taft for lying in his commercials . After the ruling , the candidates continued to contest other campaign ads for a few days . Then they signed a code of ethics . During the same election period , she represented Mark L. Mallory in a similar ad campaign battle when he unseated State Senator Janet Howard . In another campaign advertising case , she represented Richard Cordray who charged his opponent , Betty Montgomery with money laundering of campaign advertising funds . Brunner felt Montgomery should have been disqualified in the election . 
 Brunner also represented a pair of judge candidates who were charged with misconduct during the 1998 elections . She was able to get charges dismissed against Judge Deborah P. O 'Neill of Franklin County Common Pleas Court . However , a disciplinary panel of the Ohio Supreme Court recommended Stark County Common Pleas judge candidate Elizabeth <unk> to pay a $ 5 @,@ 000 fine for actions that " demeans the judiciary " . 
 In 1999 , she represented a pair of individuals whose published election @-@ related literature was challenged . She represented Northland Mall owner in his attempts to block funding for roads to the planned Polaris Fashion Place mall . Her client was able to get a ballot issue placed to oppose the special financing . Television ad regarding this issue were hotly contested . The voters failed the proposal before the Franklin County prosecutors decided whether to take actions following the Ohio Election Commission 's determination that the ads were false . 
 In one of her final cases in private practice , Brunner returned to represent interested parties in Bexley . Although she was campaigning for her own November 2000 election at the time , she represented a restaurant at risk of losing its Sunday liquor license . After several years of representing controversial parties in elections issues , Brunner , a principal of Brunner , Kirby & Jeffries Co . , ran a non @-@ controversial campaign . Brunner , who was making her first run for elective office , opposed incumbent John F. Bender who had been appointed by Governor Taft in April 2000 to replace the retiring James J. O 'Grady . The race was the only contested race in the general division of Franklin County Common Pleas Court . During the campaign , Bender outpaced Brunner in fundraising by a $ 76 @,@ 613 to $ 58 @,@ 145 margin . 
 = = = Early elective career = = = 
 In 2000 , Brunner was elected to an unexpired term on the Franklin County Common Pleas Court . She was reelected in 2002 . The Court of Common Pleas judges tested , approved and created a separate drug court to reduce addiction @-@ related recidivism . Judges recommend repeat offenders who have been charged with non @-@ violent felonies stemming from their drug or alcohol addictions for the program , which targets those repeatedly charged with theft , receiving stolen property , writing bad checks , prostitution or drug possession , which are all addiction related crimes . Brunner started the court in April 2004 after several years of research . 
 In December 2001 , she approved a US $ 22 million settlement between Georgia @-@ Pacific and 6 @,@ 000 residents that resulted from a 1985 and a 1997 explosion . The settlement became controversial when several residents remained uncompensated nearly a year later . She handled cases ranging from a drug @-@ related firebomb death , a former @-@ Columbus Division of Policeman 's <unk> shooting and Interstate 71 highway chase , and an Ohio State University student Drive @-@ by shooting death , to an international kidnapping case , alcohol service suspensions , domestic abuse , a sex offender rights case , a federal fugitive case , and a state construction contract case . After Brunner 's May 30 ruling in the contract case , which involved the Ohio School Facilities Commission and their $ 2 billion school construction program , Ohio Governor Bob Taft forced the commission to review its contracts for a five @-@ year retroactive period . Brunner had ruled that a three @-@ person commission review contracts instead of just the commission 's director , Randall Fischer . Approximately 1 @,@ 800 contracts were reviewed . The 10th Ohio District Court of Appeals in Franklin County overturned her ruling . The Ohio State Supreme Court refused to hear appeals . Despite having been overturned , Brunner was supported by the Ohio Inspector General who found ethics violations . Brunner was also involved in a controversy for jailing a lawyer who she claimed was in contempt of court that resulted in op @-@ ed page debate . 
 Brunner resigned from the Court on September 1 , 2005 to run for Secretary of State . She ran unopposed in the May 2 , 2006 Democratic Primary . On November 7 , 2006 , she defeated Republican Greg Hartmann in the 2006 general election by a 55 % – 40 % margin and took office on January 8 , 2007 . Since the office is one that serves as a keeper of public records , the histories of the two candidates ' vigilance against identity theft was an important issue . The campaign also included mudslinging . She also received significant support from the Secretary of State Project , which " helped me toward the election " . 
 = = = Secretary of State = = = 
 Ohio is notorious for its 2000 and 2004 Election Day problems . The state had hours @-@ long lines at polling places in its major cities in 2004 and a fraud scandal in Cuyahoga County , which includes Cleveland , that led to the convictions of two elections workers on rigging recounts and Ms. Brunner ’ s takeover of the county board of elections . In September 2007 , Brunner announced extensive efforts to identify and correct serious problems with the security and reliability of voting machines in time for the March 4 , 2008 Ohio Democratic and Republican primaries . In a US $ 1 @.@ 9 million federally financed study released December 14 , 2007 , Brunner reported the results of tests of all five voting systems used in Ohio . All systems had major flaws . The study focused on security ; reliability of the equipment and the systems ; the software configuration ; and procedures of the local officials . Security and procedures were seen to be serious problems . The security level of the computer equipment did not match the contemporaneous levels of security used in other information @-@ sensitive industries . 
 She has advocated the replacement of all Ohio voting machines , including the direct @-@ recording electronic ( DRE ) touch @-@ screen ones used in more than 50 of Ohio 's 88 counties . Brunner supports a move to paper ballots , which would use optical scanning . As a result of the study , during the March 2008 primaries , paper ballots were supposed to be available at all polling places for voters who preferred them . The paper ballots also served as a backup for machine failures . Brunner mandated a paper ballot election for the November 2008 general election . This was due both to the study and problems faced during the 2007 election with touch screen electronic voting machines . However , the Republican @-@ controlled Ohio General Assembly has not addressed the subject of funding an all @-@ paper ballot . Consequently , Brunner focussed on addressing the procedures instead of the inherent lack of technical security . 
 In January 2007 , Brunner proposed a plan that would allow counties to recruit poll workers by mail , who would then undertake two paid training days , and work a paid eight @-@ hour shift at the polls on Election Day . Brunner explained the plan in an interview : 
 " In terms of Ohio and what happened in the 2004 presidential election , there has been a crisis in confidence in our election system in Ohio , both nationally and in our state . One of the quickest ways to repair that is to make sure that we have adequate numbers of poll workers . ... We suggested this as one tool that the boards of elections would have available to them for recruiting poll workers . We would be looking to do this similar to how we recruit jurors , only jurors are recruited for two weeks of service whereas we 'd only be asking for three days . It would also allow us to offer split shifts to poll workers . In Ohio the polling places are open for thirteen hours , so essentially a poll worker works at least fourteen hours ; with the average age of our poll workers at 72 , that 's a tough day for anyone , no matter what their age is . ... It 's an option , and we can even include a trigger , so that a county has to be deficient by a certain percentage of poll workers to even be able to use this . " 
 In the initial proposal it was not yet decided what wages would be paid , and whether refusing recruitment would result in penalties . The proposal will be decided by the Ohio General Assembly . 
 Brunner has established the Voting Right Institute ( VRI ) to improve voter access to elections in Ohio . The VRI has instituted a “ Grads Vote ” program which supplies voter registration forms to all graduating high school seniors . The VRI has also partnered with the U.S. Postal Service to include voter registration forms in government moving packets and with the Overseas Vote Foundation to improve online absentee ballot applications for overseas and military voters . 
 She has also moved to shield social security information and other private information from public view for millions of online records and coordinated with the Ohio General Assembly to prevent the filing of private information . 
 Brunner worked with Ohio 's 88 county boards of elections and thousands of poll workers to ensure record voter turnout in the March presidential primaries . Despite the record turnout , the primary was marred by paper ballot shortages , bomb threats , ice storms and power failures . In addition , flooding forced the relocation of some polling places in southeastern Ohio . 21 precincts in the Cleveland metropolitan area were held open for an extra 90 minutes due to paper ballot shortages . Brunner claimed that in Clermont and Summit Counties ballots ran out because of the number of Republicans who voted in the Democratic primary and that only Democratic ballots ran out . 
 Brunner has spoken out against election officials taking voting machines home with them in the days before an election . Such actions could allow hacking even though it makes transport and delivery to the eventual polling place simpler . Some elections officials say they feel the system is better if elections officials keep an eye on machines the days before the elections . Brunner says poll workers have sometimes cast ballots on machines in their homes . She issued the following directive on the matter : " We want Ohio ’ s voters and the rest of the nation to see that we have prepared a transparent process of transporting voting equipment , ballots and supplies . That begins with security practices at boards of elections and polling places , documented chain of custody , and now procedures to make secure voting machine delivery . " She has ordered bipartisan transport teams and proscribed storage conditions such as humidity . The federal government will subsidize the cost of her mandate . 
 = = = 2008 general election = = = 
 = = = = Same @-@ day voter registration = = = = 
 In 2008 Ohio experienced an unintended consequence of a new statute that resulted in a brief period of overlap voting , when absentee voting has started and before the close of voter registration . This period ran from September 30 until October 6 , due to the newly instituted early voting policy . On August 13 , 2008 , Brunner ordered county election board officials to establish procedures to enable voters who register to be immediately issued an absentee ballot . Because a voter could show up with only a cell phone bill , give any four digits and claim they were the last four digits of his or her Social Security Number , and then immediately vote and have such ballots put into the same pool as other votes with no procedure for more rigorous scrutiny of their validity , the Republican Party opposed the same day voting plan and fought it in several Ohio Courts . Ohio Republican Party officials and Republican voters argued in separate lawsuits that Ohio law requires voters to be registered for 30 days before they cast an absentee ballot . On September 29 , 2008 ( a day after lower state and federal courts overruled GOP objections to same @-@ day registration and voting or GOP requests for mandated ballot segregation and verification ) the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati , Ohio rejected Republican efforts to stop the plan . United States district court judge James Gwin in Cleveland , Ohio also ruled against the Republicans and issued a restraining order to enforce Brunner 's plan . In Columbus , Ohio , U.S. District Judge George Smith declined to rule on another statewide challenge , deferring to the state Supreme Court 's decision . The rulings , which opened a window to register and vote on the same day until the absentee ballot deadline on October 6 , 2008 , was upheld by the Ohio Supreme Court in a 4 @-@ 3 decision in which two Republican jurists who were on the November 2008 ballot recused themselves and were replaced by one Republican and one Democrat by Chief Justice Thomas Moyer . The normal roster of Ohio Supreme Court jurists is all Republican and the lone Democrat replacement , William H. Wolff , Jr . , cast the tie @-@ breaking vote . The dissenters noted that Ohio 's Constitution requires that a person register to vote 30 days in before voting . Brunner ordered segregation of same @-@ day @-@ registration ballots and verification of them before counting them on Election Day , November 4 , 2008 . In related proceedings on September 30 , 2008 , Judge Smith of The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Ohio in Columbus had granted an Ohio Republican Party request for a restraining order that would mandate election observers during early voting . Brunner prevailed in the appellate court which ruled that the district court “ abused its discretion ” in granting the restraining order . 
 The same @-@ day registration ballots are subject to the standard Ohio notification card protocol whereby a postcard is sent to the newly registered address to assist in determining the validity of the address . A card that comes back marked return to sender is questioned and marked on the voter rolls . Additionally , the boards of elections submit new voter registrations into a database in the office of the Ohio Secretary of State . The information is matched with driver 's licenses on an Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles database and failing a match there it is sent to the Social Security Administration to pursue a match . 
 = = = = Help America Vote Act ( HAVA ) = = = = 
 Ohio ( along with Colorado , Indiana , Michigan , Nevada and North Carolina ) is one of six states expected to be heavily affected by compliance with the 2002 Help America Vote Act , which mandates that states corroborate voter registration applications with government databases . Due to the disproportionate voter registration by Democrats it is anticipated that much of the confusion at the polling places will be for challenges to newly registered Democrats who have been delisted from the ranks of registered voters . 
 It appears that Ohio is using social security information to verify new voter registration , even though " [ u ] <unk> federal law , election officials are supposed to use the Social Security database to check a registration application only as a last resort , if no record of the applicant is found [ within the state 's own ] databases , " according to a New York Times article . Michael J. <unk> , commissioner of the Social Security Administration , alerted the United States Department of Justice and sent letters to six states including Ohio to ensure compliance with federal law . Brunner has stated that the filing of paperwork by Republican officials may be an attempt to establish grounds for contesting ballots on Election Day . The paperwork requires use of provisional ballots by persons with discrepant registrations . On October 9 , 2008 , the Republicans also were granted an order against Brunner by Judge Smith requiring that Brunner must perform voter registration verification according to the Help America Vote Act . Matching new registrants ' information against Ohio Bureau of Motor Vehicles or the Social Security Administration databases is one of the requirements . Challenges to mismatched registrations , which force the use of provisional ballots , must be filed twenty days prior to the election . Legal expert Greta Van Susteren viewed the ruling as a significant breaking news story and interviewed Brunner on her show On the Record w / Greta Van Susteren the day it was made . Van Susteren interpreted the ruling as a statement that Brunner has not been taking sufficient steps to prevent voter fraud . Democracy Now ! also interviewed Brunner on that day , but they did so before the final verdict . 
 Between January 1 , 2008 and mid @-@ October 2008 , over 666 @,@ 000 Ohioans registered to vote either for the first time or with updated voter information , and over 200 @,@ 000 of them provided driver 's licenses or Social Security numbers that do not match government records . Over 20 % of these voters are from Cuyahoga County , which is heavily Democratic . Also , many of the newly registered voters were the result of voter registration drives to register voters for Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton for the March 4 , 2008 Ohio Democratic primary . The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit , in a 9 @-@ 6 decision , ruled against Brunner on October 14 , 2008 in deciding that extra steps must be taken to authenticate these registrants and Jeffrey Sutton 's majority opinion suggested that these <unk> voters cast provisional ballots . Historically , 20 % of provisional ballots have been thrown out . As a result of the ruling , Brunner 's Office of the Ohio Secretary of State must provide each county with a list of registrants with mismatching information and provide direction on a proper course of action . There are federal laws barring purging voters from the election rolls within 90 days of an election . This issue is considered to be a partisan one with Republicans favoring greater scrutiny , and the justices voted almost along party lines based on the United States President that appointed them . 
 On October 17 , 2008 , in Brunner v. Ohio Republican Party , <unk> , the United States Supreme Court overturned the 6th Circuit Decision requiring Brunner to provide lists of improperly registered voters to each county election board . The ruling means that Brunner can instruct the 88 county boards of elections to ignore public record requests by the Ohio Republican Party made to challenge registrants with information mismatched between their registration and their driver 's license or social security number . The Republican Party claimed that the ruling was based on a technicality rather than the merits of the arguments . Bennett said that " The justices did not disagree with our argument that Jennifer Brunner has failed to comply with federal election law . They merely said we don 't have a right to bring a private challenge against her under this particular provision . " The McCain @-@ Palin campaign said " ... the United States Supreme Court does not address violations of the Help America Vote Act ( HAVA ) by Ohio Secretary of State Jennifer Brunner . Rather , the Court ruled that Congress had likely not authorized private individuals or political parties to bring suit under the section of HAVA requiring voter registration verification through data @-@ matching . " Since the ruling did not directly address the issues that the Republicans wanted determined , they filed a similar case in the Ohio Supreme Court . However , they withdrew the case . 
 = = = = Other issues = = = = 
 One month before the 2008 United States election , 5 % of Ohio mortgages were either severely delinquent or in foreclosure . There were 67 @,@ 658 foreclosure actions in the first half of 2008 . An editorial in The New York Times purported that Republicans may try to use foreclosure lists to block voters . Brunner warned all election boards that involvement in a foreclosure is not , by itself , sufficient basis for challenging enfranchisement . 
 On entering office , Brunner took immediate action against Republican county elections officials , including Robert T. Bennett , Ohio Republican Party Chairman . At the time , while writing for The Cincinnati Enquirer , columnist Peter Bronson described Brunner as " the most partisan state official in Ohio " . More recently , she has been accused of partisanship by her former Secretary of State opponent in the 2008 general election . He claims that she set policy in order to throw out absentee ballots likely to be cast for the John McCain @-@ Sarah Palin ticket . The Ohio State Supreme Court supported the Republican argument . Other sources claim that ACORN advises and influences Brunner . 
 The 2008 general election was expected to be marred by Diebold electronic voting machines that had malfunctioned on vote transfers from the local precinct machines to the county election board headquarters . Brunner is suing Diebold for other types of vote @-@ dropping malfunctions . Fifty @-@ three of eighty @-@ eight counties used the problematic touch screen electronic voting machines . The machines had also mysteriously crashed and their printers had jammed in the 2007 elections . Brunner feels that electronic machines should be avoided until they achieve the same security standards as the computer equipment in the banking and communications industries . She issued a report that both Premier Election Solutions ( a Diebold subsidiary ) and Hart and Election Systems & Software produce electronic voting systems with severe security flaws . 
 Brunner has made several specific efforts to alleviate some of the past voting difficulties . 2008 was the first Ohio election that permits absentee voting as a matter of preference without any justification for need . This resulted in a record number of absentee ballots . Additionally , voting machine redistribution has been closely studied with the hope of alleviating long waits in problem areas . Redistribution is based on past turnout , new registrations , any recent purges under the National Voter Registration Act , and the number of ballot issues in the district . Each precinct has been supplied with sufficient paper ballots to accommodate 25 % number of voters who voted in the previous presidential election . 
 Brunner has noted that only incarcerated convicted felons become ineligible to vote in Ohio . Thus , persons incarcerated for misdemeanors and persons detained in prisons awaiting new trials can vote directly from prison . 
 In fall of 2008 , Brunner was challenged in a pair of cases involving the Northeast Ohio Coalition for the Homeless . In September , in Project Vote ( on behalf of Northeast Ohio Coalition for the Homeless ) v. Madison County Board of Elections , No. 1 : 08 @-@ cv @-@ <unk> ( N.D. Ohio ) , Judge Garvin enjoined the Madison County Board of Elections from adhering to its September 5 announcement that it would disregard Secretary Brunner ’ s directives to issue an absentee ballot to anyone who has not already been registered for 30 days . The Board had threatened an action that the judge determined would violate Section 202 of the Voting Rights Act causing irreparable injury to registered voters who will be unable to receive absentee ballots . On October 27 , 2008 in the case The Northeast Ohio Coalition for the Homeless v. Brunner , Case No . <unk> 896 , U.S. District Judge Edmund <unk> ruled that in concert with Ohio Revised Code § <unk> @.@ 02 ( I ) which states : " If a person does not have a fixed place of habitation , but has a shelter or other location at which the person has been a consistent or regular inhabitant and to which the person has the intention of returning , that shelter or other location shall be deemed the person 's residence for the purpose of registering to vote . " The order mandated that Brunner as Secretary of State " instruct the County Boards of Elections that provisional ballots may not be rejected for failing to list a building address on the provisional ballot envelope if the voter resides at a location that does not have an address . " This ruling states that all Ohio counties must allow homeless voters use non @-@ building locations such as park benches as their addresses . At the same time , the court ruled that poll worker error is not a valid reason to reject a provisional ballot . Time said that these rulings brought uniformity in handling provisional ballots to the counties that did not previously exist . 
 On October 20 , 2008 Brunner had to temporarily shut down the Ohio Secretary of State website after it was hacked . The offense was placed under the jurisdiction of the Ohio State Highway Patrol . At the time of the announcement Ohio Governor Ted Strickland noted that Brunner has been the subject of threats and Brunner noted that her office has been assaulted with threats and actual delivery of abuse . 
 In November 2008 , Brunner became involved in a legal battle against two Steve Stivers supporters that relates to the validity of a 1000 provisional ballots in the race for Ohio 's 15th congressional district that at the time of recounting had a 149 @-@ vote margin and 27 @,@ 000 absentee ballots to be counted . The case was consolidated with other cases in the United States District Court upon Brunner 's request . On December 5 , 2008 , Stivers ' supporters won a ruling in the Ohio Supreme Court that the 1 @,@ 000 provisional ballots that lacked signatures or had names and signatures in the wrong places be thrown out . 
 = = = 2010 Campaign for U.S. Senate = = = 
 Brunner 's term as Ohio Secretary of State ends in 2011 and was up for re @-@ election in 2010 along with other Ohio statewide offices . In January , rumors that were eventually confirmed began circulating that second term Republican United States Senator George Voinovich would not run for re @-@ election in 2010 . Brunner 's name was mentioned as a potential Democratic candidate for the seat . On January 23 , 2009 , Brunner and Ohio Lieutenant Governor Lee Fisher met to discuss the possibility that either of them would run , but did not confirm any decision or leanings to the media . 
 On February 17 , 2009 , Brunner announced that she would be a candidate for the U.S. Senate in 2010 . She ran against Fisher for the Democratic nomination . As of February 2010 , she had significantly less cash on hand than Fisher or likely general election opponent Rob Portman ( who would eventually win the seat ) , but claimed , " I only need enough money to win , " adding , " And frankly , in this economic environment , it 's rather obscene when people start crowing about how many millions they have on hand . " Polling in late 2009 and January 2010 showed Brunner to be more competitive than Fisher in a general election matchup against Portman , while Fisher and Brunner were deadlocked in Democratic primary polling . 
 Brunner lost to Fisher in the May 4 , 2010 party primary . 
 = = = 2014 Campaign for Ohio Tenth District Court of Appeals = = = 
 Brunner was certified as the sole Democratic candidate running for the Ohio Tenth District Court of Appeals seat occupied by incumbent judge Amy O 'Grady , who was appointed to the seat by Governor John Kasich in 2013 . The 2014 judicial elections are notable for the number of judges on the ballot , with The Columbus Dispatch stating that it was the first time 12 contested judicial seats would appear on the ballot in Franklin County , Ohio . She was the only Democratic nominee for the appellate seat , running against incumbent judge Amy O 'Grady . Brunner defeated O 'Grady and was elected to a two @-@ year term as Franklin County appeals judge unexpired term in the General Election . 
 = = = International Work = = = 
 Brunner worked with the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) of the US Department of State as a consultant on campaign finance , elections , and ballot issues in the Republic of Serbia during 2012 . Brunner also served as an adviser to Serbian misdemeanor court judges on outreach strategies to rebuild the public 's confidence in elections systems . The project , named Judicial Reform and Government Accountability , also aims to enable the Serbian government to better detect and prevent corruption in the government . She has been engaged to serve as an adviser through USAID four times , with a trip to Serbia in 2013 assisting the Serbian Minister of Justice with judicial reform . 
 Brunner also served as an international election observer in Egypt for the 2014 Egyptian constitutional referendum . 
 Judge Brunner is a Member of the Board of Advisors of the Berlin , Prague and Sydney @-@ based Global Panel Foundation - a respected NGO which works behind @-@ the @-@ scenes in conflict areas around the world . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Brunner is a resident of Columbus , Ohio . She and her husband , Rick , have been married since 1978 and have three adult children . They have also been foster parents to three children . Brunner is an alumna of Whetstone High School in Clintonville , Ohio . Brunner served on the Ohio Student Loan Commission , a nine @-@ member group that guarantees loans for college students , for a term that ended in 1992 . Republican Governor John Kasich appointed her to a Democratic seat the Ohio Cultural Facilities Commission in 2011 , which was legislated out of existence in 2013 . In October 2012 , Kasich also appointed her to the Ohio Counselor , Social Worker , Marriage and Family Therapist Board . Columbus Mayor Michael B. Coleman appointed Brunner to the Central Ohio Transit Authority Board in 2013 . 
 In March 2008 , Brunner was given the Profile in Courage Award by the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . She earned the award for challenging the reliability of electronic voting in order to protect the right to vote in Ohio . The award was announced on March 18 , 2008 . She received the award May 12 , 2008 . Brunner assumed office in 2007 and ordered paper ballots be provided to any voter who requested one in the March 2008 primary and called for the replacement of all the state 's electronic voting systems by the November 2008 presidential election . Her overhaul of the Ohio voting system was considered costly and reckless by some , but after the election her risk was heralded in the press as successful . 
 = = General election results = = 
 = Katsuhiko Nakajima = 
 Katsuhiko Nakajima ( <unk> <unk> , Nakajima Katsuhiko , born March 11 , 1988 ) is a Japanese professional wrestler , signed to Pro Wrestling Noah . He started his career in Kensuke Sasaki 's Kensuke Office / Diamond Ring dojo and agency . He has also wrestled for All Japan Pro Wrestling , where he is a former World Junior Heavyweight Champion . A successful karateka , his style is based upon strong , fast kicks and strikes . 
 Having made his professional debut aged 15 in a mixed martial arts contest , Nakajima has already made a significant impact on puroresu , earning the nickname " Supernova " and facing Hall of Famers such as Kenta Kobashi , Satoru Sayama , Jushin Thunder Liger , and Tatsumi Fujinami . He has competed in several notable Japanese promotions , including New Japan Pro Wrestling , All Japan Pro Wrestling , Inoki Genome Federation , Pro Wrestling Zero1 , Michinoku Pro , Dragon Gate , and currently , Noah . 
 He has set several age records over his short career , including being the youngest wrestler to compete in AJPW 's Champion Carnival tournament and the youngest to hold the World Junior Heavyweight Championship . He won the Tokyo Sports " Rookie of the Year " award in 2004 and the Fighting Spirit award in 2005 . Having worked for Noah for most of his career , both as a representative of Diamond Ring and as a freelancer , he officially signed with the promotion in December 2015 . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = 2002 – 2004 = = = 
 An accomplished karateka , Nakajima was hired by Riki Choshu 's World Japan promotion in December 2002 at the age of 14 . He debuted for World Japan ( WJ ) in September 2003 , facing American fighter Jason Leigh in an MMA fight , winning via knockout in one minute and thirty @-@ five seconds . His true professional wrestling debut came on the main event of World Japan 's " <unk> " card on January 5 , 2004 , losing via submission to Tomohiro Ishii . 
 Nakajima continued to wrestle for WJ for a short time , even wrestling the original Tiger Mask Satoru Sayama before signing with Kensuke Office in April . This led to his debut with New Japan Pro Wrestling , facing legendary junior heavyweight Jushin Thunder Liger in the Tokyo Dome on May 3 , 2004 . He made his debut with All Japan Pro Wrestling the next day , successfully teaming with Toshiaki Kawada in a six @-@ man tag team match . He continued to wrestle for both promotions extensively throughout 2004 , even competing in Block B of NJPW 's Best of the Super Juniors tournament , finishing with two points by defeating Curry Man and reaching the finals of the Young Lion Toukon ( fighting spirit ) tournament , losing to Ryusuke Taguchi . 
 On June 12 , 2004 in AJPW , Nakajima received the first championship match of his career , teaming with Kensuke Sasaki to unsuccessfully challenge Masanobu <unk> & Genichiro Tenryu for the All Asia Tag Team Championship . On September 17 , 2004 , Nakajima made his debut in Dragon Gate on their pay @-@ per @-@ view Gate of Sanctuary , losing to Masaaki Mochizuki . The following month , Nakajima entered the Osaka Pro <unk> @-@ <unk> single @-@ elimination tournament , losing to eventual winner Big Boss MA @-@ G @-@ MA in the first round . Nakajima and Sasaki teamed up in the World 's Strongest Tag Determination League in November and December 2004 , finishing with four points in Block B. 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 Nakajima received his first opportunity at a singles championship on April 20 , 2005 , losing to World Junior Heavyweight Champion Taka Michinoku . His appearances in NJPW became much more sporadic around this time , with his final match to date taking place on April 24 , 2005 , a loss to 6 @-@ time IWGP Heavyweight Champion Tatsumi Fujinami . 
 On May 7 , 2005 , Katsuhiko participated in the 2005 <unk> Cup , a biennial cross @-@ promotional junior heavyweight tag team tournament , teaming with Osaka Pro 's Takehiro Murahama ; the two lost to Super <unk> and Tiger Emperor in the first round . He also teamed with Tomoaki Honma in a tournament throughout June 2005 to decide the vacant All Asia Tag Team Championship , making it to the finals before losing to Shuji Kondo & " brother " YASSHI . Just over one month later on July 26 , 2005 , Nakajima and Kensuke Sasaki defeated Kondo and YASSHI for the titles in their second defense , giving Nakajima his first championship . They would continue to defend the titles through 2005 , against such teams as Arashi & Ryuji Hijikata and Buchanan & D 'Lo Brown . 
 On July 18 , 2005 , Nakajima made his debut in Pro Wrestling Noah , wrestling in a six @-@ man tag team match in the Tokyo Dome . He would continue by teaming with Kensuke Sasaki against Kenta Kobashi and his own protégé Go Shiozaki in an inter @-@ generation tag team match on November 5 , 2005 , with Sasaki pinning Shiozaki after a lariat . This match was rated 43 ⁄ 4 out of 5 stars by wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer , one of only eight NOAH matches to receive that or a higher rating . 
 Nakajima made his debut for Pro Wrestling ZERO1 @-@ MAX on July 9 , 2005 , winning a six @-@ man junior tag team match . He went on to defeat Osamu <unk> on August 31 for his first singles title , the WWA World Junior Light Heavyweight Championship , though whether this can be considered part of the title 's official lineage is disputed . He held it until June 24 , 2006 , losing the title to premier ZERO1 @-@ MAX junior Tatsuhito Takaiwa . This is to date Nakajima 's last appearance with the promotion . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 On February 11 , 2006 at a Kensuke Office show celebrating Kensuke Sasaki 's 20th career anniversary , Nakajima teamed with Genichiro Tenryu against the " dream team " of Kenta Kobashi and Kensuke Sasaki , falling to a Sasaki lariat . On March 21 , 2006 , Nakajima won a three @-@ way elimination match in AJPW , defeating both Tomoaki Honma and NOSAWA Rongai to earn a spot in Block B of the prestigious 2006 Champion Carnival , becoming the youngest man to participate in the tournament . Nakajima finished in last place in the block with two points by defeating D 'Lo Brown . On April 19 , 2006 , Nakajima entered Big Mouth Loud ( <unk> ) , losing to company ace Katsuyori Shibata . The following month , Nakajima and Kensuke Sasaki battled in Big Japan Pro Wrestling ( <unk> ) , defeating Big Japan 's Daisuke <unk> and Dramatic Dream Team 's ( DDT ) Daichi Kakimoto in a tag team match when Nakajima pinned Kakimoto . 
 Nakajima then participated in the 2006 Junior League tournament from June 25 , 2006 to July 3 , 2006 , to decide a challenger for the Junior Heavyweight Championship ; Katsuhiko won his block with five points , before losing in the final to Kaz Hayashi . On July 2 , 2006 , Nakajima 's partner Kensuke Sasaki suffered a left eye fracture in a match against Katsuyori Shibata in <unk> , taking him out of action for the foreseeable future and forcing the team to vacate the All Asia Tag Team Championship on October 29 , 2006 after holding the titles since July 2005 . 
 On October 15 , 2006 , Katsuhiko Nakajima and Kaz Hayashi were announced as one of seven teams in the 2006 World 's Strongest Tag Determination League , to take place in December 2006 . They had a strong showing in the tournament , defeating such teams as NOSAWA Rongai & Triple Crown Heavyweight Champion Minoru Suzuki and RO <unk> & <unk> and drawing with Taiyō Kea & <unk> Michinoku , finishing with 5 points overall . On November 14 , 2006 , Nakajima wrestled in the main event of the debut show of the Global Professional Wrestling Alliance , a cooperation of several different promotions , teaming with NOAH 's Go Shiozaki and El Dorado 's Takuya Sugawara to defeat ZERO1 @-@ MAX 's <unk> Sai , Dramatic Dream Team 's <unk> and <unk> Dojo 's <unk> . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 Kensuke Sasaki made his return from injury on January 2 , 2007 , teaming with Nakajima to defeat <unk> & " brother " YASSHI . The following day Nakajima faced YASSHI in a match to determine Shuji Kondo 's next challenger for the Junior Heavyweight Championship , winning via disqualification when Kondo himself interfered . He made his challenge on February 17 , 2007 , defeating Kondo to end his 16 @-@ month reign , and becoming the youngest junior heavyweight champion in history . Nakajima made his first defense of the title on April 30 , 2007 , defeating Kondo 's Voodoo Murders partner " brother " YASSHI , as well as Ryuji Hijikata on May 27 , 2007 . 
 Nakajima once again participated in the Junior League in June 2007 , finishing in third place for his block with four points , behind Hijikata and Kondo . The league was won by American wrestler Chris Sabin , setting up a title match between Sabin and Nakajima on August 26 , 2007 , in which Nakajima was victorious . On September 1 , 2007 , Nakajima challenged Pro Wrestling Noah 's Takeshi Morishima for his ROH World Championship in the main event of a Kensuke Office show , putting up a good fight but losing in the end . On September 19 , 2007 , Nakajima was pinned in a tag team match by visiting luchador Silver King , who then challenged Nakajima to a future junior heavyweight title match . The match was made official for October 18 , 2007 at All Japan 's 35th anniversary show ; on October 8 , 2007 , Nakajima suffered a fractured navicular bone in his right hand , forcing him off of several shows on the tour , though he defended the title as scheduled . When the match came , Nakajima and Silver King fought to a no contest , forcing PWF commissioner Hiroshi Hase to hold up the title belt , although Nakajima remained the official champion . Katsuhiko then took time off to nurse his injured hand . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 Nakajima returned from injury on February 11 , 2008 at Kensuke Office 's first anniversary show , defeating fellow Kensuke Sasaki protégé Ryuji Yamaguchi ; he would follow this up with victories over two more Kensuke trainees in Kento Miyahara and Takashi Okita on February 16 , 2008 and March 9 , 2008 respectively , held in the Kensuke Office exercise hall . On March 1 , 2008 , in a rematch from their October encounter , Nakajima lost to Silver King in a match to decide the vacant junior heavyweight title . Later that month , Nakajima teamed with Ryuji Hijikata to participate in the six @-@ team Junior Tag League , winning the tournament with six points by defeating the teams of Silver King and Shuji Kondo , <unk> and NOSAWA Rongai , and <unk> and KUSHIDA , as well as Kaz Hayashi and El Samurai in the final , who had defeated them in the group stage . On March 28 , 2008 , Nakajima faced and defeated Osaka Pro and Dragon Gate wrestler Magnitude <unk> on Kensuke Office 's first event in the Fukuoka region . 
 In March and April 2008 , Nakajima and Sasaki participated in Pro Wrestling Noah 's Global Tag League , a 9 @-@ team round @-@ robin tag team tournament . The two finished tied in 5th place with 8 points , defeating the teams of Jun Akiyama and Takeshi <unk> , D 'Lo Brown and Buchanan , and Go Shiozaki and Akira <unk> , and drawing with Takeshi Morishima and Muhammad <unk> , and GHC Tag Team Champions Naomichi Marufuji and Takashi Sugiura . On May 25 , 2008 in AJPW , Nakajima and Sasaki lost to Taiyō Kea and Minoru Suzuki in a match to determine the # 1 contenders to the World Tag Team Championship . On June 13 , 2008 at Kensuke Office 's " Take the Dream Vol . 5 " , Nakajima faced NOAH 's Kenta , losing the contest after 27 minutes . The following night in NOAH , Sasaki and Nakajima faced Kenta Kobashi and Kenta , wrestling to a 30 @-@ minute time limit draw . On June 29 , 2008 , Nakajima wrestled what would be his last match in AJPW for the time being , teaming with Kaz Hayashi to defeat Ryuji Hijikata and <unk> . Nakajima began to wrestle consistently with NOAH starting July 2 , 2008 , and it was announced the following week that he and the rest of Kensuke Office would be lending their support to NOAH instead of All Japan for the foreseeable future . Among Nakajima 's first matches in NOAH were singles contests against former GHC Heavyweight Champions Jun Akiyama and <unk> Misawa on July 5 , 2008 and July 13 , 2008 respectively , losing both matches . 
 In August and September 2008 , Nakajima entered NOAH 's annual NTV Cup junior heavyweight tag team league , teaming with DDT 's Kota Ibushi in the 8 @-@ team tournament . The two finished in fifth place with eight points , including a victory over 2007 winners , as well as the eventual 2008 winners , Kenta and Taiji Ishimori . Nakajima and Ibushi would team once more on September 8 , 2008 on a co @-@ production between DDT and SEM , NOAH 's offshoot promotion for younger wrestlers , against DDT 's <unk> and Antonio Honda . The match originally went to a 20 @-@ minute time limit draw , but was restarted and Nakajima pinned Honda shortly thereafter . On September 14 , 2008 , Nakajima participated in American promotion Ring of Honor 's second tour of Japan , teaming with Naomichi Marufuji against Kenta and Kota Ibushi in a special tag match . The two teams went to a 30 @-@ minute time limit draw ; the match was restarted , but ended once more in a draw after an additional five minutes expired . The following week on September 20 , Nakajima wrestled his first match in the United States , challenging GHC Junior Heavyweight Champion Bryan Danielson at ROH 's Glory by Honor VII . Danielson would retain his title , making Nakajima submit to the Cattle Mutilation . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Nakajima went to win the GHC Junior Heavyweight Championship from Kenta using his Death Roll at the February 11th Kensuke Office event . A notable fact is that this was the second time Nakajima and Sasaki held the Jr . Heavyweight and Heavyweight titles of the same promotion at the same time , the first being All Japan . 
 He would then lose the GHC Junior Heavyweight Championship back to Kenta via a Go 2 Sleep at the March 1st Pro Wrestling Noah event ; coincidentally , Sasaki would lose the GHC Heavyweight Title later that night . 
 On Nov. 13 Nakajima made his return to Ring of Honor in Novi , Michigan in a losing effort against Kenny Omega . The next night in Mississauga Ontario he was victorious against El Generico in a match that was hard hitting and fast paced . The fans in turn gave Nakajima the " please come back " chant . 
 = = = 2011 – present = = = 
 On September 23 , 2011 , Nakajima defeated Kotaro Suzuki to win the GHC Junior Heavyweight Championship for the second time . However , he was forced to vacate the title just nine days later , after undergoing surgery for acute appendicitis . Nakajima returned on November 27 and defeated Ricky Marvin in a decision match to regain the GHC Junior Heavyweight Championship . On May 9 , 2012 , Nakajima lost the GHC Junior Heavyweight Championship to Yoshinobu <unk> , ending his third reign at 164 days . Nakajima along with his mentor Kensuke Sasaki reached the Pro Wrestling Noah Global Tag League final in 2013 , but lost to the team of <unk> and Yoshihiro Takayama . Nakajima then took part in a brief feud with Maybach Taniguchi which culminated at NOAH " GREAT <unk> 2013 IN TOKYO " event . Also at the event Naomichi Marufuji recruited Nakajima into is faction " Brave " . On February 11 , 2014 , Nakajima earned his first win over his mentor Kensuke Sasaki in the main event of a show celebrating his tenth anniversary in professional wrestling . The match turned out to be Sasaki 's retirement match . 
 On July 31 , 2015 , Nakajima left Diamond Ring . On December 24 , 2015 , Noah held a press conference announcing that Nakajima would be ending his days as a freelancer and officially joining the promotion on January 1 , 2016 . On February 24 , 2016 , Nakajima picked up the biggest win of his career by defeating Minoru Suzuki in the main event of Noah 's show in Korakuen Hall . As a result , Nakajima was granted a shot at the GHC Heavyweight Championship , but was defeated by Takashi Sugiura on March 19 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Bridging German suplex , sometimes while hooking the opponent 's leg or while applying a straight jacket 
 Diamond Bomb ( Fireman 's carry brainbuster ) – 2014 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Death Roll ( Jumping spinning calf to back of the opponent 's head ) 
 R @-@ 15 ( High @-@ angle reverse roundhouse to the opponent 's head ) 
 Roundhouse to the opponent 's head 
 Northern Lights Bomb ( Scoop brainbuster ) – adopted from Kensuke Sasaki and Akira Hokuto 
 Twister ( Twisting brainbuster ) – adopted from Masaaki Mochizuki 
 Twister II ( Twisting sitout suplex slam ) – adopted from Masaaki Mochizuki 
 Vertical Spike ( <unk> ) 
 Signature moves 
 Ankle lock , sometimes while grapevining the opponent 's leg 
 Lariat 
 Moonsault 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Big boot 
 Drop 
 Jumping high 
 Roundhouse 
 Multiple suplex variations 
 Belly @-@ to @-@ back 
 Northern Lights 
 <unk> 
 Tiger 
 Wheelbarrow 
 Over the shoulder back @-@ to @-@ belly piledriver 
 Nicknames 
 " Young Volcano " 
 " <unk> " 
 " The Aggression " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Genius of the Kick " 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 All Japan Pro Wrestling 
 All Asia Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Kensuke Sasaki 
 World Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Junior Tag League ( 2008 ) – with Ryuji Hijikata 
 January 3 Korakuen Hall Junior Heavyweight Battle Royal ( 2005 ) 
 Samurai ! TV Cup Triple Arrow Tournament ( 2007 ) – with Kensuke Sasaki and Seiya Sanada 
 Michinoku Pro Wrestling 
 Tohoku Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Kensuke Sasaki 
 New Japan Pro Wrestling 
 Yuko Six Man Tag Team Tournament ( 2004 ) – with Blue Wolf and Shinsuke Nakamura 
 New Wave Award ( 2004 ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 49 of the 500 best singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2006 
 Pro Wrestling Noah 
 GHC Junior Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 Leave Cup Scramble Battle Royal ( 2013 ) 
 Global League Tournament Outstanding Performance Award ( 2014 ) 
 Global Tag League Outstanding Performance Award ( 2013 ) – with Kensuke Sasaki 
 Global Tag League Outstanding Performance Award ( 2014 ) – with Naomichi Marufuji 
 Pro Wrestling Zero1 @-@ Max 
 WWA World Junior Light Heavyweight Championship ( Disputed Branch ) ( 1 time ) 
 Tenryu Project 
 Tenryu Project International Junior Heavyweight Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Satoshi <unk> 
 Tokyo Sports 
 Fighting Spirit Award ( 2005 ) 
 Rookie of the Year ( 2004 ) 
 = Medieval household = 
 The medieval household was , like modern households , the center of family life for all classes of European society . Yet in contrast to the household of today , it consisted of many more individuals than the nuclear family . From the household of the king to the humblest peasant dwelling , more or less distant relatives and varying numbers of servants and dependents would cohabit with the master of the house and his immediate family . The structure of the medieval household was largely dissolved by the advent of privacy in early modern Europe . 
 Variations were of course great , over an entire continent and a time span of about 1000 years . Yet it is still possible to speak of a classical model of the medieval household , particularly as it evolved in Carolingian France and from there spread over great parts of Europe . 
 = = Aristocratic households = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 Neither Greek nor Latin had a word corresponding to modern @-@ day " family " . The Latin familia must be translated to " household " rather than " family " . The aristocratic household of ancient Rome was similar to that of medieval Europe , in that it consisted – in addition to the paterfamilias , his wife and children – of a number of clients ( <unk> ) , or dependents of the lord who would attend upon him , counsel him and receive rewards . Where it differed from its medieval equivalent was in the use of slaves rather than paid servants for the performance of menial tasks . Another difference was that , due to the relative security and peacefulness within the borders of the Roman Empire , there was little need for fortification . The aristocratic household of medieval Europe , on the other hand , was as much a military as a socio @-@ economic unit , and from the 9th century onwards the ideal residence was the castle . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 As a result of the military nature of the medieval noble household , its composition was predominately male . Towards the end of the medieval period the ratio levelled out somewhat , but at an earlier date the feminine element of the household consisted only of the lady and her daughters , their attendants , and perhaps a few domestics to perform particular tasks such as washing . Many of the male servants were purely military personnel ; there would be a gatekeeper , as well as various numbers of knights and <unk> to garrison the castle as a military unit . Yet many of these would also serve other functions , and there would be servants entirely devoted to domestic tasks . At the lower level , these were simply local men recruited from the localities . The higher level positions – in particular those attending on the lord – were often filled by men of rank : sons of the lord 's relatives , or his retainers . 
 The presence of servants of noble birth imposed a social hierarchy on the household that went parallel to the hierarchy dictated by function . This second hierarchy had at its top the steward ( alternatively seneschal or majordomo ) , who had the overriding responsibility for the domestic affairs of the household . Taking care of the personal wellbeing of the lord and his family were the Chamberlain , who was responsible for the chamber or private living @-@ quarters , and the Master of the Wardrobe , who had the main responsibility for clothing and other domestic items . Of roughly equal authority as the steward was the marshal . This officer had the militarily vital responsibility for the stables and horses of the household ( the " <unk> " ) , and was also in charge of discipline . The marshal , and other higher @-@ ranking servants , would have assistants helping them perform their tasks . These – called valet de chambres , grooms or pages , ranking from top to bottom in that order – were most often young boys , although in the larger royal courts the valet de chambres included both young noble courtiers , and often artists , musicians and other specialists who might be of international repute . <unk> these the office of valet was a way of <unk> their position within the household . 
 One of the most important functions of the medieval household was the <unk> , storage and preparation of food . This consisted both in feeding the occupants of the residence on a daily basis , and in preparing larger feasts for guests , to maintain the status of the lord . The kitchen was divided into a pantry ( for bread , cheese and <unk> ) and a buttery ( for wine , ale and beer ) . These offices were headed by a <unk> and a butler respectively . Depending on the size and wealth of the household , these offices would then be subdivided further . The following is a list of some of the offices one could expect to find in a large medieval aristocratic or royal household : 
 In addition to these offices there was a need for servants to take care of the hunting animals . The master huntsman , or the <unk> , held a central position in greater noble households . Likewise , the master falconer was a high @-@ ranking officer , often of noble birth himself . There were spiritual needs to be cared for , and a chapel was a natural part of every large household . These household chapels would be staffed by varying numbers of clerics . The chaplains , confessors and <unk> could serve in administrative capacities as well as the religious ones . 
 = = = Noble households = = = 
 The households of medieval kings were in many ways simply aristocratic households on a larger scale : as the Burgundian court chronicler Georges <unk> observed of the splendidly ordered court of the dukes of Burgundy , " after the deeds and exploits of war , which are claims to glory , the household is the first thing that strikes the eye , and which it is , therefore , most necessary to conduct and arrange well . " In some ways though , they were essentially different . One major difference was the way in which royal household officials were largely responsible for the governance of the realm , as well as the administration of the household . The 11th century Capetian kings of France , for instance , " ruled through royal officers who were in many respects indistinguishable from their household officers . " These officers – primarily the seneschal , constable , butler , chamberlain and chancellor – would naturally gain extensive powers , and could exploit this power for social advancement . One example of this is the Carolingians of France , who rose from the position of royal stewards – the Mayors of the Palace – to become kings in their own right . It was the father of Charlemagne , Pepin the Short , who gained control of government from the enfeebled Merovingian king Childeric III . Another example can be found in the royal House of Stuart in Scotland , whose family name bore witness to their background of service . 
 Eventually the central positions of the royal household became little else than honorary titles bestowed upon the greatest families , and not necessarily even dependent on attendance at court . In Flanders , by the thirteenth century , the offices of constable , butler , steward and chamberlain had become the hereditary right of certain high noble families , and held no political significance . 
 Finally , the royal household differed from most noble households in the size of their military element . If a king was able to muster a substantial force of household knights , this would reduce his dependence on the military service of his subjects . This was the case with Richard II of England , whose one @-@ sided dependence on his household knights – mostly recruited from the county of Cheshire – made him unpopular with his nobility and eventually contributed to his downfall . 
 In England , the semi @-@ royal household of Edward of Carnarvon , later Edward II when Prince of Wales , is the earliest for which detailed knowledge can be obtained from sources . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The medieval aristocratic household was not fixed to one location , but could be more or less permanently on the move . Greater nobles would have estates scattered over large geographical areas , and to maintain proper control of all their possessions it was important to physically inspect the localities on a regular basis . As the master of the horses , travel was the responsibility of the marshal . Everything in the noble household was designed for travel , so that the lord could enjoy the same luxury wherever he went . 
 Particularly for kings , <unk> was a vital part of governance , and in many cases kings would rely on the hospitality of their subjects for maintenance while on the road . This could be a costly affair for the localities visited ; there was not only the large royal household to cater for , but also the entire royal administration . It was only towards the end of the medieval period , when means of communication improved , that households , both noble and royal , became more permanently attached to one residence . 
 = = = Regional variations = = = 
 The aristocratic society centered on the castle originated , as much of medieval culture in general , in Carolingian France , and from there spread over most of Western Europe . In other parts of Europe , the situation was different . On the northern and western fringes of the continent , society was kin @-@ based rather than feudal , and households were organised correspondingly . In Ireland , the basis for social organisation was the " sept " , a clan that could comprise as many as 250 households , or 1250 individuals , all somehow related . In Viking @-@ age Scandinavia , housing arrangements were more humble than those of contemporary France or England , but also here the greater lords would own grand halls wherein they might entertain large numbers of guests . 
 In the Byzantine Empire , slaves were employed until the end of the Empire , as were eunuchs . Little is known of the living arrangements of the Byzantines , as very few buildings remain . From historical and architectural evidence it is known that , even though castles were rare , the wealthy lived in palaces of varying magnitude , with chapels and gardens , and rich decorations of mosaics and frescoes . 
 = = Common households = = 
 = = = Rural = = = 
 The households of medieval peasant families were naturally smaller than those of the aristocracy , and as such resembled modern households more . The patterns of marriage fluctuated greatly over the course of the Middle Ages . Even though most of the available evidence concerns the higher classes , and the source material for southern Europe is richer than for the rest , it is still possible to make some rough generalisations . It seems clear that the average age of marriage during the Early Middle Ages was comparatively high , in the early twenties , and quite equal for men and women . The reason for this can be found in traditions brought forward from the Germanic tribes , but equally in the fact that habitation was confined to small areas , a factor that enforced restrictions on population growth . As more land was won for cultivation , this trend changed . During the High and Late Middle Ages , women were increasingly married away in their teens , leading to higher birth rates . While women would be married once they reached reproductive age , men had to possess independent means of sustenance – to be able to provide for a family – before entering into marriage . For this reason , the average age of marriage for men remained high , in the mid- to late twenties . 
 Even though peasant households were significantly smaller than aristocratic ones , the wealthiest of these would also employ servants . Service was a natural part of the cycle of life , and it was common for young people to spend some years away from home in the service of another household . This way they would learn the skills needed later in life , and at the same time earn a wage . This was particularly useful for girls , who could put the earnings towards their dowry . 
 The houses of medieval peasants were of poor quality compared to modern houses . The floor was normally of earth , and there was very little ventilation or sources of light in the form of windows . In addition to the human inhabitants , a number of livestock animals would also reside in the house . Towards the end of the medieval period , however , conditions generally improved . Peasant houses became larger in size , and it became more common to have two rooms , and even a second floor . 
 = = = Urban = = = 
 The medieval world was a much less urban society than either the Roman Empire or the modern world . The fall of the Roman Empire had caused a catastrophic de @-@ population of the towns and cities that had existed within the Empire . Between the 10th and 12th centuries , however , a revival of the European city occurred , with an increase in the urbanisation of society . 
 The practice of sending children away to act as servants was even more common in towns than in the countryside . The inhabitants of towns largely made their livelihood as merchants or artisans , and this activity was strictly controlled by guilds . The members of these guilds would in turn employ young people – primarily boys – as apprentices , to learn the craft and later take a position as guild members themselves . These apprentices made up part of the household – or " family " – as much as the children of the master . 
 = = Later perspectives = = 
 Towards the end of the Middle Ages , the functions and composition of households started to change . This was due primarily to two factors . First of all , the introduction of gunpowder to the field of warfare rendered the castle a less effective defence , and did away with the military function of the household . The result was a household more focused on comfort and luxury , and with a significantly larger proportion of women . 
 The second factor that brought about change was the early modern ascendancy of the individual , and focus on privacy . Already in the later Middle Ages castles had begun to incorporate an increasing number of private chambers , for the use both of the lord and of his servants . Once the castle was discarded to the benefit of palaces or stately homes , this tendency was reinforced . This did not mean an end to the employment of domestic servants , or even in all cases a reduction in household staff . What it did mean , however , was a realignment whereby the family – in a genealogical sense – became the cornerstone of the household . 
 = Vladimír Remek = 
 Vladimír Remek ( born 26 September 1948 ) is a Czech politician and diplomat as well as a former cosmonaut and military pilot . He flew aboard Soyuz 28 from 2 to 10 March 1978 , becoming the first Czechoslovak in space and the only Czech in space . As the first cosmonaut from a country other than the Soviet Union or the United States , and with the entry of the Czech Republic into the European Union , Remek is considered to be the first astronaut from the European Union . Remek was a member of the European Parliament between 2004 and 2013 and , since 2014 , has been the Czech Ambassador to Russia . 
 = = Early life and military career = = 
 Remek was born on 26 September 1948 in the city of České Budějovice . He spent two years studying at the observatory in <unk> hora , Brno between 1962 and 1964 . Remek was influenced by his father , Jozef Remek , himself a military pilot . Remek was an active member both in the Pioneers and the Czechoslovak Union of Youth . He studied mathematics and physics at middle school in Čáslav where he earned awards in track running the 400 @-@ meter , 800 @-@ meter , and 1 @,@ 500 @-@ meter events . Remek graduated in 1966 and proceeded to <unk> <unk> <unk> , an aviation school in Košice , where he trained in an Aero L @-@ 29 <unk> . Remek graduated in 1970 and was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Czechoslovak Air Force . Remek served as a fighter pilot , flying MiG @-@ 21s in the 1st Fighter Air Regiment . In the 1970s Remek married his first wife , Czech actress Hana <unk> , the daughter of politician Václav David . They had a daughter together , Anna , in 1980 . He had a second daughter , Jana , three years after the first , with his second wife , also called Jana . From 1972 to 1976 , Remek studied at the Gagarin Air Force Academy . Upon his return to Czechoslovakia in 1976 , he was promoted to captain and appointed deputy commander of his fighter regiment , after which Remek went back to Russia to train for the Soviet @-@ led space program . Following his return from space in March 1978 , Remek spent time in the Czechoslovak People 's Army ( <unk> ) staff as the deputy director of the Flight Research Institute in Prague . In 1986 , Remek became the deputy commander of a flight division based in Čáslav . In 1988 he graduated from Voroshilov @-@ Staff Academy of Soviet Air Force and was appointed to his highest command , as deputy of the 2nd Air Defense Division stationed in Moravia . Following the Velvet Revolution in 1989 , Remek was relegated to a role as Director of the Museum for Aviation and Astronautics in Prague . Following his retirement from the air force in 1995 , Remek represented Czech firm CZ <unk> and joint venture CZ – Turbo @-@ GAZ in Moscow . 
 = = Intercosmos program = = 
 Remek ( then a Captain ) joined the Intercosmos program in 1976 ; his backup was Oldřich <unk> , the other Czechoslovak cosmonaut selected to participate with the program . During the flight , <unk> experimented with the Kristall furnace on board the capsule . The mission , coinciding with the 30th anniversary of the Soviet @-@ backed 1948 Czechoslovak coup d 'état , and including Remek , the son of a Czech mother and Slovak father , had propaganda value in stressing Czechoslovak @-@ Soviet cooperation . Remek himself has not denied this although he retains pride in his voyage regardless of the circumstances . He became the first cosmonaut from a country other than the Soviet Union or the United States , and with the entry of the Czech Republic into the European Union , Remek is considered to be the first astronaut from the European Union . After Remek 's March 1978 flight , he was celebrated in his home country with a series of receptions at factories and other civil workplaces . He was also recognized at a ceremony at Prague Castle as a guest of Gustáv Husák , then the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia . On 16 March , Remek and Aleksei <unk> , the other member of the crew , were awarded the medal Hero of the Soviet Union . Czechoslovak reaction to Remek 's flight included comments about the media 's inundation focused on Remek and the fact that he was only able to journey with a Soviet cosmonaut as if Remek needed a minder . One joke went : " Why didn 't the Soviets send up two Czechoslovak cosmonauts ? Because they would 've landed in West Germany . " Remek himself joked that his Soviet counterpart would slap Remek 's hands off of controls if he touched anything without permission . French astronaut Jean @-@ Loup Chrétien experienced this same behavior onboard Soyuz TM @-@ 7 in 1988 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Due in part to his previous business contacts in Russia , Remek was appointed to the Czech Embassy in Moscow as a Trade and Economic Counselor . During the 2004 European Parliament election , Remek was a candidate for the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia and , being second on the list behind Miloslav <unk> , was elected into the European Parliament . During his first term ( 20 July 2004 to 13 July 2009 ) , Remek was a member of the Confederal Group of the European United Left – Nordic Green Left in the European Parliament . He was a vocal proponent of the EU 's Galileo satellite constellation warning that bureaucratic delay could cede opportunity to the <unk> , a Chinese competitor . He was reelected in 2009 . When Petr <unk> resigned as the Czech Ambassador to Russia in December 2012 , the ambassadorship sat empty for a year until the President of the Czech Republic , Miloš Zeman , appointed Remek in January 2014 . The appointment met with controversy as it was against the wishes of Zeman 's Foreign Minister , Karel Schwarzenberg . Observers have noted Remek has a friendly history with the Russians and although his communist affiliations are a minority in Russia , his appointment represents Zeman 's pragmatic and pro @-@ Russia stance . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Czech astronomer Antonín <unk> discovered an asteroid in September 1978 and named it 2552 Remek after the cosmonaut . Remek is featured in a 2009 independent comedy film called <unk> about three residents from <unk> that seek out Remek at his office in Brussels to help tourism in their town . Sculptor Jan Bartoš created a statue of Remek and <unk> , which is located at <unk> metro station in Prague . Another statue of Remek is located in Košice , Slovakia . 
 = Cerro Tuzgle = 
 Cerro Tuzgle is a dormant stratovolcano in the <unk> Department of Jujuy Province in Argentina . Tuzgle is a prominent volcano of the back @-@ arc of the Andes and lies about 280 kilometres ( 170 mi ) east of the main volcanic arc . Part of the Central Volcanic Zone of the Andes , it is 5 @,@ 486 metres ( 17 @,@ 999 ft ) high above sea level and was constructed during different stages over a caldera and lava domes . Some major lava flows emanate from the summit crater , and one confirmed and one possible flank collapse unit as well as an ignimbrite sheet are associated with this volcano . 
 The first volcanic activity of Tuzgle occurred 650 @,@ 000 years ago and formed the Tuzgle Ignimbrite . Subsequently , lava domes were erupted and three lava flow units were named San Antonio , Azufre , and Tuzgle . The latest lava flows are dated at 17 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 5 Ma and volcanic activity may have continued into the Holocene . Several thermal springs are associated with the volcano , and some have been investigated for possible geothermal energy production . Sulfur was formerly mined on the mountain . Argentina 's National Route 40 runs along the foot of the volcano . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 = = = Regional setting = = = 
 Volcanic activity as well as general <unk> in the Central Andes is caused by the subduction of the Nazca plate beneath the South American plate at a horizontal pace of 10 centimetres per year ( 3 @.@ 9 in / year ) or 65 millimetres per year ( 0 @.@ 081 in / Ms ) forming the Central Volcanic Zone ( CVZ ) between latitude 16 and 28 ° south . Starting with activity in the Coastal Cordillera during the Jurassic ( La Negra formation ) , this has caused spatially complex patterns of volcanic activity as well as the formation of the Altiplano @-@ Puna highland with dimensions of 3 @,@ 000 by 200 by 3 @.@ 7 – 4 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 864 @.@ 1 mi × 124 @.@ 3 mi × 2 @.@ 3 mi – 2 @.@ 5 mi ) . Maximum deformation occurred during the late Miocene , with the formation of tectonic highs and lows . Small andesitic @-@ basaltic volcanic centres of Quaternary age are associated with faulting . Seismic activity is still ongoing at the edge of the Puna , indicating thrusting . The crust beneath the CVZ is 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) thick . 
 A steepening of the subduction zone during the Late Miocene has been linked to an increase in volcanic activity and its westward migration , but it is unlikely that the pattern of activity in the southern Puna next to the Toro fault zone can be explained through this alone . A large low velocity and low seismic attenuation anomaly is found between 20 and 24 ° latitude south . Some geologic evidence , including geochemistry and geographic indicators , imply that lithospheric detachment did occur beneath the southern Puna . 
 Several major fault zones run across the Puna in the area , the most important being the Toro lineament to the south of Tuzgle . On this lineament , which has been subject to left @-@ lateral displacement , are aligned several Pleistocene volcanoes , including Cordon Puntas Negras , Rincon , Tul Tul @-@ Del Medio @-@ Pocitos , <unk> , and <unk> ( from north to south ) ( as well as the Negra Muerta volcanic complex ) . A segment named the Chorrillos fault is located directly south of Tuzgle . The segment of the Toro fault closest to Tuzgle has been active recently . Based on displacements along two monogenetic volcanoes , slip rates of 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 16 millimetres per year ( 0 @.@ <unk> – 0 @.@ <unk> in / Ms ) have been estimated . The <unk> San Geronimo and Negro de <unk> scoria cones and lava flows , as well as Antuco hot springs and travertine deposits ( 24 ° 10 ′ S 66 ° 40 ′ W ) , are also linked to the Toro fault zone and thermal waters flowing along it . Volcanic activity in the area occurred during two separate phases , the first one between 17 @.@ 15 mya and 5 @.@ 3 mya that generated a large number of volcanic centres , with a much more limited phase of activity since 1 @.@ 5 mya associated with the <unk> phase of Andean deformation . 
 = = = Local setting = = = 
 Tuzgle is a dormant stratovolcano in the <unk> Department of Jujuy Province in Argentina . It is a prominent back @-@ arc volcanic centre in the Andes located about 280 kilometres ( 170 mi ) east of the main volcanic arc . Cerro Tuzgle lies within a geological depression in the Puna bordered by normal faults . The depression dates back to the Ordovician and slopes northward from 4 @,@ 400 metres ( 14 @,@ 400 ft ) altitude on the southern side to 4 @,@ 100 metres ( 13 @,@ 500 ft ) altitude on the northern side . A low gravity field anomaly is also found in the area . The basement consists of fractured rocks of Precambrian @-@ Ordovician age , known as the <unk> Formation and <unk> <unk> , respectively , overlain with an impermeable Cretaceous unit named the <unk> Formation . Volcanism in the area has existed since the Miocene , involving lava domes , ignimbrite eruptions ( the 0 @.@ 6 mya Tuzgle ignimbrite ) and monogenetic volcanism . Volcanoes located south of Tuzgle are Aguas <unk> , Negro de Chorrillos and San Jeronimo . This region belongs to the back @-@ arc region of the Andes , and the formation of melts is dependent on the melting of a heated mantle , whereas melt generation under the arc proper is dependent on the interaction between fluids and mantle rocks , leading to a reduction in their melting point . There is tomographic evidence that lithospheric delamination is currently underway beneath Tuzgle . 
 The highest unit of the Cerro Tuzgle volcano is the " Platform " unit , which covers a surface area of 0 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 19 sq mi ) and is capped off by a well @-@ preserved summit crater . It consists of well @-@ preserved blocky lava flows with maximum thicknesses of 30 metres ( 98 ft ) . These are the youngest stages of Tuzgle volcanism and are well preserved . Radiating away from the central summit of the volcano , another lava flow unit forms the so @-@ called Azufre synthem ; these lava flows reach maximum thicknesses of 15 metres ( 49 ft ) and are gray to brownish @-@ red with some evidence of hydrothermal alteration . On the northwestern and southern flanks , lava emission from one emission area down steep slopes form the San Antonio synthem ( unconformity bounded unit ) , with lava flows up to 30 metres ( 98 ft ) thick . These San Antonio stage lavas have been cut by a 1 @.@ 25 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 78 mi ) long fault scarp trending NNE @-@ SSW that may have been formed by a mass failure of the Tuzgle edifice , which was then rebuilt by the Azufre stage lavas . On the northern flank is found a volcaniclastic fan with a surface area of 12 square kilometres ( 4 @.@ 6 sq mi ) , a volume of 0 @.@ 5 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 12 cu mi ) and thicknesses of 30 – 40 metres ( 98 – 131 ft ) , presumably , considering its geochemical composition , formed by a mass failure of the San Antonio stage edifice . The scarp was probably formed by the same event but was not accompanied by explosive activity or a pyroclastic flow . This flank collapse may have been triggered by magma injection . A structure on the southern side of the volcano may also be a collapse scar , but no deposit is identifiable . A weakness zone running east @-@ west cuts across the Tuzgle edifice , and some volcanic features are aligned along this weakness . A 5 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) wide feeder dyke has been modelled and is associated with this weakness zone . The <unk> and best @-@ exposed lava flow of Cerro Tuzgle originated in a group of three depressions bordered by 1 – 2 metres ( 3 ft 3 in – 6 ft 7 in ) scoria ridges . These depressions , presumably eruption fissures , are arranged in en echelon order . This youngest lava flow has a structure between block lava and aa lava . In non @-@ volcanic terms patterned ground is found resulting from pre @-@ glacial processes . 
 Tuzgle is underpinned by a plateau formed by mostly <unk> ignimbrites , while the so @-@ called " Pre @-@ platform " , " Platform " , " Post @-@ platform " and " Young Flow " units make up the central volcano . The moderately crystal @-@ rich ignimbrite has a volume of 0 @.@ 5 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 12 cu mi ) and is 80 metres ( 260 ft ) thick , and was presumably emitted from a caldera now buried by the Cerro Tuzgle edifice . Circular lava domes ( 50 metres ( 160 ft ) thick at a maximum ) are found in the southeastern , eastern and northern sector of the volcano and may have formed along ring dykes associated with the caldera . A high electrical conductivity zone beneath Tuzgle may constitute a magma chamber embedded within porous material containing saline fluids with the bottom at a depth of at least 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) and the top at a depth of 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) . Crustal silicic magmas gave rise to ignimbrites from depths of 15 – 18 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 – 11 @.@ 2 mi ) . The magma chamber appears to be placed next to a crustal <unk> at 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) . <unk> data also indicate a magma origin depth of 10 – 20 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 – 12 @.@ 4 mi ) . Beneath Tuzgle , a high seismic attenuation plume rises from an earthquake cluster at 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) depth up to the volcano and is probably linked to asthenospheric upwelling . 
 In the ground beneath Tuzgle , seismic tomography has found a 18 @-@ kilometre ( 11 mi ) thick layer of low velocity , probably linked to a lower density of the rock , at a depth of 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . <unk> analysis has found several deep ( 1 – 85 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 62 – 52 @.@ 82 mi ) ) conductive layers and one shallow one , possibly formed by the aquifers in the area . Another high conductivity body southeast of Tuzgle is associated with the Toro lineament and the <unk> volcano and may also be hydrothermal in origin . 
 = = = Composition and origin = = = 
 The Tuzgle volcano proper is constructed from an older rhyodacite @-@ mafic series and a more recent series constructed from andesites alone . These and neighbouring <unk> centres are formed from magmas with crustal contamination . Isotope analysis of magmatic rocks have shown La / Nb ratios of 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 6 and Ba / Ta ratios of 160 – 260 , lower than in the main volcanic front . The overall chemical composition is potassium @-@ rich calc @-@ alkaline . <unk> indicates that the older magmas crystallized at pressures of 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 5 gigapascals ( 36 @,@ 000 – 73 @,@ 000 psi ) while younger ones crystallized at 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 6 gigapascals ( 73 @,@ 000 – 87 @,@ 000 psi ) and temperatures of about 760 ° C ( 1 @,@ 400 ° F ) . These magma compositions indicate that the magmas are the result of complex mixing processes and also involve the transitional nature of the mantle beneath Tuzgle , where the more northern steep slab encounters the shallower southern subducting slab . Crystal fractionation and melting of upper crustal rocks further complicate the pattern . The lava domes which were erupted from the ground after the Tuzgle ignimbrite have volumes of 3 @.@ 5 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 84 cu mi ) , while the Platform and subsequent units have volumes of 0 @.@ 5 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 12 cu mi ) . The lava domes and San Antonio lava flows have porphyritic surfaces . San Antonio lavas contain large plagioclase <unk> and xenoliths . The ignimbrite contains Ordovician lithic fragments and 10 – 20 % pumice . Its eruption was presumably linked to high mantle melt rates ; the resulting mafic magmas induced the generation of large amounts of silicic melts . Lower mantle melt rates would form mafic melts that incorporate silicic melts before erupting . 
 = = = Activity = = = 
 The oldest activity is an ignimbrite erupted 0 @.@ 65 ± 0 @.@ 18 mya , called the Tuzgle ignimbrite . On the rim of the caldera left by this eruption is a lava dome complex named the Old Complex Unit . 0 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 1 mya ago effusive activity commenced with the Pre @-@ platform and Platform units that were then followed by a tectonic event that dissected these units . Afterwards , the Post @-@ platform and Young Flow Units were erupted . The youngest unit is <unk> and was dated 0 @.@ 1 ± ( 0 @.@ 1 @-@ 0 @.@ 3 ) mya ago . This unit may be Holocene or Pleistocene – Holocene in age . It is possible that the continuing activity of the Chorrillos fault zone is compressing the magma chamber and feeder dyke of Tuzgle , thus impeding eruptive activity . The well @-@ preserved summit crater and youthful @-@ looking lava flows have been assigned Holocene ages . 
 = = = Geothermal area and sulfur = = = 
 The area around Cerro Tuzgle has a high geothermal gradient of 0 @.@ 4 degrees Celsius per metre ( 0 @.@ 22 ° F / ft ) , and geothermal studies indicate temperatures of over 400 ° C ( 752 ° F ) at depth . Hot springs ( with temperatures around 57 ° C ( 135 ° F ) ) are also found in the area . The Miocene ignimbritic Trinchera formation may be a geothermal reservoir and the later Miocene – Pliocene sedimentary Pastos <unk> Formation a seal above it . This geothermal reservoir is 50 – 300 metres ( 160 – 980 ft ) deep beneath the earth and 100 – 600 metres ( 330 – 1 @,@ 970 ft ) thick . A deeper reservoir is also presumed to exist at a depth of 2 – 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 5 mi ) . Selected hot springs include Tuzgle – Agua Caliente ( 40 – 56 ° C ( 104 – 133 ° F ) , 24 ° 01 ′ 44 @.@ 46 ″ S 66 ° 31 ′ 24 @.@ 42 ″ W ) , Las Minas ( 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) ) <unk> ( 24 ° 14 ′ 48 @.@ 12 ″ S 66 ° 21 ′ 45 @.@ 3 ″ W ) , Mina Betty ( 24 ° 06 ′ 31 @.@ 26 ″ S 66 ° 27 ′ 28 @.@ 92 ″ W ) and <unk> ( 24 ° 11 ′ 18 @.@ 9 ″ S 66 ° 33 ′ 11 @.@ 76 ″ W ) . The water enters the geothermal system in ridges above 4 @,@ 500 metres ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) altitude which are not covered by impermeable layers . Two maars have been found in the <unk> area . Further , the Antuco travertine and hot springs may be associated with heat flow from the Tuzgle volcanic system . 
 The Tuzgle area has been identified as a possible site for geothermal energy production in Argentina with an energy potential of < 0 @.@ 1 megawatts ( 130 hp ) . These were explored in the 1980s and 1990s , yielding evidence of temperatures 133 – 142 ° C ( 271 – 288 ° F ) . In 2015 a company named <unk> <unk> had six concessions in the area for geothermal drilling . The location of a main power line between Chile and Argentina close to Tuzgle may assist in power generation , and some hot springs could be exploited for tourism . 
 Sulfur deposits generated from hydrothermal alteration are found on Cerro Tuzgle . They are mostly associated with the Azufre synthem and were previously mined on the southern , eastern and western flanks of the volcano . The mines are now abandoned . Arsenic is also found in the groundwater and presumably comes from Tuzgle . 
 = = Climate and vegetation = = 
 The climate of the Puna is arid , with most precipitation originating in the Amazon basin . During the Last Glacial Maximum , a humid period occurred ( possibly directed by orbital changes and monsoon activity ) , whereas preceding glacial periods were associated with dry phases in travertine deposits at Antuco . Temperatures are usually less than 5 ° C ( 41 ° F ) in the Puna with extremes of 16 – − 4 ° C ( 61 – 25 ° F ) . Winds usually blow from the west in the dry winter season , with wetter easterly winds arriving during summer . Precipitation in San Antonio de los <unk> ( 24 ° 13 ′ 32 ″ S 66 ° 19 ′ 9 ″ W ) southeast of Tuzgle amounts to 100 millimetres per year ( 0 @.@ 12 in / Ms ) . 
 Vegetation is largely missing from the Puna plateau in the area of Tuzgle , which has facilitated the mapping of lava flows from Cerro Tuzgle . A steppe @-@ like vegetation dominated by herbs grows on the slopes of Tuzgle , containing taxa like Festuca , Poa and Stipa as elsewhere on the Puna . 
 = Save Our Children = 
 Save Our Children , Inc. was a political coalition formed in 1977 in Miami , Florida to overturn a recently legislated county ordinance that banned discrimination in areas of housing , employment , and public accommodation based on sexual orientation . The coalition was publicly headed by celebrity singer Anita Bryant , who claimed the ordinance discriminated against her right to teach her children biblical morality . It was a well @-@ organized campaign that initiated a bitter political fight between unprepared gay activists and highly motivated Christian fundamentalists . When the repeal of the ordinance went to a vote , it attracted the largest response of any special election in Dade County 's history , passing by 70 % . 
 Save Our Children was the first organized opposition to the gay rights movement , whose beginnings were traced to the Stonewall riots in 1969 . The defeat of the ordinance encouraged groups in other cities to attempt to overturn similar laws . In the next year voters in St. Paul , Minnesota , Wichita , Kansas , and Eugene , Oregon overturned ordinances in those cities , sharing many of the same campaign strategies that were used in Miami . Save Our Children was also involved in Seattle , Washington , where they were unsuccessful , and heavily influenced Proposition 6 — a proposed state law in California that would have made the firing of openly gay public school employees mandatory — that was rejected by California voters in 1978 . 
 Historians have since connected the success of Save Our Children with the organization of conservative Christian participation in political processes . Although forceful Christian involvement had not taken a widespread role in politics in the United States since 1925 , within two years the Reverend Jerry Falwell developed a coalition of conservative religious groups named the Moral Majority that influenced the Republican Party to incorporate a social agenda in national politics . Homosexuality , the Equal Rights Amendment ( ERA ) , abortion , and pornography were among the issues most central to the Moral Majority 's priorities until it folded in 1989 . For many gay people , the surprise at the outcome of all the campaigns in 1977 and 1978 instilled a new determination and consolidated activism and communities in many cities where the gay community had not been politically active . 
 = = Background = = 
 On January 18 , 1977 , the Dade County Commission approved a law that would outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in employment , housing , and public services . Commissioner Ruth Shack proposed the bill on December 7 , 1976 at the request of a gay lobbying organization , named the Dade County Coalition for the Humanistic Rights of Gays , that was less than a year old . The group was headed by three gay activists : Jack Campbell , an owner of 40 gay bathhouses across the United States , political and gay activist Bob Basker , and Bob Kunst , a local publicist and enthusiast of the Human Potential Movement . 
 = = = Homosexuality in Miami = = = 
 The general attitude about homosexuality in Miami mirrored many other cities across the country . Though gay nightlife in the city had enjoyed the same boisterous existence as other forms of entertainment in the 1930s , by the 1950s , the city government worked to shut down as many gay bars as possible and enacted laws making homosexuality and cross @-@ dressing illegal . From 1956 to 1966 , the Johns Committee of the Florida Legislature actively sought to root out homosexuals in state employment and in public universities across the state , publishing the inflammatory " Purple Pamphlet , " which portrayed all homosexuals as predators and a dire threat to the children of Florida . In the 1960s The Miami Herald ran several stories implying the life of area homosexuals as synonymous with pimps and child molesters , and the local NBC television station aired a documentary entitled " The Homosexuals " in 1966 warning viewers that young boys were in danger from predatory men . 
 The public image of homosexuals changed with liberalized social attitudes of the late 1960s . In 1969 , the Stonewall riots occurred in New York City , marking the start of the gay rights movement . Though gay life in Miami was intensely closeted , and bars were subject to frequent raids , Christ Metropolitan Community Church — a congregation for gay and lesbian Christians in Miami — was founded in 1970 as a religious outlet , attracting hundreds of parishioners . The 1972 Democratic National Convention was held in Miami , featuring , for the first time , a public speech about the rights of gay men and lesbians by openly gay San Francisco political activist Jim Foster . Jack Campbell opened the Miami branch of Club Baths in 1974 . When it was raided , he made sure that all charges against those arrested were dropped , filed a lawsuit against the Miami Police Department prohibiting further harassment , and received a formal apology from the police . Even the depiction of gay men and lesbians in the local newspaper had changed to that of a silent , oppressed minority . By 1977 , Miami was one of nearly 40 cities in the U.S. that had passed ordinances outlawing discrimination against gay men and lesbians . 
 = = = Reaction to the ordinance = = = 
 When the news of the ordinance proposal was reported in December 1976 , a small ripple of protest spread from local churches . Northwest Baptist Church announced it from the pulpit . The news worried one of the church members named Anita Bryant , who was a 36 @-@ year @-@ old singer celebrity . Bryant began her career as a local child star on a television show in Oklahoma City and on Arthur Godfrey 's Talent Scouts . Her young life was marked by frequent moves ; her parents divorced each other twice , and she often lived in poverty conditions , but she became a born again Christian at eight years old , and counted her faith and her participation at church as the stabilizing influences in her life . As a child , she asked God to make her a star . She was , by her own admission , remarkably driven and ambitious . In her older teens she became a beauty pageant contestant , winning Miss Oklahoma and second runner @-@ up as Miss America . In 1960 , she married a Miami disc jockey named Bob Green and became a professional singer , finding some success with three gold records featuring popular , patriotic , and Gospel standards . She performed with the Bob Hope Christmas tour , entertaining troops serving overseas , and sang at President Lyndon Johnson 's funeral in 1973 . Since 1969 she had been employed regionally by the Florida Citrus Commission endorsing Florida orange juice in television commercials . She also advertised for Coca @-@ Cola , Tupperware , Kraft Foods and Holiday Inns . Bryant 's talent agent was married to Ruth Shack ; Bryant had contributed $ 1 @,@ 000 to her campaign . 
 Initially Bryant kept her concerns low @-@ key , despite her pastor 's pleadings to become involved . She wrote a letter to the county commission and called Ruth Shack , expressing her concerns . Her most significant objection to the ordinance was that it would allow homosexuals to work in parochial schools ; all four of Bryant 's children attended a local private Christian school . She admitted she was largely ignorant of any specific dangers homosexuals presented , but when she was sent graphic images of homosexual acts , and shown photos of child pornography by a local police sergeant visiting her church , she was horrified . Bryant credited her inspiration later to her 9 @-@ year @-@ old daughter suggesting God could assist with her cause ; then she decided to take a more public role . 
 At the time of the commission 's vote in January , the boardroom was crowded with people who held some kind of interest in the issue . <unk> of churchgoers arrived from as far away as Homestead and picketed outside ; there was no corresponding organized show of support for the ordinance . Inside the boardroom , supporters and opposers took the entire allotted time to speak . Bryant reflected most of those opposing the law , telling the Dade County Commission , " The ordinance condones immorality and discriminates against my children 's rights to grow up in a healthy , decent community " . The few members of the Dade County Coalition for the Humanistic Rights of Gays who were present were stunned , as was Ruth Shack , at the number and force of the hundreds of protesters who filled the commission room , and held placards and pickets outside . But the ordinance passed by a 5 @-@ 3 vote . 
 = = Dade County ordinance 77 @-@ 4 = = 
 After the ordinance passed , over thirty conservative political professionals and ministers from various faiths met in Bryant and Green 's home to discuss a plan to raise publicity and attempt to get at least 10 @,@ 000 signatures on a petition to force the issue to be decided by a county voter referendum . They approved the name " Save Our Children , Inc . " , and voted Bryant their president , Bob Green treasurer and a man named Robert Brake — a devout Catholic with a record of civil rights participation , but increasingly concerned with the liberalization of Miami city politics — its secretary . With the assistance of a Republican @-@ affiliated advertising executive named Mike Thompson , the coalition eschewed subtlety . They held a press conference where Bryant held a pamphlet about homosexuality she claimed was being distributed at area high schools ( a statement she later retracted ) , and said Dade County homosexuals " are trying to recruit our children into homosexuality " . Far exceeding the required number of signatures , the coalition delivered more than 64 @,@ 000 signatures within six weeks demanding a referendum vote , which the commission set for June 7 , 1977 . 
 = = = Strategy = = = 
 Mike Thompson discovered in a poll taken in March 1977 that women in Dade County opposed repealing the measure two to one ; they saw their gay friends as relatively harmless . Save Our Children 's strategy , therefore , worked to prove that homosexuals were amoral , promiscuous , and defiant of traditional gender roles , and that they were a specific danger to children . Bryant took this strategy as a crusade , delivering speeches that intoned that Dade County 's passing of the ordinance " guts the law on the side of the unrighteous . If homosexuals are allowed to change the law in their favor , why not prostitutes , thieves , or murderers ? " She specifically connected homosexuals with child molesters , saying " Some of the stories I could tell you of child recruitment and child abuse by homosexuals would turn your stomach . " Bryant resented the media depiction of her as hateful , saying that her inspiration came " out of love — not only love for God 's commandment and His word , but love for my children and yours . Yes , and even love for all sinners — even homosexuals . " 
 The Save Our Children campaign produced a local television commercial showing the " wholesome entertainment " of the Orange Bowl Parade ( which Bryant hosted ) , contrasting that with highly sexualized images of the San Francisco Gay Freedom Day Parade , including men in leather harnesses kissing each other , dancing drag queens , and topless women . The commercial 's announcer accused Miami 's gay community of trying to turn Miami into the " hotbed of homosexuality " that San Francisco had become . Full @-@ page newspaper ads were run in The Miami Herald , showing collections of headlines announcing teachers having sex with their students , children in prostitution rings , and homosexuals involved with youth organizations , followed by the question " Are all homosexuals nice ? ... There is no ' human right ' to corrupt our children . " 
 Though Miami was not the first community to overturn a sexual orientation civil rights law , the Save Our Children campaign became a national political cause . Bryant became the focus of the campaign , as noted by her husband that she was the " first person with a name " to become vocal about homosexuality ; gay activists agreed , saying that other cities " haven 't had a major personality come out and create a witch hunt . People have lost sight of the issue ; the controversy has become personality oriented " . In opposition to her , Bob Kunst , who had experience as the publicist of the local municipal soccer team , the Miami Toros , was a familiar name to the local press . Kunst , however , remained determined to act as an individual , often taking opportunities to give his views to the press that were not condoned by the Dade County Coalition on the Humanistic Rights of Gays . He took the view that it was the sexually enlightened stance to pass the ordinance , and those who opposed it were uptight , including , near the end of the campaign , Florida Governor Reubin Askew . He gave interviews addressing sexual liberation for gay and straight people , in which he freely spoke about oral and anal sex . 
 = = = Outside help = = = 
 Homosexuals in Miami were not well @-@ connected or experienced enough to combat the coalition led by Bryant , so they invited two political organizers to the city : Ethan Geto from New York and Jim Foster from San Francisco , both of whom were gay . Foster and Geto faced battles not only with the Save Our Children campaign , but the disjointed and often closeted gay community in Miami . When organizations outside of Florida promoted boycotting Florida orange juice , Jack Campbell disagreed , worried that an economic backlash in the state would work against local gay men and lesbians . Ruth Shack saw the issue simply , as one of civil rights ; Geto and Foster agreed . Bob Kunst soon broke away from the campaign to promote the orange juice boycott , and his views were often printed in the newspapers to Geto 's alarm . 
 Save Our Children also received help from outside the area . North Carolina senator Jesse Helms offered his staff and funding from the Congressional Club , and wrote in his column that he was proud of Bryant : " I have pledged my full support to her ... She is fighting for decency and morality in America — and that makes her , in my book , an all @-@ American lady " . Pastor Jerry Falwell from Lynchburg , Virginia lent his support during visits and with the appearance of B. Larry Coy , who served as a marriage counselor to Bryant and Green . Coy and Green took over management of Bryant 's ministries . 
 Two months before the referendum vote , Bob Green , speaking for Bryant , vowed to lead her cause in all cities in the United States that protected sexual orientation from discrimination , saying that gay activists waged a " disguised attack on God " , and Bryant would " lead such a crusade to stop it as this country has not seen before " . As information was distributed against the referendum , as much literature was spread expressing local dissatisfaction with Bryant . T @-@ shirts and campaign buttons were produced , showing " Anita Bryant Sucks Oranges " and " Squeeze a fruit for Anita " . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 According to Florida Atlantic University Communications professor Fred Fejes , mainstream newspapers and magazines in the 1970s were hesitant to cover the issues of homosexuality or Christian fundamentalism in detail . Media prided themselves on objective reporting without Biblical judgment and at the same time , reporting was a homophobic profession that suppressed openly gay reporters and rarely addressed topics involving homosexuality . As a result , during the 1970s fundamentalist Christians began to develop broadcasting over radio and television in the forms of The 700 Club run by Pat Robertson , PTL Club hosted by Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker , and Jerry Falwell 's Old Time Gospel Hour . These shows originated as praise and worship @-@ oriented , but slowly incorporated political themes interspersed with messages of Christian faith . Bryant 's appearances on the 700 Club and the PTL Club netted the Save Our Children campaign $ 25 @,@ 000 in donations , and assured her a position as a national spokesperson for traditional Christian values . However , when addressing a secular audience , Bryant was not as successful . During debates with Kunst and Shack she rarely made points that went beyond Bible quotes , and prayed when pressed to provide statistics on homosexuals as child molesters . At another appearance , she broke into " The Battle Hymn of the Republic " to take up time after she had read a pre @-@ written statement . As California was experiencing a drought , Bryant connected it to their tolerance of liberals and homosexuals , and suggested that other morality laws should be enforced , such as those against adultery and cohabitation out of wedlock . Mike Thompson and Robert Brake soon restricted her to primarily religious shows . 
 At the same time , the gay community promoted their causes using specialty magazines and newspapers . The Advocate , a bi @-@ weekly magazine , dedicated every issue starting in April 1977 to raising awareness of the battle taking place in Miami . It was run by David Goodstein , a friend of Jim Foster 's who had worked with Foster to create the first gay Democratic club in the U.S. in the Alice B. Toklas Memorial Democratic Club . Goodstein warned that the fight would not end in Miami if the gay community lost , as did the local gay @-@ focus newspapers of Boston 's Gay Community News and San Francisco 's Bay Area Reporter . Goodstein also suggested Bryant 's primary motivation in her actions was furthering her career , or the beginning of " an organized conspiracy to turn ( gays ) into America 's scapegoats " . 
 Bryant 's star power and her extreme views were highlighted in national news stories . Mainstream news outlets such as The New York Times , Associated Press and Washington Post reported weekly updates on campaign progress , with smaller local newspapers across the country weighing in their editorial opinions on which side should prevail . Bryant appeared on Good Morning America and The Phil Donahue Show . Her tone and accusations united gay men and lesbians in cities all over the U.S. In the weeks before the vote , almost $ 55 @,@ 000 was raised outside of Florida to oppose Save Our Children . Foreshadowing the effectiveness of the Save Our Children campaign , on April 13 , 1977 , the Florida Legislature voted not to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment ( ERA ) , to the astonishment of those anticipating the vote . The connection between the ERA and ordinance 77 @-@ 4 was obvious to many . Florida Senator Dempsey Barron vocally opposed passing the ERA , fearing it would legalize same @-@ sex marriages , force people to use unisex bathrooms , and that it would harm laws meant to protect families . National Organization for Women founder and ERA proponent Betty Friedan expressed her disdain , saying " suddenly you have this red herring in Anita Bryant . Suddenly you have this wave of anti @-@ gay hysteria and then that was preempting the air waves behind the scenes " . 
 Washington D.C. mayor Marion Barry , Los Angeles mayor Tom Bradley , President Jimmy Carter all expressed support for the ordinance . In The Miami Herald , 51 members of Dutch Parliament , ministers , and civil rights advocates from the Netherlands ran a full @-@ page ad stating " We , from the land of Anne Frank , know where prejudices and discrimination can lead to " , advising the voters of Miami @-@ Dade to uphold the ordinance to protect the rights of homosexuals . California Assemblyman Willie Brown and San Francisco sheriff Richard Hongisto campaigned respectively for Miami 's black community and law enforcement . Hongisto returned to California saying that Save Our Children made an issue of the existence of San Francisco when Thompson referred to the city as " a cesspool of perversion gone rampant " and Bob Green expressed doubt that saving San Francisco was possible . Reverend Jerry Falwell spoke at a rally as the vote neared , telling the audience , " I want to tell you we are dealing with a vile and vicious and vulgar gang . They 'd kill you as quick as look at you . " 
 = = = Community attitudes = = = 
 Foster and Geto set the public tone of the campaign battling Save Our Children and were determined not to " get down in the gutter with them " , refusing to run an ad showing Bryant in a revealing outfit she had worn while performing in 1971 , nor run commercials to point out that child molesters were primarily heterosexual . However , they also encountered difficulty when local newspapers refused to run ads that were designed to appeal to Miami 's sizable Jewish community , equating Bryant 's rhetoric with the same language that many Miami citizens faced during the Holocaust . Twenty @-@ eight of Miami 's thirty @-@ four rabbis agreed with Bryant and her campaign – the president of the Miami Beach B 'nai B 'rith served as an officer of the Save Our Children coalition . 
 Miami 's Cuban community came together as never before for the campaign , taking the opportunity to register thousands of voters who had never taken part in politics in the city . Bryant actively campaigned to the Cuban community , telling them at a rally , " You came here to get away from one sin ... and it breaks my heart that if Miami becomes another Sodom and Gomorrah you may have to leave here , too . " A Cuban social worker suggested the cause was representative of an older generation of Cuban emigres , worried that their children were being lost in the depravity of Miami . Miami 's archbishop wrote a letter against the gay rights ordinance , and ordered it to be read aloud in all Catholic churches . 
 The response from Miami 's black community was more conflicted . The Miami Times , a widely respected black newspaper , called Bryant 's tactics " pure bullshit " and urged local blacks not to vote for anything that would discriminate against anyone . However , black audiences reacted angrily during an appearance featuring Bryant and another with Kunst and white ministers from the Metropolitan Community Church . 
 Due to the intensely closeted nature of Miami 's gay community at that time , many voters who were not swayed by Bryant 's rhetoric were persuaded instead by her campaign 's point that the law was unnecessary ; they were unable to see the problem of discrimination . Unlike blacks or Cubans , gay men and lesbians were able to find jobs , although they faced dismissal upon their supervisors learning of their sexual orientation . In order to see a complaint through , they would have to remain out , and many lived in constant fear of exposure . Since the advent of second wave feminism earlier in the decade , many lesbians in the U.S. were unable to see themselves as part of the same community with gay men . Accusations from Save Our Children were almost all directed at the behavior of men . As a result , much of the response by gay men was angry and many lesbians took issue with the misogynistic tone gay men used . However , with Bryant representing a common adversary , for the first time in years , gay men and lesbians united to work together on the campaign . 
 = = = Election results = = = 
 The vote results in a special June election were overwhelming . It was the largest turnout in any special election in the history of Dade County . Voters supported repealing the gay rights ordinance by a margin of more than two to one . Bryant danced a jig when the response was announced , and told reporters " All America and all the world will hear what the people have said , and with God 's continued help , we will prevail in our fight to repeal similar laws throughout the nation which attempt to legitimize a life style that is both perverse and dangerous " . National Gay Task Force ( <unk> ) co @-@ director Jean O 'Leary said that the result was " all the evidence anyone could need of the extent and virulence of prejudice against lesbians and gay men in our society " . 
 = = Response = = 
 In New York City , Bella Abzug , who had introduced the first gay civil rights bill in U.S. Congress in 1974 , was awoken at 2 am by people in the street chanting her name . " It was hard not to feel sad for this crowd " , Abzug said of the several hundred people below her window . She was optimistic , telling them the defeat would develop a maturity and determination in gay activism . About the same time that evening , about 3 @,@ 000 gay men and lesbians spontaneously gathered in what had become the largest gay neighborhood in the United States — Castro Street in San Francisco — furious at the loss in Dade County . The crowd marched around the Castro District , chanting " We Are Your Children ! " pulling people out of gay bars to cheers . Local gay activist and future supervisor Harvey Milk led marchers through a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) course through the city , careful not to stop for too long lest rioting began . He addressed the crowd with a bullhorn : " This is the power of the gay community . Anita 's going to create a national gay force " . The day after the vote , Jean O 'Leary and <unk> co @-@ director Bruce <unk> said Bryant was doing " an enormous favor " for the gay community by focusing national media attention on discrimination against them . 
 Several weeks later at the San Francisco Gay Freedom Day Parade , 250 @,@ 000 people attended , becoming the largest attendance at any gay event in U.S. history to that point . The largest group of the parade held large placards of Joseph Stalin , Adolf Hitler , Idi Amin , a burning cross , and Anita Bryant . Other cities also saw greater participation in Gay Pride events . People marching in New York 's Gay Pride observance shouted " No more Miamis " . Thousands of people attended events in Seattle , Boston , Cleveland , and Atlanta . Kansas City observed its first Gay Pride demonstration with 30 people . The largest gay newspaper in Australia used the Dade County vote as a warning advising gay men and lesbians there to " Get off Your Butts " . More than 300 people held a vigil at the American embassy in the Netherlands , accusing the U.S. government of failing to protect their citizens ' human rights . Four thousand marchers in Spain were dispersed by rubber bullets . Gay activists in Paris and London also warned that similar challenges could occur in their cities . 
 In The New York Times , conservative columnist William Safire wrote that Miami 's gay activists had been justifiably defeated : " In the eyes of the vast majority , homosexuality is an abnormality , a mental illness , even — to use an old @-@ fashioned word — a sin . Homosexuality is not the ' alternative lifestyle ' the gay activists profess ; it may be tolerable , even acceptable — but not <unk> . " Safire , however , tempered the column ( titled " Now Ease Up , Anita " ) cautioning against Bryant 's promised nationwide crusade designed to lead to further repeal of homosexuals ' " legitimate civil rights " . 
 A Connecticut @-@ based charity for unprivileged children named Save the Children filed an injunction in July 1977 against the Miami coalition to prevent them from using the name , and Bryant from using it as a title for a book she was writing ; Save the Children lost donations due to the confusion between the names . Briefly , the coalition was known as " Protect the Children " and focused completely on moral legislation against militant homosexuality , pornography , and images of sex and violence on television . It was renamed to Anita Bryant Ministries . 
 = = = Violence = = = 
 Two weeks after the Dade County vote , a gardener who worked for the City of San Francisco named Robert Hillsborough was stabbed 15 times in his face and chest while his attackers chanted " Faggot " at him . Hillsborough 's mother and San Francisco mayor George Moscone blamed Bryant 's rhetoric for his death and 200 @,@ 000 San Francisco residents joined a memorial demonstration for him . Mrs. Hillsborough brought a $ 5 million civil suit against Anita Bryant claiming Hillsborough 's attackers said " Here 's one for Anita " . She said , " I didn 't think much about Anita Bryant 's campaign at first . Now that my son 's murder has happened , I think about the Bryant campaign a lot . Anyone who wants to carry on this kind of thing must be sick . My son 's blood is on her hands . " Bryant , Green , Mike Thompson and Save Our Children were dismissed from the suit in November 1977 . 
 Several suicides were connected to the campaign , including a Cuban gay activist in Miami named <unk> " Herbie " Ramos , who was stunned at the vehemence against homosexuals . He and several other Cuban gay activists participated in a radio call @-@ in show to hear people say homosexuals should be deported , forced into concentration camps , or executed . Ramos shot himself a few days later after telling a friend , " I didn 't know they hated us so much " . Another Cuban gay activist named Manolo Gomez was fired from his job and severely beaten , after which he decided to leave Miami . Gay activists in New Orleans tried to discourage Bryant 's performance with the New Orleans Pops orchestra by connecting local suicides to her campaign . Bryant responded to violence saying , " It made me sad and shocked me that anyone would think I had anything to do with it , but my conscience is clear . I can 't be responsible for how people react to what happened in Dade County . My stand was not taken out of homophobia , but of love for them . " 
 = = = Economic retaliation = = = 
 The economic response to the vote was swift and decisive . Bryant worked only twice during 1977 , and lost most of her paid appearances after that . She had recently finished an album named There 's Nothing Like the Love Between a Man and a Woman ; record companies chose to not distribute it . Singer Sewing Machines canceled negotiations for a television variety show . She was replaced after ten years of hosting the Orange Bowl Parade by Rita Moreno , who was older and who had recently performed in a gay @-@ themed film , The Ritz . Bryant and Green held a press conference and claimed Bryant was being blacklisted , and that a national conspiracy was underway by the nation 's homosexuals to deprive her of her livelihood . Time magazine called the charge " unlikely " , and network executives denied gay pressure was behind their decision . Bryant 's claim of being blacklisted brought a tide of condemnation against the perceived pressure by gay organizations . Three major newspapers supported Bryant 's right to free speech . Years later , she admitted that some of the statements made about her cancellations were exaggerated for effect , but that the tactic worked against her , as more organizations and companies canceled her performances . 
 Bryant became the butt of jokes on television shows and film , even by former colleague Bob Hope . Everywhere she went in the days after the vote she was met with noisy protests : Norfolk , Virginia — where demonstrators interrupted her presentation so forcefully she began crying — Chicago , and dozens of other cities . The Ku Klux Klan appeared at one of Bryant 's appearances in Huntington , West Virginia claiming they were there to protect her . She attracted the largest gay demonstration in Canadian history when she appeared at a Toronto religious performance . Though she performed and spoke only at revivals and other religious shows , audiences were often less than half the expected number , and many would leave when she came on stage . In Houston Bryant was invited to perform for the Texas State Bar Association two weeks after the Dade County vote . With no cohesive political community , a few gay organizers invited people to protest her appearance at the Hyatt Regency . An organizer estimated for police that 500 people might participate , but guessed because no gay community had responded to a cause before ; police prepared for that number . However , thousands of people swarmed around the hotel chanting loudly enough to drown Bryant 's performance ; a conservative estimate of the participants ' numbers was 2 @,@ 000 . The audience inside could not hear Bryant , and at one point attorneys working with the American Civil Liberties Union walked out and joined the protesters . One of the organizers said that he had never seen so many gay people in one place before , and then made a speech thanking Bryant : " If God in his infinite wisdom had not created Anita Bryant , we would have had to invent her " . He claimed the protest had the same result in Houston as the Stonewall riots . 
 The Florida Citrus Commission reiterated its commitment to Bryant by stating that it " wholeheartedly support ( ed ) " her right to free speech , praising her " courageous leadership on a moral issue that it is tearing up religious and other organizations which have become involved " . The commission received thousands of letters both supporting Bryant 's stance and condemning the commission ; at one point the U.S. Postal Service installed bomb detection equipment for the mail collected for delivery to the Florida Citrus Commission . The publicity director for the Florida Department of Citrus told a reporter from the Associated Press , " The whole Anita thing is a mess . No matter what we decide , we 're only going to lose . I wish she would just resign . " Although in 1979 the commission extended their $ 100 @,@ 000 annual contract with Bryant , they did not renew it in 1980 . 
 = = Other locations = = 
 In the weeks after the Dade County vote , Fort Lauderdale , Gainesville , and Palm Beach , Florida , and Austin , Texas , all rejected ordinances to outlaw discrimination based on sexual orientation . The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development overturned its own rules they had set earlier in the year to allow unmarried and same @-@ sex couples federally financed housing . Newsweek reported that a county government employee who had worked in her position for 15 years had been fired . An openly gay aide to future U.S. senator Paula Hawkins had also been dismissed . Despite the success of the Dade County campaign , activists worked quietly in liberal towns of Aspen , Colorado , Champaign @-@ Urbana , Illinois , Iowa City , Iowa , Wichita , Kansas , and the very liberal Eugene , Oregon to pass gay rights ordinances . 
 = = = Minneapolis – St. Paul = = = 
 Only three weeks before the voter referendum in Dade County , a state gay rights law to protect homosexuals from discrimination in employment , public services , and housing in Minnesota was defeated . The loss was due in large part to the efforts of the Archdiocese of Saint Paul and Minneapolis , and once more , caught gay activists completely by surprise . The Twin Cities ' gay community was much more active than Miami 's ; both Minneapolis and St. Paul had passed gay rights laws three years before . State senator Allan Spear — the first openly gay man to be elected to public office in the U.S. — served in St. Paul . Spear called it a " victory for bigots " on the senate floor , then went into his office and cried . A group of guerrilla activists struck Archbishop John Roach a week after the vote by throwing a chocolate cream pie at him as he spoke to receive the National Brotherhood Award from the National Conference of Christians and Jews . 
 Following the pie attack on the archbishop , two of Allan Spear 's colleagues invited Anita Bryant to come to St. Paul to overturn their three @-@ year @-@ old gay rights ordinance , and announced Save Our Children would be opening a branch there . Local activists did not think much of their chances ; a local gay political group invited gays and lesbians in Miami to live in Minneapolis — St. Paul . In an act representing Bryant 's diminished national public profile , in October 1977 Bryant and her husband were in Des Moines , Iowa , discussing an upcoming concert at a press conference when Thom Higgins , an activist affiliated with organizers in Minneapolis , walked up to her in front of cameras and mashed a strawberry rhubarb pie in her face . Bryant was stunned and bowed her head as she and Green held hands and prayed for Higgins . She quickly quipped " At least it 's a fruit pie . " An image of her covered with the pastry appeared on the front page of The New York Times the next day . 
 In December 1977 , however , a petition drive was organized by Temple Baptist Church to put St. Paul 's ordinance to a city @-@ wide vote . Volunteers endured below freezing temperatures to collect more than 7 @,@ 000 signatures ; their leader , Richard Angwin , pastor of Temple Baptist reasoned , " I don 't want to live in a community that gives respect to homosexuals . " Angwin used the same strategy as the Miami campaign , tapping the resources of Bryant , Green , and their pastor in Miami . Jerry Falwell held a rally where Bryant was advertised to appear , but Green replaced her at the last minute . At the rally Angwin told the audience " Homosexuality is a murderous , horrendous , twisted act . It is a sin and a powerful , addictive lust . " 
 Gay activists in St. Paul also borrowed from Miami , taking Jack Campbell 's donor list and some strategies . However , similar to Miami , many gays and lesbians in St. Paul were hesitant to come out and could not make a solid case for discrimination ; most of the activists were from Minneapolis . Gay activists were also split in strategy , much like in Miami . A more mainstream group named the St. Paul Citizens for Human Rights ( <unk> ) opted to treat the issue as one of civil and human rights . A more radical group of gays named the Target City Coalition — those who had arranged the <unk> of the archbishop — saw the issue as one of sexual liberation and grabbed the most media attention by highlighting some of the more flamboyant parts of the gay community . The Advocate wrote that they were " the most stoned @-@ out , off @-@ the @-@ wall , bona @-@ fide crackpots yet to appear in the gay rights cause . " The Target City Coalition invited Bob Kunst to St. Paul , where he spoke of sexual liberation and the need to reach out to gay youth . Allan Spear , supportive ministers , and other members of <unk> went on local television to debate the civil rights issue . Reverend Angwin stumped Spear and his cohorts by showing them an advertisement placed by the Target City Coalition in a local gay paper appealing to gay teenagers , that offered them " free prostate rubs . " 
 St. Paul 's special election day was April 25 , 1978 . Again , more than the usual number of voters appeared for a special election , who again , overturned the city 's gay rights ordinance by more than two to one . 
 = = = Eugene , Oregon = = = 
 The ordinance that had recently passed in Eugene was met with a different strategy of opposition . Eugene was a college town so liberal the Grateful Dead spent their summers there . A housewife named Lynne Greene rejected the Biblical rhetoric offered by Bryant and instead argued that since gays already had the protection they needed under the law further legislation was unnecessary . Since homosexuality was a chosen lifestyle , they reasoned , homosexuals were not a minority and needed no protection . Acknowledging the rights of gays would lead the law to give them rights to marry , and adopt children . Though gay rights advocates worked differently in Eugene , registering many new voters and seeing lesbians significantly working the campaign for the first time , their opposition worked steadily by canvassing neighborhoods . Most of their volunteers were members of conservative churches , and the message was similar to recent campaigns : " Keep it straight . Our children come first , " but the Eugene campaign lacked the sensational aspect as those in Miami and St. Paul . 
 Once more in nearly a two to one margin , the gay rights ordinance was defeated in Eugene . A poll taken after the vote showed that liberal voters who were not gay simply declined to show up and vote , and those who opposed the ordinance were much more motivated . 
 = = = Wichita , Kansas = = = 
 Anita Bryant lent her support to the effort in Wichita , which was led by a minister named Ron Adrian . They used a similar strategy , printing a full @-@ page ad in The Wichita Eagle with newspaper clippings connecting gays to child molestation . They raised approximately $ 50 @,@ 000 and used the network of churches , local media , and a highly organized grassroots voter registration and mobilization drive . Campaign literature focused on the aspect gay visibility , and the dangers of gays as role models for children : " There is a real danger that homosexual teachers , social workers or counselors , simply by public acknowledgment of their lifestyles , can encourage sexual deviation in children . " In comparison , the very small and closeted gay community raised only $ 6 @,@ 000 ; the National Gay Task Force was so pessimistic they offered no assistance at all . Bryant attended a rally stating the law would give homosexuals " special rights ... and next you will have thieves , prostitutes and people who have relations with St. Bernards asking for the same rights " . The Wichita ordinance was defeated by a five to one margin leaving Ron Adrian ecstatic . 
 = = = Seattle , Washington = = = 
 Seattle in 1977 was a liberal city that had passed a gay rights ordinance in 1973 , and whose mayor had just declared a Gay Pride Week for June . When a police officer named David Estes learned of the mayor 's gesture , he decided to take action . Estes was a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints , and regarded gay men as " mentally disturbed " according to his religious opinion . Estes designed a ballot measure named Initiative Thirteen that would overturn the existing gay rights ordinance , but also allowed the mere accusation of homosexuality to be the basis for dismissal from a job or eviction from a residence . Also included in the proposed law was the prospect of shifting the responsibility of enforcing Initiative Thirteen to a city department already overtaxed with investigating claims of bias against blacks and women . 
 Estes ' organization attracted a $ 3 @,@ 000 donation from Anita Bryant , and her pastor traveled to Seattle to give advice on Estes ' campaign . However , where Estes planned to use the network of conservative churches in the city , many members were discouraged from working with him because he was a Mormon . The tone of the advertising for the campaign was more dire than in Miami ; ads claimed homosexuals were responsible for half the murders and suicides in major cities and half the cases of syphilis . Perhaps the most significant factor of the campaign was Estes ' co @-@ chair , a police officer named Dennis Falk . Two months before election day , Falk shot and killed a suspect who turned out to be a black , mentally retarded , young boy . The black community was furious with Falk , and transferred their anger to Initiative Thirteen . 
 The tone of the Seattle campaign against Initiative Thirteen was different from those in Miami and St. Paul ; it focused consistently on privacy and civil rights . Instead of educating the public about different subcultures in the gay community , they printed effective posters showing an eye peeping through a keyhole and a family living in a fishbowl . High @-@ profile liberal figures , labor unions , and other large organizations including the Church Council of Greater Seattle opposed Initiative Thirteen . David Estes did not have the enthusiasm and momentum modeled by Bryant and other communities though his campaign used many of their tactics . On election day , Initiative Thirteen was rejected by 63 % . 
 = = = California = = = 
 A day after the Dade County repeal , State Assemblyman Art Agnos , who represented portions of San Francisco with a very high population of gays and lesbians , decided not to submit a gay civil rights bill to the state legislature , reasoning that it no longer had any support . California state senator John Briggs , from Fullerton was in the crowd with Anita Bryant the night she and Save Our Children won the Dade County vote . Greatly impressed by the voter turnout , Briggs had designs to win the race for governor of California for 1978 . When he returned from Miami , since there was no gay rights law to overturn , he proposed a law to forbid employing openly gay public school teachers and other workers . The bill , Proposition 6 — nicknamed the Briggs Initiative — was written so broadly that it also allowed the dismissal of any public school employee for supporting gay rights including voting against Proposition 6 , regardless of their sexual orientation . He stated , " What I am after is to remove those homosexual teachers who through word , thought or deed want to be a public homosexual , to entice young impressionable children into their lifestyle " . Briggs announced the proposition on the steps of San Francisco City Hall , after notifying several local gay organizations of his intentions . The city had experienced an influx of so many gay people in the past ten years that they counted as a quarter of its voting population . 
 Gay activists , newly alarmed at the threat to their rights , confronted vice president Walter Mondale at a political rally in San Francisco two weeks after the announcement of Proposition 6 . Mondale ran with Jimmy Carter in 1976 on a platform highlighting human rights as their first priority , and he was there to address the subject pertaining to Latin America . When gay activists interrupted him and demanded he address their issues , he quickly left without a response , and San Francisco Democratic organizers and liberal politicians were furious at the gay activists . 
 Briggs named his organization California Defend Our Children ( CDOC ) to avoid legal problems with the Connecticut charity , and used the same strategies as Save Our Children : collages of newspaper headlines about child molesters , and because a proposition was on the ballot regarding the death penalty in California , CDOC campaign literature urged voters to " act now to help protect your family from vicious killers and defend your children from homosexual teachers " . Briggs placed minister Lou Sheldon in charge of CDOC . 
 A significant difference between the community components in Miami and California was that both Los Angeles and San Francisco had very active and visible gay communities . Founder of Metropolitan Community Church Reverend Troy Perry , who began his career as a charismatic preacher in the Church of God of Prophecy but was rejected for being gay , went on a 16 @-@ day fast to raise $ 100 @,@ 000 and succeeded . Hollywood stars Bette Midler , Lily Tomlin , and Richard Pryor came out in force for the cause , raising another $ 100 @,@ 000 . In January 1978 Harvey Milk took office as a supervisor of San Francisco , and the first openly gay man to be elected to office in California . Briggs campaigned for the measure throughout the state , and held a series of public and televised debates with Milk who was very well received by the media , quick to quip and give print @-@ friendly comments . He often made the front page in newspapers in San Francisco with the outrageous things he said . Milk spoke to 350 @,@ 000 participants of 1978 's San Francisco Gay Freedom Day ; similar numbers were seen in Los Angeles . 
 The strategies of gay activists were once again split . David Goodstein and other professional gay men paid an advertising agency to outline their message , which focused on the threat to privacy and the rights of teachers . In The Advocate , Goodstein urged gays not to live up to stereotypes and let the professionals try to win . However , grassroots efforts by longtime activists such as Morris <unk> , who went on a walk across the state to promote voting down the Briggs Initiative , were also effective . Women were highly visible in the campaign , raising about the same amount of money as men . However , when California law was revealed to state that anyone who gave more than $ 50 to the campaign would have to release his or her name , most of the donations came in at $ 49 , including one by Rock Hudson . 
 Due to the broad nature of the law , as it would have allowed the firing of public school employees for the way they voted or spoke their opinions in favor of gay rights , conservative Republican politicians spoke out against it . Primarily , former governor Ronald Reagan voiced his opinion , saying " Prop . 6 is not needed to protect our children . We have that legal protection now . It could be very costly to implement and has the potential for causing undue harm to people . " Reagan 's statement turned public opinion against the proposition almost overnight . Gay activists were not optimistic in light of the record of voter turnout against them in the previous year , but they were overwhelmed to learn that on election day more than a million voters turned out to strike down the proposition . 
 = = Effects on Bryant = = 
 The members of the gay community were not the only people adversely affected by the Save Our Children campaign . Bryant and Bob Green were divorced in May 1979 , in a dispute made public through newspapers . Bryant moved to Alabama and gave a candid interview to Ladies Home Journal in 1980 where she told the details of her marriage during the campaign . She claimed she had been " married for the wrong reasons " and that she and Green had fought regularly , often considering divorce . Green became her manager and she claimed exhaustion due to being booked for every event available , making $ 700 @,@ 000 ( $ <unk> @.@ 67 in today 's dollars ) in 1976 . She had checked herself into a Christian psychiatric facility in 1973 , and regularly saw psychiatrists and marriage counselors . Her anxiety manifested itself in chest pains , tremors , difficulty swallowing food , and a bout with 24 @-@ hour paralysis during a trip to Israel with the Falwell family . Bryant revealed she had received severe criticism from Christians following her divorce . One Canadian pastor expressed doubt to her that she had " ever met the Lord " , to her humiliation . As a result of the backlash she received from Christians , Bryant had softened her stances on gay rights : " The church needs to be more loving , unconditionally , and willing to see these people as human beings , to minister to them and try to understand . If I had it to do over , I 'd do it again , but not in the same way , " and feminism : " The church needs to wake up and find some way to cope with divorce and women 's problems that are based on Biblical principles . I believe in the long run God will vindicate me . I 've about given up on the fundamentalists , who have become so legalistic and letter @-@ bound to the Bible . " 
 Bryant 's career did not recover . She attempted to stage comebacks in Eureka Springs , Arkansas in 1992 , Branson , Missouri in 1994 ( " People who come to my performances are hungry for the truth . They thank me for reminding them of the importance of God and country . " ) , and Pigeon Forge , Tennessee in 1997 . However , at each venue her audiences dwindled and investors were non @-@ existent . By 2002 , Bryant and her second husband Charlie Dry had claimed bankruptcy in three states . As of 2006 Bryant was living in Oklahoma City . 
 In 2007 Bob Green counted the campaign and its aftermath as factors in strengthening his faith . The breakdown of the marriage he attributed on the pressures put on Bryant , and blamed gays and lesbians for his emotional devastation after the divorce : " Their goal was to put ( Bryant ) out of business and destroy her career . And that 's what they did . It 's unfair . " However , Green said he would not have done it again if he had to : " It just wasn 't worth it ... The trauma , the battling we all got caught up in . I don 't want to ever go back to that . " 
 = = Significance = = 
 = = = Moral Majority = = = 
 The Save Our Children campaign was an intensely focused effort by conservative forces , many of whom received inspiration from previous controversies in the 1970s . Not since the Scopes Trial about the legality of teaching evolution in public schools in 1925 had religious organizations made earnest attempts to influence politics on such a wide scale . Fred Fejes credits the Save Our Children campaign as a significant factor in the rise of conservative Christian activism , noting " This was the beginning of the culture wars " . Ruth Shack points to the connection between the rise of the New Right and the Save Our Children campaign : " Back in 1977 , there was no organized religious right per se . Anita Bryant was a pioneer . " 
 In the late 1970s the Reverend Jerry Falwell moved from presiding over the <unk> Thomas Road Baptist Church in Lynchburg , Virginia and hosting the Old Time Gospel Hour , to being involved in politics . Falwell took credit for defeating the Dade County gay rights ordinance and the failure of the ERA in Florida . He developed a campaign called Clean Up America in 1977 that was a fundraising vehicle for his television show . Falwell sent letters asking for donations , which included questionnaires asking “ Do you approve of known practicing homosexuals teaching in public schools ? ” that he promised would be sent to politicians ; he distributed information about how to put together political groups to influence elections and lawmakers . In 1979 Falwell spearheaded a coalition of religious groups that included Catholics , fundamentalist Protestants , Mormons , and Orthodox Jews that he called the Moral Majority , which developed a branch dedicated to political action . Falwell declared in 1965 that he had no business in politics , but justified his involvement and the inevitable mix of religion and government with evidence that the social problems of abortion , pornography , sexual immorality , and drugs were bringing the United States to a dangerous precipice where communism would prevail over Christianity . 
 Falwell claimed that the grassroots efforts of the Moral Majority — registering millions of voters , informing the public , and using the media — had been a significant factor in the election of President Ronald Reagan . By 1982 they had a budget of $ 1 million and millions of volunteers . Around the same time , gay men were being stricken with AIDS , desperate for money for research and services . Spokesmen for the Moral Majority connected it to God 's will , asserting the general public needed protection from " the gay plague " , and warned , " If homosexuals are not stopped they will infect the entire nation and America will be destroyed . " 
 = = = Gay activism = = = 
 Just as the Save Our Children campaign was a motivational force for conservative Christians , it was also one for gay and lesbian politics . Fejes writes , " While the Stonewall riots of 1969 may have marked the beginning of the modern lesbian and gay movement , the campaigns of 1977 and 1978 marked the emergence of a national politically self @-@ conscious lesbian and gay community " . The birth of a political life for gays and lesbians gave opportunities for national networking as Anita Bryant and those who followed her acted as a virtual lightning rod , attracting a collective anger . Thirty years after the campaign , the Stonewall Library & Archives sponsored an exhibition of the events surrounding the Save Our Children campaign and displayed it at the Broward County Public Library . According to the curator of the exhibit , Bryant is considered " the best thing to happen to the gay rights movement . She and her cohorts were so over the top that it just completely galvanized the gay rights movement " . 
 San Francisco author Armistead Maupin was writing his installments of individual stories in a column for the San Francisco Chronicle titled Tales of the City in 1977 . He remembered , " I know what the battle did for me : It forced me to confront my own residual self @-@ loathing and stare it down once and for all by coming out . " Maupin used the next installment of Tales to have one of his gay characters come out to his parents who , by remarkable coincidence , Maupin had previously established as Florida citrus growers . 
 Political activism in American gay communities was transformed by the arrival of AIDS in the early 1980s . When gay men tried in several desperate measures to follow established political channels to bring attention to a disease that afflicted the most cast out members of society only to meet silence from the government , some used direct action tactics . AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power ( ACT UP ) , formed by Larry Kramer and others in 1987 , was a response not only to government forces that downplayed or ignored the seriousness of AIDS in the United States , but also to a timid gay community who were not militant enough . Their first act was to march on Wall Street in New York City to protest the high price of AZT and the lack of other drugs to address HIV . They blocked morning rush hour traffic , a civil disobedience action in which several protesters were arrested , and the fledgling organization received national news coverage for their demonstration . ACT UP inspired the establishment of direct action groups Queer Nation , Pink Panthers and the Lesbian Avengers , that concentrated on gay and lesbian rights and protection . 
 While Save Our Children may have been a temporary setback for the gay community in Florida , <unk> in Florida would go on to win numerous victories in the future , from the re @-@ enactment of the non @-@ discrimination ordinance in Miami @-@ Dade County , to the enactment of such ordinances elsewhere throughout the state , to the legalization of gay adoption to marriage equality . 
 = Future of the Earth = 
 The biological and geological future of the Earth can be extrapolated based upon the estimated effects of several long @-@ term influences . These include the chemistry at the Earth 's surface , the rate of cooling of the planet 's interior , the gravitational interactions with other objects in the Solar System , and a steady increase in the Sun 's luminosity . An uncertain factor in this extrapolation is the ongoing influence of technology introduced by humans , such as climate engineering , which could cause significant changes to the planet . The current Holocene extinction is being caused by technology and the effects may last for up to five million years . In turn , technology may result in the extinction of humanity , leaving the planet to gradually return to a slower evolutionary pace resulting solely from long @-@ term natural processes . 
 Over time intervals of hundreds of millions of years , random celestial events pose a global risk to the biosphere , which can result in mass extinctions . These include impacts by comets or asteroids with diameters of 5 – 10 km ( 3 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 2 mi ) or more , and the possibility of a massive stellar explosion , called a supernova , within a 100 @-@ light @-@ year radius of the Sun , called a Near @-@ Earth supernova . Other large @-@ scale geological events are more predictable . If the long @-@ term effects of global warming are disregarded , Milankovitch theory predicts that the planet will continue to undergo glacial periods at least until the Quaternary glaciation comes to an end . These periods are caused by eccentricity , axial tilt , and precession of the Earth 's orbit . As part of the ongoing supercontinent cycle , plate tectonics will probably result in a supercontinent in 250 – 350 million years . Some time in the next 1 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 billion years , the axial tilt of the Earth may begin to undergo chaotic variations , with changes in the axial tilt of up to 90 ° . 
 During the next four billion years , the luminosity of the Sun will steadily increase , resulting in a rise in the solar radiation reaching the Earth . This will result in a higher rate of weathering of silicate minerals , which will cause a decrease in the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere . In about 600 million years from now , the level of CO2 will fall below the level needed to sustain C3 carbon fixation photosynthesis used by trees . Some plants use the C4 carbon fixation method , allowing them to persist at CO 
 2 concentrations as low as 10 parts per million . However , the long @-@ term trend is for plant life to die off altogether . The extinction of plants will be the demise of almost all animal life , since plants are the base of the food chain on Earth . 
 In about one billion years , the solar luminosity will be 10 % higher than at present . This will cause the atmosphere to become a " moist greenhouse " , resulting in a runaway evaporation of the oceans . As a likely consequence , plate tectonics will come to an end , and with them the entire carbon cycle . Following this event , in about 2 − 3 billion years , the planet 's magnetic dynamo may cease , causing the magnetosphere to decay and leading to an accelerated loss of volatiles from the outer atmosphere . Four billion years from now , the increase in the Earth 's surface temperature will cause a runaway greenhouse effect , heating the surface enough to melt it . By that point , all life on the Earth will be extinct . The most probable fate of the planet is absorption by the Sun in about 7 @.@ 5 billion years , after the star has entered the red giant phase and expanded to cross the planet 's current orbit . 
 = = Human influence = = 
 Humans play a key role in the biosphere , with the large human population dominating many of Earth 's ecosystems . This has resulted in a widespread , ongoing mass extinction of other species during the present geological epoch , now known as the Holocene extinction . The large @-@ scale loss of species caused by human influence since the 1950s has been called a biotic crisis , with an estimated 10 % of the total species lost as of 2007 . At current rates , about 30 % of species are at risk of extinction in the next hundred years . The Holocene extinction event is the result of habitat destruction , the widespread distribution of invasive species , hunting , and climate change . In the present day , human activity has had a significant impact on the surface of the planet . More than a third of the land surface has been modified by human actions , and humans use about 20 % of global primary production . The concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has increased by close to 30 % since the start of the Industrial Revolution . 
 The consequences of a persistent biotic crisis have been predicted to last for at least five million years . It could result in a decline in biodiversity and homogenization of biotas , accompanied by a proliferation of species that are opportunistic , such as pests and weeds . Novel species may also emerge ; in particular taxa that prosper in human @-@ dominated ecosystems may rapidly diversify into many new species . Microbes are likely to benefit from the increase in nutrient @-@ enriched environmental niches . No new species of existing large vertebrates are likely to arise and food chains will probably be shortened . 
 There are multiple scenarios for known risks that can have a global impact on the planet . From the perspective of humanity , these can be subdivided into survivable risks and terminal risks . Risks that humanity pose to itself include climate change , the misuse of nanotechnology , a nuclear holocaust , warfare with a programmed <unk> , a genetically engineered disease , or a disaster caused by a physics experiment . Similarly , several natural events may pose a doomsday threat , including a highly virulent disease , the impact of an asteroid or comet , runaway greenhouse effect , and resource depletion . There may also be the possibility of an infestation by an extraterrestrial lifeform . The actual odds of these scenarios are difficult if not impossible to deduce . 
 Should the human race become extinct , then the various features assembled by humanity will begin to decay . The largest structures have an estimated decay half @-@ life of about 1 @,@ 000 years . The last surviving structures would most likely be open pit mines , large landfills , major highways , wide canal cuts , and earth @-@ fill flank dams . A few massive stone monuments like the pyramids at the Giza Necropolis or the sculptures at Mount Rushmore may still survive in some form after a million years . 
 = = Random events = = 
 As the Sun orbits the Milky Way , wandering stars may approach close enough to have a disruptive influence on the Solar System . A close stellar encounter may cause a significant reduction in the perihelion distances of comets in the Oort cloud — a spherical region of icy bodies orbiting within half a light year of the Sun . Such an encounter can trigger a 40 @-@ fold increase in the number of comets reaching the inner Solar System . Impacts from these comets can trigger a mass extinction of life on Earth . These disruptive encounters occur at an average of once every 45 million years . The mean time for the Sun to collide with another star in the solar neighborhood is approximately 3 × 1013 years , which is much longer than the estimated age of the Milky Way galaxy , at 1 – 2 × 1010 years . This can be taken as an indication of the low likelihood of such an event occurring during the lifetime of the Earth . 
 The energy release from the impact of an asteroid or comet with a diameter of 5 – 10 km ( 3 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 2 mi ) or larger is sufficient to create a global environmental disaster and cause a statistically significant increase in the number of species extinctions . Among the deleterious effects resulting from a major impact event is a cloud of fine dust ejecta blanketing the planet , which lowers land temperatures by about 15 ° C ( 27 ° F ) within a week and halts photosynthesis for several months . The mean time between major impacts is estimated to be at least 100 million years . During the last 540 million years , simulations demonstrated that such an impact rate is sufficient to cause 5 – 6 mass extinctions and 20 – 30 lower severity events . This matches the geologic record of significant extinctions during the Phanerozoic Eon . Such events can be expected to continue into the future . 
 A supernova is a cataclysmic explosion of a star . Within the Milky Way galaxy , supernova explosions occur on average once every 40 years . During the history of the Earth , multiple such events have likely occurred within a distance of 100 light years . Explosions inside this distance can contaminate the planet with radioisotopes and possibly impact the biosphere . Gamma rays emitted by a supernova react with nitrogen in the atmosphere , producing nitrous oxides . These molecules cause a depletion of the ozone layer that protects the surface from ultraviolet radiation from the Sun . An increase in UV @-@ B radiation of only 10 – 30 % is sufficient to cause a significant impact to life ; particularly to the phytoplankton that form the base of the oceanic food chain . A supernova explosion at a distance of 26 light years will reduce the ozone column density by half . On average , a supernova explosion occurs within 32 light years once every few hundred million years , resulting in a depletion of the ozone layer lasting several centuries . Over the next two billion years , there will be about 20 supernova explosions and one gamma ray burst that will have a significant impact on the planet 's biosphere . 
 The incremental effect of gravitational perturbations between the planets causes the inner Solar System as a whole to behave chaotically over long time periods . This does not significantly affect the stability of the Solar System over intervals of a few million years or less , but over billions of years the orbits of the planets become unpredictable . Computer simulations of the Solar System 's evolution over the next five billion years suggest that there is a small ( less than 1 % ) chance that a collision could occur between Earth and either Mercury , Venus , or Mars . During the same interval , the odds that the Earth will be scattered out of the Solar System by a passing star are on the order of one part in 105 . In such a scenario , the oceans would freeze solid within several million years , leaving only a few pockets of liquid water about 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) underground . There is a remote chance that the Earth will instead be captured by a passing binary star system , allowing the planet 's biosphere to remain intact . The odds of this happening are about one chance in three million . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 The gravitational perturbations of the other planets in the Solar System combine to modify the orbit of the Earth and the orientation of its spin axis . These changes can influence the planetary climate . 
 = = = Glaciation = = = 
 Historically , there have been cyclical ice ages in which glacial sheets periodically covered the higher latitudes of the continents . Ice ages may occur because of changes in ocean circulation and <unk> induced by plate tectonics . The Milankovitch theory predicts that glacial periods occur during ice ages because of astronomical factors in combination with climate feedback mechanisms . The primary astronomical drivers are a higher than normal orbital eccentricity , a low axial tilt ( or obliquity ) , and the alignment of summer solstice with the aphelion . Each of these effects occur cyclically . For example , the eccentricity changes over time cycles of about 100 @,@ 000 and 400 @,@ 000 years , with the value ranging from less than 0 @.@ 01 up to 0 @.@ 05 . This is equivalent to a change of the <unk> axis of the planet 's orbit from 99 @.@ 95 % of the semimajor axis to 99 @.@ 88 % , respectively . 
 The Earth is passing through an ice age known as the quaternary glaciation , and is presently in the Holocene interglacial period . This period would normally be expected to end in about 25 @,@ 000 years . However , the increased rate of carbon dioxide release into the atmosphere by humans may delay the onset of the next glacial period until at least 50 @,@ 000 – 130 @,@ 000 years from now . On the other hand , a global warming period of finite duration ( based on the assumption that fossil fuel use will cease by the year 2200 ) will probably only impact the glacial period for about 5 @,@ 000 years . Thus , a brief period of global warming induced through a few centuries worth of greenhouse gas emission would only have a limited impact in the long term . 
 = = = Obliquity = = = 
 The tidal acceleration of the Moon slows the rotation rate of the Earth and increases the Earth @-@ Moon distance . Friction effects — between the core and mantle and between the atmosphere and surface — can dissipate the Earth 's rotational energy . These combined effects are expected to increase the length of the day by more than 1 @.@ 5 hours over the next 250 million years , and to increase the obliquity by about a half degree . The distance to the Moon will increase by about 1 @.@ 5 Earth radii during the same period . 
 Based on computer models , the presence of the Moon appears to stabilize the obliquity of the Earth , which may help the planet to avoid dramatic climate changes . This stability is achieved because the Moon increases the precession rate of the Earth 's spin axis ( that is , the precession motion of the ecliptic ) , thereby avoiding resonances between the precession of the spin and precession of the planet 's orbital plane relative to that of Jupiter . However , as the semimajor axis of the Moon 's orbit continues to increase , this stabilizing effect will diminish . At some point , perturbation effects will probably cause chaotic variations in the obliquity of the Earth , and the axial tilt may change by angles as high as 90 ° from the plane of the orbit . This is expected to occur between 1 @.@ 5 and 4 @.@ 5 billion years from now . 
 A high obliquity would probably result in dramatic changes in the climate and may destroy the planet 's habitability . When the axial tilt of the Earth exceeds 54 ° , the yearly insolation at the equator is less than that at the poles . The planet could remain at an obliquity of 60 ° to 90 ° for periods as long as 10 million years . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Tectonics @-@ based events will continue to occur well into the future and the surface will be steadily reshaped by tectonic uplift , extrusions , and erosion . Mount Vesuvius can be expected to erupt about 40 times over the next 1 @,@ 000 years . During the same period , about five to seven earthquakes of magnitude 8 or greater should occur along the San Andreas Fault , while about 50 magnitude 9 events may be expected worldwide . Mauna Loa should experience about 200 eruptions over the next 1 @,@ 000 years , and the Old Faithful Geyser will likely cease to operate . The Niagara Falls will continue to retreat upstream , reaching Buffalo in about 30 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 years . 
 In 10 @,@ 000 years , the post @-@ glacial rebound of the Baltic Sea will have reduced the depth by about 90 m ( 300 ft ) . The Hudson Bay will decrease in depth by 100 m over the same period . After 100 @,@ 000 years , the island of Hawaii will have shifted about 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) to the northwest . The planet may be entering another glacial period by this time . 
 = = = Continental drift = = = 
 The theory of plate tectonics demonstrates that the continents of the Earth are moving across the surface at the rate of a few centimeters per year . This is expected to continue , causing the plates to relocate and collide . Continental drift is facilitated by two factors : the energy generation within the planet and the presence of a hydrosphere . With the loss of either of these , continental drift will come to a halt . The production of heat through radiogenic processes is sufficient to maintain mantle convection and plate subduction for at least the next 1 @.@ 1 billion years . 
 At present , the continents of North and South America are moving westward from Africa and Europe . Researchers have produced several scenarios about how this will continue in the future . These <unk> models can be distinguished by the subduction flux , whereby the oceanic crust moves under a continent . In the introversion model , the younger , interior , Atlantic ocean becomes preferentially subducted and the current migration of North and South America is reversed . In the extroversion model , the older , exterior , Pacific ocean remains preferentially subducted and North and South America migrate toward eastern Asia . 
 As the understanding of geodynamics improves , these models will be subject to revision . In 2008 , for example , a computer simulation was used to predict that a reorganization of the mantle convection will occur over the next 100 million years , causing a supercontinent composed of Africa , Eurasia , Australia , Antarctica and South America to form around Antarctica . 
 Regardless of the outcome of the continental migration , the continued subduction process causes water to be transported to the mantle . After a billion years from the present , a geophysical model gives an estimate that 27 % of the current ocean mass will have been subducted . If this process were to continue unmodified into the future , the subduction and release would reach an equilibrium after 65 % of the current ocean mass has been subducted . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Christopher <unk> and his colleagues have mapped out the predicted motions several hundred million years into the future as part of the <unk> Project . In their scenario , 50 million years from now the Mediterranean sea may vanish and the collision between Europe and Africa will create a long mountain range extending to the current location of the Persian Gulf . Australia will merge with Indonesia , and Baja California will slide northward along the coast . New subduction zones may appear off the eastern coast of North and South America , and mountain chains will form along those coastlines . To the south , the migration of Antarctica to the north will cause all of its ice sheets to melt . This , along with the melting of the Greenland ice sheets , will raise the average ocean level by 90 m ( 300 ft ) . The inland flooding of the continents will result in climate changes . 
 As this scenario continues , by 100 million years from the present the continental spreading will have reached its maximum extent and the continents will then begin to coalesce . In 250 million years , North America will collide with Africa while South America will wrap around the southern tip of Africa . The result will be the formation of a new supercontinent ( sometimes called Pangaea Ultima ) , with the Pacific Ocean stretching across half the planet . The continent of Antarctica will reverse direction and return to the South Pole , building up a new ice cap . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The first scientist to extrapolate the current motions of the continents was Canadian geologist Paul F. Hoffman of Harvard University . In 1992 , Hoffman predicted that the continents of North and South America would continue to advance across the Pacific Ocean , pivoting about Siberia until they begin to merge with Asia . He dubbed the resulting supercontinent , <unk> . Later , in the 1990s , Roy Livermore calculated a similar scenario . He predicted that Antarctica would start to migrate northward , and east Africa and Madagascar would move across the Indian Ocean to collide with Asia . 
 In an extroversion model , the closure of the Pacific Ocean would be complete in about 350 million years . This marks the completion of the current supercontinent cycle , wherein the continents split apart and then rejoin each other about every 400 – 500 million years . Once the supercontinent is built , plate tectonics may enter a period of inactivity as the rate of subduction drops by an order of magnitude . This period of stability could cause an increase in the mantle temperature at the rate of 30 – 100 ° C ( 54 – 180 ° F ) every 100 million years , which is the minimum lifetime of past supercontinents . As a consequence , volcanic activity may increase . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The formation of a supercontinent can dramatically affect the environment . The collision of plates will result in mountain building , thereby shifting weather patterns . Sea levels may fall because of increased glaciation . The rate of surface weathering can rise , resulting in an increase in the rate that organic material is buried . <unk> can cause a drop in global temperatures and an increase in atmospheric oxygen . This , in turn , can affect the climate , further lowering temperatures . All of these changes can result in more rapid biological evolution as new niches emerge . 
 The formation of a supercontinent insulates the mantle . The flow of heat will be concentrated , resulting in volcanism and the flooding of large areas with basalt . Rifts will form and the supercontinent will split up once more . The planet may then experience a warming period , as occurred during the Cretaceous period . 
 = = = Solidification of the outer core = = = 
 The iron @-@ rich core region of the Earth is divided into a 1 @,@ 220 km ( 760 mi ) radius solid inner core and a 3 @,@ 480 km ( 2 @,@ 160 mi ) radius liquid outer core . The rotation of the Earth creates convective eddies in the outer core region that cause it to function as a dynamo . This generates a magnetosphere about the Earth that deflects particles from the solar wind , which prevents significant erosion of the atmosphere from sputtering . As heat from the core is transferred outward toward the mantle , the net trend is for the inner boundary of the liquid outer core region to freeze , thereby releasing thermal energy and causing the solid inner core to grow . This iron crystallization process has been ongoing for about a billion years . In the modern era , the radius of the inner core is expanding at an average rate of roughly 0 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 02 in ) per year , at the expense of the outer core . Nearly all of the energy needed to power the dynamo is being supplied by this process of inner core formation . 
 The growth of the inner core may be expected to consume most of the outer core by some 3 – 4 billion years from now , resulting in a nearly solid core composed of iron and other heavy elements . The surviving liquid envelope will mainly consist of lighter elements that will undergo less mixing . Alternatively , if at some point plate tectonics comes to an end , the interior will cool less efficiently , which may end the growth of the inner core . In either case , this can result in the loss of the magnetic dynamo . Without a functioning dynamo , the magnetic field of the Earth will decay in a geologically short time period of roughly 10 @,@ 000 years . The loss of the magnetosphere will cause an increase in erosion of light elements , particularly hydrogen , from the Earth 's outer atmosphere into space , resulting in less favorable conditions for life . 
 = = Solar evolution = = 
 The energy generation of the Sun is based upon thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen into helium . This occurs in the core region of the star using the proton – proton chain reaction process . Because there is no convection in the solar core , the helium concentration builds up in that region without being distributed throughout the star . The temperature at the core of the Sun is too low for nuclear fusion of helium atoms through the triple @-@ alpha process , so these atoms do not contribute to the net energy generation that is needed to maintain hydrostatic equilibrium of the Sun . 
 At present , nearly half the hydrogen at the core has been consumed , with the remainder of the atoms consisting primarily of helium . As the number of hydrogen atoms per unit mass decreases , so too does their energy output provided through nuclear fusion . This results in a decrease in pressure support , which causes the core to contract until the increased density and temperature bring the core pressure into equilibrium with the layers above . The higher temperature causes the remaining hydrogen to undergo fusion at a more rapid rate , thereby generating the energy needed to maintain the equilibrium . 
 The result of this process has been a steady increase in the energy output of the Sun . When the Sun first became a main sequence star , it radiated only 70 % of the current luminosity . The luminosity has increased in a nearly linear fashion to the present , rising by 1 % every 110 million years . Likewise , in three billion years the Sun is expected to be 33 % more luminous . The hydrogen fuel at the core will finally be exhausted in five billion years , when the Sun will be 67 % more luminous than at present . Thereafter the Sun will continue to burn hydrogen in a shell surrounding its core , until the increase in luminosity reaches 121 % of the present value . This marks the end of the Sun 's main sequence lifetime , and thereafter it will pass through the subgiant stage and evolve into a red giant . 
 By this time , the collision of the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies should be underway . Although this could result in the Solar System being ejected from the newly combined galaxy , it is considered unlikely to have any adverse effect on the Sun or planets . 
 = = = Climate impact = = = 
 Once the core hydrogen is exhausted in five billion years , the Sun will expand into a subgiant phase and slowly double in size over about half a billion years . It will then expand more rapidly over about half a billion years until it is over two hundred times larger than today . With the increased surface area of the Sun , the amount of energy emitted will increase . Unless Earth 's orbital radius increases significantly , the global temperature of the Earth will climb because of the rising luminosity of the Sun . As global surface temperatures continue to rise , more water will start to evaporate away into space . The current atmospheric escape rate of hydrogen in the oceans is approximately one meter of oceans every billion years , but as the Sun continues to warm , the rate will increase to at least one meter of ocean every million years . The gradual loss of Earth 's water will ultimately cause plate tectonics to gradually slow down and grind to a halt as water is a lubricant for tectonic activity and with all water gone , the crust will dry out and become too hard to be subducted into the mantle . With the cessation of plate tectonics , no more carbon will be released into the atmosphere via volcanic activity nor will be subducted into the ocean floor , therefore causing the carbon cycle to cease altogether . However , geoscientist James <unk> says the oceans may evaporate much earlier , in about a billion years . 
 The rate of weathering of silicate minerals will increase as rising temperatures speed up chemical processes . This in turn will decrease the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere , as these weathering processes convert carbon dioxide gas into solid carbonates . Within the next 600 million years from the present , the concentration of CO 
 2 will fall below the critical threshold needed to sustain C3 photosynthesis : about 50 parts per million . At this point , trees and forests in their current forms will no longer be able to survive , the last living trees being evergreen conifers . However , C4 carbon fixation can continue at much lower concentrations , down to above 10 parts per million . Thus plants using C4 photosynthesis may be able to survive for at least 0 @.@ 8 billion years and possibly as long as 1 @.@ 2 billion years from now , after which rising temperatures will make the biosphere unsustainable . Currently , C4 plants represent about 5 % of Earth 's plant biomass and 1 % of its known plant species . For example , about 50 % of all grass species ( Poaceae ) use the C4 photosynthetic pathway , as do many species in the herbaceous family <unk> . 
 When the levels of carbon dioxide fall to the limit where photosynthesis is barely sustainable , the proportion of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is expected to oscillate up and down . This will allow land vegetation to flourish each time the level of carbon dioxide rises due to tectonic activity and animal life . However , the long term trend is for the plant life on land to die off altogether as most of the remaining carbon in the atmosphere becomes sequestered in the Earth . Some microbes are capable of photosynthesis at concentrations of CO 
 2 of a few parts per million , so these life forms would probably disappear only because of rising temperatures and the loss of the biosphere . 
 Plants — and , by extension , animals — could survive longer by evolving other strategies such as requiring less CO 
 2 for photosynthetic processes , becoming carnivorous , adapting to desiccation , or associating with fungi . These adaptations are likely to appear near the beginning of the moist greenhouse ( see further ) . 
 The loss of plant life will also result in the eventual loss of oxygen as well as ozone due to chemical reactions in the atmosphere and volcanic eruptions , meaning less attenuation of DNA @-@ damaging ultraviolet radiation , as well as the death of animals ; the first animals to disappear would be large mammals , followed by small mammals , birds , amphibians and large fish , reptiles and small fish , and finally invertebrates . 
 In their work The Life and Death of Planet Earth , authors Peter D. Ward and Donald Brownlee have also argued that some form of animal life may continue even after most of the Earth 's plant life has disappeared . Ward and Brownlee use fossil evidence from the Burgess Shale in British Columbia , Canada , to determine the climate of the Cambrian Explosion , and use it to predict the climate of the future when rising global temperatures caused by a warming Sun and declining oxygen levels result in the final extinction of animal life , as well as comparing the rising and eventually falling diversity of complex life to a cannonball rising to its highest point when going to the present and falling back down again when going into the future . Initially , they expect that some insects , lizards , birds and small mammals may persist , along with sea life . Without oxygen replenishment by plant life , however , they believe that the animals would probably die off from asphyxiation within a few million years . Even if sufficient oxygen were to remain in the atmosphere through the persistence of some form of photosynthesis , the steady rise in global temperature would result in a gradual loss of biodiversity . As temperatures continue to rise , the last animal life will inevitably be driven back toward the poles , and possibly even underground . They would become primarily active during the polar night , aestivating during the polar day due to the intense heat . Much of the surface would become a barren desert and life would primarily be found in the oceans ; however , due also to a decrease of the amount or organic matter coming to the oceans from the land as well as oxygen in the water , life would disappear there too following a similar path to that on Earth 's surface with invertebrates being the last living animals , and of them those that do not depend on living plants such as termites or those near hydrothermal vents such as worms of the genus <unk> As a result of these processes , multi @-@ cellular lifeforms may be extinct in about 800 million years , and eukaryotes in 1 @.@ 3 billion years , leaving only the prokaryotes . 
 = = = Loss of oceans = = = 
 One billion years from now , about 27 % of the modern ocean will have been subducted into the mantle . If this process were allowed to continue uninterrupted , it would reach an equilibrium state where 65 % of the current surface reservoir would remain at the surface . Once the solar luminosity is 10 % higher than its current value , the average global surface temperature will rise to 320 K ( 47 ° C ; 116 ° F ) . The atmosphere will become a " moist greenhouse " leading to a runaway evaporation of the oceans . At this point , models of the Earth 's future environment demonstrate that the stratosphere would contain increasing levels of water . These water molecules will be broken down through photodissociation by solar ultraviolet radiation , allowing hydrogen to escape the atmosphere . The net result would be a loss of the world 's sea water by about 1 @.@ 1 billion years from the present . This will be a simple dramatic step in annihilating all life on Earth . 
 There will be two variations of this future warming feedback : the " moist greenhouse " where water vapor dominates the troposphere while water vapor starts to accumulate in the stratosphere ( if the oceans evaporate very quickly ) , and the " runaway greenhouse " where water vapor becomes a dominant component of the atmosphere ( if the oceans evaporate too slowly ) that the Earth starts to undergo rapid warming that could send its surface temperature to over 900 ° C ( 1 @,@ 650 ° F ) as the atmosphere will be totally overwhelmed by water vapor , causing its entire surface to melt and killing all life , perhaps in about three billion years . In this ocean @-@ free era , there will continue to be reservoirs at the surface as water is steadily released from the deep crust and mantle , where it is estimated there is an amount of water equivalent to several times that currently present in the Earth 's oceans . Some water may be retained at the poles and there may be occasional rainstorms , but for the most part the planet would be a dry desert with large <unk> covering its equator , and a few salt flats on what was once the ocean floor , similar to the ones in the Atacama Desert in Chile , resembling how Saturn ’ s largest moon Titan looks today . Even in these arid conditions , the planet may retain some microbial and possibly even multi @-@ cellular life . Most of these microbes will be halophiles . However , the increasingly extreme conditions will likely lead to the extinction of the prokaryotes between 1 @.@ 6 billion years and 2 @.@ 8 billion years from now , with the last of them living in residual ponds of water at high latitudes and heights or in caverns with trapped ice ; underground life , however , could last longer . What happens next depends on the level of tectonic activity . A steady release of carbon dioxide by volcanic eruption could eventually cause the atmosphere to enter a " <unk> " state like that of the planet Venus . But without surface water , plate tectonics would probably come to a halt and most of the carbonates would remain securely buried until the Sun became a red giant and its increased luminosity heated the rock to the point of releasing the carbon dioxide . 
 The loss of the oceans could be delayed until two billion years in the future if the total atmospheric pressure were to decline . A lower atmospheric pressure would reduce the greenhouse effect , thereby lowering the surface temperature . This could occur if natural processes were to remove the nitrogen from the atmosphere . Studies of organic sediments has shown that at least 100 kilopascals ( 0 @.@ 99 atm ) of nitrogen has been removed from the atmosphere over the past four billion years ; enough to effectively double the current atmospheric pressure if it were to be released . This rate of removal would be sufficient to counter the effects of increasing solar luminosity for the next two billion years . By 2 @.@ 8 billion years from now , the surface temperature of the Earth will have reached 422 K ( 149 ° C ; 300 ° F ) , even at the poles . At this point , any remaining life will be extinguished due to the extreme conditions . If the Earth loses its surface water by this point , the planet will stay in the same conditions until the Sun becomes a red giant . If this scenario doesn 't happen , then in about 3 – 4 billion years the amount of water vapour in the lower atmosphere will rise to 40 % and a moist greenhouse effect will commence once the luminosity from the Sun reaches 35 – 40 % more than its present @-@ day value . A " runaway greenhouse " effect will ensue , causing the atmosphere to heat up and raising the surface temperature to around 1 @,@ 600 K ( 1 @,@ 330 ° C ; 2 @,@ 420 ° F ) . This is sufficient to melt the surface of the planet . However , most of the atmosphere will be retained until the Sun has entered the red giant stage . 
 = = = Red giant stage = = = 
 Once the Sun changes from burning hydrogen at its core to burning hydrogen around its shell , the core will start to contract and the outer envelope will expand . The total luminosity will steadily increase over the following billion years until it reaches 2 @,@ 730 times the Sun 's current luminosity at the age of 12 @.@ 167 billion years . Most of Earth 's atmosphere will be lost to space and its surface will consist of a lava ocean with floating continents of metals and metal oxides as well as icebergs of refractory materials , with its surface temperature reaching more than 2 @,@ 400 K ( 2 @,@ 130 ° C ; 3 @,@ 860 ° F ) . The Sun will experience more rapid mass loss , with about 33 % of its total mass shed with the solar wind . The loss of mass will mean that the orbits of the planets will expand . The orbital distance of the Earth will increase to at most 150 % of its current value . 
 The most rapid part of the Sun 's expansion into a red giant will occur during the final stages , when the Sun will be about 12 billion years old . It is likely to expand to swallow both Mercury and Venus , reaching a maximum radius of 1 @.@ 2 AU ( 180 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ) . The Earth will interact tidally with the Sun 's outer atmosphere , which would serve to decrease Earth 's orbital radius . Drag from the chromosphere of the Sun would also reduce the Earth 's orbit . These effects will act to counterbalance the effect of mass loss by the Sun , and the Earth will probably be engulfed by the Sun . 
 The drag from the solar atmosphere may cause the orbit of the Moon to decay . Once the orbit of the Moon closes to a distance of 18 @,@ 470 km ( 11 @,@ 480 mi ) , it will cross the Earth 's Roche limit . This means that tidal interaction with the Earth would break apart the Moon , turning it into a ring system . Most of the orbiting ring will then begin to decay , and the debris will impact the Earth . Hence , even if the Earth is not swallowed up by the Sun , the planet may be left moonless . The ablation and vaporization caused by its fall on a decaying trajectory towards the Sun may remove Earth 's crust and mantle , then finally destroy it after at most 200 years . Following this event , Earth 's sole legacy will be a very slight increase ( 0 @.@ 01 % ) of the solar metallicity . § IIC 
 Alternatively , should the Earth survive being engulfed to the Sun , the ablation and vaporization mentioned before may strip both its crust and mantle leaving just its core . 
 = = = Post red @-@ giant stage = = = 
 After fusing helium in its core to carbon , the Sun will begin to collapse again , evolving into a compact white dwarf star after ejecting its outer atmosphere as a planetary nebula . In 50 billion years , if the Earth and Moon are not engulfed by the Sun , they will become <unk> , with each showing only one face to the other . Thereafter , the tidal action of the Sun will extract angular momentum from the system , causing the lunar orbit to decay and the Earth 's spin to accelerate . 
 Over time intervals of around 30 trillion years , the Sun will undergo a close encounter with another star . As a consequence , the orbits of their planets can become disrupted , potentially ejecting them from the system entirely . If Earth is not destroyed by the expanding red giant Sun in 7 @.@ 6 billion years and not ejected from its orbit by a stellar encounter , its ultimate fate will be that it collides with the black dwarf Sun due to the decay of its orbit via gravitational radiation , in 1020 ( 100 quintillion ) years . 
 = Tablighi Jamaat = 
 Tablighi Jamaat <unk> ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ‘ at ; Arabic : <unk> <unk> , <unk> ‘ at at @-@ <unk> ; Bengali : <unk> <unk> ; Hindi : <unk> ़ <unk> <unk> ; English : Society for spreading faith ) is a global <unk> Islamic proselytizing and revivalist movement that focuses on urging Muslims to return to orthodox Sunni Islam , and particularly in matters of ritual , dress , and personal behavior . The organisation is estimated to have between 12 million and 150 million adherents ( the majority living in South Asia ) , and a presence in somewhere between 150 and 213 countries . It has been called " one of the most influential religious movements in 20th century Islam " . 
 The movement was started in 1927 by Muhammad Ilyas al @-@ <unk> in India . Its stated primary aim is spiritual reformation of Islam by reaching out to Muslims across social and economic spectra and working at the grass roots level , to bring them in line with the group 's understanding of Islam . The teachings of Tabligh Jamaat are expressed in " Six Principles " ( <unk> , Salat , Ilm , <unk> @-@ e @-@ Muslim , Ikhlas @-@ e @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ o @-@ Tableegh ) . Tablighi Jamaat believes that Muslims are in a constant state of spiritual Jihad in the sense of fight against evil , the weapon of choice is Dawah ( proselytization ) and that battles are won or lost in the " hearts of men . " 
 Tablighi Jamaat began as an offshoot of the Deobandi movement , and a response to perceived deteriorating moral values and a supposed negligence of aspects of Islam . It expanded from a local to a national to an international movement . 
 Tablighi Jamaat denies any affiliation in politics and fiqh ( jurisprudence ) , focusing instead on the Quran and Hadith , and states that it rejects violence as a means for evangelism , ( although some have complained that adherents have become involved in politics in Pakistan and recruited for terrorist acts in France , Britain , Spain and the US ) . Tablighi Jamaat has claimed to avoid electronic media and in favor of personal communication for proselytising , although prominent Tablighi personalities such as Tariq Jameel are featured on an extensive range of Internet videos and often appear on TV . 
 Tablighi Jamaat attracted significant public and media attention when it announced plans for the largest mosque in Europe to be built in London , United Kingdom . 
 = = History = = 
 The emergence of Tablighi Jamaat represented the intensification of individual reformation aspects of the original Deobandi movement . It was also a continuation of the broader trend of Islamic revival in India in the wake of the collapse of Muslim political power to the Maratha Empire and the subsequent consolidation of the British rule . 
 The emergence of Tablighi Jamaat also coincided closely with the rise of various Hindu proselytizing movements ( such as Shuddhi ( purification ) and <unk> ( consolidation ) ) which launched massive efforts in the early twentieth century to reconvert Hindus who had converted to Islam and Christianity . 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Muhammad Ilyas , the founder of Tablighi Jamaat , wanted to create a movement that would ' enjoin good and forbid evil ' as the Qur 'an decreed , and as his teacher Rasheed Ahmad <unk> dreamed of doing . The inspiration for this came during his second pilgrimage to Mecca in 1926 . What he lacked in scholarly learning , presence , charisma or speaking ability , he made up for in zeal . He initially tried to establish a network of mosque @-@ based religious schools to educate the <unk> Muslims about Islamic beliefs and practices . Shortly afterwards , he was disappointed with the reality that these institutions were producing religious functionaries , but not preachers . 
 Ilyas abandoned his teaching post at Madrasah <unk> Uloom in Saharanpur and became a missionary . He relocated to Nizamuddin near Delhi , where this movement was formally launched in 1926 , or 1927 . When setting the guidelines for the movement , he sought inspiration from the practices adopted by Muhammad at the dawn of Islam . Muhammad Ilyas put forward the slogan , Urdu : " ! <unk> <unk> ! <unk> <unk> " , " O Muslims , become Muslims ! " . This expressed the central focus of Tablighi Jamat : their aim to renew Muslims socially by uniting them in embracing the lifestyle of Muhammad . The movement gained a following in a relatively short period and nearly 25 @,@ 000 people attended the annual conference in November 1941 . 
 At the time , some Muslim Indian leaders feared that Muslims were losing their religious identity to the majority Hindu culture . The movement was never given any name officially , but Ilyas used to call it <unk> @-@ i Imaan . 
 The <unk> region where TJ started around Delhi was inhabited by the <unk> , a Rajput ethnic group , some of whom had allegedly converted to Islam , and then re @-@ conversion to Hinduism when Muslim political power declined in the region , lacking the necessary acumen ( according to one author , Ballard ) required to resist the cultural and religious influence of Hindus , prior to the arrival of Tablighi Jamaat . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 The group began to expand its activities in 1946 . The initial expansion within South Asia happened immediately after the partition of India in 1947 , when the Pakistan Chapter was established in the hinterlands of Raiwind town near Lahore , Pakistan . The Pakistan Chapter remained the largest till Bangladesh became independent from Pakistan in 1971 . Today , the largest Chapter is Bangladesh followed by the second largest in Pakistan . Within two decades of its establishment , the group reached Southwest and Southeast Asia , Africa , Europe , and North America . The Tablighi Jamaat 's aversion to politics , and also its lack of any direct and practical economic @-@ political @-@ social viewpoints , like the occupation of Palestine , helped it enter and operate in societies , especially western countries and societies where politically active religious groups faced severe restrictions . 
 = = = Foreign missions = = = 
 The first foreign missions were sent to the Hejaz ( western Saudi Arabia ) and Britain in 1946 . The United States followed and during the 1970s and 1980s the Tablighi Jamaat also established a large presence in continental Europe . In France it was introduced in the 1960s , and grew significantly in the two decades following 1970 . 
 In Europe Tablighi Jamaat focused on marginalized populations — " migrant workers deprived of any cultural access to European society , <unk> teens , drug addicts " . It peaked in popularity and numbers in Europe between the mid @-@ 1970s and mid 1980s , and declined thereafter ( in France it reportedly started to decline around 1989 ) as young people from Muslim families , educated in Europe , began to seek " a more intellectual framework for their faith " , and moved toward Salafi Islam . In France , as of 2004 , it was represented on the French Council of the Muslim Faith . During the first half @-@ decade of the 21st century Tablighi Jamaat went through a major revival in France , reaching 100 @,@ 000 followers by 2006 . However , the United Kingdom is the current focus of the movement in the Europe , primarily due to the large South Asian population that began to arrive there in the 1960s . By 2007 , Tablighi Jamaat members were situated at 600 of Britain 's 1 @,@ 350 mosques . 
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 , the movement made inroads into Central Asia . As of 2007 , it was estimated that 10 @,@ 000 Tablighi Jamaat members could be found in Kyrgyzstan , that was largely driven by Pakistani members initially . 
 The FBI estimates that nearly 50 @,@ 000 members of Tablighi Jamaat are active in the United States . As of 2008 , according to one estimate the organization had a presence in nearly 213 countries and a total following of between 100 and 150 million people . By some measures this made Tablighi Jamaat the largest Muslim movement in the World . The majority of the followers of the Tablighi Jamaat live in South Asia . Another source ( Pew Research Center ’ s Religion and Public Life project ) estimates there are between 12 and 80 million adherents , spread across more than 150 countries . 
 = = Beliefs and objectives = = 
 Members of TJ are allowed to follow their own fiqh as long as it does not deviate from Sunni Islam . Tablighi Jamaat defines its objective with reference to the concept of Dawah , the proselytizing or preaching of Islam . Tablighi Jamaat interprets Dawah as enjoining good and forbidding evil only and defines its objective within the framework of two particular Qur 'anic verses which refer to this mission . Those two verses are : 
 Who is better in speech than one who calls ( men ) to Allah , works righteousness , and says , " I am of the <unk> ( those who submit to Allah ) " ? 
 Let there arise out of you a band of people inviting to all that is good , enjoining what is right , and forbidding what is wrong : They are the ones to attain felicity . 
 Tablighi Jamaat encourages everyone to fulfill the Islamic requirement of dawah even if the person falls short of strong religious intellect . This was different from the other Islamic movements which were mainly ulama @-@ led and extended their leadership roles to the religious scholars . Tablighi Jamaat also disagree with the prevailing idea that the highest standards of Islamic scholarship and ethical standards were prerequisites for proselytising , and promote dawah as a mechanism of self @-@ reform . 
 Like Salafists , Tabligh seek a " separation in their daily life from the <unk> society that surrounded them " . The only objective of Tabligh Jamaat , overtly stated in most sermons , is that Muslims adopt and invite for the Islamic lifestyle , exemplified by Muhammad , in its perfection . This involves a detailed <unk> : " followers must dress like the Prophet , sleep as he did on the ground , on one 's right side " ; enter bathrooms leading with the left foot , but put pants on leading with the right foot ; do not use a fork when eating , instead use your index finger , middle finger and thumb ; men shave their upper lips , but let their beards grow ; their pants or robes should be above the ankle " because the prophet said letting clothes drag on the ground is a sign of arrogance " . The movement encourages Muslims to spend time out of their daily routine in the tablighi activities so that the rest of routine could be harmonised with Tablighi lifestyle . Adherents are also encouraged to enroll in Deobandi <unk> in Pakistan to deepen their faith . 
 The method adopted by Muhammad Ilyas was to organise units ( called jamaats , Arabic : <unk> meaning Assembly ) of at least ten persons and send them to various villages or neighborhoods to preach . These outings , Dawah tours ( see below ) , are now organized by TJ leaders . In these tours , emphasis is laid on " Ahadith about virtues of action " ( imitating Muhammad ) . In the <unk> ( reported sayings of the Islamic prophet Muhammad ) of <unk> ( virtues ) these has been called <unk> ( faith ) and <unk> ( for the sake of Allah ) and TJ believes this is the most vital deriving force for reward in <unk> ( afterlife ) . TJ founder Ilyas preached that knowledge of virtues and A <unk> @-@ <unk> ( Good Deeds and Actions ) takes precedence over the knowledge of Masa 'il ( jurisprudence ) . Knowing jurisprudence detail ( Fara 'id ( mandates ) and Sunan ( traditions ) of Salat ) is useful only if a person is ready to perform rituals such as offering Salat . They insist that the best way of learning is teaching and encouraging others , with the books prescribed by <unk> Jamaat Movement in the light of Quran and Hadith stories of Prophets , Sahaba ( Companions of Prophet ) and <unk> Allah ( " Friends of Allah " ) . Even though there are publications associated with the movement , particularly by Zakariya <unk> , the emphasis has never been on book learning , but rather on first @-@ hand personal communication . A collection of books , usually referred as Tablighi <unk> ( Tablighi Curriculum ) , is recommended by Tabligh Jamaat elders for general reading . This set includes four books namely ( <unk> Sahabah , <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> , <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> and <unk> Ahadith ) . 
 Tablighi ethic discourages social engagement or participation with some non @-@ orthodox customary and ceremonial rituals which are usually extravagantly followed in South Asia . For example , marriages are performed en masse at annual congregations and other similar mass meetings , so that the costly celebrations common in South Asia are avoided . 
 In its early days and in South Asia , the Tabligh movement aimed to return to orthodoxy and " purify " the Muslim religio @-@ cultural identity of heterodox or " borderline " Muslims who still practised customs and religious rites connected with Hinduism . Especially to counteract the efforts of Hindu proselytising movements who targeted these often recently converts from Hinduism . Unlike common proselytising movements , has TJ mostly focused on making Muslims ' better and purer ' and ideally " religiously perfect " , rather than preaching to the non @-@ Muslims . This is because ( it believes ) dawah to non @-@ Muslims will only be effective ( or will be much more effective ) when a Muslim reaches " perfection " . 
 = = = Six principles = = = 
 TJ jamaat visit a village or neighborhood , invite the local Muslims to assemble in the mosque and present their message in the form of Six Principles . These six principles were derived from the lives of the companions of Muhammad . It is said in one narration , " My Sahabah are like guiding stars , whosoever follows one of them will be guided . " Muhammad Ilyas articulated six demands in the form of Six Principles which are quintessential to Tablighi Jamaat 's teachings . These six principles are : 
 <unk> : " Imaan - An article of faith in which a Muslim accepts that there is no God but Allah and Muhammad is his last messenger " . 
 Salat : " Prayer - Five daily prayers that are essential to spiritual elevation , piety , and a life free from the ills of the material world " 
 Ilm and <unk> : " The knowledge and remembrance of Allah - conducted in sessions in which the congregation listens to preaching by the emir , performs prayers , recites the Quran and reads Hadith from the books comprising <unk> As @-@ <unk> " , <unk> Ahadith ( Collection of authentic Ahadith without commentary ) , <unk> Sahaba and <unk> 'il @-@ e A <unk> Vol 1 & 2 and other books . 
 <unk> @-@ e @-@ Muslim : " Honoring a Muslim - The treatment of fellow Muslims with honor and deference " 
 Ikhlas @-@ e @-@ <unk> : " Sincerity of Intention - Reforming one ’ s life in supplication to Allah by performing every human action for the sake of Allah and toward the goal of self @-@ transformation " 
 <unk> @-@ o @-@ Tableegh ( Dawah ) : " Inviting and Preaching - The sparing of time to live a life based on faith and learning its virtues , following in the footsteps of the Prophet Muhammad , and taking His message door to door for the sake of faith . " 
 = = Organization = = 
 Tablighi Jamaat follows an informal organizational structure and keeps an introvert institutional profile . It has been described as " a free @-@ floating religious movement with minimal dependence on hierarchy , leadership positions , and decision @-@ making procedures . " It keeps its distance from mass media and avoids publishing details about its activities and membership . The group also exercises complete abstinence from expressing opinions on political and controversial issues mainly to avoid the disputes which would accompany these endorsements . As an organisation , Tabligh Jamaat does not seek donations and is not funded by anyone , in fact members have to bear their own expenditures . Since there is no formal registration process and no official membership count has ever been taken , the exact membership statistics remain unknown . The movement discourages interviews with its elders and has never officially released texts , although there are publications associated with the movement ( usually referred as Tablighi <unk> ( Tablighi Curriculum ) ) . The emphasis has never been on book learning , but rather on first @-@ hand personal communication . 
 The organisation 's activities are coordinated through centres and headquarters called Markaz . Tablighi Jamaat maintains its international headquarters , called Nizamuddin Markaz , in the Nizamuddin West district of South Delhi , India , from where it originally started . It also has country headquarters in over 213 countries to co @-@ ordinate its activities . These headquarters organise volunteer , self @-@ funding people in groups ( called jamaats ) , averaging ten to twelve people , for reminding Muslims to remain steadfast on path of Allah . These jamaats and preaching missions are self funded by their respective members . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 Ameer is title of leadership in the Tabligh Jamaat and the attribute largely sought is the quality of faith , rather than the worldly rank . The ameer of Tabligh Jamaat is appointed for life by a central consultative council ( shu 'ara ' ) and elders of the Tabligh Jamaat . The first ameer , who was also the founder , was Maulana Muhammad Ilyas Kandhalawi , the second was his son Maulana Muhammad Yusuf Kandhalawi and the third was Maulana Inaam ul Hasan . At present , there is a council of known scholars like Haji Abdul Wahhab and Maulana Saad Kandhalawi <unk> <unk> Ul Hassan the son of Maulana <unk> Hasan died in Delhi on 18 March 2014 . He was the fourth Amir of Tableeghi Jamaat . 
 = = Activities and traditions = = 
 The activism of Tablighi Jamaat can be characterised by the last of the Six Principles . This principle , <unk> @-@ i @-@ Waqt ( English : sparing of time ) justifies the withdrawal from World , though temporarily , for travelling . Travel has been adopted as the most effective method of personal reform and has become an emblematic feature of organisation . They describe the purpose of this retreat as to patch the damages caused by the worldly indulgence and occasionally use the dry @-@ dock parable to explain this . 
 These individual jamaats , each led by an ameer , are sent from each <unk> across the city or country to remind people to persist on the path of God . The duration of the work depends on the discretion of each jamaat . A trip can take an evening , a couple of days or a prolonged duration . 
 = = = <unk> ( proselytising tour ) = = = 
 largest <unk> movement , Tabligh Jamaat encourages its followers to follow the pattern of spending " one night a week , one weekend a month , 40 continuous days a year , and ultimately 120 days at least once in their lives engaged in tabligh missions " . During the course of these tours , members are generally seen dressed in simple , white , loose @-@ clothing , carrying sleeping bags on their backs . These members use mosques as their base during this travel but particular mosques , due to more frequent <unk> activities , have come to be specifically associated with this organisation . These mosques generally hold the periodic , smaller scale convocations for neighbourhood members . 
 During their stay in mosques , these jamaats conduct a daily <unk> , which involves visiting local neighbourhoods , preferably with the help of a guide . They invite people to attend the Maghrib prayer at their mosque and those who attend are delivered a sermon after the prayers , which essentially outlines the Six Principles . They urge the attendees to spend time in tabligh for self reformation and the propagation of Islam . Also the regular activities like eating , sleeping etc. are also carried out in the mosques . 
 Generally , the assumed role of these jamaat members cycle in a way that they may be engaged as a preacher , a cook or as a cleaner at other times . Among Tabligh Jamaat members , this is generally referred to as <unk> which essentially connotes to serving their companions and freeing them for tablighi engagements . The members of the Jamaat are assigned these roles based on the day 's <unk> . The <unk> keeps records of each jamaat and its members , the identity of whom is verified from their respective mosques . Mosques are used to assist the tablighi activities of individual jamaats that voluntarily undertake preaching missions . Members of a jamaat , ideally , pay expenses themselves so as to avoid financial dependence on anyone . 
 = = = Ijtema ( annual gathering ) = = = 
 An annual gathering of followers , called ijtema , is summoned at headquarters of the respective countries . A typical ijtema continues for three days and ends with an exceptionally long prayer . These gatherings are considered moments of intense blessings by Tabligh Jamaat members and are known to attract members in excess of 2 million in some countries . The oldest ijtema of the World started in Bhopal , capital city of Madhya Pradesh , India . It attracts people from all over World . Almost 2 million people gather for this annual gathering . The largest of such annual gatherings is held in Bangladesh . The Bengali gathering , called <unk> Ijtema ( World Gathering ) , converges followers from around the World in <unk> near Dhaka , Bangladesh , with an attendance exceeding 3 million people . The second largest Tabligh Jamaat gathering takes place in Raiwind , Pakistan which was attended by approximately 1 @.@ 5 million people in 2004 . In 2011 Pakistan divided the Ijtema into two parts and total 1 million People attended each of the two Ijtema . 
 = = Role of women = = 
 In TJ women are encouraged to stay home , and to choose a life of " radical segregation between female and male " . However they also proselytize , discussing among themselves in small groups the basics of Tabligh and traveling with their husbands on proselytizing trips . 
 According to a 1996 study by Barbara Metcalf , in TJ women were encouraged to participate since the beginning of the movement . Some scholars objected to the participation of women , but Muhammad Ilyas slowly gained their support and the first jamaat of women was formed in Nizamuddin , Delhi . Accompanied by a close male relative , women are encouraged to go out in jamaats and work among other women and family members while following the rules of modesty , seclusion and segregation . They observe strict rules of hijab by covering their faces and hands . <unk> of women sometimes participate in large annual meetings ; otherwise , they commonly hold neighbourhood meetings . Since South Asian Islamic culture discourages women from going to the mosque and saintly shrines , these venues offer an opportunity for women to pray together and congregate religiously . 
 In many modern Islamist movements , women have been relegated to a domestic role . Tablighi Jamaat tends to blur the boundaries of gender roles and both genders share a common behavioural model and their commitment to tabligh . The emphasis is on a common nature and responsibilities shared by both genders . Just as men redraw the gender roles when they wash and cook during the course of da 'wa tours , women undertake the male responsibility of sustaining the household . Women do not play any role in the higher echelons of the movement , but their opinions are taken into due considerations . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Connections to terrorism = = = 
 Many outside observers have described the group as " apolitical " at least in part because it avoids media and government notice , operates largely in secrecy , and has missionaries that lead austere lifestyles with principled stands against social ills . Three western experts on Islam , for example , have described it as a : 
 peaceful and apolitical preaching @-@ to @-@ the @-@ people movement . — Graham E. Fuller , a former CIA official and an expert on Islam , ( author of The Future of Political Islam ) 
 completely apolitical and law abiding . — Olivier Roy , a prominent authority on Islam at the French National Centre for Scientific Research 
 an apolitical , <unk> movement of internal grassroots missionary renewal ( While comparing its activities to the Alcoholics Anonymous for the efforts to reshape individual lives ) — Barbara D. Metcalf , University of Michigan 
 Another describes it as having an " apolitical stance " which 
 has helped it to penetrate and operate without hindrance in Muslim and non @-@ Muslim societies where politically activist Islamic groups face severe restrictions . — Mumtaz Ahmad 
 However , Tablighi Jamaat members have been involved in politics in Pakistan , and in the West , a number of young men have passed through the group on their way to an extreme , militant interpretation of the religion . 
 In Pakistan , prime minister Nawaz Sharif ( whose father was a prominent Tablighi member and financier ) helped Tablighi members take prominent political positions . For example , in 1998 , Muhammad Rafique <unk> , a Tablighi member , took the ceremonial presidency while , in 1990 , Javed Nasir assumed the powerful director @-@ generalship of the Inter @-@ Services Intelligence , Pakistan 's chief intelligence agency . In 1995 , after Benazir Bhutto , who was less sympathetic to Islamist causes , returned to the premiership , the Pakistani army thwarted a coup attempt by several dozen high @-@ ranking military officers and civilians , all of whom were members of the Tablighi Jamaat and some of whom also held membership in Harkat @-@ ul @-@ Mujahideen , a U.S. State Department @-@ defined terrorist organization . In January 2016 , in what was " probably the first time that any restriction has been placed on Tableeghi Jamaat " in Pakistan , the Punjab government banned preaching on university campuses , and banned Tableeghi Jamaat ( and other non @-@ students ) from preaching and staying in campus hostels . 
 In France , as many as " 80 % percent of the Islamist extremists have come from Tablighi ranks , prompting French intelligence officers to call Tablighi Jamaat the ' antechamber of fundamentalism . ' " Among those who have been members of TJ in France include Zacarias Moussaoui ( the only person to be charged in the United States in the September 11 attacks ) ; Hervé <unk> Loiseau , a young Frenchman who died fleeing the 2001 American bombardment of Tora Bora in Afghanistan ; and <unk> <unk> , an Algerian @-@ born Frenchman and admitted member of Al Qaeda who was convicted in 2005 of plotting to blow up the U.S. Embassy in Paris . In a foiled January 2008 bombing plot in Barcelona , Spain , " some media reports " stated that a Muslim leader in the city stated that the fourteen suspects arrested by police in a series of raids ( where bomb @-@ making materials were seized ) were members of Tablighi Jamaat . Other terrorist plots and attacks on civilians that members of Tablighi Jamaat have been connected with include the Portland Seven , the Lackawanna Six , the 2006 transatlantic aircraft plot , the 7 / 7 London bombings , the 2007 London car bombs , and 2007 Glasgow International Airport attack . 
 Former Department of Homeland Security employee Philip Haney described Tablighi Jamaat as part of a " trans @-@ national Islamist network " that was also affiliated with the Dar Al Uloom al Islamiyah mosque in San Bernardino , which terrorist Syed Rizwan Farook attended frequently . Assistant FBI Director Michael Heimbach said " We have significant presence of Tablighi Jamaat in the United States and we have found that al Qaeda used them for recruiting . " 
 The American Foreign Policy Council 's report on Tablighi Jamaat states : 
 The available data today indicates that TJ , at least in the preponderance of locations around the World where it is found , can be considered ipso facto a passive supporter of jihadist groups via its reinforcement of strict Islamic norms , intolerance of other religious traditions and unwavering commitment to <unk> the entire planet . . . However , its <unk> of politics ( at least publicly ) has enabled TJ , in most venues , to escape suppression by wary government organs . 
 According to French Tablighi expert Marc <unk> , its philosophy and transnational goals include the " planned conquest of the World " . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Due to orthodox nature of Tablighi Jamaat , they have been criticised for being retrogressive . The women in the movement observe complete hijab for which the Tablighi Jamaat is accused of keeping women " strictly subservient and second string " . 
 Tablighi Jamaat has also been criticised within Islamic circles and the major opposition in the Indian subcontinent comes from the <unk> movement . One of the main criticisms against them is that the men neglect and ignore their families , especially by going out on da 'wa tours . Tablighi Jamaat participants , in response , argue that both genders should be equally engaged in Tabligh . They further say that women , like men , are also urged to carry the responsibility of Tabligh and that men should facilitate women 's participation by providing childcare . 
 Many critics , especially those from Hizb ut @-@ Tahrir and Jamaat @-@ e @-@ Islami , criticise Tabligh Jamaat for their neutral political stance . They say that Islamic forces , during their decisive conflicts with un @-@ Islamic forces , could have gained reinforcement from the Tabligh Jamaat followers . They criticise the Tabligh Jamaat 's neutral attitude towards crucial issues like the introduction of an Islamic constitution in Pakistan ( 1950s ) , Islam vs Socialism ( 1969 – 1971 ) , communal riots in India in the 1970s and 1980s , the <unk> @-@ e @-@ <unk> Movement ( 1974 ) , and Nizam @-@ e @-@ Mustafa Movement ( 1977 ) . The Tablighi Jamaat , in response , asserts that it is only by avoiding the political debates that the Tablighi Jamaat has been successful in reawakening the spiritual conscience of the followers . The apolitical stance also helped them operate in difficult times , such as during the governments of Ayub Khan ( 1960s ) and Indira Gandhi ( 1975 – 77 ) , when other sociopolitical Islamic groups faced restrictions . 
 The difference of opinion regarding political participation also marks the fundamental difference between the Tablighi Jamaat and Islamist movements . While the Islamists believe that the acquisition of political power is the absolute requirement for the establishment of an Islamic society , the Tablighi Jamaat believes that merely the political power is not enough to ensure effective organisation of the Islamic social order . The exclusive focus of the Tablighi Jamaat 's attention is the individual , and members believe the reformation of society and institutions will only be effective through education and reform of individuals . They insist that nations and social systems exist by the virtue of the individuals who form them ; therefore , the reform must begin at the grass @-@ roots with individuals and not at the higher level of political structure . 
 TJ have also been accused of insufficient orthodoxy and association with Sufis . Sheikh Abdul Aziz bin Baz , the former grand mufti of Saudi Arabia is reported to have said that " Jama ’ <unk> @-@ Tableegh ... have many deviations . They have some aspects of <unk> and shirk , so it is not permissible to go ( out ) with them , " Another Wahhabi cleric , <unk> Ibn <unk> Al @-@ Harbi , has reportedly complained that JT " are the originator of fictitious tales and baseless stories and people of Bid ’ ah . " The elders of Tablighi Jamaat are of the view that there are different schools of thoughts in Muslims ( like other religions ) , if we discuss differential points in our gathering than in place of uniting the Ummah ( Muslim community ) we will segregate ( <unk> ) the Muslim community . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 The Tablighi Jamaat has no membership lists or formal procedures for membership which makes it difficult to quantify and verify affiliations . 
 Former President of India , Dr. Zakir Hussain who was also associated with this movement . The former chief minister of Punjab <unk> <unk> is also a strong supporter of the Tablighi Jamaat . In 2011 he gave 75 <unk> of land for a Tablighi Jamaat mosque at the Raiwind Markaz . 
 Maulana Tariq Jameel is a prominent member of Tablighi Jamaat . Former singer and pop star Junaid Jamshed has close links with Tabligh Jamaat , and his departure from his professional singing career is attributed to his inclination towards this movement . Singers , actors and models , including <unk> Essa <unk> , Gulzar Alam , <unk> , <unk> Mujahid , are also affiliated with the movement . 
 Former Lieutenant General , and heads of Inter @-@ Services Intelligence , Javed Nasir and General Mahmud Ahmed of the Pakistan Army became a member of Tablighi Jamaat during his service . The Tablighi Jamaat also has a notable following among Pakistani professional cricketers : Shahid Afridi , Mohammad Yousuf and the former cricketers <unk> Mushtaq , Inzamam @-@ ul @-@ Haq , Mushtaq Ahmed , Saeed Anwar and Saeed Ahmed are active members . Mohammad Yousuf 's conversion to Islam is widely attributed to the influence of the Tabligh Jamaat . 
 = James Caudy = 
 James Caudy ( 1707 – March 15 , 1784 ) was an American frontiersman , settler , and landowner in the Ridge @-@ and @-@ Valley Appalachians of the Colony of Virginia — present @-@ day West Virginia . Caudy was born in the Netherlands , immigrated to the Thirteen Colonies in the 1730s , and settled within the Cacapon River valley near present @-@ day Capon Bridge in Hampshire County . As early as 1741 , Caudy was associated with the arrangement and development of transportation routes throughout present @-@ day Hampshire County . Caudy twice hosted George Washington ; first during his surveying expedition in 1748 and again upon Washington 's 1750 return to the Cacapon River valley . 
 Caudy participated in the French and Indian War and is best known for having purportedly defended himself from a band of Native American fighters on Caudy 's Castle — a sandstone outcrop that now bears his name . According to tradition , Caudy used his long rifle barrel to push his Native American attackers off the rock into the Cacapon River below . In his later life , Caudy became involved in a land dispute with John Capper that was resolved by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron in November 1762 . Caudy died in 1784 and was interred on his property south of present @-@ day Capon Bridge . According to local tradition , Caudy was buried with a Native American on either side of him , while another tradition says Caudy was buried with his horse . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James Caudy was born in 1707 in the Netherlands . He possibly arrived in the Thirteen Colonies through Prince George 's County in the Province of Maryland in the 1730s . While in Prince George 's County , Caudy married his first wife , Mary Hutchinson . 
 = = Settlement in Virginia = = 
 Around 1738 , Caudy and fellow frontiersman Joseph Edwards purchased tracts of land along the Cacapon River . He and Edwards were accompanied by the first two families of European descent to settle in the Cacapon River valley . Caudy and his family settled on 358 acres ( 145 ha ; 0 @.@ 559 sq mi ) in the Cacapon River valley near present @-@ day Capon Bridge in what was then Orange County . Caudy 's land parcel was located to the south of Edwards 's 400 acres ( 160 ha ; 0 @.@ 63 sq mi ) ; the present @-@ day U.S. Route 50 ( Northwestern Turnpike ) approximately corresponds to the boundary between Caudy 's and Edwards 's land parcels . 
 = = Development of transportation routes = = 
 As early as 1741 , Caudy was associated with the arrangement and development of transportation routes throughout present @-@ day Hampshire County . On March 25 , 1742 , an Orange County court order mandated that Jeremiah Smith and James Eaton " view and lay " a road from Caudy 's land to Isaac Perkins 's mill near Winchester . That year , a wagon road was constructed between Winchester and Caudy 's land tract . By 1744 , this route was extended from Caudy 's property to the North River at present @-@ day North River Mills . This route later terminated at the mouth of Patterson Creek on the North Branch Potomac River and connected Winchester with Cumberland , Maryland . 
 In December 1742 , the County Court of Orange County ordered the construction of another wagon road from Caudy 's land to the South Branch Potomac River . In 1743 , a wagon road connecting Winchester and Moorefield traversed Caudy 's land using a ford in the Cacapon River . This road led to a watermill near Old Fields on the South Branch Potomac River . Due to the location of Caudy 's settlement along the Winchester – Moorefield route , his residence served as an overnight stopping point for George Washington and George William Fairfax in April 1748 . Washington and Fairfax were returning to Winchester en route to Belvoir following their surveying expedition in the South Branch Potomac River valley in present @-@ day Hardy County . Washington and his surveying party stayed overnight in Caudy 's log cabin . On April 12 , 1750 , George Washington surveyed a plot of " waste land " for Caudy , using white oak trees as boundary markers . 
 Caudy and John Stewart of Frederick County coordinated the layout and construction of further transportation routes through the region , and were respected for their efforts . Following Stewart 's death in 1750 , Stewart left his eldest son in the charge of Caudy and Captain Jeremiah Smith , who both procured land along the Cacapon River for him . 
 = = French and Indian War = = 
 = = = Caudy 's Castle incident = = = 
 According to local tradition and folklore , Caudy is known as an " Indian fighter " . Upon detecting a Native American stalker in pursuit of him , Caudy pretended to flee along a pathway leading up the mountain toward the craggy bluffs spanning between 450 and 600 feet ( 140 and 180 m ) above the Cacapon River , south of present @-@ day Forks of Cacapon . This pathway edged around the face of a rock formation overlooking the Cacapon River , and narrowed into a rocky ledge . Another legend says Caudy was leading a group of pioneer settlers in defense against Native American attacks . 
 In both versions of the story , Caudy awaited his pursuers within the craggy recesses of the rock formation . The narrow recesses within the pinnacle 's sandstone ledges allowed only single file passage through the rock outcrop toward the formation 's face . As Caudy 's followers traversed the outcrop 's narrow passes and ledges , Caudy is said to have used his long rifle barrel to push them one @-@ by @-@ one off the rock formation into the Cacapon River 450 to 600 feet ( 140 to 180 m ) below . Other legends say Caudy used the tactic atop this rock on several occasions . The outcrop was named " Caudy 's Castle , " by which it is still known . With the exception of this event , there exist no other accounts of encounters or conflicts between Caudy and Native Americans . 
 = = = French and Indian War service = = = 
 During the French and Indian War , Caudy remained on his property on the Cacapon River ; he staunchly defended it and likely sought further protection at Fort Edwards to the north . Caudy 's residence may have been fortified ; it was known as " <unk> 's Fort " . This fortification was not part of the " chain of forts " organized by George Washington for the defense of settlers against Native American raids in the South Branch Potomac and Cacapon River valleys . Caudy also served as a drummer in Maryland frontiersman Michael Cresap 's militia . 
 Caudy hosted Washington again in 1755 , providing Washington with an ample supply of grass seed that was likely produced in one of Caudy 's fertile fields known as " Caudy 's Meadow " . Civil engineer Claudius Crozet later mentioned Caudy 's Meadow in his <unk> during the planning and construction of the Northwestern Turnpike nearby . Washington sent payment for the grass seed to Caudy through James Wood , the founder of Winchester , Virginia . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his marriage to the widow of James McCoy by 1761 , Caudy intended to acquire McCoy 's 369 acres ( 149 ha ; 0 @.@ 577 sq mi ) east of Great North Mountain in Frederick County . Caudy 's claim to McCoy 's land was disputed by John Capper , who claimed to have purchased McCoy 's property before his death . A feud developed between Caudy and Capper ; it was resolved by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron in November 1762 . Lord Fairfax awarded 165 acres ( 67 ha ; 0 @.@ 258 sq mi ) to Caudy and the remainder of the disputed land to Capper . 
 Caudy never learned to write in English ; he signed his last will and testament with an X mark in 1784 . Caudy died on March 15 , 1784 , and was interred on his property south of present @-@ day Capon Bridge . According to local tradition , Caudy was buried with a Native American on either side of him . Another tradition says he was buried with his horse . The site of Caudy 's interment is located on property now known as Hartford <unk> farm . In the 1930s , Caudy 's burial site was attended to by a local Boy Scouts troop , who landscaped the site and planted shrubbery . By 1976 , Caudy 's burial place was marked with four posts . In 2002 , the Capon Bridge <unk> Club removed the overgrown shrubs and erected a white fence around Caudy 's interment site . The project was initiated by Capon Bridge area residents Roy Giffin , Ken Edmonds , and Roberta <unk> . The <unk> purchased a marble marker and erected it on the site at 9 a.m. on November 15 , 2003 . The burial site is accessible and visible from Christian Church Road , West Virginia Secondary Route 13 . 
 = = Marriages and issue = = 
 Caudy 's first marriage was to Mary Hutchinson in Prince George 's County , Maryland . He and Mary had five children together : 
 David Caudy ( died in November 1782 ) , married Martha Hiett 
 Ann Caudy Dulany , married a Mr. Dulany 
 Margaret Caudy Wood , married Daniel Wood 
 Mary Caudy Kinman , married Samuel Kinman 
 Sarah Caudy Hancher , married Joseph Hancher 
 By 1761 , Caudy had married the widow of James McCoy , who lived across Great North Mountain in Frederick County . 
 = Lavochkin La @-@ 7 = 
 The Lavochkin La @-@ 7 ( Russian : <unk> <unk> @-@ 7 ) was a piston @-@ engined Soviet fighter developed during World War II by the Lavochkin Design Bureau ( OKB ) . It was a development and refinement of the Lavochkin La @-@ 5 , and the last in a family of aircraft that had begun with the LaGG @-@ 1 in 1938 . Its first flight was in early 1944 and it entered service with the Soviet Air Forces later in the year . A small batch of La @-@ 7s was given to the Czechoslovak Air Force the following year , but it was otherwise not exported . Armed with two or three 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) cannon , it had a top speed of 661 kilometers per hour ( 411 mph ) . The La @-@ 7 was felt by its pilots to be at least the equal of any German piston @-@ engined fighter and even shot down a Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter . It was phased out in 1947 by the Soviet Air Force , but served until 1950 with the Czechoslovak Air Force . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 By 1943 , the La @-@ 5 had become a mainstay of the Soviet Air Forces , yet both its head designer , Semyon Lavochkin , as well as the engineers at the Central <unk> Institute ( Russian : TsAGI ) , felt that it could be improved upon . TsAGI refined earlier studies of aerodynamic improvements to the La @-@ 5 airframe in mid @-@ 1943 and modified La @-@ 5FN c / n 39210206 to evaluate the changes . These included complete sealing of the engine cowling , rearrangement of the wing center section to accommodate the oil cooler and the relocation of the engine air intake from the top of the cowling to the bottom to improve the pilot 's view . 
 The aircraft was evaluated between December 1943 and February 1944 and proved to have exceptional performance . Using the same engine as the standard La @-@ 5FN c / n 39210206 had a top speed of 684 kilometers per hour ( 425 mph ) at a height of 6 @,@ 150 meters ( 20 @,@ 180 ft ) , some 64 kilometers per hour ( 40 mph ) faster than the production La @-@ 5FN . It took 5 @.@ 2 minutes to climb to 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) . It was faster at low to medium altitudes than the La @-@ 5 that used the more powerful prototype Shvetsov M @-@ 71 engine . 
 Lavochkin had been monitoring TsAGI 's improvements and began construction in January 1944 of an improved version of the La @-@ 5 that incorporated them as well as lighter , but stronger , metal wing spars to save weight . The La @-@ 5 , as well as its predecessors , had been built mostly of wood to conserve strategic materials such as aircraft alloys . With Soviet strategists now confident that supplies of these alloys were unlikely to become a problem , Lavochkin was now able to replace some wooden parts with alloy components . In addition Lavochkin made a number of other changes that differed from c / n 39210206 . The engine air intake was moved from the bottom of the engine cowling to the wing roots , the wing / fuselage fillets were streamlined , each engine cylinder was provided with its own exhaust pipe , the engine cowling covers were reduced in number , a <unk> was added to the cockpit , longer shock struts were fitted for the main landing gear while that for the tail wheel was shortened , an improved PB @-@ 1B ( V ) gunsight was installed , and a new VISh @-@ 105V @-@ 4 propeller was fitted . Three prototype 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Berezin B @-@ 20 autocannon were mounted in the engine cowling , firing through the propeller , arming the 1944 standard @-@ setter ( Russian : etalon ) , as the modified aircraft was designated . 
 The etalon only made nine test flights in February and March 1944 before testing had to be suspended after two engine failures , but quickly proved itself to be the near @-@ equal of c / n 39210206 . It was 180 kilograms ( 400 lb ) lighter than the earlier aircraft , which allowed the etalon to <unk> the other aircraft ( 4 @.@ 45 minutes against 5 @.@ 2 minutes climb to 5 @,@ 000 meters ) . However it was 33 kilometres per hour ( 20 @.@ 5 mph ) slower at sea level , but only 4 kilometers per hour ( 2 @.@ 5 mph ) slower at 6 @,@ 000 meters ( 19 @,@ 685 ft ) . The flight tests validated Lavochkin 's modifications and it was ordered into production under the designation of La @-@ 7 , although the B @-@ 20 cannon were not yet ready for production and the production La @-@ 7 retained the two 20 @-@ mm ShVAK cannon armament of the La @-@ 5 . 
 Five La @-@ 7s were built in March by Factory ( Russian : Zavod ) Nr. 381 in Moscow and three of these were accepted by the Air Force that same month . The Moscow factory was the fastest to complete transition over to La @-@ 7 production and the last La @-@ 5FN was built there in May 1944 . Zavod Nr. 21 in Gorky was considerably slower to make the change as it did not exhaust its stock of wooden La @-@ 5 wings until October . The quality of the early production aircraft was significantly less than the etalon due to issues with the engine , incomplete sealing of the cowling and fuselage , and defective propellers . One such aircraft was tested , after these problems had been fixed , by the Flight Research Institute ( Russian : <unk> @-@ Issledovatel 'skiy Institut ) and proved to be only 6 kilometers per hour ( 3 @.@ 7 mph ) slower than the etalon at altitude . Aircraft from both factories were evaluated in September by the Air Force Scientific Test Institute ( Russian : NII VVS ) and the problems persisted as the aircraft could only reach 658 kilometers per hour ( 409 mph ) at a height of 5 @,@ 900 meters ( 19 @,@ 357 ft ) and had a time to altitude of 5 @.@ 1 minutes to 5 @,@ 000 meters . 
 Combat trials began in mid @-@ September 1944 and were generally very positive . However four aircraft were lost to engine failures and the engines suffered from numerous lesser problems , despite its satisfactory service in the La @-@ 5FN . One cause was the lower position of the engine air intakes in the wing roots of the La @-@ 7 which caused the engine to ingest sand and dust . One batch of flawed wings was built and caused six accidents , four of them fatal , in October which caused the fighter to be grounded until the cause was determined to be a defect in the wing spar . 
 Production of the first aircraft fitted with three B @-@ 20 cannon began in January 1945 when 74 were delivered . These aircraft were 65 kilograms ( 143 lb ) heavier than those aircraft with the two ShVAK guns , but the level speed was slightly improved over the original aircraft . However , the time to climb to 5000 meters increased by two @-@ tenths of a second over the older model . More than 2000 aircraft were delivered before the war 's end , most by Zavod Nr. 21 . A total of <unk> aircraft had been built by Zavod Nr. 21 , Nr. 381 , and Nr. 99 in Ulan @-@ Ude , when production ended in early 1946 . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The 63rd Guard Fighter Aviation Corps began combat trials of the La @-@ 7 in mid @-@ September 1944 in support of the 1st Baltic Front . Thirty aircraft were provided for the trials , which lasted one month . During this time the new fighters made 462 individual sorties and claimed 55 aerial victories while losing four aircraft in combat . Four other La @-@ 7s were lost to non @-@ combat causes , mostly related to engine problems . A total of three pilots were killed during the trials to all causes . 
 One regimental commander , Colonel Ye . <unk> , a Hero of the Soviet Union , commented : " The La @-@ 7 exhibited unquestionable advantages over German aircraft in multiple air combats . In addition to fighter tasks , photo reconnaissance and bombing were undertaken with success . The aircraft surpasses the La @-@ 5FN in speed , manoeuvrability , and , especially , in the landing characteristics . It requires changes in its armament , and urgent fixing of its engine . " The twin ShVAK armament inherited from the La @-@ 5 was no longer powerful enough to bring down later , more heavily armored German fighters , especially the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 , in a single burst , even when Soviet pilots opened fire at ranges of only 50 – 100 meters ( 160 – 330 ft ) . 
 The 156th Fighter Air Corps of the 4th Air Army was the next unit to receive the La @-@ 7 in October 1944 . At one point during the month , they had fourteen aircraft simultaneously unserviceable with engine failures . By 1 January 1945 there were 398 La @-@ 7s in front @-@ line service of which 107 were unserviceable . By 9 May 1945 this had increased to 967 aircraft , of which only 169 were unserviceable . For the invasion of Japanese Manchuria , 313 La @-@ 7s were assigned and only 28 of these were unserviceable on 9 August 1945 . 
 The La @-@ 7 was flown by the top Soviet ace of the war , Ivan <unk> Kozhedub . Kozhedub , nicknamed " Ivan the Terrible " , a three @-@ time Hero of Soviet Union , scored his last 17 air victories in 1945 in the La @-@ 7 numbered 27 , which is now preserved in the Central Air Force Museum at Monino on the outskirts of Moscow . The last German aircraft that he shot down was the Messerschmitt Me @-@ 262 , of Sergeant ( German : Unteroffizier ) Kurt Lange from 1 . / KG ( J ) 54 , over Frankfurt an der Oder on 15 February 1945 . 
 One fighter regiment of the 1st Czechoslovak Composite Aviation Division was later equipped with the La @-@ 7 after participating in the Slovak National Uprising of August – October 1944 with La @-@ 5FN . A total of 56 aircraft were delivered and equipped the 1st and 2nd Fighter Regiments . The bulk of the aircraft , however , were delivered in 1945 and saw no combat during the war . It remained in service with the Czechoslovaks until 1950 and was designated postwar by them as the S @-@ 97 . One of these aircraft survives in the Prague Aviation Museum , Kbely . Despite reports to the contrary , no La @-@ 7s were ever sold or transferred to the People 's Republic of China or North Korea . Such reports arose from misidentification by Western pilots of the La @-@ 9s or La @-@ 11s that were given to those countries . 
 The British test pilot , Eric " Winkle " Brown was given the chance to fly an La @-@ 7 at the Tarnewitz test site on the Baltic coast , shortly after the German surrender in May 1945 . He described the handling and performance as " quite superb " , but the armament and sights were " below par " , the " wooden construction would have withstood little combat punishment " and the instrumentation was " appallingly basic " . 
 Production of the La @-@ 7 amounted to 5 @,@ 753 aircraft , plus 584 La @-@ <unk> trainers . Those aircraft still in service after the end of the war were given the NATO reporting name Fin . The follow @-@ up model , the La @-@ 9 , despite its outward similarity , was a completely new design . 
 = = = Tactical significance = = = 
 The La @-@ 7 ended the superiority in vertical maneuverability that the Messerschmitt Bf 109G had previously enjoyed over other Soviet fighters . Furthermore , it was fast enough at low altitudes to catch , albeit with some difficulties , Focke Wulf Fw 190 fighter @-@ bombers that attacked Soviet units on the frontlines and immediately returned to German @-@ controlled airspace at full speed . The Yakovlev Yak @-@ 3 and the Yakovlev Yak @-@ <unk> with the Klimov VK @-@ 107 engine lacked a large enough margin of speed to overtake the German raiders . 115 La @-@ 7s were lost in air combat , only half the number of Yak @-@ 3s . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = La @-@ <unk> = = = 
 One aircraft used to evaluate the TK @-@ 3 <unk> in July 1944 in the hopes of improving high @-@ altitude performance . It was destroyed when the TK @-@ 3 disintegrated in flight . 
 = = = La @-@ 7R = = = 
 Testbed for a tail @-@ mounted liquid @-@ fuelled RD @-@ <unk> rocket engine . The rocket was rated at 300 kilograms @-@ force ( 660 lbf ) of thrust and its fuel ( 90 liters ( 20 imp gal ; 24 U.S. gal ) of kerosene and 180 liters ( 40 imp gal ; 48 U.S. gal ) of red fuming nitric acid ) was expected to last between three and three and a half minutes . While the rocket was firing it increased the fighter 's speed by 80 kilometers per hour ( 50 mph ) , but the aircraft 's other flying qualities deteriorated . Fifteen flights were made in the first quarter of 1945 , although the rocket exploded on the ground on 12 May . The aircraft was repaired , but later had an explosion in flight although the pilot managed to land it safely . Details of any later flights are unknown , but the La @-@ 7R was displayed at the August 1946 Tushino Airshow with the rocket firing . 
 = = = La @-@ <unk> = = = 
 Testbed for two underwing ramjet engines . The aircraft was expected to reach a speed of 800 kilometers per hour ( 497 mph ) at a height of 6 @,@ 000 metres ( 19 @,@ 685 ft ) , but could not exceed 670 kilometers per hour ( 416 mph ) due to the high drag of the ramjets . 
 = = = La @-@ 7 / M @-@ 71 = = = 
 One aircraft was fitted with the Shvetsov M @-@ 71 for trials in 1944 . However the engine was not yet ready for service and the program was cancelled . 
 = = = La @-@ <unk> = = = 
 Two @-@ seat trainer version . Armament reduced to a single 20 mm gun and the oil cooler was relocated underneath the engine cowling . Fitted with a radio compass and gun camera . Considerably heavier than the fighter at 3 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 7 @,@ 716 lb ) , but it retained the flying characteristics of the single @-@ seat aircraft . 584 built , the last two delivered in 1947 . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 One aircraft in the Prague Aviation Museum , Kbely . 
 Ivan Kozhedub 's La @-@ 7 number 27 in the Central Air Force Museum , Monino , Moscow . 
 La @-@ 7 on a monument in front of Lavochkin NPO , <unk> , Moscow . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Czechoslovakia 
 Czechoslovakian Air Force 
 Czechoslovakian National Security Guard 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Forces 
 = = Specifications ( 1945 production model ) = = 
 Data from Soviet Airpower in World War 2 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 8 @.@ 6 m ( 28 ft 3 in ) 
