 Wingspan : 9 @.@ 8 m ( 32 ft 2 in ) 
 Height : 2 @.@ 54 m ( 8 ft 4 in ) 
 Wing area : 17 @.@ 59 m2 ( 189 @.@ 3 sq ft ) 
 Gross weight : 3 @,@ 315 kg ( 7 @,@ 308 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Shvetsov ASh @-@ <unk> 14 @-@ cylinder , two @-@ row , air @-@ cooled radial , 1 @,@ 230 kW ( 1 @,@ 650 hp ) 
 Propellers : 3 @-@ bladed VISh @-@ 105V @-@ 4 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 661 km / h ( 411 mph ; 357 kn ) @ 6 @,@ 000 meters ( 19 @,@ 685 ft ) 
 Range : 665 km ( 413 mi ; 359 nmi ) ( 1944 model ) 
 Service ceiling : 10 @,@ 450 m ( 34 @,@ 285 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 15 @.@ 72 m / s ( 3 @,@ 095 ft / min ) 
 Time to altitude : 5 @.@ 3 minutes to 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 2 × cowl @-@ mounted 20 mm ShVAK cannons with 200 rounds per gun or 3 × cowl @-@ mounted 20 mm Berezin B @-@ 20 cannons with 100 rounds per gun 
 Bombs : 200 kg ( 440 lb ) of bombs 
 = WKEY ( AM ) = 
 WKEY ( 1340 AM ) is an American radio station licensed to serve the community of Covington , Virginia . The station , which began broadcasting in 1941 , is owned and operated by Todd P. Robinson , Inc . The WKEY broadcast license is held by <unk> , LLC . 
 The station broadcasts a country music format to the Covington / Clifton Forge area . WKEY is branded , along with its broadcast translator <unk> ( 103 @.@ 5 FM , Covington ) , as " 103 @.@ 5 Big Country " . 
 = = History = = 
 WKEY began broadcasting on May 23 , 1941 as WJMA with 250 watts of power . WJMA was owned by John Arrington Jr. and his wife , Marcia . On May 26 , 1942 , WJMA was sold to Earl M. Key and the callsign changed to WKEY in 1943 . 
 By 1964 , the station 's power had increased to 1 @,@ 000 watts during the day , while the nighttime power remained at 250 watts . On June 1 , 1973 , WKEY was sold to WKEY , Inc . , headed by E.H. Barr , for an undisclosed amount . WKEY increased its nighttime power in 1987 to 1 @,@ 000 watts , matching its daytime power . 
 On December 20 , 2002 , WKEY was acquired by Quorum Radio Partners of Virginia , Inc. for $ 650 @,@ 000 . During 2002 , WKEY switched from its longtime country format to oldies . On April 20 , 2005 , Quorum Radio Partners of Virginia , Inc. filed for bankruptcy and WKEY placed into debtor @-@ in @-@ possession status pending a sale . On January 1 , 2006 , WKEY was sold to Todd P. Robinson , Inc . , for $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 On May 1 , 2008 , the station changed its format from oldies to Southern Gospel , under " The Cross " branding . On January 14 , 2012 , WKEY began simulcasting sister station <unk> @-@ FM , after its move to Forest , Virginia , and away from Covington . On August 9 , 2012 , WKEY began simulcasting full @-@ time on translator station <unk> ( 103 @.@ 5 FM ) , located in Covington , with the country format that was previously heard on <unk> . 
 On November 18 , 2013 , WKEY began streaming its signal live on the internet . 
 = = Programming = = 
 WKEY carries a mix of local and syndicated programming . Weekdays begin with a locally produced morning show called " Highway 64 with Big Al " . The station also has a news department which prepares and broadcasts local news reports on weekdays . The bulk of the broadcast day 's programming comes from Dial Global 's Mainstream Country network . Nationally syndicated programs aired on WKEY include the " Tim White Bluegrass Show " and " <unk> Racing Country " . The station carries a one @-@ minute newscast from Fox News Radio at the top of each hour . 
 WKEY broadcasts live football games from Covington High School in the Fall . WKEY is an affiliate of the University of Virginia 's Virginia Sports Network , which carries the school 's football and basketball games . NASCAR Sprint Cup Series races can also be heard on WKEY with live coverage provided by the Motor Racing Network and the Performance Racing Network . 
 On Sunday mornings , WKEY airs an assortment of religious programming . Beginning with a half @-@ hour , locally produced Gospel music program , the station then airs the syndicated In Touch Ministries and Focus on the Family programs , rounding out the block with a live local church service broadcast . 
 = = Translator = = 
 In addition to the main station , WKEY is relayed by an FM translator to widen its broadcast area . 
 = Clarinet = 
 The clarinet is a musical @-@ instrument family belonging to the group known as the woodwind instruments . It has a single @-@ reed mouthpiece , a straight cylindrical tube with an almost cylindrical bore , and a flared bell . A person who plays a clarinet is called a clarinetist ( sometimes spelled clarinettist ) . 
 The word clarinet may have entered the English language via the French <unk> ( the feminine diminutive of Old French clarin or clarion ) , or from Provençal clarin , " oboe " . It would seem however that its real roots are to be found amongst some of the various names for trumpets used around the renaissance and baroque eras . Clarion , clarin and the Italian clarino are all derived from the medieval term <unk> which referred to an early form of trumpet . This is probably the origin of the Italian <unk> , itself a diminutive of clarino , and consequently of the European equivalents such as <unk> in French or the German <unk> . According to Johann Gottfried Walther , writing in 1732 , the reason for the name is that " it sounded from far off not unlike a trumpet " . The English form clarinet is found as early as 1733 , and the now @-@ archaic <unk> appears from 1784 until the early years of the 20th century . 
 While the similarity in sound between the earliest clarinets and the trumpet may hold a clue to its name , other factors may have been involved . During the late baroque era , composers such as Bach and Handel were making new demands on the skills of their trumpeters , who were often required to play difficult melodic passages in the high , or as it came to be called , clarion register . Since the trumpets of this time had no valves or pistons , melodic passages would often require the use of the highest part of the trumpet 's range , where the harmonics were close enough together to produce scales of adjacent notes as opposed to the gapped scales or arpeggios of the lower register . The trumpet parts that required this speciality were known by the term clarino and this in turn came to apply to the musicians themselves . It is probable that the term clarinet may stem from the diminutive version of the ' clarion ' or ' clarino ' and it has been suggested that clarino players may have helped themselves out by playing particularly difficult passages on these newly developed " mock trumpets " . 
 Johann Christoph Denner is generally believed to have invented the clarinet in Germany around the year 1700 by adding a register key to the earlier chalumeau . Over time , additional keywork and airtight pads were added to improve the tone and playability . 
 These days the most popular clarinet is the B ♭ clarinet . However , the clarinet in A , just a semitone lower , is commonly used in orchestral music . Since the middle of the 19th century the bass clarinet ( nowadays invariably in B ♭ but with extra keys to extend the register down a few notes ) has become an essential addition to the orchestra . The clarinet family ranges from the ( extremely rare ) BBB ♭ <unk> @-@ contrabass to the A ♭ piccolo clarinet . The clarinet has proved to be an exceptionally flexible instrument , equally at home in the classical repertoire as in concert bands , military bands , marching bands , klezmer , and jazz . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 The cylindrical bore is primarily responsible for the clarinet 's distinctive timbre , which varies between its three main registers , known as the chalumeau , clarion , and <unk> . The tone quality can vary greatly with the musician , the music , the instrument , the mouthpiece , and the reed . The differences in instruments and geographical isolation of players in different countries led to the development , from the last part of the 18th century onwards , of several different schools of clarinet playing . The most prominent were the German / Viennese traditions and the French school . The latter was centered on the clarinetists of the Conservatoire de Paris . The proliferation of recorded music has made examples of different styles of clarinet playing available . The modern clarinetist has a diverse palette of " acceptable " tone qualities to choose from . 
 The A clarinet and B ♭ clarinet have nearly the same bore , and use the same mouthpiece . Orchestral players using the A and B ♭ instruments in the same concert could use the same mouthpiece ( and often the same barrel ) for both ( see ' usage ' below ) . The A and the B ♭ instruments have nearly identical tonal quality , although the A typically has a slightly warmer sound . The tone of the E ♭ clarinet is brighter than that of the lower clarinets and can be heard even through loud orchestral or concert band textures . The bass clarinet has a characteristically deep , mellow sound , while the alto clarinet is similar in tone to the bass ( though not as dark ) . 
 = = = Range = = = 
 Clarinets have the largest pitch range of common woodwinds . The intricate key organization that makes this range possible can make the playability of some passages awkward . The bottom of the clarinet ’ s written range is defined by the keywork on each instrument , standard keywork schemes allowing a low E on the common B ♭ clarinet . The lowest concert pitch depends on the transposition of the instrument in question . The nominal highest note of the B ♭ clarinet is a semitone higher than the highest note of the oboe . Since the clarinet has a wider range of notes , the lowest note of the B ♭ clarinet is significantly deeper ( a minor or major sixth ) than the lowest note of the oboe . 
 Nearly all soprano and piccolo clarinets have keywork enabling them to play the E below middle C as their lowest written note ( in scientific pitch notation that sounds D3 on a soprano clarinet or C4 , i.e. concert middle C , on a piccolo clarinet ) , though some B ♭ clarinets go down to E ♭ 3 to enable them to match the range of the A clarinet . On the B ♭ soprano clarinet , the concert pitch of the lowest note is D3 , a whole tone lower than the written pitch . Most alto and bass clarinets have an extra key to allow a ( written ) E ♭ 3 . Modern professional @-@ quality bass clarinets generally have additional keywork to written C3 . Among the less commonly encountered members of the clarinet family , contra @-@ alto and contrabass clarinets may have keywork to written E ♭ 3 , D3 , or C3 ; the basset clarinet and basset horn generally go to low C3 . 
 Defining the top end of a clarinet ’ s range is difficult , since many advanced players can produce notes well above the highest notes commonly found in method books . G6 is usually the highest note clarinetists encounter in classical repertoire . The C above that ( C7 i.e. resting on the fifth ledger line above the treble staff ) is attainable by advanced players and is shown on many fingering charts , and fingerings as high as G7 exist . 
 The range of a clarinet can be divided into three distinct registers . The lowest register , from low written E to the written B ♭ above middle C ( B ♭ 4 ) , is known as the chalumeau register ( named after the instrument that was the clarinet 's immediate predecessor ) . The middle register is known as the clarion register ( sometimes in the U.S.A. as the clarino register from the Italian ) and spans just over an octave ( from written B above middle C ( B4 ) to the C two octaves above middle C ( C6 ) ) ; it is the dominant range for most members of the clarinet family . The top or altissimo register consists of the notes above the written C two octaves above middle C ( C6 ) . All three registers have characteristically different sounds . The chalumeau register is rich and dark . The clarion register is brighter and sweet , like a trumpet ( clarion ) heard from afar . The altissimo register can be piercing and sometimes shrill . 
 = = = Acoustics = = = 
 Sound is a wave that propagates through the air as a result of a local variation in air pressure . The production of sound by a clarinet follows these steps : 
 The mouthpiece and reed are surrounded by the player ’ s lips , which put light , even pressure on the reed and form an airtight seal . Air is blown past the reed and down the instrument . In the same way that a flag flaps in the breeze , the air rushing past the reed causes it to vibrate . As air pressure from the mouth increases , the amount the reed vibrates increases until the reed hits the mouthpiece . At this point the reed stays pressed against the mouthpiece until either the <unk> of the reed forces it to open , or a returning pressure wave ‘ bumps ’ into the reed and opens it . Each time the reed opens , a puff of air goes through the gap , after which the reed swings shut again . When played loudly , the reed can spend up to 50 % of the time shut . The ‘ puff of air ’ or compression wave ( around 3 % greater pressure than the surrounding air ) travels down the cylindrical tube and escapes at the point where the tube opens out . This is either at the closest open hole or at the end of the tube ( see diagram : image 1 ) . 
 More than a ‘ neutral ’ amount of air escapes from the instrument , which creates a slight vacuum or rarefaction in the clarinet tube . This rarefaction wave travels back up the tube ( image 2 ) . 
 The rarefaction is reflected off the sloping end wall of the clarinet mouthpiece . The opening between the reed and the mouthpiece makes very little difference to the reflection of the rarefaction wave . This is because the opening is very small compared to the size of the tube , so almost the entire wave is reflected back down the tube even if the reed is completely open at the time the wave hits ( image 3 ) . 
 When the <unk> wave reaches the other ( open ) end of the tube , air rushes in to fill the slight vacuum . A little more than a ‘ neutral ’ amount of air enters the tube and causes a compression wave to travel back up the tube ( image 4 ) . Once the compression wave reaches the mouthpiece end of the clarinet ‘ tube ’ , it is reflected again back down the pipe . However at this time , either because the compression wave ‘ bumped ’ the reed or because of the natural vibration cycle of the reed , the gap opens and another ‘ puff ’ of air is sent down the pipe . 
 The original compression wave , now greatly reinforced by the second ‘ puff ’ of air , sets off on another two trips down the pipe ( travelling 4 pipe lengths in total ) before the cycle is repeated again . 
 The cycle repeats at a frequency relative to how long it takes a wave to travel to the first open hole and back twice ( i.e. four times the length of the pipe ) . For example : when all the holes bar the very top one are open ( i.e. the trill ' B ' key is pressed ) , the note A4 ( 440 Hz ) is produced . This represents a repeat of the cycle 440 times per second . 
 In addition to this primary compression wave , other waves , known as harmonics , are created . Harmonics are caused by factors including : the imperfect wobbling and shaking of the clarinet reed , the reed sealing the mouthpiece opening for part of the wave cycle ( which creates a flattened section of the sound wave ) and imperfections ( bumps and holes ) in the clarinet bore . A wide variety of compression waves are created , but only some ( primarily the odd harmonics ) are reinforced . These extra waves are what gives the clarinet its characteristic tone . 
 The bore of the clarinet is cylindrical for most of the tube with an inner bore diameter between 14 and 15 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 55 and 0 @.@ 61 in ) , but there is a subtle hourglass shape , with the thinnest part below the junction between the upper and lower joint . The reduction is 1 to 3 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 039 to 0 @.@ 118 in ) depending on the maker . This " hourglass " shape , although not visible to the naked eye , helps to correct the pitch / scale discrepancy between the chalumeau and clarion registers ( perfect 12th ) . The diameter of the bore affects characteristics such as available harmonics , timbre , and pitch stability ( how far the player can bend a note in the manner required in jazz and other music ) . The bell at the bottom of the instrument flares out to improve the tone and tuning of the lowest notes . 
 Most modern clarinets have " undercut " tone holes that improve intonation and sound . <unk> means <unk> the bottom edge of tone holes inside the bore . <unk> , this makes the tone hole function as if it were larger , but its main function is to allow the air column to follow the curve up through the tone hole ( surface tension ) instead of " blowing past " it under the increasingly directional frequencies of the upper registers . 
 The fixed reed and fairly uniform diameter of the clarinet give the instrument an acoustical behavior approximating that of a cylindrical stopped pipe . Recorders use a tapered internal bore to overblow at the 8th ( octave ) when its thumb / register hole is pinched open while the clarinet , with its cylindrical bore , <unk> on the 12th . Adjusting the angle of the bore taper controls the frequencies of the overblown notes ( harmonics ) . Changing the mouthpiece 's tip opening and the length of the reed changes aspects of the harmonic timbre or voice of the instrument because this changes the speed of reed vibrations . Generally , the goal of the clarinetist when producing a sound is to make as much of the reed vibrate as possible , making the sound fuller , warmer , and potentially louder . 
 The lip position and pressure , the shaping of the vocal tract , the choice of reed and mouthpiece , the amount of air pressure created , and the evenness of the air flow account for most of the player ’ s ability to control the tone of a clarinet . A highly skilled musician will provide the ideal lip pressure and air pressure for each frequency ( note ) being produced . They will have an embouchure which places an even pressure across the reed by carefully controlling their lip muscles . The air flow will also be carefully controlled by using the strong stomach muscles ( as opposed to the weaker and erratic chest muscles ) and they will use the diaphragm to oppose the stomach muscles to achieve a tone softer than a forte , rather than weakening the stomach muscle tension to lower air pressure . Their vocal tract will be shaped to resonate at frequencies associated with the tone being produced . 
 Covering or uncovering the tone holes varies the length of the pipe , changing the resonant frequencies of the enclosed air column and hence the pitch of the sound . A clarinetist moves between the chalumeau and clarion registers through use of the register key , or speaker key : clarinetists call the change from chalumeau register to clarion register " the break " . The open register key stops the fundamental frequency from being reinforced and the reed is forced to vibrate at three times the speed it was originally vibrating at . This produces a note a twelfth above the original note . Most instruments overblow at two times the speed of the fundamental frequency ( the octave ) but as the clarinet acts as a closed pipe system , the reed cannot vibrate at twice the original speed because it would be creating a ‘ puff ’ of air at the time the previous ‘ puff ’ is returning as a rarefaction . This means that it cannot be reinforced and so would die away . 
 The chalumeau register plays fundamentals , whereas the clarion register , aided by the register key , plays third harmonics , a perfect twelfth higher than the fundamentals . The first several notes of the altissimo range , aided by the register key and venting with the first left @-@ hand hole , play fifth harmonics , a major seventeenth ( that is a perfect twelfth plus a major sixth ) above the fundamental . The clarinet is therefore said to overblow at the twelfth , and when moving to the altissimo register , a seventeenth . By contrast , nearly all other woodwind instruments overblow at the octave , or like the ocarina and <unk> , do not overblow at all ) . A clarinet must have holes and keys for nineteen notes ( a chromatic octave and a half , from bottom E to B ♭ ) in its lowest register to play the chromatic scale . This overblowing behavior explains the clarinet 's great range and complex fingering system . The fifth and seventh harmonics are also available , sounding a further sixth and fourth ( a flat , diminished fifth ) higher respectively ; these are the notes of the altissimo register . This is also why the inner " waist " measurement is so critical to these harmonic frequencies . 
 The highest notes on a clarinet can have a shrill piercing quality and can be difficult to tune accurately . Different instruments often play differently in this respect due to the sensitivity of the bore and reed measurements . Using alternate fingerings and adjusting the embouchure help correct the pitch of these higher notes . 
 Since approximately 1850 , clarinets have been nominally tuned according to twelve @-@ tone equal temperament . Older clarinets were nominally tuned to meantone . A skilled performer can use his or her embouchure to considerably alter the tuning of individual notes or to produce vibrato , a pulsating change of pitch often employed in jazz . Vibrato is rare in classical or concert band literature ; however , certain clarinetists , such as Richard Stoltzman , do use vibrato in classical music . Special fingerings may be used to play quarter tones and other microtonal intervals . Around 1900 , Dr. Richard H. Stein , a Berlin musicologist , made a quarter @-@ tone clarinet , which was soon abandoned . Years later , another German , Fritz <unk> of <unk> , built a quarter tone clarinet , with two parallel bores of slightly different lengths whose tone holes are operated using the same keywork and a valve to switch from one bore to the other . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Materials = = = 
 Clarinet bodies have been made from a variety of materials including wood , plastic , hard rubber , metal , resin , and ivory . The vast majority of clarinets used by professional musicians are made from African hardwood , <unk> ( African Blackwood ) or grenadilla , rarely ( because of diminishing supplies ) Honduran rosewood and sometimes even <unk> . Historically other woods , notably boxwood , were used . 
 Most modern , inexpensive instruments are made of plastic resin , such as ABS . These materials are sometimes called <unk> , which is Selmer 's trademark name for its type of plastic . Metal soprano clarinets were popular in the early 20th century , until plastic instruments supplanted them ; metal construction is still used for the bodies of some contra @-@ alto and contrabass clarinets , and for the necks and bells of nearly all alto and larger clarinets . Ivory was used for a few 18th @-@ century clarinets , but it tends to crack and does not keep its shape well . 
 Buffet Crampon 's <unk> clarinets are made from a composite of grenadilla wood powder and carbon fiber . Such instruments are less affected by humidity and temperature changes than wooden instruments but are heavier . Hard rubber , such as <unk> , has been used for clarinets since the 1860s , although few modern clarinets are made of it . Clarinet designers Alastair Hanson and Tom Ridenour are strong advocates of hard rubber . Hanson Clarinets of England manufactures clarinets using a grenadilla compound reinforced with <unk> , known as ' BTR ' ( <unk> reinforced ) grenadilla . This material is also not affected by humidity , and the weight is the same as that of a wooden clarinet . 
 <unk> are generally made of hard rubber , although some inexpensive mouthpieces may be made of plastic . Other materials such as crystal / glass , wood , ivory , and metal have also been used . Ligatures are often made out of metal and plated in nickel , silver , or gold . Other ligature materials include wire , wire mesh , plastic , <unk> , string , or leather . 
 = = = Reed = = = 
 The instrument uses a single reed made from the cane of Arundo donax , a type of grass . Reeds may also be manufactured from synthetic materials . The ligature fastens the reed to the mouthpiece . When air is blown through the opening between the reed and the mouthpiece facing , the reed vibrates and produces the instrument 's sound . 
 Basic reed measurements are as follows : tip , 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) wide ; lay , 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) long ( distance from the place where the reed touches the mouthpiece to the tip ) ; gap , 1 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) ( distance between the underside of the reed tip and the mouthpiece ) . Adjustment to these measurements is one method of affecting tone color . 
 Most clarinetists buy manufactured reeds , although many make adjustments to these reeds and some make their own reeds from cane " blanks " . Reeds come in varying degrees of hardness , generally indicated on a scale from one ( soft ) through five ( hard ) . This numbering system is not standardized — reeds with the same hardness number often vary in hardness across manufacturers and models . Reed and mouthpiece characteristics work together to determine ease of playability , pitch stability , and tonal characteristics . 
 = = = Components = = = 
 Note : A Boehm system soprano clarinet is shown in the photos illustrating this section . However , all modern clarinets have similar components . 
 The reed is attached to the mouthpiece by the ligature , and the top half @-@ inch or so of this assembly is held in the player ’ s mouth . In the past clarinetists used to wrap a string around the mouthpiece and reed instead of using a ligature . The formation of the mouth around the mouthpiece and reed is called the embouchure . 
 The reed is on the underside of the mouthpiece , pressing against the player 's lower lip , while the top teeth normally contact the top of the mouthpiece ( some players roll the upper lip under the top teeth to form what is called a ‘ double @-@ lip ’ embouchure ) . Adjustments in the strength and shape of the embouchure change the tone and intonation ( tuning ) . It is not uncommon for clarinetists to employ methods to relieve the pressure on the upper teeth and inner lower lip by attaching pads to the top of the mouthpiece or putting ( temporary ) padding on the front lower teeth , commonly from folded paper . 
 Next is the short barrel ; this part of the instrument may be extended to fine @-@ tune the clarinet . As the pitch of the clarinet is fairly temperature @-@ sensitive , some instruments have interchangeable barrels whose lengths vary slightly . Additional compensation for pitch variation and tuning can be made by pulling out the barrel and thus increasing the instrument 's length , particularly common in group playing in which clarinets are tuned to other instruments ( such as in an orchestra or concert band ) . Some performers use a plastic barrel with a <unk> that adjusts the barrel length . On basset horns and lower clarinets , the barrel is normally replaced by a curved metal neck . 
 The main body of most clarinets is divided into the upper joint , the holes and most keys of which are operated by the left hand , and the lower joint with holes and most keys operated by the right hand . Some clarinets have a single joint : on some basset horns and larger clarinets the two joints are held together with a screw clamp and are usually not disassembled for storage . The left thumb operates both a tone hole and the register key . On some models of clarinet , such as many Albert system clarinets and increasingly some higher @-@ end Boehm system clarinets , the register key is a ' wraparound ' key , with the key on the back of the clarinet and the pad on the front . Advocates of the wraparound register key say it improves sound , and it is harder for moisture to accumulate in the tube beneath the pad . Nevertheless , there is a consensus among repair techs that this type of register key is harder to keep in adjustment , i.e. , it is hard to have enough spring pressure to close the hole securely . 
 The body of a modern soprano clarinet is equipped with numerous tone holes of which seven ( six front , one back ) are covered with the fingertips , and the rest are opened or closed using a set of keys . These tone holes let the player produce every note of the chromatic scale . On alto and larger clarinets , and a few soprano clarinets , key @-@ covered holes replace some or all finger holes . The most common system of keys was named the Boehm system by its designer Hyacinthe Klosé in honour of flute designer Theobald Boehm , but it is not the same as the Boehm system used on flutes . The other main system of keys is called the Oehler system and is used mostly in Germany and Austria ( see History ) . The related Albert system is used by some jazz , klezmer , and eastern European folk musicians . The Albert and Oehler systems are both based on the early Mueller system . 
 The cluster of keys at the bottom of the upper joint ( protruding slightly beyond the cork of the joint ) are known as the trill keys and are operated by the right hand . These give the player alternative fingerings that make it easy to play ornaments and trills . The entire weight of the smaller clarinets is supported by the right thumb behind the lower joint on what is called the thumb @-@ rest . Basset horns and larger clarinets are supported with a neck strap or a floor peg . 
 Finally , the flared end is known as the bell . Contrary to popular belief , the bell does not amplify the sound ; rather , it improves the uniformity of the instrument 's tone for the lowest notes in each register . For the other notes the sound is produced almost entirely at the tone holes and the bell is irrelevant . On basset horns and larger clarinets , the bell curves up and forward and is usually made of metal . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Theobald Boehm did not directly invent the key system of the clarinet . Boehm was a flautist who created the key system that is now used for the transverse flute . Klosé and Buffet applied Boehm 's system to the clarinet . Although the credit goes to those people , Boehm 's name was given to that key system because it was based on that used for flute . 
 The current Boehm key system consists of generally 6 rings , on the thumb , 1st , 2nd , 4th , 5th and 6th holes , a register key just above the thumb hole , easily accessible with the thumb . Above the 1st hole , there is a key that lifts two covers creating the note A in the throat register ( high part of low register ) of the clarinet . A key at the side of the instrument at the same height as the A key lifts only one of the two covers , producing G ♯ a semitone lower . The A key can be used in conjunction solely with the register key to produce A ♯ / B ♭ . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Lineage = = = 
 The clarinet has its roots in the early single @-@ reed instruments or hornpipes used in Ancient Greece , old Egypt , Middle East , and Europe since the Middle Ages , such as the <unk> , <unk> , and double clarinet . 
 The modern clarinet developed from a Baroque instrument called the chalumeau . This instrument was similar to a recorder , but with a single @-@ reed mouthpiece and a cylindrical bore . Lacking a register key , it was played mainly in its fundamental register , with a limited range of about one and a half octaves . It had eight finger holes , like a recorder , and two keys for its two highest notes . At this time , contrary to modern practice , the reed was placed in contact with the upper lip . 
 Around the turn of the 18th century , the chalumeau was modified by converting one of its keys into a register key to produce the first clarinet . This development is usually attributed to German instrument maker Johann Christoph Denner , though some have suggested his son Jacob Denner was the inventor . This instrument played well in the middle register with a loud , shrill sound , so it was given the name <unk> meaning " little trumpet " ( from clarino + <unk> ) . Early clarinets did not play well in the lower register , so players continued to play the chalumeaux for low notes . As clarinets improved , the chalumeau fell into disuse , and these notes became known as the chalumeau register . Original Denner clarinets had two keys , and could play a chromatic scale , but various makers added more keys to get improved tuning , easier fingerings , and a slightly larger range . The classical clarinet of Mozart 's day typically had eight finger holes and five keys . 
 Clarinets were soon accepted into orchestras . Later models had a mellower tone than the originals . Mozart ( d . 1791 ) liked the sound of the clarinet ( he considered its tone the closest in quality to the human voice ) and wrote numerous pieces for the instrument . , and by the time of Beethoven ( c . 1800 – 1820 ) , the clarinet was a standard fixture in the orchestra . 
 = = = Pads = = = 
 The next major development in the history of clarinet was the invention of the modern pad . Because early clarinets used felt pads to cover the tone holes , they leaked air . This required pad @-@ covered holes to be kept to a minimum , restricting the number of notes the clarinet could play with good tone . In 1812 , Iwan Müller , a Baltic German community @-@ born clarinetist and inventor , developed a new type of pad that was covered in leather or fish bladder . It was airtight and let makers increase the number of pad @-@ covered holes . Müller designed a new type of clarinet with seven finger holes and thirteen keys . This allowed the instrument to play in any key with near @-@ equal ease . Over the course of the 19th @-@ century makers made many enhancements to Mueller 's clarinet , such as the Albert system and the <unk> system , all keeping the same basic design . Modern instruments may also have cork or synthetic pads . 
 = = = Arrangement of keys and holes = = = 
 The final development in the modern design of the clarinet used in most of the world today was introduced by Hyacinthe Klosé in 1839 . He devised a different arrangement of keys and finger holes , which allow simpler fingering . It was inspired by the Boehm system developed for flutes by Theobald Boehm . Klosé was so impressed by Boehm 's invention that he named his own system for clarinets the Boehm system , although it is different from the one used on flutes . This new system was slow to gain popularity but gradually became the standard , and today the Boehm system is used everywhere in the world except Germany and Austria . These countries still use a direct descendant of the Mueller clarinet known as the Oehler system clarinet . Also , some contemporary Dixieland players continue to use Albert system clarinets . 
 = = Usage and repertoire = = 
 = = = Use of multiple clarinets = = = 
 The modern orchestral standard of using soprano clarinets in both B ♭ and A has to do partly with the history of the instrument , and partly with acoustics , aesthetics , and economics . Before about 1800 , due to the lack of airtight pads ( see History ) , practical woodwinds could have only a few keys to control accidentals ( notes outside their diatonic home scales ) . The low ( chalumeau ) register of the clarinet spans a twelfth ( an octave plus a perfect fifth ) , so the clarinet needs keys / holes to produce all nineteen notes in that range . This involves more keywork than is necessary on instruments that " overblow " at the octave — oboes , flutes , bassoons , and saxophones , for example , which need only twelve notes before overblowing . 
 Clarinets with few keys cannot therefore easily play chromatically , limiting any such instrument to a few closely related key signatures . For example , an eighteenth @-@ century clarinet in C could be played in F , C , and G ( and their relative minors ) with good intonation , but with progressive difficulty and poorer intonation as the key moved away from this range . In contrast , for octave @-@ overblowing instruments , an instrument in C with few keys could much more readily be played in any key . 
 This problem was overcome by using three clarinets — in A , B ♭ , and C — so that early 19th @-@ century music , which rarely strayed into the remote keys ( five or six sharps or flats ) , could be played as follows : music in 5 to 2 sharps ( B major to D major concert pitch ) on A clarinet ( D major to F major for the player ) , music in 1 sharp to 1 flat ( G to F ) on C clarinet , and music in 2 flats to 4 flats ( B ♭ to A ♭ ) on the B ♭ clarinet ( C to B ♭ for the player ) . Difficult key signatures and numerous accidentals were thus largely avoided . 
 With the invention of the airtight pad , and as key technology improved and more keys were added to woodwinds , the need for clarinets in multiple musical keys was reduced . However , the use of multiple instruments in different keys persisted , with the three instruments in C , B ♭ , and A all used as specified by the composer . 
 The lower @-@ pitched clarinets sound more " mellow " ( less bright ) , and the C clarinet — being the highest and therefore brightest of the three — fell out of favour as the other two clarinets could cover its range and their sound was considered better . While the clarinet in C began to fall out of general use around 1850 , some composers continued to write C parts after this date , e.g. , Bizet 's Symphony in C ( 1855 ) , Tchaikovsky 's Symphony No. 2 ( 1872 ) , Smetana 's overture to The Bartered Bride ( 1866 ) and Má <unk> ( 1874 ) , Dvořák 's Slavonic Dance Op. 46 , No. 1 ( 1878 ) , Brahms ' Symphony No. 4 ( 1885 ) , Mahler 's Symphony No. 6 ( 1906 ) , and Richard Strauss deliberately reintroduced it to take advantage of its brighter tone , as in Der Rosenkavalier ( 1911 ) . 
 While technical improvements and an equal @-@ tempered scale reduced the need for two clarinets , the technical difficulty of playing in remote keys persisted , and the A has thus remained a standard orchestral instrument . In addition , by the late 19th century , the orchestral clarinet repertoire contained so much music for clarinet in A that the disuse of this instrument was not practical . Attempts were made to standardise to the B ♭ instrument between 1930 and 1950 ( e.g. , tutors recommended learning the routine transposition of orchestral A parts on the B ♭ clarinet , including solos written for A clarinet , and some manufacturers provided a low E ♭ on the B ♭ to match the range of the A ) , but this failed in the orchestral sphere . 
 Similarly there have been E ♭ and D instruments in the upper soprano range , B ♭ , A , and C instruments in the bass range , and so forth ; but over time the E ♭ and B ♭ instruments have become predominant . 
 The B ♭ instrument remains dominant in concert bands and in jazz . Both B ♭ and C instruments are used in some ethnic traditions , such as klezmer music . 
 = = = Classical music = = = 
 In classical music , clarinets are part of standard orchestral and concert band instrumentation . 
 The orchestra frequently includes two clarinetists playing individual parts — each player is usually equipped with a pair of standard clarinets in B ♭ and A , and clarinet parts commonly alternate between B ♭ and A instruments several times over the course of a piece or even , less commonly , of a movement ( e.g. , 1st movement Brahms 3rd symphony ) . Clarinet sections grew larger during the last few decades of the 19th century , often employing a third clarinetist , an E ♭ or a bass clarinet . In the 20th century , composers such as Igor Stravinsky , Richard Strauss , Gustav Mahler , and Olivier Messiaen enlarged the clarinet section on occasion to up to nine players , employing many different clarinets including the E ♭ or D soprano clarinets , basset horn , alto clarinet , bass clarinet , and / or contrabass clarinet . 
 In concert bands , clarinets are an important part of the instrumentation . The E ♭ clarinet , B ♭ clarinet , alto clarinet , bass clarinet , and contra @-@ alto / contrabass clarinet are commonly used in concert bands . Concert bands generally have multiple B ♭ clarinets ; there are commonly 3 B ♭ clarinet parts with 2 – 3 players per part . There is generally only one player per part on the other clarinets . There are not always E ♭ clarinet , alto clarinet , and contra @-@ alto clarinets / contrabass clarinet parts in concert band music , but all three are quite common . 
 This practice of using a variety of clarinets to achieve coloristic variety was common in 20th @-@ century classical music and continues today . However , many clarinetists and conductors prefer to play parts originally written for obscure instruments on B ♭ or E ♭ clarinets , which are often of better quality and more prevalent and accessible . 
 The clarinet is widely used as a solo instrument . The relatively late evolution of the clarinet ( when compared to other orchestral woodwinds ) has left solo repertoire from the Classical period and later , but few works from the Baroque era . Many clarinet concertos have been written to showcase the instrument , with the concerti by Mozart , Copland , and Weber being well known . 
 Many works of chamber music have also been written for the clarinet . Common combinations are : 
 = = = Jazz = = = 
 The clarinet was originally a central instrument in jazz , beginning with the New Orleans players in the 1910s . It remained a signature instrument of jazz music through much of the big band era into the 1940s . American players Alphonse <unk> , Larry Shields , Jimmie Noone , Johnny Dodds , and Sidney Bechet were all pioneers of the instrument in jazz . The B ♭ soprano was the most common instrument , but a few early jazz musicians such as Louis Nelson Delisle and Alcide Nunez preferred the C soprano , and many New Orleans jazz brass bands have used E ♭ soprano . 
 Swing clarinetists such as Benny Goodman , Artie Shaw , and Woody Herman led successful big bands and smaller groups from the 1930s onward . Duke Ellington , active from the 1920s to the 1970s , used the clarinet as lead instrument in his works , with several players of the instrument ( Barney <unk> , Jimmy Hamilton , and Russell <unk> ) spending a significant portion of their careers in his orchestra . Harry Carney , primarily Ellington 's baritone saxophonist , occasionally doubled on bass clarinet . Meanwhile , Pee Wee Russell had a long and successful career in small groups . 
 With the decline of the big bands ' popularity in the late 1940s , the clarinet faded from its prominent position in jazz . By that time , an interest in Dixieland or traditional New Orleans jazz had revived ; Pete Fountain was one of the best known performers in this genre . Bob Wilber , active since the 1950s , is a more eclectic jazz clarinetist , playing in several classic jazz styles . During the 1950s and 1960s , Britain underwent a surge in the popularity of what was termed ' Trad jazz ' . In 1956 the British clarinetist Acker Bilk founded his own ensemble . Several singles recorded by Bilk reached the British pop charts , including the ballad " Stranger on the Shore " . 
 The clarinet 's place in the jazz ensemble was usurped by the saxophone , which projects a more powerful sound and uses a less complicated fingering system . The requirement for an increased speed of execution in modern jazz also did not favour the clarinet , but the clarinet did not entirely disappear . A few players such as Buddy DeFranco , Tony Scott , and Jimmy Giuffre emerged during the 1950s playing bebop or other styles . A little later , Eric Dolphy ( on bass clarinet ) , Perry Robinson , John Carter , Theo <unk> , and others used the clarinet in free jazz . The French composer and clarinetist Jean @-@ Christian Michel initiated a jazz @-@ classical cross @-@ over on the clarinet with the drummer Kenny Clarke . 
 In the U.S. , the prominent players on the instrument since the 1980s have included Eddie Daniels , Don Byron , Marty Ehrlich , and others playing the clarinet in more contemporary contexts . 
 = = = Other genres = = = 
 The clarinet is uncommon , but not unheard of in rock music . Jerry Martini played clarinet on Sly and the Family Stone 's 1968 hit , " Dance to the Music " ; Don Byron , a founder of the Black Rock Coalition who was a member of hard rock guitarist Vernon Reid 's band , plays clarinet on the Mistaken Identity album ( 1996 ) . The Beatles , Pink Floyd , Radiohead , Aerosmith , Billy Joel , and Tom Waits have also all used clarinet on occasion . 
 Clarinets feature prominently in klezmer music , which entails a distinctive style of playing . The use of quarter @-@ tones requires a different embouchure . Some klezmer musicians prefer Albert system clarinets . 
 The popular Brazilian music styles of <unk> and samba use the clarinet . Prominent contemporary players include Paulo Moura , Naylor ' <unk> ' Azevedo , Paulo Sérgio dos Santos and Paquito D 'Rivera . 
 Even though it has been adopted recently in Albanian folklore ( around the 18th century ) , the clarinet , or <unk> as it is called , is one of the most important instruments in Albania , especially in the central and southern areas . The clarinet plays a crucial role in <unk> ( folk ensemble ) that perform in weddings and other celebrations . It is worth mentioned that the <unk> ( instrumental Albanian <unk> included in UNESCO 's intangible cultural heritage list ) is a very characteristic play of these ensembles . There are many clarinet players in Albania ; arguably the most famous are Selim <unk> , <unk> Lena , <unk> Lela ( <unk> ) , Laver <unk> ( <unk> ) , and <unk> <unk> ( <unk> i Korçës ) . 
 The clarinet is prominent in Bulgarian wedding music , an offshoot of Roma / Romani traditional music . Ivo <unk> is a well @-@ known clarinetist in this genre . In Moravian dulcimer bands , the clarinet is usually the only wind instrument among string instruments . 
 In the Republic of Macedonia , old @-@ town folk music <unk> <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , the clarinet has the most important role in wedding music ; clarinet solos mark the high point of dancing euphoria . One of the most renowned Macedonian clarinet players is Tale <unk> , who gained worldwide fame for his virtuosity . 
 In Greece the clarinet ( usually referred to as " <unk> " — " clarino " ) is prominent in traditional music , especially in central , northwest and northern Greece ( Thessaly , Epirus and Macedonia ) . The double @-@ reed <unk> was the dominant woodwind instrument before the clarinet arrived in the country , although many Greeks regard the clarinet as a native instrument . Traditional dance music , wedding music and laments include a clarinet soloist and quite often improvisations . <unk> <unk> is a famous clarinetist in this genre . 
 The instrument is equally famous in Turkey , especially the lower pitched clarinet in G. The western European clarinet crossed via Turkey to Arabic music , where it is widely used in Arabic pop , especially if the intention of the arranger is to imitate the Turkish style . 
 Also in Turkish folk music , a clarinet @-@ like woodwind instrument , the <unk> , is used . However , it 's far more rare than the soprano clarinet and is mainly limited to folk music of the Aegean Region . 
 = = = Groups of clarinets = = = 
 Groups of clarinets playing together have become increasingly popular among clarinet enthusiasts in recent years . Common forms are : 
 Clarinet choir , which features a large number of clarinets playing together , usually involves a range of different members of the clarinet family ( see Extended family of clarinets ) . The homogeneity of tone across the different members of the clarinet family produces an effect with some similarities to a human choir . 
 Clarinet quartet , usually three B ♭ sopranos and one B ♭ bass , or two B ♭ , an E ♭ alto clarinet , and a B ♭ bass clarinet , or sometimes four B ♭ sopranos . 
 Clarinet choirs and quartets often play arrangements of both classical and popular music , in addition to a body of literature specially written for a combination of clarinets by composers such as Arnold Cooke , Alfred Uhl , Lucien <unk> and Václav <unk> . 
 = = Extended family of clarinets = = 
 There is a family of many differently pitched clarinet types , some of which are very rare . The following are the most important sizes , from highest to lowest : 
 Experimental <unk> ♭ and BBB ♭ <unk> @-@ alto and <unk> clarinets have also been built . There have also been soprano clarinets in C , A , and B ♭ with curved barrels and bells marketed under the names <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Cited sources = = 
 Lawson , Colin , ed . ( 1995 ) . The Cambridge Companion to the Clarinet . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Pino D. ( 1998 ) . The Clarinet and Clarinet Playing . Dover Publications . ISBN 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Rendall , F. Geoffrey ( 1971 ) . The Clarinet : Some Notes upon Its History and Construction ( 3rd ed . ) . New York : W. W. Norton & Company Inc . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Pitfour estate = 
 The Pitfour estate , in the Buchan area of north @-@ east Scotland , was an ancient barony encompassing most of the extensive Longside Parish , stretching from St Fergus to New Pitsligo . It was purchased in 1700 by James Ferguson of Badifurrow , who became the first Laird of Pitfour . 
 The estate was substantially renovated by Ferguson and the following two generations of his family . At the height of its development in the 18th and 19th centuries the 50 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 130 km2 ) property had several extravagant features including a two @-@ mile racecourse , an artificial lake and an observatory . The original mansion house was extended before being rebuilt . The surrounding parklands were landscaped , major renovations were undertaken , and follies such as a small replica Temple of Theseus were constructed , in which George Ferguson , the fifth laird , was thought to keep alligators in a cold bath . 
 The first three lairds transformed the estate into a valuable asset . Lord Pitfour , the second laird , purchased additional lands including Deer Abbey and Inverugie Castle . Pitfour 's son , James Ferguson , who became the third laird , continued to improve and expand the estate by adding the lake and bridges , and establishing planned villages . The third laird died a bachelor with no children , so the estate passed to the elderly George Ferguson , who was only in possession of the property for a few months . George was already a wealthy man , owning lands in Trinidad and Tobago , but despite not directly improving the Pitfour estate he added considerable value to the inheritance passed to his illegitimate son . The extravagant lifestyles of the fifth and sixth lairds led to the sequestration of the estate , which was sold off piecemeal to pay their debts . 
 What remained of the estate was sold after the First World War . The mansion house was demolished in about 1926 , and its stone used to build council houses in Aberdeen . In more recent times some of the remaining buildings , including the temple , the bridges and the stables , have been classified as at high risk by Historic Scotland because their condition has become poor . The chapel was fully renovated and converted to a private residence in 2003 ; the observatory was purchased and restored by Banff & Buchan District Council ( now Aberdeenshire Council ) and can be accessed by the public . The racecourse has been forested since 1926 , and the lake is used by members of a private fishing club . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The Pitfour estate in Mintlaw extended from St Fergus to New Pitsligo and encompassed most of the extensive Longside Parish . The meaning of Pitfour is given in the 1895 records of the Clan Fergusson as " cold croft " , but the historian John Milne breaks the name into two parts and indicates the meaning as Pit being place and <unk> or <unk> being grass . The Pitfour estate is shown on old maps as Petfouir or Petfour . It was formerly one of Scotland 's largest and best @-@ appointed estates and was referred to as " The Blenheim of Buchan " , " The Blenheim of the North " and " The Ascot of the North " by the architectural historian Charles McKean . 
 Scant early records exist of the lands but Alexander Stewart ( <unk> <unk> ) , the natural son of King Robert II of Scotland , was given the Pitfour lands together with those of Lunan by his father in 1383 . However , writing in 1887 Cadenhead states the lands were sold to Stewart by Ricardus <unk> , also known as Richard <unk> . During the next three centuries the lands had several different owners . Transactions show it passed to a burgess of Aberdeen in 1477 from Egidia Stewart ; Walter Innes of <unk> gained feudal superiority to all Pitfour lands in 1493 ; and in 1506 the land was purchased by Thomas Innes , who died the following year . His son , John , inherited the property . It remained in the possession of the Innes family until at least 1581 , when it was owned by James Innes and his wife Agnes Urquhart . Between 1581 and 1667 the lands were bought by George Morrison . His son William inherited the property in 1700 , and immediately sold the estate to James Ferguson , who became the first Laird of Pitfour . 
 The lands purchased by Ferguson were recorded in 1667 in a charter granted by Charles II and were stated as encompassing " the lands and Barony of Toux and Pitfour in the Parish of Old Deer and Sheriffdom of Aberdeen including the towns and lands of Mintlaw , Longmuir , <unk> in the Parish of Longside , and County of Aberdeen . " Several other lands , including " the Barony of Aden with the Tower , <unk> , Mains and Manor Place therof and <unk> of the same called <unk> , <unk> Mill thereof , Croft Brewerie , <unk> and <unk> " were individually listed . State papers from the reign of Queen Anne in the 18th century record the lands in favour of James Ferguson . 
 = = Lairds and subsequent development = = 
 1st laird 
 James Ferguson — known as the Sheriff , reflecting the post he held , recognised by the Society of Advocates — bought the Pitfour estate after selling the lands of Badifurrow . He had inherited Badifurrow after demanding that his uncle Robert Ferguson should appear in court if he wished to contest the inheritance . Robert , nicknamed the Plotter , was in hiding to avoid charges of treachery , and after his non @-@ appearance in court James Ferguson 's inheritance was confirmed in mid @-@ June 1700 . At that time the estate contained only a small country house . 
 2nd laird 
 James was laird until his death in 1734 , after which the estate passed to his eldest son , also called James , who was born at Pitfour soon after it was purchased . A solicitor like his father , he was promoted to the bench in 1764 and became Lord Pitfour . He continued to expand and improve the estate until his death in 1777 , and set up the planned village of Fetterangus in 1752 . 
 Lord Pitfour purchased the lands of the last Earl Marischal , George Keith , which were adjacent to Pitfour , in 1766 . They were considered the Earl Marischal 's most significant property and had been forfeited when the Earl Marischal fell out of favour . He had bought it back from the York Buildings Company for £ 31 @,@ 000 , but Pitfour only paid £ 15 @,@ 000 for it . The 8 @,@ 000 acres ( 32 square kilometres ) of land included Deer Abbey and Inverugie Castle , but consisted predominantly of peat bogs , woods and uncultivated land . This addition made the Pitfour estate the largest in the area , at more than 30 @,@ 000 acres ( 120 square kilometres ) stretching from Buchanhaven to Maud along the course of the River Ugie . 
 3rd laird 
 The third laird , also named James , inherited the estate in 1777 ; he was usually referred to as the Member to differentiate him from previous generations . Like his forebears , he was an advocate but also became a Member of Parliament . He too continued to expand and improve the estate ; he constructed a lake and a canal , and built the new mansion . He also expanded and altered Longside at the start of the 1800s , founded Mintlaw in 1813 , assisted in the extension of New Deer and extended Buchanhaven . 
 The Member died unmarried , childless and intestate in 1820 . In normal circumstances his brother Patrick would have been his heir , but he died in battle in October 1780 . 
 4th laird 
 In 1820 the estate was inherited by the Member 's younger brother , George Ferguson , who was by then in his seventies . He was known as the Governor , reflecting his appointment as Lieutenant Governor of Tobago . He was laird from September 1820 , but died in December that year . The Governor had spent most of his life in Trinidad and Tobago , where he was a principal landowner , and had inherited the Castara Estate on Tobago from Patrick . George was appointed Lieutenant Governor of Tobago in 1779 , and after a battle with the French in 1781 surrendered the island to the French on 2 June . The Governor returned to Britain , although the terms of the surrender meant he still owned the Castara estate and all the slaves who worked on it . George had illegitimate children with an unknown woman . He continued to buy estates in the Caribbean and returned there in 1793 , staying until 1810 . 
 5th laird 
 The estate started to deteriorate after it was inherited by the Governor 's illegitimate son George Ferguson , known as the Admiral because of his naval career . He was already heavily in debt when he became the fifth laird in 1821 , but he still enjoyed a lavish lifestyle and undertook much extravagant construction on the estate , including the erection of follies . To cover his substantial gambling debts , he began to sell parcels of estate land , and upon inheriting Pitfour he began selling furniture , books , farm equipment and other items , realising more than £ 9 @,@ 000 . 
 6th laird 
 After the Admiral 's death in March 1867 , the estate passed to his son , George Arthur Ferguson , the sixth and final laird . He served in the Grenadier Guards and eventually became a captain . He married Nina Maria Hood , the eldest daughter of Alexander Nelson Hood , 1st Viscount Bridport , in February 1861 . Later that year Captain Ferguson was posted to Canada , where he was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel and where his first two sons , Arthur and Francis William , were born . His eldest son , Arthur , became Inspector of Constabulary for Scotland . Returning to Britain in 1864 , the family had a nomadic lifestyle , but the sixth laird and his wife were extravagant and habitual gamblers . In June 1909 , a trust deed was registered , and what remained of the estate was put on the market . After large parts of the land had been sold under the ownership of the sixth laird the estate was listed by Bateman in 1883 as being just over 23 @,@ 000 acres ( 93 square kilometres ) with an income of £ 19 @,@ 938 ; at the height of its development the estate had occupied 50 square miles ( 130 square kilometres ) , and was valued at £ 30 million . 
 The last laird died in 1924 and is buried in Luton . 
 Following its 20th @-@ century decline the estate changed hands several times until local farmer Hamish Watson purchased it in December 2010 . The local historian Alex Buchan summed up the demise of the estate : " They thought the estate was here to provide them with money , to gamble , to travel , to simply fritter away and very quickly , within a couple of decades , they had wasted the whole lot . " He added , " Eccentricity amounted to just squandering money . " 
 = = Mansion house = = 
 The original small country house was first altered during the early 18th century . In 1809 the Sheriff 's grandson James Ferguson , the third laird , employed the architect John Smith to design new accommodation . The resulting three @-@ storey house , 98 feet ( 30 metres ) square and 33 feet ( 10 metres ) high , is reputed to have had 365 windows . When the fourth laird , George ( the Governor ) , died in 1820 , the estate was worth £ 300 @,@ 000 with almost £ 35 @,@ 000 of moveable assets . George Ferguson , the fifth laird ( the Admiral ) added a large , glazed gallery when he inherited the house . The Admiral had a lavish lifestyle and despite having a healthy income incurred heavy debts . 
 When the Admiral died after 46 years of managing the estate it was mortgaged for £ 250 @,@ 000 , despite the sale of a number of the lands originally included in it . The house fell into disrepair under the ownership of George Arthur , the sixth and final laird , who had inherited his father 's lifestyle . The entire estate was put on the market in September 1909 but remained unsold until after the First World War ; the house and what remained of the estate were finally purchased by a speculator , Edgar Fairweather , from London in 1926 . Fairweather bought several other Scottish estates , including those nearby at <unk> and Strichen ; he habitually reduced the estates into smaller holdings that he then sold on or rented out . The house was sold to an Aberdeen building company and was demolished sometime between 1927 and 1930 . After demolition , the mansion 's veranda was installed at the front of Kinloch Farmhouse in St Fergus . Other remains from the mansion have been discovered at the farmhouse , including a crest above the conservatory door and tiles inscribed with the Ferguson of Pitfour family crest . The stone from the mansion was transported to Aberdeen and used in the construction of council houses . 
 = = Chapels = = 
 The Fergusons were Episcopalian , and in 1766 , the second laird , Lord Pitfour had a small Qualified Chapel built on the estate at Waulkmill . It was a large , plain building that could accommodate up to 500 people . Saplinbrae , a house that was initially used as a coaching inn after it was built under instruction from Lord Pitfour in 1756 , was used as the minister 's manse for the first chapel . 
 A more modern chapel was built in 1850 after the Admiral had an argument with the Reverend Arthur Ranken , the minister at Old Deer . This was a small , private chapel for the use of the Pitfour estate . It was built in the Gothic style from rubble but was recast in 1871 . A 60 @-@ foot ( 18 @-@ metre ) tower with a battlemented top is at its western end . The chapel fell into disrepair , and by the 1980s it was a roofless ruin . 
 In 1990 Historic Scotland said that Kinloch Farmhouse , in St Fergus featured a bench and chair salvaged from the Pitfour Chapel . In 2003 , the second chapel was renovated and converted to a private residence . The chapel restoration won a " Highly commended " award for craftsmanship from Aberdeenshire Council in 2010 ; the council said the craftsmanship " allowed for the retention of the ecclesiastical spirit and integrity to remain prevalent both internally and externally . " It was also " Highly Commended " in the conservation category . 
 = = Stables and riding school = = 
 The stables were built in 1820 , during the early part of the Admiral 's ownership of the estate , based on a design by John Smith ; the buildings are sited to the rear of the mansion house . Built in a horseshoe @-@ shape , neo @-@ classical design , the two @-@ storey building was constructed in pinned rubble with granite dressings ; grey granite was used for the parapet and quoins . The main buildings were originally harled . A corrugated asbestos hipped roof was at some point substituted for the original slate roof . It features a columned rotunda above a timber clock tower , which has a finial and domed copper roof . The pedimented centrepiece of the symmetrical front elevation is a segmental arch and has three panels set back between columns . Each side is bordered by wings of three bays with single @-@ bay pavilions . 
 The stables are connected to an adjoining two @-@ storey house . They provided accommodation for ten horses and included four loose boxes , a harness room and a coachman 's house ; six bedrooms above were for servants . Two coach houses were later used as garages . The stables building was marketed in 1997 for approximately £ 70 @,@ 000 . Charles McKean describes the stables as " straddling the skyline like a palace " . The stables are listed by Historic Scotland as being at very high risk , and were described in 1997 sale literature as unused and dilapidated . 
 An indoor riding school slightly to the north @-@ west of the stables measured 98 feet ( 30 metres ) by 49 feet ( 15 metres ) . It was used to entertain guests when the facilities at the mansion house were not large enough . More than two hundred local farmers and other landowners celebrated the wedding of George Arthur , the sixth laird , in the riding school in 1861 . In 1883 it was again used to entertain ; on that occasion it was decorated with flags and Chinese lanterns , and pine flooring was laid . Later , it was used as indoor tennis courts before being demolished . 
 = = Canal and lake = = 
 James Ferguson , the third laird , owned the estate during the Industrial Revolution in Britain . He began work on a canal between Pitfour and Peterhead in 1797 , despite fierce opposition from adjoining landowners . The canal was proposed to cover about ten miles following the course of the River Ugie . Pitfour 's canal is sometimes called the St Fergus and River Ugie Canal . Ferguson had thought about building the canal since 1793 , but it was never completed because of " difficulties in effecting the necessary arrangements with neighbouring heritors . " Objections were raised by the Merchant Maiden Hospital , which owned the land on the south side of the Ugie . Despite being advised to take out an interdict to prevent the work , in January 1797 the hospital thought its case was not strong enough . The hospital applied for an interdict four months later however , when two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the canal had been dug to the point where the north and south Ugie joined ; it was granted in July 1797 . 
 A few years after starting work on the canal , Ferguson had a lake built on flat land to the front of the mansion house . The landscape gardener William S. Gilpin was carrying out work on the adjacent Strichen estate at about the same time , and it is assumed he helped with the work at Pitfour . The lake extends to almost 50 acres ( 20 hectares ) and is 174 feet ( 53 metres ) above sea level . Designed in the same style as the lake in Windsor Great Park , the lake was stocked with trout , both rainbow and brown ; there were three bridges and four islands . The siting of the lake meant the driveway had to be moved , and ornate bridges were constructed to cross the water . Built from granite , the northern bridge has three arches with ashlar starlings , the southern bridge has a single arch and the third , smaller bridge crosses a large stream that drains into the lake . 
 The neighbouring Russell family of Aden were concerned their land would be flooded when the lake was built , and their animosity was fully demonstrated when a bridge had to be jointly constructed by the two landowners over the River Ugie . It was wide enough for carriages on the Pitfour side but too narrow on the Russell 's half . 
 = = Theseus temple = = 
 Alongside the lake was a six @-@ bay Greek Doric temple , a small replica styled after the Temple of Theseus . Its exact date of construction is unknown ; it may have been built during the time of James Ferguson , the third laird , or under the instruction of George Ferguson , the fifth laird . The local historian Alex Buchan attributes it to James , the third laird ; according to Historic Scotland , it was built " probably circa 1835 " . Like the mansion house , the temple is credited to the architect John Smith . Measuring 8 metres ( 26 ft ) by 16 metres ( 52 ft ) , it has six columns at both ends and thirteen columns down each side . It had a flat roof with an ornate wooden entablature and contained a cold @-@ water bath in which George , the fifth laird was believed to have kept alligators . As of 2013 the temple is in a ruinous state ; it has been held up by scaffolding since 1992 and is listed by Historic Scotland as being in critical condition . 
 = = Racecourse and observatory = = 
 George Ferguson ( the Admiral ) had a racecourse about 2 @.@ 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 5 kilometres ) long and 52 feet ( 16 metres ) wide built near White Cow Woods , an area which is quite flat . This led to the estate being called the " Ascot of the North " . 
 In 1845 the Admiral had an observatory built , again designed by the architect John Smith . It is an octagonal tower with a crenellated parapet and is symmetrical in design . The observatory stands at the top of a hill 396 feet ( 121 m ) above sea level . The tower is 50 feet ( 15 m ) high and is more than half a mile ( 1 kilometre ) from the racecourse . It has three storeys with square windows on the upper floor , and was fully renovated by Banff & Buchan District Council ( now Aberdeenshire Council ) in 1983 . 
 = = Twentieth century = = 
 Sales of country estates became common around the 1920s . The annual tax payable had spiralled and was twenty times greater than in 1870 resulting in the break @-@ up of many larger land @-@ holdings . Pitfour was no exception and the dispersal of the estate continued piecemeal after the sequestration of George Arthur , the sixth laird . The main estate policies including the lake and other land were purchased by Bernard Drake in November 1926 when he bought Saplinbrae , the former minister 's house . Drake was a partner in the electrical engineering company , Drake and Gorham . 
 Sixty years later , in 1986 the BBC Domesday Project does not give any ownership details but indicates many of the buildings are in poor condition . Other surviving structures are used for storage by a farmer who also " manages the land " . 
 = = Recent times = = 
 At the end of 2012 Aberdeenshire Council gave the go @-@ ahead for the present owner 's planned restoration work on the temple and bridges , which he hoped would enhance existing facilities at nearby <unk> Wood surrounding the Observatory , White Cow Woods and Aden Country Park . The lake is used regularly by local fishermen , and a fishing club with about 120 members was established in 2011 . The rest of the estate is seldom used by local residents , many of whom are completely unaware of it . 
 = Internationalist ( album ) = 
 Internationalist is the third studio album by Australian alternative rock band , Powderfinger . The album was released on 7 September 1998 and was often labelled Powderfinger 's most adventurous work , with greater experimentation than in previous works . 
 Internationalist followed in the success of its predecessor , Double Allergic , and was certified five times platinum in Australia . Internationalist received four ARIA Music Awards , including " Album of the Year " . The album produced four singles for the band ; " The Day You Come " , " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out / Good @-@ Day Ray " , " Already Gone " and " Passenger " , which all appeared on Triple J 's Hottest 100 poll in two consecutive years . 
 Internationalist received fairly positive reviewers in the Australian press , and cemented Powderfinger 's position on the local music scene ; however , the album failed to launch the band in the overseas market . 
 = = Background = = 
 Powderfinger spent much of early 1997 touring , after the success of Double Allergic . Songwriter Bernard Fanning then spent much of 1997 writing songs for Internationalist in Brisbane , drawing on inspiration from a mid @-@ 1997 band trip to the United States . 
 The album 's title refers to escapism — namely , the ability that an " internationalist " has to escape from racial and social tension . When asked in a Juice interview , Bernard Fanning summarised the title of the album by stating ; 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Internationalist was recorded at Melbourne 's Sing Sing Studios , with Powderfinger accompanied by American producer Nick DiDia for the first time . As the band had already prepared " about 30 or 40 " songs when they entered the studio , DiDia 's task was relatively minor . Bassist John Collins said of DiDia ; " Nick was really good . The way Nick based the record was that he wanted to record the band how we were at that particular moment , he didn 't want to play around too much . " As a result of this attitude , the band only spent one month in the studio , and the album was mixed by DiDia soon after . Powderfinger used the extra time to play table tennis , which was the band 's recreation of choice during the Internationalist and Odyssey Number Five recording sessions . 
 Collins described the album as not being as easy listening as their previous work , and that it contained numerous experiments in songwriting that they had not put into previous albums . Fanning later said Internationalist was " a better record " than Double Allergic , but acknowledged that it was not as easily likeable — it was just an improvement in songwriting . Collins and Fanning acknowledged that the album 's experimental nature could lose them some old fans , but the pair drew parallels with bands such as U2 , who Collins said had " constantly re @-@ invented themselves , and with success " . He said Powderfinger 's reinvention was as much for the band 's own interest as it was for the " public 's perception " . Meanwhile , guitarist Ian Haug described the album as a " moderation " between Parables for Wooden Ears ( " the complicated beast " ) and Double Allergic ( " totally simplified " ) , Powderfinger 's two previous albums . He also agreed that the album was much more experimental , and described the album as the band 's " most successful " , as well as stating that the album that best replicated " the sound we have live " . 
 Two of the songs derived their names from the way the song was played rather than from the lyrics . <unk> was named due to the use of the Capo on guitar during the solo . Belter was named after the main verse riff which is " belted " out over a 4 : 4 time . 
 Numerous songs on Internationalist were politically and socially influenced , although the band denied it being a deliberate motif . Fanning explaining that the band did not intentionally discuss political issues , saying " we don 't try to do anything in particular " . He noted , however , that the songs , as his emotional responses to recent events , could inevitably be interpreted as being political . When " The Day You Come " was released , there was speculation that it alluded to Pauline Hanson 's One Nation political party , although the band claimed the song was vague and didn 't specifically refer to one person . Fanning said of " The Day You Come " ; 
 = = Single releases = = 
 The first single from the album was " The Day You Come " , a politically and socially influenced song . The band did not intend for it to be the first single , and released it only when they could not decide on anything else . Haug said it being " a pretty inoffensive song musically " helped Powderfinger make that decision . " The Day You Come " spent nine weeks on the ARIA Charts , peaking at # 25 . 
 The second single was the double a @-@ side , " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out / Good @-@ Day Ray " , released on 9 November 1998 . " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " , a song about a friend of Fanning 's who had difficulty in social situations , was one of the roughest Powderfinger songs to date . ' Don 't Wanna Be Left Out ' could be comfortably ranked with other Powderfinger songs such as ' Lighten My Load ' and ' Rise Up ' . Drummer Jon Coghill described it as the most difficult Powderfinger song to play live at the time , because it was so " fast and offbeat " . The music video for " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " was unpopular and drew criticism from band members . " Good @-@ Day Ray " was dedicated to Australian television presenter Ray Martin and his public disagreements with former Media Watch host Stuart Littlemore . Its lyrics verged on punk , though Coghill denied that Powderfinger were a punk band . He also described the music video for " Good @-@ Day Ray " as being one of the better videos the band had made . 
 Internationalist 's third single was " Already Gone " , released on 12 February 1999 . The song was a tribute to The Beatles and their influence on Powderfinger 's music . The fourth and final single from the album was " Passenger " , released on 9 August 1999 . " Passenger " was influenced by Elvis Presley , and included a big horn section , as well as backing vocals from folk group Tiddas . " Passenger " won the ARIA Award for " Song Of The Year " in 1999 . The song 's music video was one of Powderfinger 's first to feature computer graphics , and was produced by Fifty Fifty Films . " Passenger " spent 11 weeks on the ARIA Charts , peaking at # 30 . It appeared at # 48 on Max 's top 100 songs from the 1990s list . 
 = = Touring and promotion = = 
 Powderfinger went on a nationwide tour after the release of Internationalist , performing with British band <unk> and fellow Brisbane band Not From There in capital cities across Australia . In 1999 , the band also toured with Something for Kate and Alex Lloyd . Collins described the process of choosing who the band would play with as a simple matter of choosing whose music the band preferred , stating " we had played with most of the bands , and if you 're going on tour with someone you may as well go with someone you get along with and whose music you enjoy . " Despite being fans of <unk> , who were renowned for " their capability to reproduce their album sound perfectly in the live setting " according to Beat Magazine 's Neala Johnson , Fanning said Powderfinger would never attempt to replicate them , because he believed their live shows to be much more " emotionally powerful " than recordings . 
 With Internationalist , Powderfinger first set their sights overseas , appearing at numerous music festivals in the U.S. , including South by Southwest in Texas . While in the U.S. , Powderfinger played several showcase performances to record @-@ label representatives in Los Angeles and New York City . In a later interview in Australia , Fanning said these shows were difficult due to the lack of any homegrown fan support . He also said the band were not focused at the shows , and thus they did not go as well as he had hoped . Coghill , however , described the showcases , and the performances in Austin , as " worthwhile " and " fun " . After performing in the United States , Powderfinger completed a tour of Canada . Fanning described the band 's overseas outlook as a necessity for an Australian @-@ based band , as " people [ in Australia ] are going to get sick of you pretty quickly if you 're going to do five tours a year , so that you can sustain yourself financially . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Internationalist debuted at the top of the ARIA Albums Chart , and was certified gold in its first week , selling over 35 @,@ 000 copies . It then went on to go platinum , and is currently certified platinum five times , for 350 @,@ 000 copies . At the 1999 ARIA Awards , the album received three awards — " Album of the Year " , " Best Rock Album " , and " Best Cover Art " . " The Day You Come " also won " Single of the Year " . In 2000 , " Passenger " was nominated for three awards , but did not win any . 
 Haug said he was amazed with the highly positive critical response the album had received , surprised that " even Molly [ Meldrum ] gave it nine out of ten . " The positivity of the album 's reception created a feeling of surrealism , and Haug told Juice Magazine " I wish someone would write a really bad [ review ] . " Nonetheless , he appreciated the credibility the album helped Powderfinger develop . Coghill agreed with Haug on the album 's popularity , stating " you couldn 't ask for much better " , and saying he really took notice of the album 's positive critical commentary . Juice 's Benedict Watts said it received " a level of universal praise not yet dished out on an Australian release since You Am I 's Hi Fi Way " . Despite Polydor telling the band the album would be heavily marketed , Fanning still found its success surprising . HIT 's Teresa Bolster suggested Fanning feared the worst during songwriting ; " Celebrity Head " , a song on the album , was seen as a " pre @-@ emptive , scathing attack on music writers " , which he argued was intended as a joke . 
 Internationalist 's critical reception was positive , following in its chart success . The Courier @-@ Mail 's Nicola Six called it the band 's most diverse album yet , using " The Day You Come " as an example ; its " opening staccato guitar riff to the way the bass blends with Bernard Fanning 's almost @-@ falsetto in the final chorus " made it the " perfect first single " . Watts said it " brilliantly pre @-@ <unk> the mood and progressive nature of the album " , and Allmusic 's Jonathan Lewis described it as the best track on the album . The Weekend Australian 's Iain Shedden said it was " one of the best Australian rock songs of the decade " . 
 " The Day You Come " was not the only single to draw praise ; " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " was described as " surf guitar @-@ fuelled " , " Good Day Ray " as " thrashy " , and HIT 's Teresa Bolster wrote that the released of the two as an a @-@ side displayed the album 's true scope to the public . Allmusic approved of the " rocking " " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " , but said Powderfinger sacrificed their uniqueness on " Good Day Ray " , which Lewis argued was heavily Foo Fighters influenced . Lewis approved of the " melodic " " Already Gone " , while Juice 's Simon Wooldridge said it and " Passenger " <unk> Powderfinger 's " flair for the big hook " . 
 Beat 's Neala Johnson compared the album 's political motifs to the Manic Street Preachers — " an earnest , sometimes cynical , social and personal conscience displayed in the lyrics " . Noel Mangel of The Courier @-@ Mail said it had " a lightness of touch and boisterous spirit " , especially compared to the distorted guitars on debut album Parables for Wooden Ears . MS Queensland 's Lauren McKay said the album ranked up there with the best of Bon Jovi and Robbie Williams . Time Off 's Geoff Nicholson said Internationalist was " a blend of shimmering pop songs and thought @-@ provoking probing " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Hindley Street " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 3 : 41 
 " Belter " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 4 : 13 
 " The Day You Come " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 4 : 00 
 " Already Gone " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 3 : 28 
 " Passenger " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 4 : 20 
 " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " ( Fanning / Middleton / Powderfinger ) – 2 : 12 
 " Good @-@ Day Ray " ( Coghill / Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 1 : 58 
 " Trading Places " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 4 : 27 
 " Private Man " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 3 : 40 
 " Celebrity Head " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 2 : 20 
 " Over My Head " ( Middleton ) – 1 : 36 
 " <unk> " ( Fanning / Powderfinger ) – 5 : 44 
 " Lemon Sunrise " ( Fanning / Middleton / Powderfinger ) – 3 : 34 
 = = = P2K bonus disc = = = 
 The second release of pressings of the album were released in late November 1998 which included a bonus disc featuring a live recording of Powderfinger 's performance at the Sydney Opera House 25th birthday celebration in October 1998 . 
 " Passenger " – 4 : 42 
 " Private Man " – 4 : 01 
 " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " – 2 : 55 
 " Pick You Up " – 5 : 51 
 " The Day You Come " – 4 : 36 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bernard Fanning – vocals , guitars , piano , keyboards 
 Darren Middleton – backing vocals , guitars , piano , keyboards , lead vocal on Over My Head 
 Ian Haug – guitar , handclaps , backing vocals 
 John Collins – bass guitar , bass and organ pedals , backing vocals 
 Jon Coghill – drums , percussion , handclaps , backing vocals 
 Tiddas – backing vocals 
 Nick DiDia – production , engineering , mixing 
 Lachlan " Magoo " Goold , Mark McElligott – additional engineering 
 Michael Mucci – artwork 
 Sophie Howarth – photography 
 = = Award nominations and accolades = = 
 = = = ARIA Awards = = = 
 Internationalist and singles from it have been nominated to win ARIA Music Awards from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) in two consecutive years . 
 = = = Other awards = = = 
 In 1999 , " The Day You Come " was nominated to win the " Song of the Year " APRA Award from the Australasian Performing Right Association , and " Passenger " won the same award the following year . The same year , the tracks " Already Gone " , " Good @-@ Day Ray " and " Passenger " all featured in Triple J 's Hottest 100 list , and " Don 't Wanna Be Left Out " and " The Day You Come " featured in the list in 1998 . Australian music magazine Juice selected Internationalist as # 80 of their top 100 albums of the 1990s . 
 = Tropical Storm Barry ( 2013 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Barry was a weak and short @-@ lived tropical cyclone that brought heavy rains to parts of Central America and Mexico in June 2013 . Barry originated from a tropical wave that developed in the southern Caribbean Sea . The wave tracked northwestward and began to develop in marginally favorable conditions . On June 17 , the disturbance was upgraded to Tropical Depression Two by the National Hurricane Center . Due to its close proximity to land , the system failed to intensify before crossing the southern Yucatán Peninsula . The depression emerged over the Bay of Campeche late on June 18 and became increasingly organized . During the afternoon of June 19 , data from Hurricane Hunters revealed the system had intensified into a tropical storm . The newly named Barry attained peak winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) before making landfall in Veracruz , Mexico on June 20 . Once onshore , the storm quickly weakened and degenerated into a remnant low that night . 
 Areas from northern Nicaragua to South @-@ Central Mexico experienced heavy rains from the storm , with notable flooding occurring in many areas . Swollen rivers displaced thousands in Veracruz and killed two people , while two others were killed by a river in Oaxaca . In El Salvador , one person was killed by flooding . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 8 , a tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa , moving quickly westward without development . During the evening hours of June 15 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring a large area of disturbed weather in association with a tropical wave over the southwestern Caribbean Sea . That day , a low pressure area developed just north of Panama . Drifting west @-@ northwest , environmental conditions were expected to be favorable for organization , but the system moved over eastern Nicaragua on June 16 . Despite moving over land , the circulation and convection became better organized , and after it emerged over open waters , the system developed into Tropical Depression Two at 1200 UTC on June 17 about 25 mi ( 45 km ) north @-@ northwest of La Ceiba , Honduras . Located about 60 mi ( 95 km ) east of Monkey River Town , Belize , the depression was not expected to undergo significant strengthening . Failing to intensify , the depression made landfall in southern Belize near Big Creek late on June 17 with winds estimated at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Despite a waning structure , the NHC noted that if the system emerged into the Bay of Campeche , re @-@ development and intensification was plausible . 
 While traversing the southern Yucatán Peninsula , the system nearly degenerated into a remnant low during the afternoon of June 18 ; however , as it neared water , sufficient convection redeveloped to maintain the system as a tropical depression . The circulation contracted over land and emerged into the warm waters of the Bay of Campeche that day . The system became increasingly organized as it turned westward in response to a mid @-@ level ridge over the northwestern Gulf of Mexico . A Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance mission into the depression during the afternoon of June 19 revealed gale @-@ force winds , prompting the NHC to upgrade and name the system Tropical Storm Barry . Based on a reconnaissance flight and Dvorak estimates , it was estimated that Barry attained peak winds of 45 km / h ( 75 mph ) late on June 19 . At 1115 UTC on June 20 , Barry made landfall at Laguna La Mancha , just north of Veracruz , Mexico . Hours after moving inland , Barry weakened to a tropical depression as it interacted with the high terrain of Mexico . The center of circulation became increasingly ill defined , with the majority of convection located well away from the center . Late on June 20 , Barry dissipated over the Mexican state of Puebla . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Central America and Yucatán = = = 
 The precursor to Barry produced significant rains in Nicaragua , causing flooding in 14 districts in the North Caribbean Coast Autonomous Region . Heavy rains in Honduras , peaking at 4 in ( 100 mm ) in La Ceiba , resulted in floods that damaged 60 homes and affected 300 people . Several landslides occurred in <unk> , blocking off roadways . A likely tornado struck the community of Limón , destroying 9 homes and damaging 91 more . Four people were injured when their home was lifted and dropped back down . In southern Belize , an estimated 10 in ( 250 mm ) of rain fell in 24 hours , causing several rivers to top their banks . In some areas , culverts were washed away . At least 54 people living along Hope Creek were relocated to shelters . In El Salvador , six minors were swept away by a flooded creek ; five were quickly rescued but one remains missing and is presumed killed . Two people were injured after being struck by lightning . In the Mexican state of Yucatán , wind gusts to 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) and heavy rains downed trees and power lines . More than 26 @,@ 000 residents temporarily lost hydroelectric power after lightning struck a power station and caused a fire . 
 = = = Eastern Mexico = = = 
 As Tropical Depression Two emerged into the Bay of Campeche on June 18 , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for coastal areas between Punta El Lagarto and Barra Da Nautla . The watch was upgraded to a tropical storm warning early on June 19 . Following the storm 's intensification that day , the warning was expanded northward to Tuxpan . Officials dispatched 34 @,@ 250 workers to set up refugee camps throughout the state . Across Veracruz , approximately 2 @,@ 000 people sought refuge in shelters . 
 Heavy rains in Veracruz , peaking at 14 @.@ 6 in ( 370 mm ) in Misantla , brought more than a dozen rivers to critical levels and triggered flash floods that killed two people . As a precautionary measure , officials urged 4 @,@ 000 residents along La Antigua River to evacuate . Several landslides occurred in the states of Guerrero and Puebla . Two people were swept away by a river in Oaxaca . 
 = Economy of Iran = 
 The economy of Iran is a mixed and transition economy with a large public sector . Some 60 percent of the economy is centrally planned . It is dominated by oil and gas production , although over 40 industries are directly involved in the Tehran Stock Exchange , one of the best performing exchanges in the world over the past decade . With 10 percent of the world 's proven oil reserves and 15 percent of its gas reserves , Iran is considered an " energy superpower " . 
 It is the world 's eighteenth largest by purchasing power parity ( PPP ) and twenty @-@ nine by nominal gross domestic product . The country is a member of Next Eleven because of its high development potential . A unique feature of Iran 's economy is the presence of large religious foundations called <unk> , whose combined budgets represent more than 30 percent of central government spending . 
 Price controls and subsidies , particularly on food and energy , burden the economy . Contraband , administrative controls , widespread corruption , and other restrictive factors undermine private sector @-@ led growth . The legislature in late 2009 passed the subsidy reform plan . This is the most extensive economic reform since the government implemented gasoline rationing in 2007 . 
 Most of the country 's exports are oil and gas , accounting for a majority of government revenue in 2010 . Oil export revenues enabled Iran to amass well over $ 100 billion in foreign exchange reserves as of 2010 . Iran ranked first in scientific growth in the world in 2011 and has one of the fastest development in telecommunication globally . 
 Due to its relative isolation from global financial markets , Iran was initially able to avoid recession in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisis . Yet , following increasingly stringent sanctions imposed by the international community as a result of the country 's nuclear program , oil exports fell by half , allowing Iraqi oil exports to overtake Iran 's for the first time since the 1980s . In September 2012 , the Iranian rial fell to a record low of 23 @,@ 900 to the US dollar . 
 Exports aided self @-@ sufficiency and domestic investment , although double @-@ digit unemployment and inflation remain problematic . Iran 's educated population , high human development , constrained economy and insufficient foreign and domestic investment prompted an increasing number of Iranians to seek overseas employment , resulting in a significant " brain drain " . 
 = = History = = 
 In 546 BC , Croesus of Lydia was defeated and captured by the Persians , who then adopted gold as the main metal for their coins . There are accounts in the biblical Book of Esther of dispatches being sent from Susa to provinces as far out as India and the Kingdom of Kush during the reign of Xerxes the Great ( 485 – 465 BC ) . By the time of Herodotus ( c . 475 BC ) , the Royal Road of the Persian Empire ran some 2 @,@ 857 km from the city of Susa on the Karun ( 250 km east of the Tigris ) to the port of Smyrna ( modern İzmir in Turkey ) on the Aegean Sea . 
 Modern agriculture in Iran dates back to the 1820s , when Amir Kabir undertook a number of changes to the traditional agricultural system . Such changes included importing modified seeds and signing collaboration contracts with other countries . Polyakov 's Bank <unk> was bought in 1898 by the <unk> government of Russia , and later passed into the hands of the Iranian government by a contract in 1920 . The bank continued its activities under the name of Bank Iran until 1933 when incorporating the newly founded <unk> Bank . 
 The Imperial Bank of Persia was established in 1885 , with offices in all major cities of Persia . Reza Shah Pahlavi ( r . 1925 – 41 ) improved the country ’ s overall infrastructure , implemented educational reform , campaigned against foreign influence , reformed the legal system , and introduced modern industries . During this time , Iran experienced a period of social change , economic development , and relative political stability . 
 Reza Shah Pahlavi , who abdicated in 1941 , was succeeded by his son , Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi ( r . 1941 – 79 ) . No fundamental change occurred in the economy of Iran during World War II ( 1939 – 45 ) and the years immediately following . However , between 1954 and 1960 a rapid increase in oil revenues and sustained foreign aid led to greater investment and fast @-@ paced economic growth , primarily in the government sector . Subsequently , inflation increased , the value of the national currency ( the rial ) depreciated , and a foreign @-@ trade deficit developed . Economic policies implemented to combat these problems led to declines in the rates of nominal economic growth and per capita income by 1961 . 
 Prior to 1979 , Iran developed rapidly . Traditionally agricultural , by the 1970s the country had undergone significant industrialization and modernization . The pace slowed by 1978 as capital flight reached $ 30 to $ 40 billion 1980 @-@ US dollars just before the revolution . 
 Following the <unk> in 1979 and the outbreak of the Iran – Iraq War , over 80 % of the economy came under government control . The eight @-@ year war with Iraq claimed at least 300 @,@ 000 Iranian lives and injured more than 500 @,@ 000 . The cost of the war to the country 's economy was some $ 500 billion . 
 After hostilities ceased in 1988 , the government tried to develop the country 's communication , transportation , manufacturing , health care , education and energy sectors ( including its prospective nuclear power facilities ) , and began integrating its communication and transportation systems with those of neighboring states . 
 The government 's long @-@ term objectives since the revolution were stated as economic independence , full employment , and a comfortable standard of living , but at the end of the 20th century , the economy faced many obstacles . Iran 's population more than doubled between 1980 and 2000 and its median age declined . Although many Iranians are farmers , agricultural production has consistently fallen since the 1960s . By the late 1990s , Iran imported much of its food . At that time , economic hardship in the countryside resulted in many people moving to cities . 
 = = Macroeconomic trends = = 
 More than two @-@ thirds of the population ( 74 million people ) are under the age of 30 . Net primary school enrollment is almost 100 % , suggesting a secondary " demographic boom " . 
 Iran 's national science budget in 2005 was about $ 900 million , roughly equivalent to the 1990 figure . By early 2000 , Iran allocated around 0 @.@ 4 % of its GDP to research and development , ranking the country behind the world average of 1 @.@ 4 % . In 2009 the ratio of research to GDP was 0 @.@ 87 % against the government 's medium @-@ term target of 2 @.@ 5 % . Iran ranked first in scientific growth in the world in 2011 and 17th in science production in 2012 . 
 Iran has a broad and diversified industrial base . According to The Economist , Iran ranked 39th in a list of industrialized nations , producing $ 23 billion of industrial products in 2008 . Between 2008 and 2009 Iran moved to 28th from 69th place in annual industrial production growth because of its relative isolation from the 2008 international financial crisis . 
 In the early 21st century the service sector was the country 's largest , followed by industry ( mining and manufacturing ) and agriculture . In 2008 GDP was estimated at $ 382 @.@ 3 billion ( $ 842 billion PPP ) , or $ 5 @,@ 470 per capita ( $ 12 @,@ 800 PPP ) . 
 Nominal GDP is projected to double in the next five years . However , real GDP growth is expected to average 2 @.@ 2 % a year in 2012 – 16 , insufficient to reduce the unemployment rate . Furthermore , international sanctions have damaged the economy by reducing oil exports by half . The Iranian rial lost more than half of its value in 2012 , directing Iran at an import substitution industrialization and a resistive economy . According to the International Monetary Fund , Iran is a " transition economy " , i.e. , changing from a planned to a market economy . 
 The United Nations classifies Iran 's economy as semi @-@ developed . In 2014 , Iran ranked 83rd in the World Economic Forum 's analysis of the global competitiveness of 144 countries . Political , policy and currency stability is regarded as the most problematic factor in doing business in Iran . Difficulty in accessing financing is also a major concern , specially for small and medium enterprises . According to Goldman Sachs , Iran has the potential to become one of the world 's largest economies in the 21st century . 
 = = National economic planning = = 
 Following annual approval of the government ’ s budget by Majlis , the central bank presents a detailed monetary and credit policy to the Money and Credit Council ( MCC ) for approval . Thereafter , major elements of these policies are incorporated into the five @-@ year economic development plan . The fifth development plan , for 2010 – 15 , is designed to delegate power to the people and develop a knowledge economy . The plan is part of " Vision 2025 " , a strategy for long @-@ term sustainable growth . 
 = = = Economic reform plan = = = 
 Expansion of public healthcare and international relations are the other main objectives of the fifth plan , an ambitious series of measures that include subsidy reform , banking , currency , taxation , customs , construction , employment , nationwide goods and services distribution , social justice and productivity . The intent is to make the country self @-@ sufficient by 2015 and replace the payment of $ 100 billion in subsidies annually with targeted social assistance . These reforms target the country 's major sources of inefficiency and price distortion and are likely to lead to major restructuring of almost all economic sectors . As such , by removing energy subsidies , Iran intends to make its industries more efficient and competitive . By 2016 , one third of Iran ’ s economic growth is expected to originate from productivity improvement . Energy subsidies left the country one of the world 's least energy @-@ efficient , with energy intensity three times the global average and 2 @.@ 5 times higher than the Middle Eastern average . The banking sector is seen as a potential hedge against the removal of subsidies , as the plan is not expected to directly impact banks . Iranian President Hassan Rouhani stated in 2014 that the country has the potential to become one of the ten largest economies within the next 30 years . 
 = = Fiscal and monetary policy = = 
 Since the 1979 revolution , government spending has averaged 59 % on social policies , 17 % on economic matters , 15 % on national defense , and 13 % on general affairs . Payments averaged 39 % on education , health and social security , 20 % on other social programs , 3 % on agriculture , 16 % on water , power and gas , 5 % on manufacturing and mining , 12 % on roads and transportation and 5 % on other economic affairs . Iran 's investment reached 27 @.@ 7 % of GDP in 2009 . Between 2002 and 2006 , inflation fluctuated around 14 % . In 2008 , around 55 % of government revenue came from oil and natural gas revenue , with 31 % from taxes and fees . There are virtually millions of people who do not pay taxes in Iran and hence operate outside the formal economy . The budget for year 2012 was $ 462 billion , 9 % less than 2011 . The budget is based on an oil price of $ 85 per barrel . The value of the US dollar is estimated at IRR 12 @,@ 260 for the same period . According to the head of the Department of Statistics of Iran , if the rules of budgeting were observed the government could save at least 30 to 35 % on its expenses . The central bank 's interest rate is 21 % , and the inflation rate has climbed to 22 % in 2012 , 10 % higher than in 2011 . There is little alignment between fiscal and monetary policy . According to the Central Bank of Iran the gap between the rich and the poor narrowed because of monthly subsidies but the trend could reverse if high inflation persists . 
 Iran had an estimated $ 110 billion in foreign reserves in 2011 and balances its external payments by pricing oil at approximately $ 75 per barrel . As of 2013 , only $ 30 to $ 50 billion of those reserves are accessible because of current sanctions . Iranian media has questioned the reason behind Iran 's government non @-@ repatriation of its foreign reserves before the imposition of the latest round of sanctions and failure to convert into gold . As a consequence , the Iranian rial lost more than 40 % of its value between December 2011 and April 2012 . Iran 's external and fiscal accounts reflect falling oil prices in 2012 – 13 , but remain in surplus . The current account was expected to reach a surplus of 2 @.@ 1 % of GDP in 2012 – 13 , and the net fiscal balance ( after payments to Iran 's National Development Fund ) will register a surplus of 0 @.@ 3 % of GDP . In 2013 the external debts stood at $ 7 @.@ 2 billion down from $ 17 @.@ 3 billion in 2012 . Iran 's GDP is predicted to grow 2 @.@ 8 % in 2014 . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 Following the hostilities with Iraq the Government declared its intention to privatize most industries and to liberalize and decentralize the economy . Sale of state @-@ owned companies proceeded slowly , mainly due to opposition by a nationalist majority in the parliament . In 2006 most industries , some 70 % of the economy , remained state @-@ owned . The majority of heavy industries including steel , petrochemicals , copper , automobiles , and machine tools remained in the public sector , with most light industry privately owned . 
 Article 44 of the Iranian Constitution declares that the country 's economy should consist of state , cooperative and private sectors based . The state sector includes all large @-@ scale industries , foreign trade , major minerals , banking , insurance , power generation , dams and large @-@ scale irrigation networks , radio and television , post , telegraph and telephone services , aviation , shipping , roads , railroads and the like . These are publicly owned and administered by the State . Cooperative companies and enterprises concerned with production and distribution in urban and rural areas form the basis of the cooperative sector and operated in accordance with Shariah law . As of 2012 , 5 @,@ 923 consumer cooperatives , employed 128 @,@ 396 . Consumer cooperatives have over six million members . Private sector operate in construction , agriculture , animal husbandry , industry , trade , and services that supplement the economic activities of the state and cooperative sectors . 
 Since Article 44 has never been strictly enforced , the private sector has played a much larger role than that outlined in the constitution . In recent years the role of this sector has increased . A 2004 constitutional amendment allows 80 % of state assets to be privatized . Forty percent of such sales are to be conducted through the " Justice Shares " scheme and the rest through the Tehran Stock Exchange . The government would retain the remaining 20 % . In 2005 , government assets were estimated at around $ 120 billion . Some $ 63 billion of such assets were privatized from 2005 to 2010 , reducing the government 's direct share of GDP from 80 % to 40 % . Many companies in Iran remain uncompetitive because of mismanagement over the years , thus making privatization less attractive for potential investors . According to then @-@ President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , 60 % of Iran 's wealth is controlled by just 300 people . 
 = = = Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps = = = 
 The Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps ( IRGC ) are thought to control about one third of Iran 's economy through subsidiaries and trusts . Estimates by the Los Angeles Times suggest IRGC has ties to over one hundred companies and annual revenue in excess of $ 12 billion , particularly in construction . The Ministry of Petroleum awarded IRGC billions of dollars in no @-@ bid contracts as well as major infrastructure projects . Tasked with border control , IRGC maintains a monopoly on smuggling , costing Iranian companies billions of dollars each year . Smuggling is encouraged in part by the generous subsidization of domestic goods ( including fuel ) . IRGC also runs laser eye @-@ surgery clinics , makes cars , builds bridges and roads and develops oil and gas fields . 
 = = = Religious foundations = = = 
 Welfare programs for the needy are managed by more than 30 public agencies alongside semi @-@ state organizations known as <unk> , together with several private non @-@ governmental organizations . <unk> are a consortium of over 120 tax @-@ exempt organizations that receive subsidies and religious donations . They answer directly to the Supreme Leader of Iran and control over 20 % of GDP . Operating everything from vast soybean and cotton farms to hotels , soft drink , auto @-@ manufacturing and shipping lines , they are seen as overstaffed , corrupt and generally unprofitable . <unk> companies also compete with Iran 's unprotected private sector , whose firms complain of the difficulty of competing with the subsidized <unk> . <unk> are not subject to audit or Iran 's accounting laws . <unk> is a multi @-@ sector business organization , with holdings of 37 companies , and an estimated value of $ 95 billion . It is under the control of the Supreme Leader , Ali Khamenei , and created from thousands of properties confiscated from Iranians . 
 = = Labor force = = 
 After the revolution , the government established a national education system that improved adult literacy rates : as of 2008 85 % of the adult population was literate , well ahead of the regional average of 62 % . The Human Development Index was 0 @.@ 749 in 2013 , placing Iran in the " high human development " bracket . 
 Annual economic growth of above 5 % is necessary to absorb the 750 @,@ 000 new labor force entrants each year . Agriculture contributes just over 11 % to GDP and employs one third of the labor force . As of 2004 the industrial sector , which includes mining , manufacturing , and construction , contributed 42 % of GDP and employed 31 % of the labor force . Mineral products , notably petroleum , account for 80 % of Iran ’ s export revenues , even though mining employs less than 1 % of the labor force . In 2004 the service sector ranked as the largest contributor to GDP ( 48 % ) and employed 44 % of workers . Women made up 33 % of the labor force in 2005 . Youth unemployment ( aged 15 – 24 ) was 29 @.@ 1 % in 2012 , resulting in significant brain drain . 
 = = = Personal income and poverty = = = 
 Iran is classed as a middle income country and has made significant progress in provision of health and education services in the period covered by the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) . In 2010 , Iran 's average monthly income was about $ 500 ( GNI per capita in 2012 : $ 13 @,@ 000 by PPP ) . A minimum national wage applies to each sector of activity as defined by the Supreme Labor Council . In 2009 this was about $ 263 per month ( $ 3 @,@ 156 per year ) . The World Bank reported that in 2001 , approximately 20 % of household consumption was spent on food , 32 % on fuel , 12 % on health care and 8 % on education . Iranians have little debt . Seventy percent of Iranians own their homes . 
 After the Revolution , the composition of the middle class in Iran did not change significantly , but its size doubled from about 15 % of the population in 1979 to more than 32 % in 2000 . The official poverty line in Tehran for the year ending March 20 , 2008 , was $ 9 @,@ 612 , while the national average poverty line was $ 4 @,@ 932 . In 2010 , Iran 's Department of Statistics announced that 10 million Iranians live under the absolute poverty line and 30 million live under the relative poverty line . 
 = = = Social security = = = 
 Although Iran does not offer universal social protection , in 1996 , the Iranian Center for Statistics estimated that more than 73 % of the Iranian population was covered by social security . Membership of the social security system for all employees is compulsory . 
 Social security ensures employee protection against unemployment , disease , old age and occupational accidents . In 2003 , the government began to consolidate its welfare organizations to eliminate redundancy and inefficiency . In 2003 the minimum standard pension was 50 % of the worker ’ s earnings but no less than the minimum wage . Iran spent 22 @.@ 5 % of its 2003 national budget on social welfare programs of which more than 50 % covered pension costs . Out of the 15 @,@ 000 homeless in Iran in 2015 , 5 @,@ 000 were women . 
 Employees between the age of 18 and 65 years are covered by the social security system with financing shared between the employee ( 7 % of salary ) , the employer ( 20 – 23 % ) and the state , which in turn supplements the employer contribution up to 3 % . Social security applies to self @-@ employed workers , who voluntarily contribute between 12 % and 18 % of income depending on the protection sought . Civil servants , the regular military , law enforcement agencies , and IRGC have their own pension systems . 
 = = = Trade unions = = = 
 Although Iranian workers have a theoretical right to form labor unions , there is no union system in the country . <unk> worker representation is provided by the Workers ' House , a state @-@ sponsored institution that attempts to challenge some state policies . Guild unions operate locally in most areas , but are limited largely to issuing credentials and licenses . The right to strike is generally not respected by the state . Since 1979 strikes have often been met by police action . 
 A comprehensive law covers labor relations , including hiring of foreign workers . This provides a broad and inclusive definition of the individuals it covers , recognizing written , oral , temporary and indefinite employment contracts . Considered employee @-@ friendly , the labor law makes it difficult to lay off staff . Employing personnel on consecutive six @-@ month contracts ( to avoid paying benefits ) is illegal , as is dismissing staff without proof of a serious offense . Labor disputes are settled by a special labor council , which usually rules in favor of the employee . 
 = = Sectors of the economy = = 
 = = = Agriculture and foodstuffs = = = 
 Agriculture contributes just over 11 % to the gross national product and employs a third of the labor force . About 11 % of Iran 's land is arable , with the main food @-@ producing areas located in the Caspian region and in northwestern valleys . Some northern and western areas support rain @-@ fed agriculture , while others require irrigation . Primitive farming methods , overworked and under @-@ fertilized soil , poor seed and water scarcity are the principal obstacles to increased production . About one third of total cultivated land is irrigated . Construction of multipurpose dams and reservoirs along rivers in the Zagros and Alborz mountains have increased the amount of water available for irrigation . Agricultural production is increasing as a result of modernization , mechanization , improvements to crops and livestock as well as land redistribution programs . 
 Wheat , the most important crop , is grown mainly in the west and northwest . Rice is the major crop in the Caspian region . Other crops include barley , corn , cotton , sugar beets , tea , hemp , tobacco , fruits , potatoes , legumes ( beans and lentils ) , vegetables , fodder plants ( alfalfa and clover ) , almonds , walnuts and spices including cumin and sumac . Iran is the world 's largest producer of saffron , pistachios , honey , <unk> and berries and the second largest date producer . Meat and dairy products include lamb , goat meat , beef , poultry , milk , eggs , butter and cheese . 
 Non @-@ food products include wool , leather and silk . Forestry products from the northern slopes of the Alborz Mountains are economically important . Tree @-@ cutting is strictly controlled by the government , which also runs a reforestation program . Rivers drain into the Caspian Sea and are fished for salmon , carp , trout , pike and sturgeon that produce caviar , of which Iran is the largest producer . 
 Since the 1979 revolution commercial farming has replaced subsistence farming as the dominant mode of agricultural production . By 1997 , the gross value reached $ 25 billion . Iran is 90 % self @-@ sufficient in essential agricultural products , although limited rice production leads to substantial imports . In 2007 Iran reached self @-@ sufficiency in wheat production and for the first time became a net wheat exporter . By 2003 , a quarter of Iran 's non @-@ oil exports were of agricultural products , including fresh and dried fruits , nuts , animal hides , processed foods , and spices . Iran exported $ 736 million worth of foodstuffs in 2007 and $ 1 billion ( ~ 600 @,@ 000 tonnes ) in 2010 . A total of 12 @,@ 198 entities are engaged in the Iranian food industry , or 12 % of all entities in the industry sector . The sector also employs approximately 328 @,@ 000 people or 16 @.@ 1 % of the entire industry sector ’ s workforce . 
 = = = Manufacturing = = = 
 Large @-@ scale factory manufacturing began in the 1920s . During the Iran – Iraq War , Iraq bombed many of Iran 's petrochemical plants , damaging the large oil refinery at Abadan bringing production to a halt . Reconstruction began in 1988 and production resumed in 1993 . In spite of the war , many small factories sprang up to produce import @-@ substitution goods and materials needed by the military . 
 Iran 's major manufactured products are petrochemicals , steel and copper products . Other important manufactures include automobiles , home and electric appliances , telecommunications equipment , cement and industrial machinery . Iran operates the largest operational population of industrial robots in West Asia . Other products include paper , rubber products , processed foods , leather products and pharmaceuticals . In 2000 , textile mills , using domestic cotton and wool such as Tehran <unk> and Iran <unk> employed around 400 @,@ 000 people around Tehran , Isfahan and along the Caspian coast . 
 A 2003 report by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization regarding small and medium @-@ sized enterprises ( SMEs ) identified the following impediments to industrial development : 
 Lack of monitoring institutions ; 
 Inefficient banking system ; 
 Insufficient research & development ; 
 Shortage of managerial skills ; 
 Corruption ; 
 Inefficient taxation ; 
 Socio @-@ cultural apprehensions ; 
 Absence of social learning loops ; 
 <unk> in international market awareness necessary for global competition , 
 <unk> bureaucratic procedures ; 
 Shortage of skilled labor ; 
 Lack of intellectual property protection ; 
 Inadequate social capital , social responsibility and socio @-@ cultural values . 
 Despite these problems , Iran has progressed in various scientific and technological fields , including petrochemical , pharmaceutical , aerospace , defense , and heavy industry . Even in the face of economic sanctions , Iran is emerging as an industrialized country . 
 = = = = Handicrafts = = = = 
 Iran has a long tradition of producing artisanal goods including Persian carpets , ceramics , copperware , brassware , glass , leather goods , textiles and wooden artifacts . The country 's carpet @-@ weaving tradition dates from pre @-@ Islamic times and remains an important industry contributing substantial amounts to rural incomes . An estimated 1 @.@ 2 million weavers in Iran produce carpets for domestic and international export markets . More than $ 500 million worth of hand @-@ woven carpets are exported each year , accounting for 30 % of the 2008 world market . Around 5 @.@ 2 million people work in some 250 handicraft fields and contribute 3 % of GDP . 
 = = = = Automobile manufacturing = = = = 
 As of 2001 , 13 public and privately owned automakers within Iran , led by Iran Khodro and Saipa that accounted for 94 % of domestic production . Iran Khodro 's <unk> , replaced by the <unk> in 2005 , is the predominant brand . With 61 % of the 2001 market , Khodro was the largest player , whilst Saipa contributed 33 % that year . Other car manufacturers , such as the Bahman Group , Kerman Motors , Kish Khodro , <unk> , <unk> , Shahab Khodro and others accounted for the remaining 6 % . These automakers produce a wide range of vehicles including motorbikes , passenger cars such as Saipa 's <unk> , vans , mini trucks , medium @-@ sized trucks , heavy trucks , minibuses , large buses and other heavy automobiles used for commercial and private activities in the country . In 2009 Iran ranked fifth in car production growth after China , Taiwan , Romania and India . Iran was the world 's 12th biggest automaker in 2010 and operates a fleet of 11 @.@ 5 million cars . Iran produced 1 @,@ 395 @,@ 421 cars in 2010 , including 35 @,@ 901 commercial vehicles . 
 = = = = Defense industry = = = = 
 In 2007 the International Institute for Strategic Studies estimated Iran 's defense budget at $ 7 @.@ 31 billion , equivalent to 2 @.@ 6 % of GDP or $ 102 per capita , ranking it 25th internationally . The country 's defense industry manufactures many types of arms and equipment . Since 1992 , Iran 's Defense Industries Organization ( DIO ) has produced its own tanks , armored personnel carriers , guided missiles , radar systems , a guided missile destroyer , military vessels , submarines and a fighter plane . In 2006 Iran exported weapons to 57 countries , including NATO members , and exports reached $ 100 million . It is also developing a sophisticated mobile air defense system dubbed as <unk> 373 . 
 = = = = Construction and real estate = = = = 
 Until the early 1950s construction remained in the hands of small domestic companies . Increased income from oil and gas and easy credit triggered a building boom that attracted international construction firms to the country . This growth continued until the mid @-@ 1970s when a sharp rise in inflation and a credit squeeze collapsed the boom . The construction industry had revived somewhat by the mid @-@ 1980s , although housing shortages and speculation remained serious problems , especially in large urban centers . As of January 2011 , the banking sector , particularly Bank <unk> , had loaned up to 102 trillion rials ( $ 10 @.@ 2 billion ) to applicants of <unk> housing scheme . Construction is one of the most important sectors accounting for 20 – 50 % of total private investment in urban areas and was one of the prime investment targets of well @-@ off Iranians . 
 Annual turnover amounted to $ 38 @.@ 4 billion in 2005 and $ 32 @.@ 8 billion in 2011 . Because of poor construction quality , many buildings need seismic reinforcement or renovation . Iran has a large dam building industry . 
 = = = = Mines and metals = = = = 
 Mineral production contributed 0 @.@ 6 % of the country ’ s GDP in 2011 , a figure that increases to 4 % when mining @-@ related industries are included . <unk> factors include poor infrastructure , legal barriers , exploration difficulties and government control over all resources . Iran is ranked among the world 's 15 major mineral @-@ rich countries . 
 Although the petroleum industry provides the majority of revenue , about 75 % of all mining sector employees work in mines producing minerals other than oil and natural gas . These include coal , iron ore , copper , lead , zinc , chromium , barite , salt , gypsum , molybdenum , strontium , silica , uranium , and gold , the latter of which is mainly a by @-@ product of the Sar <unk> copper complex operation . The mine at Sar <unk> in Kerman Province is home to the world 's second largest store of copper . Large iron ore deposits exist in central Iran , near Bafq , Yazd and Kerman . The government owns 90 % of all mines and related industries and is seeking foreign investment . The sector accounts for 3 % of exports . 
 Iran has recoverable coal reserves of nearly 1 @.@ 9 billion short tonnes . By mid @-@ 2008 , the country produced about 1 @.@ 3 million short tonnes of coal annually and consumed about 1 @.@ 5 million short tonnes , making it a net importer . The country plans to increase hard @-@ coal production to 5 million tons in 2012 from 2 million tons in November 2008 . 
 The main steel mills are located in Isfahan and Khuzestan . Iran became self @-@ sufficient in steel in 2009 . Aluminum and copper production are projected to hit 245 @,@ 000 and 383 @,@ 000 tons respectively by March 2009 . Cement production reached 65 million tons in 2009 , exporting to 40 countries . 
 = = = = Petrochemicals = = = = 
 Iran manufactures 60 – 70 % of its equipment domestically , including refineries , oil tankers , drilling rigs , offshore platforms and exploration instruments . 
 Thanks to a fertilizer plant in Shiraz , the world 's largest ethylene unit , in <unk> , and the completion of other special economic zone projects , Iran 's exports in petrochemicals reached $ 5 @.@ 5 billion in 2007 , $ 9 billion in 2008 and $ 7 @.@ 6 billion during the first ten months of the Iranian calendar year 2010 . National Petrochemical Company 's output capacity will increase to over 100 million tpa by 2015 from an estimated 50 million tpa in 2010 thus becoming the world ' second largest chemical producer globally after Dow Chemical with Iran housing some of the world 's largest chemical complexes . 
 Major refineries located at Abadan ( site of its first refinery ) , Kermanshah and Tehran failed to meet domestic demand for gasoline in 2009 . Iran 's refining industry requires $ 15 billion in investment over the period 2007 – 2012 to become self @-@ sufficient and end gasoline imports . Iran has the fifth cheapest gasoline prices in the world leading to fuel smuggling with neighboring countries . 
 = = = Services = = = 
 Despite 1990s efforts towards economic liberalization , government spending , including expenditure by quasi @-@ governmental foundations , remains high . Estimates of service sector spending in Iran are regularly more than two @-@ fifths of GDP , much government @-@ related , including military expenditures , government salaries and social security disbursements . Urbanization contributed to service sector growth . Important service industries include public services ( including education ) , commerce , personal services , professional services and tourism . 
 The total value of transport and communications is expected to rise to $ 46 billion in nominal terms by 2013 , representing 6 @.@ 8 % of Iran ’ s GDP . Projections based on 1996 employment figures compiled for the International Labour Organization suggest that Iran ’ s transport and communications sector employed 3 @.@ 4 million people , or 20 @.@ 5 % of the labor force in 2008 . 
 = = = = Energy , gas and petroleum = = = = 
 Iran possesses 10 % of the world 's proven oil reserves and 15 % of its gas reserves . Domestic oil and gas along with hydroelectric power facilities provide power . Energy wastage in Iran amounts to six or seven billion dollars per year , much higher than the international norm . Iran recycles 28 % of its used oil and gas , whereas some other countries reprocess up to 60 % . In 2008 Iran paid $ 84 billion in subsidies for oil , gas and electricity . It is the world 's third largest consumer of natural gas after United States and Russia . In 2010 Iran completed its first nuclear power plant at Bushehr with Russian assistance . 
 Iran has been a major oil exporter since 1913 . The country 's major oil fields lie in the central and southwestern parts of the western Zagros mountains . Oil is also found in northern Iran and in the Persian Gulf . In 1978 , Iran was the fourth largest oil producer , OPEC 's second largest oil producer and second largest exporter . Following the 1979 revolution the new government reduced production . A further decline in production occurred as result of damage to oil facilities during the Iraq @-@ Iran war . Oil production rose in the late 1980s as pipelines were repaired and new Gulf fields exploited . By 2004 , annual oil production reached 1 @.@ 4 billion barrels producing a net profit of $ 50 billion . Iranian Central Bank data show a declining trend in the share of Iranian exports from oil @-@ products ( 2006 / 2007 : 84 @.@ 9 % , 2007 / 2008 : 86 @.@ 5 % , 2008 / 2009 : 85 @.@ 5 % , 2009 / 2010 : 79 @.@ 8 % , 2010 / 2011 ( first three quarters ) : 78 @.@ 9 % ) . Iranian officials estimate that Iran 's annual oil and gas revenues could reach $ 250 billion by 2015 once current projects come on stream . 
 Pipelines move oil from the fields to the refineries and to such exporting ports as Abadan , Bandar @-@ e <unk> and <unk> Island . Since 1997 , Iran 's state @-@ owned oil and gas industry has entered into major exploration and production agreements with foreign consortia . In 2008 the Iranian Oil Bourse ( <unk> ) was inaugurated in Kish Island . The <unk> trades petroleum , petrochemicals and gas in various currencies . Trading is primarily in the euro and rial along with other major currencies , not including the US dollar . According to the Petroleum Ministry , Iran plans to invest $ 500 billion in its oil sector by 2025 . 
 = = = = Retail and distribution = = = = 
 Iran 's retail industry consists largely of cooperatives ( many of them government @-@ sponsored ) , and independent retailers operating in bazaars . The bulk of food sales occur at street markets with prices set by the Chief Statistics Bureau . Iran has 438 @,@ 478 small grocery retailers . These are especially popular in cities other than Tehran where the number of hypermarkets and supermarkets is still very limited . More mini @-@ markets and supermarkets are emerging , mostly independent operations . The biggest <unk> are state @-@ owned <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> Market . Electronic commerce in Iran passed the $ 1 billion mark in 2009 . 
 In 2012 , Iranians spent $ 77 billion on food , $ 22 billion on clothes and $ 18 @.@ 5 billion on outward tourism . In 2015 , overall consumer expenditures and disposable income are projected at $ 176 @.@ 4 billion and $ 287 billion respectively . 
 = = = = Healthcare and pharma = = = = 
 The constitution entitles Iranians to basic health care . By 2008 , 73 % of Iranians were covered by the voluntary national health insurance system . Although over 85 % of the population use an insurance system to cover their drug expenses , the government heavily subsidizes pharmaceutical production / importation . The total market value of Iran ’ s health and medical sector was $ 24 billion in 2002 and was forecast to rise to $ 50 billion by 2013 . In 2006 , 55 pharmaceutical companies in Iran produced 96 % ( quantitatively ) of the medicines for a market worth $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . This figure is projected to increase to $ 3 @.@ 65 billion by 2013 . 
 = = = = Tourism and travel = = = = 
 Although tourism declined significantly during the war with Iraq , it has subsequently recovered . About 1 @,@ 659 @,@ 000 foreign tourists visited Iran in 2004 and 2 @.@ 3 million in 2009 mostly from Asian countries , including the republics of Central Asia , while about 10 % came from the European Union and North America . 
 The most popular tourist destinations are Isfahan , Mashhad and Shiraz . In the early 2000s the industry faced serious limitations in infrastructure , communications , industry standards and personnel training . The majority of the 300 @,@ 000 tourist visas granted in 2003 were obtained by Asian Muslims , who presumably intended to visit important pilgrimage sites in Mashhad and Qom . Several organized tours from Germany , France and other European countries come to Iran annually to visit archaeological sites and monuments . In 2003 Iran ranked 68th in tourism revenues worldwide . According to UNESCO and the deputy head of research for Iran Travel and Tourism Organization ( <unk> ) , Iran is rated among the " 10 most touristic countries in the world " . Domestic tourism in Iran is one of the largest in the world . 
 = = = = Banking , finance and insurance = = = = 
 Government loans and credits are available to industrial and agricultural projects , primarily through banks . Iran ’ s unit of currency is the rial which had an average official exchange rate of 9 @,@ 326 rials to the U.S. dollar in 2007 . <unk> are exchanged on the unofficial market at a higher rate . In 1979 , the government nationalized private banks . The restructured banking system replaced interest on loans with handling fees , in accordance with Islamic law . This system took effect in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 The banking system consists of a central bank , the Bank Markazi , which issues currency and oversees all state and private banks . Several commercial banks have branches throughout the country . Two development banks exist and a housing bank specializes in home mortgages . The government began to privatize the banking sector in 2001 when licenses were issued to two new privately owned banks . 
 State @-@ owned commercial banks predominantly make loans to the state , <unk> enterprises , large @-@ scale private firms and four thousand wealthy / connected individuals . While most Iranians have difficulty obtaining small home loans , 90 individuals secured facilities totaling $ 8 billion . In 2009 , Iran 's General Inspection Office announced that Iranian banks held some $ 38 billion of delinquent loans , with capital of only $ 20 billion . 
 Foreign transactions with Iran amounted to $ 150 billion of major contracts between 2000 and 2007 , including private and government lines of credit . In 2007 , Iran had $ 62 billion in assets abroad . In 2010 , Iran attracted almost $ 11 @.@ 9 billion from abroad , of which $ 3 @.@ 6 billion was FDI , $ 7 @.@ 4 billion was from international commercial bank loans , and around $ 900 million consisted of loans and projects from international development banks . 
 As of 2010 , the Tehran Stock Exchange traded the shares of more than 330 registered companies . Listed companies were valued at $ 100 billion in 2011 . 
 Insurance premiums accounted for just under 1 % of GDP in 2008 , a figure partly attributable to low average income per head . Five state @-@ owned insurance firms dominate the market , four of which are active in commercial insurance . The leading player is the Iran Insurance Company , followed by Asia , Alborz and Dana insurances . In 2001 / 02 third @-@ party liability insurance accounted for 46 % of premiums , followed by health insurance ( 13 % ) , fire insurance ( 10 % ) and life insurance ( 9 @.@ 9 % ) . 
 = = = = Communications , electronics and IT = = = = 
 Broadcast media , including five national radio stations and five national television networks as well as dozens of local radio and television stations are run by the government . In 2008 there were 345 telephone lines and 106 personal computers for every 1 @,@ 000 residents . Personal computers for home use became more affordable in the mid @-@ 1990s , since when demand for Internet access has increased rapidly . As of 2010 , Iran also had the world 's third largest number of bloggers ( 2010 ) . In 1998 the Ministry of Post , Telegraph & Telephone ( later renamed the Ministry of Information & Communication Technology ) began selling Internet accounts to the general public . In 2006 , revenues from the Iranian telecom industry were estimated at $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . In 2006 , Iran had 1 @,@ 223 Internet Service Providers ( ISPs ) , all private sector operated . As of 2014 , Iran has the largest mobile market in the Middle East , with 83 @.@ 2 million mobile subscriptions and 8 million smart @-@ phones in 2012 . 
 According to the World Bank , Iran 's information and communications technology sector had a 1 @.@ 4 % share of GDP in 2008 . Around 150 @,@ 000 people work in this sector , including 20 @,@ 000 in the software industry . 1 @,@ 200 IT companies were registered in 2002 , 200 in software development . In 2014 software exports stood at $ 400 million . By the end of 2009 , Iran 's telecom market was the fourth @-@ largest in the Middle East at $ 9 @.@ 2 billion and was expected to reach $ 12 @.@ 9 billion by 2014 at a compound annual growth rate of 6 @.@ 9 % . 
 = = = = Transport = = = = 
 Iran has an extensive paved road system linking most towns and all cities . In 2011 the country had 173 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 107 @,@ 000 mi ) of roads , of which 73 % were paved . In 2007 there were approximately 100 passenger cars for every 1 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Trains operated on 11 @,@ 106 kilometres ( 6 @,@ 901 mi ) of track . 
 The country ’ s major port of entry is Bandar @-@ Abbas on the Strait of Hormuz . After arriving in Iran , imported goods are distributed by trucks and freight trains . The Tehran – Bandar @-@ Abbas railroad , opened in 1995 , connects Bandar @-@ Abbas to Central Asia via Tehran and Mashhad . Other major ports include Bandar <unk> and Bandar <unk> on the Caspian Sea and <unk> and Bandar Imam Khomeini on the Persian Gulf . Dozens of cities have passenger and cargo airports . Iran Air , the national airline , was founded in 1962 and operates domestic and international flights . All large cities have bus transit systems and private companies provide intercity bus services . Tehran , Mashhad , Shiraz , Tabriz , Ahvaz and Isfahan are constructing underground railways . More than one million people work in the transportation sector , accounting for 9 % of 2008 GDP . 
 = = International trade = = 
 Iran is a founding member of OPEC and the Organization of Gas Exporting Countries . Petroleum constitutes 80 % of Iran 's exports with a value of $ 46 @.@ 9 billion in 2006 . For the first time , the value of Iran ’ s non @-@ oil exports is expected to reach the value of imports at $ 43 billion in 2011 . Pistachios , liquefied propane , methanol ( methyl alcohol ) , hand @-@ woven carpets and automobiles are the major non @-@ oil exports . Copper , cement , leather , textiles , fruits , saffron and caviar are also export items of Iran . 
 Technical and engineering service exports in 2007 – 08 were $ 2 @.@ 7 billion of which 40 % of technical services went to Central Asia and the Caucasus , 30 % ( $ 350 million ) to Iraq , and close to 20 % ( $ 205 million ) to Africa . Iranian firms have developed energy , pipelines , irrigation , dams and power generation in different countries . The country has made non @-@ oil exports a priority by expanding its broad industrial base , educated and motivated workforce and favorable location , which gives it proximity to an estimated market of some 300 million people in Caspian , Persian Gulf and some ECO countries further east . 
 Total import volume rose by 189 % from $ 13 @.@ 7 billion in 2000 to $ 39 @.@ 7 billion in 2005 and $ 55 @.@ 189 billion in 2009 . Iran 's major commercial partners are China , India , Germany , South Korea , Japan , France , Russia and Italy . From 1950 until 1978 , the United States was Iran 's foremost economic and military partner , playing a major role in infrastructure and industry modernization . It is reported that around 80 % of machinery and equipment in Iran is of German origin . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1990s , Iran has increased its economic cooperation with other developing countries in " south @-@ south integration " including Syria , India , China , South Africa , Cuba and Venezuela . Iran 's trade with India passed $ 13 billion in 2007 , an 80 % increase within a year . Iran is expanding its trade ties with Turkey and Pakistan and shares with its partners the common objective to create a common market in West and Central Asia through ECO . 
 Since 2003 , Iran has increased investment in neighboring countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan . In Dubai , UAE , it is estimated that Iranian expatriates handle over 20 % of its domestic economy and account for an equal proportion of its population . Migrant Iranian workers abroad remitted less than $ 2 billion home in 2006 . Between 2005 and 2009 , trade between Dubai and Iran tripled to $ 12 billion ; money invested in the local real estate market and import @-@ export businesses , collectively known as the Bazaar , and geared towards providing Iran and other countries with required consumer goods . It is estimated that one third of Iran 's imported goods and exports are delivered through the black market , underground economy , and illegal jetties . 
 = = = Foreign direct investment = = = 
 In the 1990s and early 2000s , indirect oilfield development agreements were made with foreign firms , including buyback contracts in the oil sector whereby the contractor provided project finance in return for an allocated production share . Operation transferred to National Iranian Oil Company ( NIOC ) after a set number of years , completing the contract . 
 Unfavorable or complex operating requirements and international sanctions have hindered foreign investment in the country , despite liberalization of relevant regulations in the early 2000s . Iran absorbed $ 24 @.@ 3 billion of foreign investment between the Iranian calendar years 1993 and 2007 . The EIU estimates that Iran 's net FDI will rise by 100 % between 2010 and 2014 . 
 Foreign investors concentrated their activities in the energy , vehicle manufacture , copper mining , construction , utilities , petrochemicals , clothing , food and beverages , telecom and pharmaceuticals sectors . Iran is a member of the World Bank 's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency . In 2006 , the combined net worth of Iranian citizens abroad was about 1 @.@ 3 trillion dollars . 
 According to the head of the Organization for Investment , Economic and Technical Assistance of Iran ( <unk> ) , in 2008 Iran ranked 142 among 181 countries in working conditions . Iran stands at number 96 in terms of business start @-@ ups , 165 in obtaining permits , 147 in employment , 147 in asset registration , 84 in obtaining credit , 164 in legal support for investments , 104 in tax payments , 142 in overseas trade , 56 in contract feasibility and 107 in bankruptcy . Firms from over 50 countries invested in Iran between 1992 and 2008 , with Asia and Europe the largest participants as shown below : 
 The economic impact of a partial lifting of sanctions extends beyond the energy sector ; the New York Times reported that " consumer @-@ oriented companies , in particular , could find opportunity in this country with 81 million consumers , many of whom are young and prefer Western products " . Iran is considered " a strong emerging market play " by investment and trading firms . Opening Iran ’ s market place to foreign investment could also be a boon to competitive multinational firms operating in a variety of manufacturing and service sectors , worth $ 600 billion to $ 800 billion in new investment opportunities over the next decade . 
 = = = Iran and the World Trade Organization = = = 
 Iran has held observer status at the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) since 2005 . Although the United States has consistently blocked its bid to join the organization , observer status came in a goodwill gesture to ease nuclear negotiations between Iran and the international community . 
 Should Iran eventually gain membership status in the WTO , among other prerequisites , copyrights will have to be enforced in the country . This will require a major overhaul . The country is hoping to attract billions of dollars ' worth of foreign investment by creating a more favorable investment climate through freer trade . Free trade zones such as Qeshm , Chabahar and Kish Island are expected to assist in this process . Iran allocated $ 20 billion in 2010 to loans for the launch of twenty trade centers in other countries . 
 = = = International sanctions = = = 
 After the Iranian Revolution in 1979 , the United States ended its economic and diplomatic ties with Iran , banned Iranian oil imports and froze approximately $ 11 billion of its assets . In 1996 , the U.S. Government passed the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act ( <unk> ) which prohibits U.S. ( and non @-@ U.S. ) companies from investing and trading with Iran in amounts of more than $ 20 million annually . Since 2000 exceptions to this restriction have been made for items including pharmaceuticals and medical equipment . 
 Iran 's nuclear program has been the subject of contention with the West since 2006 over suspicions of its intentions . The UN Security Council imposed sanctions against select companies linked to the nuclear program , thus furthering the country 's economic isolation . Sanctions notably bar nuclear , missile and many military exports to Iran and target investments in oil , gas and petrochemicals , exports of refined petroleum products , as well as the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps , banks , insurance , financial transactions and shipping . In 2012 the European Union tightened its own sanctions by joining the three decade @-@ old US oil embargo against Iran . In 2015 , Iran and the world powers reached a deal on Iran 's nuclear program that will remove the main sanctions against Iran by early 2016 . 
 = = = = Effects = = = = 
 According to Undersecretary of State William Burns , Iran may be losing as much as $ 60 billion annually in energy investment . Sanctions are making imports 24 % more costly on average . In addition , the latest round of sanctions could cost Iran annually $ 50 billion in lost oil revenues . Iran is increasingly using barter trade because its access to the international dollar payment system has been denied . According to Iranian officials , large @-@ scale withdrawal by international companies represents an " opportunity " for domestic companies to replace them . 
 The IEA estimated that Iranian exports fell to a record of 860 @,@ 000 bpd in September 2012 from 2 @.@ 2 million bpd at the end of 2011 . This fall led to a drop in revenues and clashes on the streets of Tehran when the local currency , the rial , collapsed . September 2012 output was Iran 's lowest since 1988 . 
 The U.S. Energy Department has warned that imposing oil embargoes on Iran would increase world oil prices by widening the gap between supply and demand . According to the U.S. Iran could reduce the world price of crude petroleum by 10 % , saving the United States annually $ 76 billion ( at the proximate 2008 world oil price of $ 100 / bbl ) . 
 According to NIAC , sanctions cost the United States over $ 175 billion in lost trade and 279 @,@ 000 lost job opportunities . Between 2010 and 2012 , sanctions cost the E.U. states more than twice as much as the United States in terms of lost trade revenue . Germany was hit the hardest , losing between $ 23 @.@ 1 and $ 73 @.@ 0 billion between 2010 – 2012 , with Italy and France following at $ <unk> $ 42 @.@ 8 billion and $ <unk> $ 34 @.@ 2 billion respectively . 
 From positive growth , sanctions have reduced GDP growth to -5 % in 2013 . The unofficial unemployment rate was 20 % by mid @-@ 2012 . Oil exports dropped to 1 @.@ 4 million bpd in 2014 from 2 @.@ 5 million bpd in 2011 . By 2013 , Iran had $ 80 billion in foreign exchange reserves frozen overseas . Automobile production declined 40 % between 2011 and 2013 . According to the U.S. government in 2015 , Iran ’ s economy has reached a point where it is " fundamentally incapable of recovery " without a nuclear accommodation with the West . 
 = Gordon P. Saville = 
 Gordon Philip Saville ( September 14 , 1902 – January 31 , 1984 ) was a United States Air Force major general who was the top authority on US air defense from 1940 to 1951 . Blunt and direct in manner , Saville had been an outspoken proponent of tactical aviation in the 1930s against a brotherhood of airmen who promoted strategic bombing . 
 Saville succeeded Claire L. Chennault as America 's leading fighter aircraft tactician . With Benjamin S. Kelsey , Saville co @-@ wrote the technical specifications which led to the Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning and the Bell P @-@ 39 Airacobra fighters . In 1949 he selected the North American F @-@ 86 Sabre as America 's main defense fighter , and in 1950 he approved a guided air @-@ to @-@ air missile system that would be carried aboard the proposed supersonic 1954 interceptor ; the missile produced was the AIM @-@ 4 Falcon . 
 Saville was a technical and scientific @-@ minded leader who helped pioneer advanced mathematics for operations research , and computer systems for centralized coordination of air defense . He advocated the expansion of radar installations to create an unbroken air defense network . He explored the concept of a military aircraft designed around an integrated electronics fire @-@ control system built by various subcontractors . After retiring from the military , Saville worked in the defense industry . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Gordon Philip Saville was born in Macon , Georgia , on September 14 , 1902 . His Regular Army officer father propelled Saville 's older brother to enroll at the United States Military Academy at West Point , and he urged Saville to accept an appointment to the United States Naval Academy . However , Saville wanted to fly so he rejected formal military schools . Instead , he attended the University of Washington , Antioch College , and then the University of California and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the United States Army Reserve on November 5 , 1923 , in the infantry , seeing active duty in August 1924 and August 1925 . While on reserve duty at Crissy Field in San Francisco , Saville watched Army Air Service pilots training on military aircraft . He determined that he would join them or leave the military . 
 Saville became a flying cadet with the Army Air Service in March 1926 , and entered the primary flying school at Brooks Field , Texas . During this time his service branch reformed as the United States Army Air Corps ( USAAC ) . In September of that year he was transferred to the advanced flying school at Kelly Field , Texas , from which he graduated on February 28 , 1927 , gaining a commission as second lieutenant in the Air Reserve . He was assigned to the Fifth Observation Squadron at Mitchel Field , New York and in June 1927 , he was appointed a second lieutenant in the Air Corps of the Regular Army . At Mitchel , Saville served ably as adjutant to Lieutenant Colonel Benjamin Foulois , but Foulois was unhappy with Saville 's absence during weekend train trips to Connecticut to see Ina Isola Hards , his girlfriend . Hards was an honors graduate of Wellesley College where she had performed in theatre plays and had served as class officer . Foulois ' wife successfully addressed the problem by inviting Miss Hards to stay at the Foulois home on weekends . Saville married Hards in the Church of Transfiguration in New York City in September 1928 ; her father , Ira A. Hards , producer of the Mae West Broadway play Diamond Lil , walked her down the aisle . As a wedding present , Foulois granted Saville 's request for a transfer back to Crissy Field . 
 Saville was made adjutant of Crissy Field in December 1928 . He and his wife produced a daughter in July 1930 , Ina Gordon Saville . Later that year Saville transferred to Mather Field , California , where he was appointed adjutant of the field and of the 20th Pursuit Group . The <unk> welcomed a son in October 1931 : Edward A. Saville . In 1932 , Saville and family traveled to Barksdale Field , Louisiana , along with the 20th Pursuit Group . 
 = = Tactics and theory = = 
 At Foulois ' recommendation , Saville entered the Air Corps Tactical School at Maxwell Field , Alabama , in August 1933 . Saville graduated in May 1934 , at the top of his class , and remained at the school as an instructor in the Maps and Photographs Section . At ACTS , Saville joined Claire L. Chennault in favoring an air defense strategy <unk> on a strong fighter force . Saville argued against the so @-@ called Bomber Mafia ; he did not believe that fleets of bombers were unstoppable , and he considered close coordination between ground units and tactical air power a key part of Army doctrine . In July 1935 , at the temporary rank of captain , he was named recorder of the Air Corps Board at Maxwell Field , in addition to his duties as fighter aviation instructor . Saville removed a degree of independent command from fighter squadron leaders who previously could ignore instructions radioed from the ground . Backed by Brigadier General Henry Conger Pratt , Saville 's unpopular control methods proved their worth , as ground controllers were often in possession of better information than squadron leaders in flight . From 1935 to 1937 , as Chennault was eased out by the bomber advocates , Saville took his place as the top fighter proponent . Saville avoided Chennault 's fate by refraining from disputing the bomber 's important role in offensive operations . He felt that the fighter aircraft was undervalued in its defensive role . 
 In February 1937 , Saville paired with Lieutenant Benjamin S. Kelsey , Project Officer for Fighters at the USAAC , to find a way to get around the USAAC 's arbitrary 500 @-@ pound ( 225 kg ) limit on the weight of fighter aircraft armament . The two men settled on the term " interceptor " , creating a new Army classification for fighters , not a new mission . They issued a specification for two new heavily armed fighters via Circular Proposal X @-@ 608 and Circular Proposal X @-@ 609 . These were requests for fighters having " the tactical mission of interception and attack of hostile aircraft at high altitude " . Specifications called for at least 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) of heavy armament including a cannon , one or two liquid @-@ cooled Allison V @-@ 1710 engines each with a General Electric turbo @-@ supercharger , tricycle landing gear , a level airspeed of at least 360 miles per hour ( 580 km / h ) at altitude , and a climb to 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) within 6 minutes — the toughest set of specifications USAAC had presented to that date . From these specifications a competition was held , and eventually the single @-@ engine fighter became the Bell Aircraft P @-@ 39 Airacobra , and the twin @-@ engine fighter became the Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightning . Saville 's rank of captain was made permanent in June 1937 . 
 Saville entered the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kan . , in September 1938 , and graduated the following June . He then was assigned to Washington , D.C. , as assistant to the chief of the Plans Division in the Office of the Chief of Air Corps . He assumed the role of assistant intelligence and operations officer of the Air Defense Command ( ADC ) at Mitchel Field in March 1940 . Led by Brigadier General James E. Chaney , the ADC was tasked with testing various air defense measures to determine what worked . Chaney was unfamiliar with air defense , and he made Saville the coordinator of all projects . This was the first time Saville was able to test and implement his theories on a large scale . New SCR @-@ 270 radar units were tried out and incorporated into the command scheme , giving greater reach to ground controllers . Army maneuvers held at Watertown , New York , in August 1940 allowed Saville to prove that fighter aircraft could protect a domestic target from air attack long before anti @-@ aircraft artillery could fire , a result that Chaney said " astonished " high @-@ ranking Army observers . 
 In October 1940 , Saville flew to London with Chaney for temporary duty as a military air observer studying British air defenses , and returned to Mitchel Field after two months to become executive officer at the temporary rank of major of the First Interceptor Command . He began drafting a comprehensive air defense doctrine which combined features of the British system with those advocated by Chennault and himself . Saville was promoted to the permanent rank of major in February , 1941 , and from March 25 to April 12 , he conducted an intensive course in air defense given to 60 fighter group staff , including Kenneth P. Bergquist , posted to Hawaii 's fighter wing . In August 1941 , he returned to London and observed British air defense measures until December 1941 . During this time , Saville 's Air Defense Doctrine draft was reviewed by the USAAC , but it was not approved or published . Saville 's proposed defense involved rigorous round @-@ the @-@ clock coordination between ground observers , radar installations , and centralized command posts to filter reports to defense forces consisting of anti @-@ aircraft artillery batteries , barrage balloons , and fighter wings . Unusually , Saville proposed that fighter wings involved in air defense be completely separate from fighter wings making attacks on enemy air forces . 
 = = World War II = = 
 After the attack on Pearl Harbor , Saville was assigned to United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) headquarters in Washington as director of the country 's air defenses , which he considered inadequate . Because of the greatly increased civilian interest in air defense , much of Saville 's unpublished air defense doctrine was copied into the War Department 's Training Circulars No. 70 and 71 , published nine and eleven days after Pearl Harbor , respectively . These training materials emphasized regional command and control of air defenses . Fighter group commanders were to direct the efforts of anti @-@ aircraft artillery officers — one of Saville 's suggestions that had been a sticking point , resisted by artillerists . Before these plans were implemented , British radar pioneer Robert Watson @-@ Watt surveyed West Coast defenses and found them " dangerously unsatisfactory " , a confirmation of Saville 's assessment . Saville found Watson @-@ Watt 's report " a damning indictment of our whole warning service . " 
 Saville was made lieutenant colonel on January 5 , 1942 . In tackling the problem of air defense of the Panama Canal Zone , he brought together civilian mathematicians and military defense experts to organize the first operations research group in the Air Corps , following two such groups formed by the Navy . Saville was promoted to brigadier general on November 2 . 
 Once it was clear that U.S. territory was not in danger of being attacked by enemy air units , Saville 's expertise in air defense was not needed . In March 1943 , he was made director of tactical development at the Army Air Forces School of Applied Tactics ( <unk> ) at Orlando , Florida , where he reorganized the Army Air Forces Board by July 2 , 1943 . Saville 's structure put tactical and strategic development on equal footing , and tied together the efforts of the Chief of Air Staff for Operations , Commitments , and Requirements ( OC & R ) , the Proving Ground Command and the School of Applied Tactics . Saville charged the <unk> with developing air defense doctrines and tactics , and with the testing of air defense equipment and methods . 
 Later that month he was ordered to the North African theater , where he served as chief of staff of the Mediterranean Air Command . Under Carl Andrew Spaatz , Saville argued against the plans for Operation Tidal Wave in August , the air attack on oil refineries in Ploieşti . After the operation resulted in heavy American casualties with little effect on oil production , Saville described it as a " goddamned thing ... ridiculous and suicidal . " 
 In October 1943 , he was appointed commander of the XII Fighter Command ( XXII Tactical Air Command ) , and in January 1944 was named deputy commander of the XII Air Support Command ( XII Tactical Air Command ) in the Mediterranean . There , Saville achieved close coordination between air power and the infantry . Tactics used by Saville were employed again during the Normandy Invasion , with fighter aircraft clearing enemy units from roads behind the front lines . He took part in Operation Strangle , the effort to deny roads and rail to German supply columns . In this , Saville was critical of the inaccuracy of high @-@ altitude bombing ; he wrote privately to a friend in April , " Our waste of effort in trying to hit railroad tracks and bridges is simply fantastic . " Saville was promoted to major general on June 30 , 1944 , distinguishing himself during Operation Dragoon , the invasion of Southern France . He assumed command of the First Tactical Air Force in January 1945 . 
 The following month , Saville returned to the United States for temporary assignment to USAAF headquarters , and in March 1945 became commander of the III Tactical Air Command at Barksdale Field . Two months later , he was appointed deputy commander of Air Transport Command at Washington . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 In January 1947 , Saville was sent to Brazil to serve as chief of the Air Section of the Joint Brazil – United States Military Commission , stationed at the American Embassy at Rio de Janeiro . Saville took his family with him to Brazil ; he enrolled his daughter in the American School of Rio de Janeiro , where she graduated high school in June . During this time the USAAF reformed as an independent service branch ; United States Air Force ( USAF ) . 
 In May 1948 , Muir S. Fairchild was made vice chief of staff of the USAF . In light of the developing Cold War and the threat of Soviet long @-@ range bombers , Fairchild determined that Saville 's expertise was critically needed . Fairchild ordered Saville , the top U.S. authority on air defense and a scientifically minded pragmatist , to return stateside in June 1948 , for assignment to the ADC headquarters at Mitchel Air Force Base . 
 Saville evaluated the ambitious Radar Fence Plan of Major General Francis L. <unk> , which had recently failed in Congress because it was too expensive in manpower and material , and would take too long to put in place . Fairchild and Saville determined to devise a more practical radar defense plan , one that would bypass the slow approval methods previously established . In pushing his plan to fruition , Saville angered other officers who expected to have a say in air defense ; he said , " I wasn 't going to stand in line and wait . " He first focused on a foundation of radar systems , and concluded that the U.S. should spend $ 116 million in 1949 and 1950 , to build 75 radar sites and 20 control centers in the continental U.S. , with 10 more radar sites facing the Soviet Union from the Territory of Alaska , controlled through a territorial center . The radar sites would primarily be composed of older World War II @-@ era microwave units , but these would be augmented by a few advanced radar units , carefully positioned . Dubbed the " <unk> " plan ( from " lash @-@ up " , meaning " hastily improvised " ) , it was about 20 % of the cost of <unk> 's Radar Fence Plan , and it was more flexible in terms of future expansion . 
 In September , Saville told Secretary of Defense James Forrestal , Secretary of the Air Force Stuart Symington , and the assembled Air Force staff that America 's air defenses were wholly inadequate . The Chiefs of Staff agreed that air defense was second in importance only to a strong retaliation force , one that would give pause to an aggressor . In November , Saville was named commanding general of ADC . He worked to combine it with Tactical Air Command ( TAC ) to form the backbone of the Continental Air Command ( <unk> ) organization . In February 1949 , Saville updated the House Armed Services Committee on the necessity of radar air defense , and in March the <unk> plan was approved by Congress . 
 Earlier , in mid @-@ 1948 , Saville asked Colonel Bruce K. Holloway to evaluate existing fighter aircraft defense capabilities . Holloway teamed with Major General William E. Kepner , commander of the Air Proving Ground at Eglin Air Force Base , to measure interceptor performance under realistic conditions . Tests showed that the Northrop P @-@ 61 Black Widow , the Lockheed P @-@ 80 Shooting Star and the North American F @-@ 82 Twin Mustang , then in service , were completely inadequate to stop high @-@ altitude bomber attacks at night or in bad weather . Fairchild learned of this failure and formed a team to evaluate two prototype interceptors , the Northrop XP @-@ 89 Scorpion and the Curtiss @-@ Wright XP @-@ 87 Blackhawk , in October 1948 . As a member of the team , Holloway was disappointed with the performance of the prototypes , and he recommended that both aircraft be refused for air defense . Fairchild canceled the Curtiss machine but the Northrop , the " best of a poor lot " , was pushed into immediate service . Holloway and Saville agreed that America needed a fighter that could take off under " zero @-@ zero " conditions of no visibility , and they felt that such a design should be in production by 1954 , when the Soviets were expected to have fleets of bombers . Until then , an interim solution was sought . In a May 1949 meeting of the USAF Senior Officers Board , Saville recommended that the North American F @-@ 86 Sabre be procured in quantity , as it was in his opinion the best available American all @-@ weather fighter for air defense . The government quickly ordered 124 F @-@ <unk> , as a start . 
 In April 1949 , General Ennis Whitehead was put in charge of <unk> . He devised his own command methods rather than those established by Saville , making Saville redundant in his role as air defense chief . In support of Saville , Colonel Jacob E. Smart , assistant to USAF Commander Henry H. Arnold , wrote that Saville 's unorthodox methods since the end of World War II provided " the only tangible results toward building an air defense system " of any worth . Smart said that Saville , though a " thorn in the side to many people " , should be credited for all recent air defense progress in the U.S. Saville was moved from air defense operations to long @-@ range planning and research . In September 1949 , Arnold appointed Saville head of the newly established Directorate of Requirements in the Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations at USAF headquarters . The following January , Saville became Deputy Chief of Staff for Development , Air Research and Development Command , a new staff section at USAF headquarters . To equip the U.S. with a fighter that could defend against the new threat of Soviet nuclear bombers , Saville initiated a design competition for a fire @-@ control system ( FCS ) codenamed MX @-@ 1179 , the basis of a guided air @-@ to @-@ air missile system simple enough that it could be operated alone by the pilot of a supersonic fighter rather than by a weapons officer . The proposed fighter concept was referred to as the 1954 interceptor , resulting directly in the 1956 Convair F @-@ 102 Delta Dagger , and several other fighter models indirectly . Saville was less concerned with the aircraft details than with the weapons system ; regarding the FCS he said , " when that system is developed , we 're going to put aluminum around it , engines on it , and a pilot to run the aluminum , and that is the interceptor . " 
 From a handful of company designs , Saville selected Hughes Aircraft to make the FCS . Saville worked closely with Dr. Ruben F. <unk> of Hughes , to lay out the desired strategy of the weapons system and to describe the expected fighter tactics . This weapon would eventually be developed as the AIM @-@ 4 Falcon after much urging by Saville . The Falcon was used successfully for more than a decade , beginning in 1956 . Designing an aircraft around a weapons system was something Saville had witnessed in the development of Bell 's P @-@ 39 Airacobra around a large autocannon , but he further refined the concept and made it a requirement for government contractors , a practice that is continued to this day . Saville put an end to specific design goals in aircraft requests for proposal ( <unk> ) ; instead , he briefed potential designers on general requirements and discussed with them the defense problems the aircraft was to solve . 
 In early 1950 , Saville served on the Guided Missiles Interdepartmental Operational Requirements Group ( <unk> ) , a military and civilian committee tasked with the coordination of research on guided missiles , as well as the development of tactics and overall strategy . In his role as USAF Deputy Chief of Staff for Development , Saville helped direct missile work , but soon replaced himself on the <unk> with Major General Robert M. Lee , commander of TAC . Saville was more interested in air @-@ to @-@ air guided missiles than in ground @-@ based ballistic missiles , which became the focus of the committee . 
 Saville and Fairchild went to Congress in 1950 , and obtained $ 114 million for the development of an electronic computer @-@ based air defense system , a project headed by George E. Valley Jr , who was a physicist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) . The computer , named Whirlwind , helped the USAF develop the Semi Automatic Ground Environment ( SAGE ) air defense system . 
 In March 1950 , Fairchild died . Fairchild had been Saville 's champion in the USAF , and Saville had used Fairchild 's influence as a shield to " get things done " , according to Smart . In the process , Saville had made enough enemies in the Air Staff that he realized Fairchild 's absence would greatly limit his career advancement . He began planning his retirement , finishing ongoing projects , and first selecting then grooming his replacement : Brigadier General Laurence C. Craigie . In June 1950 , Saville gave a lecture on air defense at the Air War College , Maxwell AFB , Alabama , telling the students that the optimal air defense system as he envisaged might be able to destroy 60 % of an attacking bomber force , but that realistic results would be closer to 30 % reduction . He emphasized the need for better intelligence regarding Soviet offensive airpower capabilities , to increase the accuracy of air defense predictions . 
 In late 1950 , USAF Chief Scientist Louis Ridenour initiated Project Charles at MIT to study problems of air defense . The study determined that Valley 's methods were the best option . In May 1951 , the project was reformed as Project Lincoln to investigate unusual reconnaissance methods ; this group met at Beacon Hill , Boston , and became known as the Beacon Hill Study Group . Saville expanded the group by naming 15 men to the project , all experts in their fields , including Edwin H. Land , James Gilbert Baker , Edward Mills Purcell , Richard Scott Perkin and USAF Colonel Richard S. Leghorn . The project led to the establishment of Lincoln Laboratory , a research and development project of the Defense Department . 
 = = Civilian career = = 
 In the Army , Navy , Air Force Journal , Saville announced the engagement of his daughter Ina Gordon Saville to James R. Pitts , a cadet at West Point . Ina graduated from the College of William and Mary in 1951 , with a degree in English , then married Pitts on June 17 . In July 1951 , Saville retired from the USAF . 
 Saville was invited to join a November 1952 experimental commercial flight from Los Angeles to Copenhagen , flying to Denmark in a Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) DC @-@ 6B named Arild Viking , stopping first in Edmonton , Canada , then at the newly operational Thule Air Force Base in Greenland , which Saville had previously approved for major construction . The 28 @-@ hour , 5 @,@ 940 @-@ mile ( 9 @,@ 560 km ) flight plan pioneered a polar route for SAS . Saville accompanied Colonel Bernt Balchen , the Norwegian @-@ born commander of Thule AFB . 
 In 1953 , Saville wrote a feature for Air Force Magazine , describing a strong air defense as one of the essential elements for preventing wars . He said " only a fool would run into a hornet 's nest of opposition . " However , he emphasized that a perfect air defense could never succeed in preventing an attack by itself , only in blunting it . A powerful counterattack force was required . 
 In December 1954 , Saville celebrated the marriage of his airman son Edward to Lettice Lee von <unk> , a debutante from Wisconsin . Saville 's younger son John served as best man . Edward was a lieutenant in the USAF , and among the eight ushers were five other USAF lieutenants . 
 Saville was hired in November 1954 , to work for Ramo @-@ Wooldridge , a company that formed from the FCS team at Hughes . Saville was made Director of Military Requirements , a new position tailored to his unique background . In this liaison role , Saville met regularly with military leaders to ensure that Ramo @-@ Wooldridge projects answered America 's defense needs . When Thompson Products merged with Ramo @-@ Woodridge to form TRW , Saville became vice president of the new company . Saville retired in 1963 , and became a consultant to TRW and to other government agencies . In the mid @-@ 1960s Saville invested in cattle ranches , embarking upon what he called a " third career " as a cattle rancher . He was invited to participate in a panel discussion at the annual Conference on World Affairs in 1966 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Saville died on January 31 , 1984 . His ashes are interred at Arlington National Cemetery . His wife , Ina Hards Saville , died in 1995 , and her ashes joined Saville 's . 
 In his career , Saville was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal with oak leaf cluster , the Legion of Merit , the Distinguished Flying Cross , the Bronze Star Medal and the Air Medal . He was rated a Command Pilot , Combat Observer , Aircraft Observer and Technical Observer . 
 Saville 's daughter Ina bore four daughters in the 1950s , and died in 2005 . Saville 's son Edward produced two sons and a daughter . He retired from the USAF at the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and lives in Beaufort , South Carolina ; his wife " Letty " died in 2000 . 
 = 1986 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season = 
 The 1986 Tampa Bay Buccaneers season began with the team trying to improve on an 2 – 14 season . This was one of the worst seasons in franchise history . There is some sentiment that the 1986 team was even worse than the winless team of 1976 , and the 473 points conceded was not beaten by any NFL team until the 2001 Indianapolis Colts gave up 486 . The Buccaneers selected Bo Jackson with the top pick in the draft , but were unable to convince him to join the team . Three weeks after the draft , Jackson signed a three @-@ year baseball contract with the Kansas City Royals . Despite holding four of the first forty selections in the draft , and the presence of a great influx of fresh talent from defunct USFL teams , the Buccaneers were unable to find any impact players in either the draft or free agency . They entered the season with a roster nearly identical to the previous season 's 2 – 14 team . 
 Coach Leeman Bennett treated the season as a building season , but was disappointed with the team 's mental errors and lack of progress . Later in the season , he would begin to privately admit that the Buccaneers ' talent was much worse than he had realized . Steve DeBerg won the starting quarterback job after outplaying Steve Young in the preseason , but was benched in favor of Young after struggling in the first two games . Kevin House and Jimmie Giles were released after an October loss to the New Orleans Saints , along with ex @-@ Dallas Cowboys fullback Ron Springs . Bennett showed up at a press conference held after the season by owner Hugh Culverhouse , unaware that the purpose of the press conference was to announce Bennett 's firing . Giles , then with the Detroit Lions , criticized the move , saying that no coach could compensate for the Buccaneers ' lack of talent . He also claimed that administrator Phil Krueger destroyed team chemistry by demeaning players during contract negotiations , pointing to guard Sean Farrell 's disgruntlement as an example . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 Defensive end Lee Roy Selmon retired a week before the draft . He missed the entire 1985 season due to a herniated disk , and chose to retire rather than undergo surgery . Although his retirement was expected , the Buccaneers did not seek a replacement in the draft . With Mark Cotney and Steve Wilson having retired earlier in the year , Selmon was the last of the original Buccaneers on the roster . 
 = = = NFL Draft = = = 
 The Buccaneers received additional picks in the 1st and 2nd rounds from the Miami Dolphins in exchange for linebacker Hugh Green . Their extra 6th @-@ round pick came from the New England Patriots in exchange for a 5th @-@ round pick in the 1987 draft . The second pick in the 12th round came from the San Francisco 49ers in return for the rights to center Jim Leonard . The Buccaneers ' 3rd @-@ round pick was traded to the New Orleans Saints for defensive back David Greenwood . Their 6th @-@ round pick was traded to the Denver Broncos in exchange for defensive end <unk> Manor . Their 7th @-@ round pick went to the Buffalo Bills in exchange for wide receiver Perry Tuttle . Their 8th @-@ round pick went to the Rams for defensive back Ivory Sully . 
 = = = = The Bo Jackson draft fiasco = = = = 
 Auburn University running back Bo Jackson was selected with the Buccaneers ' first overall pick in the draft , but refused to sign with them . Jackson was angry with the Buccaneers after accepting a private jet ride to attend a team workout caused him to lose his eligibility to play baseball at Auburn . Although NCAA rules allow a professional athlete to compete collegiately in a different sport , stricter Southeastern Conference rules disqualify a professional athlete from competing in any college sports . Jackson accused the Buccaneers of sabotaging his college baseball career , although Phil Krueger insisted that the SEC had advised them that the flight was allowable , and that it was Jackson himself who had insisted on using a private flight . Jackson had been rated as the best running back prospect to come out of college since O.J. Simpson 17 years earlier . Jackson was said to have ridiculed Tampa Bay 's offensive line , and shortly before the baseball draft to have told two teams that he had no intention of playing football . Most teams did not believe him , but the Kansas City Royals , although they were unsure enough that they waited until the fourth round of the Major League Baseball Draft to select him . Jackson vowed never to play football again and accepted an offer from the Royals worth much less than what the Buccaneers offered . The Buccaneers turned down several impressive trade offers for Jackson , including the San Francisco 49ers ' offer of Ronnie Lott , Wendell Tyler , and first- and second @-@ round draft picks . Jackson 's statements about not playing football were contradictory , as he alternated between stating he didn 't want to play at all and between saying he didn 't want to play for a terrible team and organization like Tampa Bay . In his book , Jackson recalls a meeting with Al Davis where he said he liked Davis and told the Raider boss he would love to play for them , and that the Raiders made offers for the # 1 pick to Tampa Bay that were spurned . 
 There was speculation that owner Hugh Culverhouse was torn between his promise to make Jackson the highest @-@ paid rookie ever , and his status as a member of the NFL Finance Committee , which obligated him to set a reasonable fiscal precedent for the rest of the league . This resulted in an underwhelming contract offer and produced the perception that the Buccaneers were not serious about signing Jackson . Although the Buccaneers offered Jackson $ 7 million over the five years , half of it was in the form of incentives , annuities , and real estate . The actual salary averaged to over $ 700 @,@ 000 per year , still more than twice his yearly salary from the Royals , who gave him a three @-@ year , $ 1 million contract . Negotiator Phil Krueger said that officials from other NFL teams agreed that the Buccaneers had offered Jackson fair money ; however , Jackson also recounted in his book that Culverhouse got angry when he turned out an initial offer and said the Bucs would cut their next offer by 50 % if Jackson didn 't accept the first contract by the following day . Jackson 's Royals contract gave him the option of buying out his contract if he wanted to return to football . Jackson was eligible to be drafted again the next year if not signed by April 28 , 1987 , which turned out to be the case . Culverhouse announced the embarrassment at a news conference in which he quoted the " keep smiling , keep shining " lyrics of Dionne Warwick 's then @-@ current hit song " That 's What Friends are For " . Jackson became the fourth consecutive Heisman Trophy winner ( after USFL players Herschel Walker , Mike Rozier , and Doug Flutie ) to spurn the NFL , although he was the first since Pete Dawkins in 1958 to leave football entirely . It was the first time since 1979 , when Tom <unk> signed with the Canadian Football League instead of the Buffalo Bills , that the first overall pick chose not to play in the NFL . 
 = = = = Other draft selections = = = = 
 Rod Jones was known as a hard hitter and a world @-@ class track star , but was a controversial selection because , coming from the run @-@ heavy Southwest Conference , his pass @-@ coverage skills were unknown . At 5 ' 11 " , 165 lbs . , he was considered undersized for the NFL . Jones was the first defensive back selected , but was rated no better than fifth @-@ best by most scouting services . The Buccaneers were criticized for taking linebacker Jackie Walker with their third pick , when Kevin Murphy of the national champion Oklahoma Sooners was still available . The Buccaneers did eventually draft Murphy , who they were surprised to find still available with their 40th overall selection . Murphy was believed to have fallen due to rumors of a knee injury . The Buccaneers had rated both Walker and Murphy among the top 15 players in the draft . Craig Swoope was rated as the best safety in the draft , but fell to the fourth round because of a previous charge ( and acquittal ) of conspiracy to distribute cocaine . Swoope was eventually the only Buccaneer to achieve any kind of postseason honors in 1986 , being selected to the Football Digest All @-@ Rookie team . The team went for big offensive linemen in the later rounds . One of them was J.D. Maarleveld , the first cancer patient drafted by the NFL . Maarleveld was considered to have been a second @-@ round talent , but fell all the way to the fifth round . Belief that Maarleveld was worth much more money than the average fifth @-@ rounder caused his agent , Greg Marotta , to advise him to reject the Buccaneers ' offer and sign with the USFL Baltimore Stars . Maarleveld was eventually able to reach agreement with the Buccaneers . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 = = = Personnel moves = = = 
 Bennett made efforts in the offseason to address the passing game , and to improve team speed . He held an extra " passing camp " before training camp for all offensive and defensive players involved in the passing game . Establishing the offense was complicated by the situation of not having enough reliable running backs to run a two @-@ back offense . Finding enough speedy receivers to run a three @-@ receiver set was also difficult , as was finding faster defensive backs who could play the man @-@ to @-@ man coverage that Bennett wanted to move to . Cutting safety David Greenwood and trading cornerback John Holt improved the speed of the secondary by opening up starting spots for rookies Jones and Swoope . Former Florida Gators cornerback Vito McKeever , a product of local <unk> High School who had played for the USFL Michigan Panthers under Buccaneer defensive coordinator Jim Stanley , was signed toward the end of preseason . The addition of McKeever , who took over Jeremiah Castille 's starting spot , meant that three of the four secondary positions turned over from the previous year . The quest for speed in the secondary meant cutting safety and punt returner Mike Prior , who went on to become a mainstay on the Green Bay Packer playoff teams of the 1990s . In an attempt to upgrade the offensive line , five @-@ time Pro Bowl tackle Marvin Powell was brought in . While there was speculation that the New York Jets let him go because he was President of the National Football League Players Association , the Jets were concerned over quarterback Ken O 'Brien having been sacked an NFL @-@ record 62 times the previous season , and selected two tackles in the draft . There was sentiment among some teams that , despite his Pro Bowl appearances , Powell was an overrated player who had never lived up to his reputation . Powell performed well for Tampa Bay , but was placed on injured reserve midseason after undergoing arthroscopic knee surgery . Undrafted free @-@ agent running back Nathan Wonsley emerged in the preseason as a legitimate complement to James Wilder . Tyrone Keys , a defensive end from a team loaded with pass @-@ rushers , and David Williams , a receiver who had led the nation in catches during his junior year , were claimed off waivers from the defending world champion Chicago Bears . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 Steve DeBerg won the starting quarterback job over Steve Young in the preseason , but lost it after throwing seven interceptions in the season opener against the San Francisco 49ers , and another two the next week against the Minnesota Vikings . Nose tackle Dave Logan summed up the team 's condition after the 49ers game by saying , " the teams we play do not respect us " . Players coming from winning teams to the Buccaneers , such as Marvin Powell and Tyrone Keys , found themselves shocked by the constant losing and discouraged by the team 's easy acceptance of losses . Keys in particular thought that the Buccaneers were too used to losing , and not bothered by it . Young later criticized the team 's will to win , saying that " if they could hide for four quarters and just go home , they would be happy " . Powell , one of the highest @-@ paid offensive linemen in the league , was placed on injured reserve with a knee injury after only a few games . An embarrassing loss to the New Orleans Saints was followed by the release of Jimmie Giles and Kevin House , the top two receivers in Buccaneer history at the time , and former starting fullback Ron Springs . This upset several club veterans , and weakened an offense that already had to compensate for a defense that had allowed over 1 @,@ 000 rushing yards in the previous four games . League perception was that the Buccaneers were replacing older veterans with younger players who were incapable of taking their places . Said an executive from another team of Giles ' replacement , " Calvin Magee runs a 5 @.@ 2 40 ... We wouldn 't even bring him into camp " . Rumors , denied by Culverhouse , began to circulate that secret meetings were being held to arrange replacing Bennett with Steve Spurrier . Nathan Wonsley , the rookie free @-@ agent running back whose play was one of the few bright spots in the season , was lost to the team after suffering dislocated neck vertebrae during a week 10 loss to the Chicago Bears . After the abnormally large number of injuries suffered during the Bears game , the Buccaneers ended their pattern of suffering fourth @-@ quarter collapses in close games , instead losing their last seven games by an average of over 21 points . With Jerry Bell , a tight end who played a " U @-@ back " position that was crucial to Tampa Bay 's running game , suffering a broken ankle in the same game , the Buccaneers were forced to re @-@ sign Ron Springs just to have enough runners in their backfield . Culverhouse , saying that he had made the decision only minutes prior , fired Bennett at a press conference on Dec. 29 . Bennett , who had spoken to Culverhouse earlier the same morning , was unaware that he was to be let go . Culverhouse met with Ray Perkins and offered him the Tampa Bay coaching job only hours after firing Bennett . The firing was criticized by some , who felt that no steps were being taken to address the front @-@ office problems that were the real root of the Buccaneers ' woes . This criticism was echoed by safety David Greenwood , by then with the Packers , who pointed out the team 's cheapness by recounting a 1985 incident in which he wanted to keep a football as a game ball after catching it for an interception . Executive Phil Krueger demanded that Greenwood pay $ 35 for the football . 
 = = = 1986 roster = = = 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 = = = Schedule = = = 
 = = = Game summaries = = = 
 = = = = Week 1 : vs San Francisco 49ers = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 San Francisco 49ers quarterback Joe Montana completed 32 of 46 passes for 356 yards before leaving the game with an injury in the fourth quarter . The injury , similar to the one that ended Lee Roy Selmon 's career , would require season @-@ ending surgery and threaten Montana 's football future . Steve DeBerg 's 31 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Gerald Carter in the third quarter brought the Buccaneers to within a touchdown , but they would not score again . The 49ers ' seven interceptions of DeBerg were a team record , and one short of the NFL record . DeBerg placed blame for the loss on himself , but teammates defended him , pointing out that he was under constant pressure from the 49ers ' pass rush . Opposing safety Ronnie Lott said that DeBerg was predictable as to where he would throw the ball when pressured . James Wilder rushed for 81 yards and caught five passes . Selmon 's number 63 was retired in a halftime ceremony . 
 = = = = Week 2 : vs Minnesota Vikings = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Early in the first quarter , James Wilder tipped a pass from Steve DeBerg into the hands of Vikings linebacker Chris Doleman , who returned it for a touchdown . Wilder took a helmet to the sternum on this play , leaving a deep bruise that caused him to miss the next two games , and reduced his effectiveness for the remainder of the season . Seventeen seconds later , Scott <unk> recovered a Wilder fumble at the Tampa Bay 18 @-@ yard line , leading to a Viking field goal . The Buccaneers added a Donald Igwebuike field goal before the end of the quarter , but the Vikings answered it with a touchdown pass from Tommy Kramer to Mike <unk> . DeBerg 's 1 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Jimmie Giles brought the Buccaneers to within a touchdown before halftime , but they were unable to score in the second half . The Buccaneers outperformed the Vikings in a number of statistical categories , but could not overcome the turnovers . 
 = = = = Week 3 : at Detroit Lions = = = = 
 at Pontiac Silverdome , Pontiac , Michigan 
 With running back James Wilder nursing a bruised sternum , Nathan Wonsley rushed for 138 yards and two touchdowns . Wonsley became the first Buccaneer running back , other than Wilder , to rush for 100 yards since Nov. 29 , 1981 . He was the first Tampa Bay rookie to rush for 100 yards since Jerry Eckwood in 1979 . Wonsley followed in the footsteps of his two older brothers , George and Otis , both backup NFL running backs who came off the bench to have breakout games while leading their respective teams to victory against the Lions . Constant Buccaneer blitzes resulted in four sacks , two interceptions , and six forced fumbles . Although Lions quarterback Eric <unk> had a good statistical day , completing 31 passes for 318 yards , the Tampa Bay defense 's pressure prevented him from converting his opportunities into points . The win broke Tampa Bay 's 19 @-@ game road losing streak . 
 = = = = Week 4 : vs Atlanta Falcons = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Atlanta Falcons overcame a 20 – 7 halftime deficit to defeat the Buccaneers in overtime on a Mick Luckhurst field goal . The strategy of running out the clock with a conservative offense that had worked so well against the Lions the previous week backfired against the Falcons . The Buccaneers ' offensive line failed to dominate , and the Falcons wound up running 57 offensive plays in the second half , while the Buccaneers ran only 26 . Twenty of those plays were runs by Gerald Riggs , who finished the day with 127 yards rushing . The Buccaneers outgained the Falcons 255 yards to 190 in the first half , but were outgained 300 yards to 68 in the second half , in which the Buccaneers never advanced beyond midfield . The win left Atlanta undefeated at 4 – 0 . 
 = = = = Week 5 : at Los Angeles Rams = = = = 
 at Anaheim Coliseum , Anaheim , <unk> Dickerson earned his fourth career 200 @-@ yard rushing game with a 42 @-@ yard touchdown run to win the game in overtime for the Los Angeles Rams . Steve Young led an 80 @-@ yard drive in the fourth quarter that ended in a Donald Igwebuike field goal and sent the game into overtime , but the Buccaneers were unable to stop Dickerson all day . It was the second consecutive overtime loss for the Buccaneers . Nathan Wonsley rushed 18 times for 108 yards and a 59 @-@ yard touchdown run . Young also ran for a touchdown . Bennett was again criticized after the game for conservative play @-@ calling , although the Buccaneers ' total of 174 rushing yards was more than double the average the Rams had allowed in their previous four games . The game left Wonsley as the NFL leader in rushing average , with 5 @.@ 7 yards per carry . Dickerson continued to lead the NFL in rushing with 657 yards , 159 ahead of his record @-@ setting pace from 1984 . 
 = = = = Week 6 : vs St. Louis Cardinals = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Buccaneers were once again criticized for poor tackling and conservative play @-@ calling following a loss to a previously winless St. Louis Cardinals team . This time , complaints came from the players as the Cardinals seemed to know in advance which plays the Buccaneers would be running , and the Buccaneers waited until too late in the game to make adjustments . The Buccaneers led early , after Steve DeBerg 's touchdown pass to Calvin Magee on a fake field goal . Steve Young 's rushing and passing combined for 304 of the Buccaneers ' 347 yards . The Cardinals unexpectedly used a soft zone defense instead of their usual blitzing , which contributed to Tampa Bay 's decision to avoid the passing game until the fourth quarter . The Cardinals put the game away with Stump Mitchell 's 31 @-@ yard fourth @-@ quarter touchdown run , in which three Buccaneers missed tackles . Ron Holmes , Jeremiah Castille , Marvin Powell , and Gerald Carter all missed the game with injuries . 
 = = = = Week 7 : at New Orleans Saints = = = = 
 at Louisiana Superdome , New Orleans , <unk> Mayes rushed for 147 yards , the second @-@ most in New Orleans Saints history , as the Saints equalled their highest @-@ ever margin of victory . The Saints scored on their first three possessions . The Buccaneers did not score until the fourth quarter , when Steve DeBerg ran for a 1 @-@ yard touchdown . Steve Young left the stadium on crutches , and starting defensive end Ron Holmes left the game after trying to play the first quarter with a broken fibula . Mayes was selected with a third @-@ round draft pick that had been obtained from the Buccaneers in exchange for safety David Greenwood , who the Buccaneers had already waived . 
 = = = = Week 8 : at Kansas City Chiefs = = = = 
 at Arrowhead Stadium , Kansas City , Missouri 
 Veteran quarterback Bill Kenney , making the start for the Kansas City Chiefs in place of the struggling Todd Blackledge , completed 15 of 29 passes for 230 yards and a touchdown . The Chiefs ' offensive line protected Kenney well , allowing only one sack and few hurries . Although the Buccaneers led at halftime on a 10 @-@ yard pass from Steve Young to Calvin Magee and two Donald Igwebuike field goals , they were unable to hold the lead in the second half . They tied the game at 20 on a fourth @-@ quarter touchdown run , James Wilder 's first of the year , but immediately allowed the Chiefs to drive the length of the field for the winning touchdown . The sloppily played game included four fumbles , six sacks , two interceptions , and 17 penalties for 146 yards . Art Still contributed three of the Chiefs ' five sacks . 
 = = = = Week 9 : vs Buffalo Bills = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Buccaneers took a 20 – 0 halftime lead over the Buffalo Bills after recovering fumbles on two kickoffs . They barely held on for victory , as a Jim Kelly pass went incomplete in the end zone with no time remaining . Afterward , Leeman Bennett declared it the " start of a new season " . Steve Young completed 14 of 24 passes for 193 yards , and ran for two touchdowns . James Wilder also contributed a 45 @-@ yard touchdown run . The Bills attempted a comeback , with Kelly throwing three touchdowns . Kelly , who only threw twice in the first half , completed 21 of 32 for 257 yards in the second half . It was the Bills ' 31st consecutive road loss . Bills coach Hank Bullough was fired following the loss , and was replaced by Marv Levy . 
 = = = = Week 10 : vs Chicago Bears = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Doug Flutie made his NFL debut in the fourth quarter for the Chicago Bears . The Bears took an early 14 – 0 lead after Mike Tomczak 's 37 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Willie Gault . The play occurred after Ervin Randle 's recovery of a Calvin Thomas fumble was nullified due to an offsides penalty on Craig Swoope . While the Buccaneers ' defense improved later in the game , it was not enough to overcome the problems of the injury @-@ battered offense . Nathan Wonsley suffered a broken neck while making a tackle on the opening kickoff . This was followed by injuries to Jerry Bell , Phil Freeman , Craig Swoope , and Willie Gillespie . Calvin Magee played with a prior injury , as did James Wilder and Leonard Harris , though both were forced to leave the game . With Gerald Carter left as the only experienced receiver , the Bears keyed on him , and with Bell , Wonsley and Wilder out , the Buccaneers could not run . 
 = = = = Week 11 : at Green Bay Packers = = = = 
 at Lambeau Field , Green Bay , Wisconsin 
 With James Wilder leaving the game after aggravating his rib injury , the Buccaneers were unable to take advantage of Green Bay Packers quarterback Randy Wright 's three interceptions . Wright completed 18 of 29 passes for 238 yards , with a career @-@ best three first @-@ half touchdowns . The win was only the Packers ' second of the season . The loss left the Buccaneers ' defense in last place in the league , despite their having spent four of their first five draft picks on defensive players . 
 = = = = Week 12 : vs Detroit Lions = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 Three first @-@ half possessions deep in Detroit Lions territory led to zero Buccaneer points en route to another blowout loss . Lions receiver Jeff Chadwick took a 73 @-@ yard reception to the Buccaneers ' 1 @-@ yard line when Rod Jones fell down while covering him . Jones also got beaten by Leonard Thompson on a jump ball in the end zone . Vito McKeever was outrun by Chadwick on the Lions ' third score . James Wilder had 130 yards rushing and 71 yards receiving for the Buccaneers . 
 = = = = Week 13 : at Minnesota Vikings = = = = 
 at Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome , Minneapolis , Minnesota 
 With Tommy Kramer injured , Vikings quarterback Wade Wilson threw for a career @-@ best 339 yards and three touchdowns . With Tampa Bay down by 45 – 6 , Steve DeBerg 's 45 @-@ yard pass to Calvin Magee set up a 1 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Ron Heller on a tackle @-@ eligible play . The Buccaneers ' only other offense came on two Donald Igwebuike field goals . 
 = = = = Week 14 : at Chicago Bears = = = = 
 at Soldier Field , Chicago , Illinois 
 The Buccaneers almost exceeded their worst @-@ ever loss , a 42 – 0 loss to the Pittsburgh Steelers , on its 10th anniversary . They were shut out until the fourth quarter , and only scored when Chicago Bears safety Todd Bell intercepted a Steve Young pass and lateraled it to Mike Richardson , who attempted to lateral it to Shaun Gayle , only to have Tampa Bay receiver Vince Heflin intercept the lateral and run it in for a score . Mike Tomczak ran for the Bears ' first score . Later , a Walter Payton touchdown was called back on a holding penalty . The Buccaneers stopped the Bears on fourth @-@ and @-@ 1 , but an offside penalty on Craig Swoope gave the Bears another chance . Tomczak fumbled , however , causing him to be benched in favor of Doug Flutie . Flutie scored two touchdowns , one passing and one running , before Tomczak returned in the second half . Tampa Bay scored a second time on Young 's 14 @-@ yard pass to Calvin Magee , but Lew Barnes returned the ensuing kickoff for a touchdown . Magee 's 143 receiving yards remain ( as of 2009 ) the Buccaneers ' single @-@ game record for a tight end . 
 = = = = Week 15 : vs Green Bay Packers = = = = 
 at Tampa Stadium , Tampa , Florida 
 The Green Bay Packers had seven different players each contribute a sack , and Randy Wright 's 190 yards passing made him the second player in Packers history to throw for 3 @,@ 000 yards in a season . The crowd cheered the news that an Indianapolis Colts win moved the Buccaneers into first place for the rights to the first overall draft pick , and pelted Buccaneer players with lemons . Ron Holmes 's sack of Wright was the Buccaneers ' first since Oct. 12 , and Ivory Sully recorded the first blocked punt in Buccaneers ( regular @-@ season ) history . Both teams went to their second @-@ string quarterbacks in the second half , but Steve Young returned to the game after Steve DeBerg suffered a concussion , and Wright was reinserted after the Buccaneers threatened to start a comeback . 
 = = = = Week 16 : at St. Louis Cardinals = = = = 
 at Busch Stadium , St. Louis , Missouri 
 St. Louis Cardinals Pro Bowl rookie Vai <unk> tied an NFL record by returning two punts for touchdowns as the Buccaneers clinched the NFL 's worst record for the second consecutive year . Frank Garcia , playing with a back injury , had a third punt blocked for a net gain of 1 yard . The Buccaneers scored first , on a 1 @-@ yard Bobby Howard run , but the Cardinals ' 21 unanswered points gave them the lead for good before halftime . A 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Steve Young to Phil Freeman brought the Buccaneers to within 4 points in the third quarter . The game not only ended a futile season for the Buccaneers , but also concluded the Cardinals ' worst season since moving to St. Louis 27 years earlier . 
 = = = Standings = = = 
 = Russian battleship Petropavlovsk ( 1894 ) = 
 Petropavlovsk ( Петропавловск ) was the lead ship of the Petropavlovsk class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy . She displaced 11 @,@ 854 long tons ( 12 @,@ 044 t ) at full load and was 369 feet ( 112 @.@ 5 m ) long overall , and mounted a main battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in two twin turrets . Petropavlovsk participated in the Boxer Rebellion , and during the Russo @-@ Japanese War was the flagship of the First Pacific Squadron , taking part in battles against the Imperial Japanese Navy . On 13 April 1904 , the battleship was sunk after striking two mines near Port Arthur . 652 men and 27 officers died , including the Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov and renowned war artist Vasily Vereshchagin . The loss of Petropavlovsk and Makarov greatly hindered the Russians in the war . 
 = = Design = = 
 The first design for Petropavlovsk and her sister ships of the Petropavlovsk class was approved in January 1891 . She was to be an improved version of the battleship Imperator Nikolai I , but with most of her armament in barbettes , including four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns . The class was designed with a displacement of 10 @,@ 960 long tons ( 11 @,@ 136 t ) at full load . She had a full waterline belt , and the upper hull featured a tumblehome . Imperator Nikolai I was chosen as a starting point for the design because of her good seakeeping and seaworthiness . Some characteristics were copied from the French battleship Brennus and the American Indiana @-@ class battleships , such as the flush @-@ deck hull and Brennus ' high freeboard . 
 Following a redesign of the class , Petropavlovsk ceased to resemble Imperator Nikolai I. The armor plating was changed before construction , and plans for the armament were modified while the ship was being built . The barbettes were replaced with turrets , including wing turrets for some of the secondary 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns modeled after those on Brennus , with electric hoists . The propulsion was based on the machinery on Georgii Pobedonosets . Petropavlovsk had nickel @-@ steel armor imported from the United States . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Petropavlovsk displaced 11 @,@ 842 long tons ( 12 @,@ 032 t ) and was 376 feet ( 114 @.@ 6 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 70 feet ( 21 @.@ 3 m ) and a maximum draft of 28 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 6 m ) . She was powered by 16 cylindrical boilers with coal @-@ burning furnaces , and had bunkers for 1 @,@ 050 long tons ( 1 @,@ 070 t ) of coal . This gave her a range of 3 @,@ 750 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 940 km ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . She had a crew of 662 . 
 The ship 's main armament was a battery of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in two twin turrets . Her secondary armament was a battery of 12 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . She had also 10 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns , 28 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) anti @-@ torpedo boat guns , and six 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 In October 1897 Petropavlovsk sailed from Saint Petersburg to Kronstadt to be outfitted . In 1898 the guns were fitted ; later the battleship moved to Liepāja , returning to Kronstadt in 1899 . On 5 October 1899 Petropavlovsk was transferred to the Far Eastern , East Asia Squadron . Aleksandr Kolchak , who was the chief of the watch on aboard , was to have conducted hydrology experiments in the northern Pacific ocean . However , when the ship arrived in the Mediterranean , Kolchak accepted a position with Eduard Toll 's expedition and left the vessel . Petropavlovsk reached Port Arthur on 28 April 1900 , becoming the flagship of Vice Admiral <unk> and the East Asia Squadron . In 1900 the ship took part in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in China . In October 1902 Rear Admiral Oskar <unk> Stark took command of the East Asia Squadron and raised his flag on Petropavlovsk . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 In early February 1904 the Japanese Navy launched a surprise attack on the Russian fleet at Port Arthur . The squadron was attacked by a flotilla of Japanese torpedo boat destroyers . The Russians were not prepared for the attack and confusion ran rampant throughout the harbor 's interior . Petropavlovsk escaped damage during the torpedo attack , but was lightly damaged in an engagement the next day against the Japanese fleet ( she was hit by one 6 @-@ inch and two 12 @-@ inch shells ) , killing one and wounding four . Petropavlovsk fired twenty 12 @-@ inch and sixty @-@ eight 6 @-@ inch shells at the Japanese battleships , but none hit . As a result of the damage incurred in the attack by Tsesarevich and the subsequent lengthy repair @-@ time , Makarov was compelled to choose as his flagship Petropavlovsk against his better judgement ( he viewed the former as sturdier than the latter ) . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Having failed to blockade or bottle up the Russian squadron at Port Arthur by sinking blockships in the harbor 's channel , the Japanese under Admiral Togo formulated a new plan . Ships were to mine the entrance from the harbor and then lure the Russians into the minefield in the hopes of sinking a number of Russian warships . Under cover of four detachments of torpedo boat destroyers , the minelayer <unk> @-@ Maru began to lay mines near the entrance to Port Arthur on the night of 31 March . The Japanese were observed by Admiral Makarov , who believed that they were Russian destroyers whom he had ordered to patrol that area . 
 On 13 April 1904 ( 31 March old style ) , Strashnii , a Russian destroyer , was intercepted by Japanese destroyers . A sea battle erupted between the opposing destroyers . Makarov immediately dispatched the cruiser Bayan to assist Strashnii . After Bayan had informed on presence of enemy cruisers on the site , Makarov decided to lead main forces in order to seek battle with the surrounding enemy warships and rescue more survivors from Strashnii . He led two battleships ( Petropavlovsk and Poltava ) , four cruisers and a group of destroyers into the Yellow Sea . 
 However , the Japanese retreated beyond Port Arthur 's gunfire support range , and had been reinforced by main forces of six battleships . At <unk> , Makarov turned around to head back to the harbor and join with three other battleships that had just left . After the squadron had united and turned back towards the enemy , about two miles from the shore , on 9 @.@ 42 <unk> detonated a Japanese @-@ laid mine on her port side . Petropavlovsk sank , taking 27 officers and 652 men , including Admiral Makarov and war artist Vasily Vereshchagin with her . A monument was constructed in Saint Petersburg in 1913 to honor Stephan Makarov after Japanese divers identified his remains inside the wreck of Petropavlovsk and gave him a burial at sea . 
 = Missing ( Body of Proof ) = 
 " Missing " is the third episode of the second season of the American medical drama Body of Proof . It was originally broadcast in the United States on ABC on October 4 , 2011 . The episode was directed by Eric Laneuville and written by Matthew V. Lewis . 
 Following Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) , a former neurosurgeon turned medical examiner at Philadelphia , in this episode , Helen Martin ( Nicole Callender ) is run over by a speeding truck whilst trying to stop the kidnapping of Noah Parker ( Anthony <unk> ) . With the help of FBI agent Derek Ames ( Cliff Curtis ) , Detective Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) tries to find the culprits of the kidnapping before the child dies . Meanwhile , Megan has to relive the death of her father , when her mother Joan ( Joanna Cassidy ) visits . 
 The episode received positive reviews , and was watched by 9 @.@ 95 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , on the Tuesday night it aired in the United States . Critics praised the scenes which involved Bud , Joan as well as Megan and Derek ; " the banter " and " opposites attracting " , calling the episode " tense " and saying that it was the " most gripping episode of this season so far " . Christine Orlando from TV Fanatic said , " Having been a bit bored with last week 's episode , I was glad to see Body of Proof step up its game " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Helen Martin ( Nicole Callender ) , a nanny , is run over by a speeding truck whilst trying to stop the kidnapping of the six @-@ year @-@ old child she was caring for , Noah Parker ( Anthony <unk> ) . Detective Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) is assisted by Special Agent Derek Ames ( Cliff Curtis ) of the FBI , who takes a call from Noah , but the kidnapper hangs up before the phone can be traced . Bud questions Jason Peterson ( Stink Fisher ) , when his truck matches that of the kidnapping vehicle . Bud turns off the cameras whilst interrogating , and later on , Jason is found dead , which causes Bud 's reputation to be questioned , but is later cleared . Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) finds several clues which reveal that Jason knew where Noah is , but the detectives are worried that Noah may die as he is asthmatic and is without his inhaler . Megan 's mother Joan ( Joanna Cassidy ) offers to help with the case , but only to help her re @-@ election as a judge . Joan is using pamphlets , for her campaign , with a picture of Megan at the funeral of her father . Megan dislikes the photo , but Joan likes the picture as it shows " strength and survival " . A ransom is made , with the kidnappers wanting one million dollars for the return of Noah . A picture of Noah is sent , with Megan stating that he looks extremely sick . Bud and Derek , with the help of Joan , search many places associated with Jason , despite Bud knowing that Internal Affairs is considering voluntary manslaughter charges against him due to Jason 's death . 
 Curtis Brumfield ( Windell Middlebrooks ) and Ethan Gross ( Geoffrey Arend ) begin to believe that Noah is being held by fresh water , so the search is narrowed . Bud is also cleared of voluntary manslaughter , and him , Curtis , Megan and Kate Murphy ( Jeri Ryan ) suspect that the kidnapping may be an inside job , meaning that someone close to Noah kidnapped him . Bud checks his parents , Tom ( Stephen Barker Turner ) and Jennifer ( Keira Naughton ) but they are not the culprits . They then find that Helen 's friend , Jason 's girlfriend , Rena Talbot ( Wrenn Schmidt ) looked after Noah whilst Helen was on taking care of her boyfriend Oscar Mendez who had been injured badly in a fight . They find Rena , and result in finding Noah , who is sick but alive , and is reunited with his parents . Whilst Rena is arrested , Derek asks Megan to have a ride on her motorbike , to which she rejects and instead goes to see Joan , having a conversation about her father . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Missing " was written by Matthew V. Lewis and directed by Eric Laneuville . Laneuville is best known for directing episodes of Ghost Whisperer and is also an actor . Daniel Licht who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . Actor Stephen Barker Turner and actress Keira Naughton guest starred in the episode as Tom and Jennifer Parker . Stink Fisher appeared as Jason Peterson and <unk> starred as Kevin <unk> , a drug dealer . <unk> said of his role in the episode , " As a lot of people know I have branched out from hip @-@ hop to acting and this will be my first venture into network television . I ’ m really looking forward to working on this , as it ’ s a great show with a fantastic cast " . This episode marked the first appearance of Cliff Curtis , who plays Special Agent Derek Ames , a love interest for Megan Hunt ( Delany ) . Curtis was reported to have a role in Body of Proof in November 2010 . Curtis was originally meant to be appearing towards the end of the season . Delany said , " We do have a very dashing FBI agent coming on for the end of the season , played by Cliff Curtis . [ Cliff is ] an old friend , so I wanted him for the role " . Afterwards , Curtis appears in one more episode ; " Hard Knocks " . " Missing " marked the first appearance of Joanna Cassidy since the first season . Cassidy , who plays Joan Hunt has appeared in season one episodes , " Society Hill " and " Buried Secrets " . Delany said that Megan 's relationship with Joan in the second season would be " tough " because it has been " going on for a long time and most people don ’ t change after a certain age " . Regular cast member Mary Mouser who plays Lacey Fleming , did not appear in this episode . 
 " Missing " , along with the nineteen episode 's from Body of Proof 's second season , were released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 18 , 2012 . The sets included brief audio commentaries from various crew and cast members for several episode 's , the webisodes entitled " Outbreak " , five " featurettes " on the making of the show , detailing on the fashion , bodies and special effects throughout the season , as well as a " Body of <unk> " blooper reel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on 4 October 2011 , " Missing " was seen by 9 @.@ 95 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 11 share . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 0 per cent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 per cent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode achieved a significant higher number of viewers than the previous episode , " Hunting Party " , as well as the subsequent episode , " Lazarus Man " . Body of Proof came fifth in the ratings on Tuesday night ; it was outperformed by one episode of ABC 's Dancing with the Stars , one episode of CBS 's NCIS and Unforgettable and NCIS 's spinoff , NCIS : Los Angeles . However , the episode came second in the timeslot it aired in , being beaten b Unforgettable . " Missing " was watched by 1 @.@ 35 million viewers upon its airing on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews . The episode was described as " tense " , with Christine Orlando from TV Fanatic , saying that " " Missing " upped the emotional intensity when the autopsies weren 't about finding a killer , but about finding a kidnapped little boy " . Orlando said that the scenes with Bud were a highlight , as well as the scenes with Megan and Derek . Orlando said , " I enjoyed the banter between Megan and Derek . He 's the optimist to her pessimist . When they get the photo of the boy , Derek pointed out that at least he 's alive and not alone . Megan said yes , but he 's sick and possibly coughing up blood . The amateur nature of the photo gave Derek hope that the kidnapper wasn 't a professional . Great , said Megan , that meant he was incompetent and desperate . Was anyone else seeing a case where opposites attract ? " . She said it was a " pity " that Megan turned Derek down ; " Megan could use a bit of a love life and I 'm hoping we see more of Agent Ames in the future " . She said she was " thankful " that there was not a storyline with Lacey ( Mary Mouser ) , saying that the storyline with Megan and Kate arguing over Lacey had gotten " old " , " I 'm happy they seem to be moving on " . Finishing , she praised the scenes with Megan and Joan and added , " Having been a bit bored with last week 's episode , I was glad to see Body of Proof step up its game . The only thing lacking was a bit of the humour I 've grown to love " . 
 = Geography of Scotland in the early modern era = 
 The geography of Scotland in the early modern era covers all aspects of the land in Scotland , including physical and human , between the sixteenth century and the beginnings of the Agricultural Revolution and industrialisation in the eighteenth century . The defining factor in the geography of Scotland is the distinction between the Highlands and Islands in the north and west and the Lowlands in the south and east . The Highlands were subdivided by the Great Glen and the Lowlands into the fertile Central Lowlands and the Southern Uplands . The Uplands and Highlands had a relatively short growing season , exacerbated by the Little Ice Age , which peaked towards the end of the seventeenth century . 
 A network of roads developed in the Lowlands in this period . Drover 's roads , between the Highlands and north @-@ east England , had become established by the end of the seventeenth century and a series of military roads were built and maintained as a response to the Jacobite Risings in the eighteenth century . At the beginning of the period , most farming was based on the Lowland fermtoun or Highland baile , but a system of land ownership based on large estates emerged . This was the beginning of a process that would create a landscape of rectangular fields and carefully located farm complexes with interconnecting roads . There was an attempt improve agriculture , resulting in new crops , techniques and enclosures began to displace the run rig system and free pasture . 
 There are almost no reliable sources with which to track the population of Scotland before the late seventeenth century . It probably grew for most of the period , reaching 1 @,@ 234 @,@ 575 by 1691 and 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 by the first census in 1751 . Compared with the situation after the redistribution of population as a result of the clearances and the industrial revolution that began in the eighteenth century , these numbers were more evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half north of the River Tay . Most were housed in small hamlets and isolated dwellings . The Little Ice Age saw the abandonment of marginal land , but new settlements were created as a result of the opening up of hunting reserves like Ettrick Forest and less desirable low @-@ lying land was also settled . As the population expanded , some settlements were sub @-@ divided to create new hamlets . Perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of the many burghs that had grown up in the later Medieval period , mainly in the east and south of the country . By 1750 , with its suburbs , Edinburgh had reached a population of 57 @,@ 000 . 
 By the early modern era Gaelic had been in geographical decline for three centuries and had begun to be a second class language , confined to the Highlands and Islands . It was gradually being replaced by Middle Scots . From the mid sixteenth century , written Scots was increasingly influenced by the developing Standard English of Southern England , which came to dominate elite discourse . After the Union in 1707 the use of Gaelic and Scots were discouraged by many in authority and education , as was the notion of Scottishness itself . The extent and borders of the kingdom had been fixed in their modern form by the beginning of the sixteenth century , with the exception of the debatable lands , settled by a French led commission in 1552 . The accession of James VI to the English throne made the borders less significant in military terms , becoming , in his phrase the " middle shires " of Great Britain , but it remained a jurisdictional and tariff boundary until the Act of Union in 1707 . Edinburgh had emerged as the capital in the fifteenth century and continued to be a major administrative centre . From the seventeenth century the responsibilities of shires expanded from judicial functions into wider local administration . The parish also became an important unit of local government . By the mid @-@ seventeenth century this system had largely been rolled out across the Lowlands , but was limited in the Highlands . There was much greater awareness of geography and political boundaries in this period and Scotland was extensively mapped for the first time . 
 = = Physical = = 
 The defining factor in the geography of Scotland is the distinction between the Highlands and Islands in the north and west and the Lowlands in the south and east . The Highlands are further divided into the Northwest Highlands and the Grampian Mountains by the fault line of the Great Glen . The Lowlands are divided into the fertile belt of the Central Lowlands and the higher terrain of the Southern Uplands , which included the Cheviot hills , over which , as now , the border with England runs . The Central Lowland belt averages about 50 miles in width and , because it contains most of the good quality agricultural land and has easier communications , could support most of the urbanisation and elements of conventional government . However , the Southern Uplands , and particularly the Highlands , were economically less productive and much more difficult to govern . The Uplands and Highlands had a relatively short growing season and , in the extreme case of the upper Grampians , this was an ice free season of four months or less and for much of the Highlands and Uplands of seven months or less . The early modern era also saw the impact of the Little Ice Age , of worldwide colder and wetter weather , which peaked towards the end of the seventeenth century . In 1564 there were thirty @-@ three days of continual frost , and rivers and lochs froze . The 1690s marked its lowest point , leading to the Seven ill years of famine . 
 Most roads in the Lowlands were maintained by justices from a monetary levy on landholders and work levy on tenants . The development of national grain prices indicates the network had improved considerably by the early eighteenth century . By the end of the seventeenth century , the drover 's roads , stretching down from the Highlands through south @-@ west Scotland to north @-@ east England and used for the transport of Highland Cattle for the English meat market , had become firmly established . In the Highlands and Galloway in the early eighteenth century , a series of military roads were built and maintained by the central government , with the aim of facilitating the movement of troops in the event of rebellion . 
 At the beginning of the period , most farming was based on the Lowland fermtoun or Highland baile , settlements of a handful of families that jointly farmed an area notionally suitable for two or three plough teams , allocated in run rigs , of " runs " ( furrows ) and " rigs " ( ridges ) , to tenant farmers . They usually ran downhill so that they included both wet and dry land , helping to offset the problems of extreme weather conditions . In this era , a system of land ownership based on large estates emerged as the dominant form as Scottish society was largely divided between a few large estate holders and a large number of workers . This had a major impact on the landscape as feudal systems of ownership were abandoned and land holdings reorganised . This process also facilitated the Scottish Agricultural Revolution that further changed the Scottish landscape from the first half of the eighteenth century . This was the beginning of a process that would create a landscape of rectangular fields , carefully located farm complexes with interconnecting roads . 
 Increasing contacts with England after the Union of 1707 led to a conscious attempt to improve agriculture among the gentry and nobility . The Society of Improvers was founded in 1723 , including in its 300 members dukes , earls , lairds and landlords . Haymaking was introduced along with the English plough and foreign grasses , the sowing of rye grass and clover . Turnips and cabbages were introduced , lands enclosed and marshes drained , lime was put down , roads built and woods planted . Drilling and sowing and crop rotation were introduced . The introduction of the potato to Scotland in 1739 greatly improved the diet of the peasantry . Enclosures began to displace the run rig system and free pasture . New farm buildings , often based on designs in patterns books , replaced the fermtoun and regional diversity was replaced with a standardisation of building forms . Smaller farms retained the linear outline of the longhouse , with dwelling house , barn and byre in a row , but in larger farms a three- or four @-@ sided layout became common , separating the dwelling house from barns and servants quarters . There was increasing regional specialisation . The Lothians became a major centre of grain , Ayrshire of cattle breading and the Borders of sheep . However , although some estate holders improved the quality of life of their displaced workers , enclosures led to unemployment and forced migrations to the burghs or abroad . 
 = = Settlement and demography = = 
 There are almost no reliable sources with which to track the population of Scotland before the late seventeenth century . Estimates based on English records suggest that by the end of the Middle Ages the Black Death and subsequent recurring outbreaks of the plague may have caused the population of Scotland to fall as low as half a million people . Price inflation , which generally reflects growing demand for food , suggests that this probably expanded in the first half of the sixteenth century , levelling off after the famine of 1595 , as prices were relatively stable in the early seventeenth century . Calculations based on Hearth Tax returns for 1691 indicate a population of 1 @,@ 234 @,@ 575 . This level may have been seriously effected by the famines of the 1690s . The first reliable information available on national population is from the census conducted by the Reverend Alexander Webster in 1755 , which showed the inhabitants of Scotland as 1 @,@ 265 @,@ 380 persons . 
 Compared with the situation after the redistribution of population as a result of the clearances and the industrial revolution that began in the eighteenth century , the population was evenly spread over the kingdom , with roughly half living north of the Tay . Most of the early modern population , in both the Lowlands and Highlands , was housed in small hamlets and isolated dwellings . One result of the Little Ice Age was the abandonment of marginal land in the early part of the period , as it became impossible to sustain agriculture in some regions , particularly in the uplands , but new settlements were created as a result of the opening up of hunting reserves like Ettrick Forest and less desirable low @-@ lying land was also settled , often incorporating features into their names such as bog , marsh and muir . 
 As the population expanded , some of these settlements were sub @-@ divided to create new hamlets and more marginal land was again settled , with sheilings ( clusters of huts occupied while summer pasture was being used for grazing ) becoming permanent settlements . Perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of the burghs that had grown up in the later Medieval period , mainly in the east and south of the country . They may have had a mean population of about 2 @,@ 000 , and the largest , Edinburgh , probably had a population of over 10 @,@ 000 at the beginning of the era , but many were much smaller than 1 @,@ 000 . During the seventeenth century , the number of people living in the capital grew rapidly . It also expanded beyond the city walls in suburbs at Cowgate , Bristo and Westport and by 1750 , with its suburbs , it had reached a population of 57 @,@ 000 . The only other towns above 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the period were Glasgow with 32 @,@ 000 , Aberdeen with around 16 @,@ 000 and Dundee with 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Language = = 
 By the early modern era Gaelic had been in geographical decline for three centuries and had begun to be a second class language , confined to the Highlands and Islands . It was gradually being replaced by Middle Scots , which became the language of both the nobility and the majority population . Scots was derived substantially from Old English , with Gaelic and French influences . It was called Inglyshe in the fifteenth century and was very close to the language spoken in northern England , but by the sixteenth century , it had established orthographic and literary norms largely independent of those developing in England . From the mid sixteenth century , written Scots was increasingly influenced by the developing Standard English of Southern England due to developments in royal and political interactions with England . With the increasing influence and availability of books printed in England , most writing in Scotland came to be done in the English fashion . Unlike many of his predecessors , James VI generally despised Gaelic culture . Having extolled the virtues of Scots " poesie " , after his accession to the English throne , he increasingly favoured the language of southern England . In 1611 the Kirk adopted the Authorized King James Version of the Bible . In 1617 interpreters were declared no longer necessary in the port of London because Scots and Englishmen were now " not so far different bot ane understandeth ane uther " . Jenny Wormald , describes James as creating a " three @-@ tier system , with Gaelic at the bottom and English at the top " . 
 After the Union in 1707 and the shift of political power to England , the use of Gaelic and Scots were discouraged by many in authority and education . The Scottish Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge ( SSPCK ) , established in 1709 , aimed to teach English language and end the attachment to Roman Catholicism associated with rebellious Jacobitism . It was partly cultural , intending to " wear out " Gaelic and " learn the people the English tongue " . Although SSPCK schools eventually taught in Gaelic , the overall effect contributed to the erosion of Highland culture . Many leading Scots of the period , such as David Hume , considered themselves Northern British rather than Scottish . They attempted to rid themselves of their Scots in a bid to establish Standard English as the official language of the newly formed Union . Many well @-@ off Scots took to learning English through the activities of those such as Thomas Sheridan , who in 1761 gave a series of lectures on English elocution . Charging a guinea at a time ( about £ 100 in today 's money ) they were attended by over 300 men , and he was made a freeman of the City of Edinburgh . Following this , some of the city 's intellectuals formed the Select Society for Promoting the Reading and Speaking of the English Language in Scotland . Nevertheless , Scots remained the vernacular of many rural communities and the growing number of urban working @-@ class Scots . 
 = = Political = = 
 The extent and borders of the kingdom had been fixed in their modern form by the beginning of the sixteenth century . The exception , the debatable lands at the western end of the border with England , were settled by a French led commission in 1552 and the Scots ' Dike built to mark the boundary . The Scottish administration of the Borders was divided into three marches : East , West and Middle . The accession of James VI to the English throne made the border less significant in military terms , becoming , in his phrase , the " middle shires " of Great Britain . In 1605 , he established a single commission of ten men drawn from equally Scotland and England to bring law and order to the region , but lawlessness continued and it remained a jurisdictional and tariff boundary until the Act of Union in 1707 . 
 Edinburgh had emerged as the capital in the fifteenth century . It was the wealthiest and largest city in the kingdom and held the central law courts , parliament and royal residence at Holyrood Palace . After James VI left for London at the Union of Crowns in 1603 , it continued to be the centre of government . Even after the Acts of Union in 1707 removed the parliament , it retained the exchequer and law courts . 
 From the seventeenth century the responsibilities of shires expanded from judicial functions into wider local administration . In 1667 , Commissioners of Supply were appointed in each sheriffdom or shire to collect the cess land tax . The parish also became an important unit of local government after three major pieces of legislation , in 1574 , 1579 and 1592 , established what would become known as " the Old Poor Law " . Pressured by Justices , the parish became responsible for taking care of the destitute in periods of famine , to prevent the impoverished from taking to the roads and causing general disorder . By the mid @-@ seventeenth century the system had largely been rolled out across the Lowlands , but was limited in the Highlands . 
 There was a growing awareness of geography and political boundaries in this period . Scotland was extensively mapped for the first time . In the last quarter of the sixteenth century , Timothy Pont created a series of sketch maps of Scotland and recorded the names and details of 20 @,@ 000 places he visited or noted . His work became the basis for the set of maps of Scotland published the following century by Willem and Johannes Blaeu . In the eighteenth century , there was a " militarisation of cartography " , by which the armed forces took over the business of mapping . One response to the Jacobite risings in 1715 and 1745 was the Ordnance Survey , from which over 800 military plans survive for Scotland . The new generation of cartographers were engineers and military surveyors . 
 = Henry de Lichton = 
 Henry de Lichton [ de <unk> , Leighton ] ( died 1440 ) was a medieval Scottish prelate and diplomat , who , serving as Bishop of Moray ( 1414 – 1422 ) and Bishop of Aberdeen ( 1422 – 1440 ) , became a significant patron of the church , a cathedral builder , and a writer . He also served King James I of Scotland as a diplomat in England , France , and Italy . 
 = = Early church career = = 
 Lichton was born in the diocese of Brechin ( probably Angus ) somewhere between 1369 and 1379 to Henry and Janet Lichton . He was well @-@ educated for his time , attending the University of Orléans and possibly the University of St Andrews , earning <unk> in civil law and canon law , a <unk> in canon law , and a doctorate in canon law , all achieved between 1394 and 1415 ; he attained an additional doctorate — in civil law — by 1436 . Lichton followed an ecclesiastical career simultaneously with his studies . The first notice of this career comes in 1392 , when he was vicar of Markinch in Fife , a vicariate of St Andrews Cathedral Priory . He was a canon of the diocese of Moray by 1394 , and Archdeacon of Aberdeen by 1395 , holding this position into the following year , 1396 . 
 = = Bishop of Moray = = 
 After the death of Bishop John de Innes in 1414 , the chapter of Elgin Cathedral met to elect a new bishop , and on 18 May Lichton was elected Bishop of Moray . Lichton travelled to Continental Europe to receive consecration , and was consecrated on 8 March 1415 , at Valencia by Pope Benedict XIII . 
 Lichton enjoyed an amicable relationship with the most powerful magnate in the area , Alexander Stewart , Lord of Badenoch and Earl of Mar , as Lichton appears to have suffered no harassment , attended the latter 's marriage to Isabella , Countess of Mar back in 1404 and procured for him an annulment of that marriage when Stewart chose to remarry in 1415 . Lichton was probably a kinsman of Stewart , as he is described as a kinsman of Stewart 's uncle , Robert Stewart , Duke of Albany , the man who ruled Scotland as governor until his death in 1420 . 
 = = Bishop of Aberdeen = = 
 After the death of Gilbert de Greenlaw , Bishop of Aberdeen , in 1421 , Lichton was chosen as his successor , and was translated to the diocese of Aberdeen in early April 1422 , on the authority of Pope Martin V. Pope Martin delegated authority to Robert de Cardeny , Bishop of Dunkeld , and William Stephen , Bishop of Dunblane , in order to take Lichton 's oath to the Papal see without forcing him to travel to Rome . It is of note that Lichton had already been in possession of the prebend of Kinkell in the Aberdeen diocese , a former possession of the Knights Hospitaller but attached to Aberdeen Cathedral by Lichton 's time . 
 As Bishop of Aberdeen , Lichton was one of its greatest builders . The Aberdeen <unk> noted that he began to rebuild the cathedral , and Hector Boece gave a description of his rebuilding , noting that although he finished the walls and two <unk> , the third belltower remained unfinished at his death . <unk> also constructed a new chapel dedicated to St John the Evangelist , and donated much of his own money to new service books and vestments , as well as to the reconstruction of the cathedral . He also authored several legal and religious texts , though none have survived . 
 = = Diplomatic career = = 
 Henry was frequently used as an ambassador by the king , James I of Scotland . According to the 16th century Bishop of Ross and historian John Lesley , Henry was one of the men sent to England to arrange the ransom of King James - held in England for most of his youth , not being released until 1424 . On 9 June 1425 , he and other prelates received a safe @-@ conduct from King Henry VI of England enabling them to travel through England on their way to visit Pope Martin V at Rome . In 1428 , Henry was the leader of an embassy sent to King Charles VII of France for a marriage proposal and to renew the Franco @-@ Scottish alliance , and in January 1430 , was sent into England for discussion of various grievances . On 31 March 1434 , Lichton is found in attendance at the Council of Basel , though no more details of his activities there have survived . 
 = = Death = = 
 Lichton 's death cannot be precisely dated . It fell between 11 November ( Martinmas ) 1440 , and 11 January 1441 ; it is probable that he died on either 12 or 14 December , because these were the anniversaries given to him in the 15th century and the 16th century respectively . He was buried in his new chapel , the one dedicated to St John the Evangelist . As a churchman , Lichton could never marry and did not ; he did however father a bastard , a daughter named Janet , who appeared in the records receiving papal dispensation to marry in 1432 . 
 = Plant defense against herbivory = 
 Plant defense against herbivory or host @-@ plant resistance ( <unk> ) describes a range of adaptations evolved by plants which improve their survival and reproduction by reducing the impact of herbivores . Plants can sense being touched , and they can use several strategies to defend against damage caused by herbivores . Many plants produce secondary metabolites , known as allelochemicals , that influence the behavior , growth , or survival of herbivores . These chemical defenses can act as repellents or toxins to herbivores , or reduce plant digestibility . 
 Other defensive strategies used by plants include escaping or avoiding herbivores in any time and / or any place , for example by growing in a location where plants are not easily found or accessed by herbivores , or by changing seasonal growth patterns . Another approach diverts herbivores toward eating non @-@ essential parts , or enhances the ability of a plant to recover from the damage caused by herbivory . Some plants encourage the presence of natural enemies of herbivores , which in turn protect the plant . Each type of defense can be either constitutive ( always present in the plant ) , or induced ( produced in reaction to damage or stress caused by herbivores ) . 
 Historically , insects have been the most significant herbivores , and the evolution of land plants is closely associated with the evolution of insects . While most plant defenses are directed against insects , other defenses have evolved that are aimed at vertebrate herbivores , such as birds and mammals . The study of plant defenses against herbivory is important , not only from an evolutionary view point , but also in the direct impact that these defenses have on agriculture , including human and livestock food sources ; as beneficial ' biological control agents ' in biological pest control programs ; as well as in the search for plants of medical importance . 
 = = Evolution of defensive traits = = 
 The earliest land plants evolved from aquatic plants around 450 million years ago ( Ma ) in the Ordovician period . Many plants have adapted to iodine @-@ deficient terrestrial environment by removing iodine from their metabolism , in fact iodine is essential only for animal cells . An important antiparasitic action is caused by the block of the transport of iodide of animal cells inhibiting sodium @-@ iodide <unk> ( NIS ) . Many plant pesticides are glycosides ( as the cardiac <unk> ) and cyanogenic glycosides which liberate cyanide , which , blocking cytochrome c oxidase and NIS , is poisonous only for a large part of parasites and herbivores and not for the plant cells in which it seems useful in seed dormancy phase . Iodide is not pesticide , but is oxidized , by vegetable peroxidase , to iodine , which is a strong oxidant , it is able to kill bacteria , fungi and protozoa . 
 The Cretaceous period saw the appearance of more plant defense mechanisms . The diversification of flowering plants ( angiosperms ) at that time is associated with the sudden burst of speciation in insects . This diversification of insects represented a major selective force in plant evolution , and led to selection of plants that had defensive adaptations . Early insect herbivores were <unk> and bit or chewed vegetation ; but the evolution of vascular plants lead to the co @-@ evolution of other forms of herbivory , such as sap @-@ sucking , leaf mining , gall forming and nectar @-@ feeding . 
 The relative abundance of different species of plants in ecological communities including forests and grasslands may be determined in part by the level of defensive compounds in the different species . Since the cost of replacement of damaged leaves is higher in conditions where resources are scarce , it may also be that plants growing in areas where water and nutrients are scarce may invest more resources into anti @-@ herbivore defenses . 
 = = = Records of herbivores = = = 
 Our understanding of herbivory in geological time comes from three sources : fossilized plants , which may preserve evidence of defense ( such as spines ) , or herbivory @-@ related damage ; the observation of plant debris in fossilised animal faeces ; and the construction of herbivore mouthparts . 
 Long thought to be a Mesozoic phenomenon , evidence for herbivory is found almost as soon as fossils which could show it . Within under 20 million years of the first fossils of sporangia and stems towards the close of the Silurian , around 420 million years ago , there is evidence that they were being consumed . Animals fed on the spores of early Devonian plants , and the Rhynie chert also provides evidence that organisms fed on plants using a " pierce and suck " technique . Many plants of this time are preserved with spine @-@ like <unk> , which may have performed a defensive role before being co @-@ opted to develop into leaves . 
 During the ensuing 75 million years , plants evolved a range of more complex organs - from roots to seeds . There was a gap of 50 to 100 million years between each organ evolving , and it being fed upon . Hole feeding and <unk> are recorded in the early Permian , with surface fluid feeding evolving by the end of that period . 
 = = = Co @-@ evolution = = = 
 Herbivores are dependent on plants for food , and have evolved mechanisms to obtain this food despite the evolution of a diverse arsenal of plant defenses . <unk> adaptations to plant defense have been likened to offensive traits and consist of adaptations that allow increased feeding and use of a host plant . Relationships between herbivores and their host plants often results in reciprocal evolutionary change , called co @-@ evolution . When an herbivore eats a plant it selects for plants that can mount a defensive response . In cases where this relationship demonstrates specificity ( the evolution of each trait is due to the other ) , and reciprocity ( both traits must evolve ) , the species are thought to have co @-@ evolved . The " escape and radiation " mechanism for co @-@ evolution presents the idea that adaptations in herbivores and their host plants have been the driving force behind speciation , and have played a role in the radiation of insect species during the age of angiosperms . Some herbivores have evolved ways to hijack plant defenses to their own benefit , by sequestering these chemicals and using them to protect themselves from predators . Plant defenses against herbivores are generally not complete so plants also tend to evolve some tolerance to herbivory . 
 = = Types = = 
 Plant defenses can be classified generally as constitutive or induced . <unk> defenses are always present in the plant , while induced defenses are produced or mobilized to the site where a plant is injured . There is wide variation in the composition and concentration of constitutive defenses and these range from mechanical defenses to digestibility reducers and toxins . Many external mechanical defenses and large quantitative defenses are constitutive , as they require large amounts of resources to produce and are difficult to mobilize . A variety of molecular and biochemical approaches are used to determine the mechanism of constitutive and induced plant defenses responses against herbivory . 
 Induced defenses include secondary metabolic products , as well as morphological and physiological changes . An advantage of inducible , as opposed to constitutive defenses , is that they are only produced when needed , and are therefore potentially less costly , especially when herbivory is variable . 
 = = = Chemical defenses = = = 
 The evolution of chemical defences in plants is linked to the emergence of chemical substances that are not involved in the essential photosynthetic and metabolic activities . These substances , secondary metabolites , are organic compounds that are not directly involved in the normal growth , development or reproduction of organisms , and often produced as by @-@ products during the synthesis of primary metabolic products . Although these secondary metabolites have been thought to play a major role in defenses against herbivores , a meta @-@ analysis of recent relevant studies has suggested that they have either a more minimal ( when compared to other non @-@ secondary metabolites , such as primary chemistry and physiology ) or more complex involvement in defense . 
 Secondary metabolites are often characterized as either qualitative or quantitative . Qualitative metabolites are defined as toxins that interfere with an herbivore ’ s metabolism , often by blocking specific biochemical reactions . Qualitative chemicals are present in plants in relatively low concentrations ( often less than 2 % dry weight ) , and are not dosage dependent . They are usually small , water @-@ soluble molecules , and therefore can be rapidly synthesized , transported and stored with relatively little energy cost to the plant . Qualitative allelochemicals are usually effective against non @-@ adapted specialists and generalist herbivores . 
 Quantitative chemicals are those that are present in high concentration in plants ( 5 – 40 % dry weight ) and are equally effective against all specialists and generalist herbivores . Most quantitative metabolites are digestibility reducers that make plant cell walls indigestible to animals . The effects of quantitative metabolites are dosage dependent and the higher these chemicals ’ proportion in the herbivore ’ s diet , the less nutrition the herbivore can gain from ingesting plant tissues . Because they are typically large molecules , these defenses are energetically expensive to produce and maintain , and often take longer to synthesize and transport . 
 The geranium , for example , produces a unique chemical compound in its petals to defend itself from Japanese beetles . Within 30 minutes of ingestion the chemical paralyzes the herbivore . While the chemical usually wears off within a few hours , during this time the beetle is often consumed by its own predators . 
 See <unk> 
 = = = = Types of chemical defences = = = = 
 Plants have evolved many secondary metabolites involved in plant defense , which are collectively known as <unk> compounds and can be classified into three sub @-@ groups : nitrogen compounds ( including alkaloids , cyanogenic glycosides , glucosinolates and <unk> ) , terpenoids , and phenolics . 
 Alkaloids are derived from various amino acids . Over 3000 known alkaloids exist , examples include nicotine , caffeine , morphine , cocaine , colchicine , <unk> , strychnine , and quinine . Alkaloids have pharmacological effects on humans and other animals . Some alkaloids can inhibit or activate enzymes , or alter carbohydrate and fat storage by inhibiting the formation phosphodiester bonds involved in their breakdown . Certain alkaloids bind to nucleic acids and can inhibit synthesis of proteins and affect DNA repair mechanisms . Alkaloids can also affect cell membrane and <unk> structure causing the cells to weaken , collapse , or leak , and can affect nerve transmission . Although alkaloids act on a diversity of metabolic systems in humans and other animals , they almost uniformly invoke an <unk> bitter taste . 
 <unk> glycosides are stored in inactive forms in plant vacuoles . They become toxic when herbivores eat the plant and break cell membranes allowing the glycosides to come into contact with enzymes in the cytoplasm releasing hydrogen cyanide which blocks cellular respiration . <unk> are activated in much the same way as cyanogenic glucosides , and the products can cause gastroenteritis , salivation , diarrhea , and irritation of the mouth . <unk> , secondary defence metabolites , which are characteristic for grasses ( Poaceae ) , are also stored as inactive glucosides in the plant vacuole . Upon tissue disruption they get into contact with β @-@ <unk> from the chloroplasts , which enzymatically release the toxic <unk> . Whereas some <unk> are constitutively present , others are only synthesised following herbivore infestation , and thus , considered inducible plant defenses against herbivory . 
 The terpenoids , sometimes referred to as isoprenoids , are organic chemicals similar to terpenes , derived from five @-@ carbon isoprene units . There are over 10 @,@ 000 known types of terpenoids . Most are <unk> structures which differ from one another in both functional groups , and in basic carbon skeletons . <unk> , continuing 2 isoprene units , are volatile essential oils such as <unk> , limonene , menthol , camphor , and pinene . <unk> , 4 isoprene units , are widely distributed in latex and resins , and can be quite toxic . <unk> are responsible for making Rhododendron leaves poisonous . Plant steroids and sterols are also produced from terpenoid precursors , including vitamin D , glycosides ( such as digitalis ) and saponins ( which lyse red blood cells of herbivores ) . 
 <unk> , sometimes called phenols , consist of an aromatic 6 @-@ carbon ring bonded to a hydroxy group . Some phenols have antiseptic properties , while others disrupt endocrine activity . <unk> range from simple tannins to the more complex flavonoids that give plants much of their red , blue , yellow , and white pigments . Complex phenolics called polyphenols are capable of producing many different types of effects on humans , including antioxidant properties . Some examples of phenolics used for defense in plants are : lignin , <unk> and cannabinoids . Condensed tannins , polymers composed of 2 to 50 ( or more ) flavonoid molecules , inhibit herbivore digestion by binding to consumed plant proteins and making them more difficult for animals to digest , and by interfering with protein absorption and digestive enzymes . Silica and lignins , which are completely indigestible to animals , grind down insect mandibles ( appendages necessary for feeding ) . 
 In addition to the three larger groups of substances mentioned above , fatty acid <unk> , amino acids and even peptides are also used as defense . The cholinergic <unk> , cicutoxin of water hemlock , is a <unk> derived from the fatty acid <unk> β @-@ N @-@ <unk> @-@ L @-@ α , β @-@ <unk> acid as simple amino acid is used by the sweet pea which leads also to intoxication in humans . The synthesis of fluoroacetate in several plants is an example of the use of small molecules to disrupt the metabolism of herbivores , in this case the citric acid cycle . 
 In tropical Sargassum and <unk> species that are often preferentially consumed by herbivorous fishes and echinoids , there is a relatively low level of phenolics and tannins . 
 = = = Mechanical defenses = = = 
 Plants have many external structural defenses that discourage herbivory . Depending on the herbivore ’ s physical characteristics ( i.e. size and defensive armor ) , plant structural defenses on stems and leaves can deter , injure , or kill the grazer . Some defensive compounds are produced internally but are released onto the plant ’ s surface ; for example , resins , lignins , silica , and wax cover the epidermis of terrestrial plants and alter the texture of the plant tissue . The leaves of holly plants , for instance , are very smooth and slippery making feeding difficult . Some plants produce <unk> or sap that traps insects . 
 A plant 's leaves and stem may be covered with sharp prickles , spines , thorns , or <unk> hairs on the leaf often with barbs , sometimes containing irritants or poisons . Plant structural features like spines and thorns reduce feeding by large ungulate herbivores ( e.g. kudu , impala , and goats ) by restricting the herbivores ' feeding rate , or by wearing down the molars . <unk> are sharp needles of calcium oxalate or calcium carbonate in plant tissues , making ingestion painful , damaging a herbivore 's mouth and gullet and causing more efficient delivery of the plant 's toxins . The structure of a plant , its branching and leaf arrangement may also be evolved to reduce herbivore impact . The shrubs of New Zealand have evolved special wide branching adaptations believed to be a response to browsing birds such as the moas . Similarly , African <unk> have long spines low in the canopy , but very short spines high in the canopy , which is comparatively safe from herbivores such as giraffes . 
 Trees such as coconut and other palms , may protect their fruit by multiple layers of armor , needing efficient tools to break through to the seed contents , and special skills to climb the tall and relatively smooth trunk . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> movements , those that occur in response to touch , are used as a defense in some plants . The leaves of the sensitive plant , Mimosa pudica , close up rapidly in response to direct touch , vibration , or even electrical and thermal stimuli . The proximate cause of this mechanical response is an abrupt change in the turgor pressure in the <unk> at the base of leaves resulting from osmotic phenomena . This is then spread via both electrical and chemical means through the plant ; only a single leaflet need be disturbed . 
 This response lowers the surface area available to herbivores , which are presented with the underside of each leaflet , and results in a wilted appearance . It may also physically dislodge small herbivores , such as insects . 
 = = = Mimicry and camouflages = = = 
 Some plants mimic the presence of insect eggs on their leaves , dissuading insect species from laying their eggs there . Because female butterflies are less likely to lay their eggs on plants that already have butterfly eggs , some species of neotropical vines of the genus Passiflora ( Passion flowers ) contain physical structures resembling the yellow eggs of Heliconius butterflies on their leaves , which discourage oviposition by butterflies . 
 = = = Indirect defenses = = = 
 Another category of plant defenses are those features that indirectly protect the plant by enhancing the probability of attracting the natural enemies of herbivores . Such an arrangement is known as mutualism , in this case of the " enemy of my enemy " variety . One such feature are semiochemicals , given off by plants . <unk> are a group of volatile organic compounds involved in interactions between organisms . One group of semiochemicals are allelochemicals ; consisting of <unk> , which play a defensive role in interspecies communication , and kairomones , which are used by members of higher trophic levels to locate food sources . When a plant is attacked it releases <unk> containing an abnormal ratio of volatiles . Predators sense these volatiles as food cues , attracting them to the damaged plant , and to feeding herbivores . The subsequent reduction in the number of herbivores confers a fitness benefit to the plant and demonstrates the indirect defensive capabilities of semiochemicals . Induced volatiles also have drawbacks , however ; some studies have suggested that these volatiles also attract herbivores . 
 Plants also provide housing and food items for natural enemies of herbivores , known as " biotic " defense mechanisms , as a means to maintain their presence . For example , trees from the genus Macaranga have adapted their thin stem walls to create ideal housing for an ant species ( genus Crematogaster ) , which , in turn , protects the plant from herbivores . In addition to providing housing , the plant also provides the ant with its exclusive food source ; from the food bodies produced by the plant . Similarly , some Acacia tree species have developed thorns that are swollen at the base , forming a hollowing structure that acts as housing . These Acacia trees also produce nectar in extrafloral nectaries on their leaves as food for the ants . 
 Plant use of endophytic fungi in defense is a very common phenomenon . Most plants have endophytes , microbial organisms that live within them . While some cause disease , others protect plants from herbivores and pathogenic microbes . <unk> can help the plant by producing toxins harmful to other organisms that would attack the plant , such as alkaloid producing fungi which are common in grasses such as tall fescue ( Festuca <unk> ) . 
 = = = Leaf shedding and color = = = 
 There have been suggestions that leaf shedding may be a response that provides protection against diseases and certain kinds of pests such as leaf miners and gall forming insects . Other responses such as the change of leaf colors prior to fall have also been suggested as adaptations that may help undermine the camouflage of herbivores . Autumn leaf color has also been suggested to act as an honest warning signal of defensive commitment towards insect pests that migrate to the trees in autumn . 
 = = Costs and benefits = = 
 Defensive structures and chemicals are costly as they require resources that could otherwise be used by plants to maximize growth and reproduction . Many models have been proposed to explore how and why some plants make this investment in defenses against herbivores . 
 = = = Optimal defense hypothesis = = = 
 The optimal defense hypothesis attempts to explain how the kinds of defenses a particular plant might use reflect the threats each individual plant faces . This model considers three main factors , namely : risk of attack , value of the plant part , and the cost of defense . 
 The first factor determining optimal defense is risk : how likely is it that a plant or certain plant parts will be attacked ? This is also related to the plant <unk> hypothesis , which states that a plant will invest heavily in broadly effective defenses when the plant is easily found by herbivores . Examples of apparent plants that produce generalized protections include long @-@ living trees , shrubs , and perennial grasses . <unk> plants , such as short @-@ lived plants of early successional stages , on the other hand , preferentially invest in small amounts of qualitative toxins that are effective against all but the most specialized herbivores . 
 The second factor is the value of protection : would the plant be less able to survive and reproduce after removal of part of its structure by a herbivore ? Not all plant parts are of equal evolutionary value , thus valuable parts contain more defenses . A plant ’ s stage of development at the time of feeding also affects the resulting change in fitness . Experimentally , the fitness value of a plant structure is determined by removing that part of the plant and observing the effect . In general , reproductive parts are not as easily replaced as vegetative parts , terminal leaves have greater value than basal leaves , and the loss of plant parts mid @-@ season has a greater negative effect on fitness than removal at the beginning or end of the season . Seeds in particular tend to be very well protected . For example , the seeds of many edible fruits and nuts contain cyanogenic glycosides such as <unk> . This results from the need to balance the effort needed to make the fruit attractive to animal dispersers while ensuring that the seeds are not destroyed by the animal . 
 The final consideration is cost : how much will a particular defensive strategy cost a plant in energy and materials ? This is particularly important , as energy spent on defense cannot be used for other functions , such as reproduction and growth . The optimal defense hypothesis predicts that plants will allocate more energy towards defense when the benefits of protection outweigh the costs , specifically in situations where there is high herbivore pressure . 
 = = = Carbon : nutrient balance hypothesis = = = 
 The carbon : nutrient balance hypothesis , also known as the environmental constraint hypothesis or Carbon Nutrient Balance Model ( <unk> ) , states that the various types of plant defenses are responses to variations in the levels of nutrients in the environment . This hypothesis predicts the Carbon / Nitrogen ratio in plants determines which secondary metabolites will be synthesized . For example , plants growing in nitrogen @-@ poor soils will use carbon @-@ based defenses ( mostly digestibility reducers ) , while those growing in low @-@ carbon environments ( such as shady conditions ) are more likely to produce nitrogen @-@ based toxins . The hypothesis further predicts that plants can change their defenses in response to changes in nutrients . For example , if plants are grown in low @-@ nitrogen conditions , then these plants will implement a defensive strategy composed of constitutive carbon @-@ based defenses . If nutrient levels subsequently increase , by for example the addition of fertilizers , these carbon @-@ based defenses will decrease . 
 = = = Growth rate hypothesis = = = 
 The growth rate hypothesis , also known as the resource availability hypothesis , states that defense strategies are determined by the inherent growth rate of the plant , which is in turn determined by the resources available to the plant . A major assumption is that available resources are the limiting factor in determining the maximum growth rate of a plant species . This model predicts that the level of defense investment will increase as the potential of growth decreases . Additionally , plants in resource @-@ poor areas , with inherently slow @-@ growth rates , tend to have long @-@ lived leaves and twigs , and the loss of plant appendages may result in a loss of scarce and valuable nutrients . 
 A recent test of this model involved a reciprocal transplants of seedlings of 20 species of trees between clay soils ( nutrient rich ) and white sand ( nutrient poor ) to determine whether trade @-@ offs between growth rate and defenses restrict species to one habitat . When planted in white sand and protected from herbivores , seedlings originating from clay outgrew those originating from the nutrient @-@ poor sand , but in the presence of herbivores the seedlings originating from white sand performed better , likely due to their higher levels of constitutive carbon @-@ based defenses . These finding suggest that defensive strategies limit the habitats of some plants . 
 = = = Growth @-@ differentiation balance hypothesis = = = 
 The growth @-@ differentiation balance hypothesis states that plant defenses are a result of a tradeoff between " growth @-@ related processes " and " differentiation @-@ related processes " in different environments . Differentiation @-@ related processes are defined as " processes that enhance the structure or function of existing cells ( i.e. maturation and specialization ) . " A plant will produce chemical defenses only when energy is available from photosynthesis , and plants with the highest concentrations of secondary metabolites are the ones with an intermediate level of available resources . The GDBH also accounts for tradeoffs between growth and defense over a resource availability gradient . In situations where resources ( e.g. water and nutrients ) limit photosynthesis , carbon supply is predicted to limit both growth and defense . As resource availability increases , the requirements needed to support photosynthesis are met , allowing for accumulation of carbohydrate in tissues . As resources are not sufficient to meet the large demands of growth , these carbon compounds can instead be partitioned into the synthesis of carbon based secondary metabolites ( phenolics , tannins , etc . ) . In environments where the resource demands for growth are met , carbon is allocated to rapidly dividing <unk> ( high sink strength ) at the expense of secondary metabolism . Thus rapidly growing plants are predicted to contain lower levels of secondary metabolites and vice versa . In addition , the tradeoff predicted by the GDBH may change over time , as evidenced by a recent study on Salix spp . Much support for this hypothesis is present in the literature , and some scientists consider the GDBH the most mature of the plant defense hypotheses . 
 = = Importance to humans = = 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 The variation of plant susceptibility to pests was probably known even in the early stages of agriculture in humans . In historic times , the observation of such variations in susceptibility have provided solutions for major socio @-@ economic problems . The grape phylloxera was introduced from North America to France in 1860 and in 25 years it destroyed nearly a third ( 100 @,@ 000 km ² ) of the French grape yards . Charles Valentine Riley noted that the American species Vitis labrusca was resistant to Phylloxera . Riley , with J. E. Planchon , helped save the French wine industry by suggesting the grafting of the susceptible but high quality grapes onto Vitis labrusca root stocks . The formal study of plant resistance to herbivory was first covered extensively in 1951 by Reginald ( R.H. ) Painter , who is widely regarded as the founder of this area of research , in his book Plant Resistance to Insects . While this work pioneered further research in the US , the work of <unk> was the basis of further research in the USSR . 
 Fresh growth of grass is sometimes high in prussic acid content and can cause poisoning of grazing livestock . The production of cyanogenic chemicals in grasses is primarily a defense against herbivores . 
