 The human innovation of cooking may have been particularly helpful in overcoming many of the defensive chemicals of plants . Many enzyme inhibitors in cereal grains and pulses , such as trypsin inhibitors prevalent in pulse crops , are denatured by cooking , making them digestible . 
 It has been known since the late 17th century that plants contain noxious chemicals which are avoided by insects . These chemicals have been used by man as early insecticides ; in 1690 nicotine was extracted from tobacco and used as a contact insecticide . In 1773 , insect infested plants were treated with nicotine fumigation by heating tobacco and blowing the smoke over the plants . The flowers of Chrysanthemum species contain pyrethrin which is a potent insecticide . In later years , the applications of plant resistance became an important area of research in agriculture and plant breeding , particularly because they can serve as a safe and low @-@ cost alternative to the use of pesticides . The important role of secondary plant substances in plant defense was described in the late 1950s by Vincent Dethier and G.S. Fraenkel . The use of botanical pesticides is widespread and notable examples include <unk> from the neem ( Azadirachta indica ) , d @-@ <unk> from Citrus species , <unk> from <unk> , <unk> from chili pepper and Pyrethrum . 
 Natural materials found in the environment also induce plant resistance as well . <unk> derived from chitin induce a plant 's natural defense response against pathogens , diseases and insects including cyst nematodes , both are approved as biopesticides by the EPA to reduce the dependence on toxic pesticides . 
 The selective breeding of crop plants often involves selection against the plant 's intrinsic resistance strategies . This makes crop plant varieties particularly susceptible to pests unlike their wild relatives . In breeding for host @-@ plant resistance , it is often the wild relatives that provide the source of resistance genes . These genes are incorporated using conventional approaches to plant breeding , but have also been augmented by recombinant techniques , which allow introduction of genes from completely unrelated organisms . The most famous transgenic approach is the introduction of genes from the bacterial species , Bacillus thuringiensis , into plants . The bacterium produces proteins that , when ingested , kill lepidopteran caterpillars . The gene encoding for these highly toxic proteins , when introduced into the host plant genome , confers resistance against caterpillars , when the same toxic proteins are produced within the plant . This approach is controversial , however , due to the possibility of ecological and toxicological side effects . 
 = = = Pharmaceutical = = = 
 Many currently available pharmaceuticals are derived from the secondary metabolites plants use to protect themselves from herbivores , including opium , aspirin , cocaine , and atropine . These chemicals have evolved to affect the biochemistry of insects in very specific ways . However , many of these biochemical pathways are conserved in vertebrates , including humans , and the chemicals act on human biochemistry in ways similar to that of insects . It has therefore been suggested that the study of plant @-@ insect interactions may help in <unk> . 
 There is evidence that humans began using plant alkaloids in medical preparations as early as 3000 B.C. Although the active components of most medicinal plants have been isolated only recently ( beginning in the early 19th century ) these substances have been used as drugs throughout the human history in potions , medicines , teas and as poisons . For example , to combat herbivory by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species , Cinchona trees produce a variety of alkaloids , the most familiar of which is quinine . Quinine is extremely bitter , making the bark of the tree quite unpalatable , it is also an anti @-@ fever agent , known as Jesuit 's bark , and is especially useful in treating malaria . 
 Throughout history <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) have been highly sought after for their reputed aphrodisiac properties . However , the roots of the mandrake plant also contain large quantities of the alkaloid scopolamine , which , at high doses , acts as a central nervous system depressant , and makes the plant highly toxic to herbivores . <unk> was later found to be medicinally used for pain management prior to and during labor ; in smaller doses it is used to prevent motion sickness . One of the most well @-@ known medicinally valuable terpenes is an anticancer drug , taxol , isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew , Taxus brevifolia , in the early 1960s . 
 = = = Biological pest control = = = 
 <unk> companion planting , defensive live fencing hedges , and " obstructive @-@ repellent " <unk> , with host @-@ plant resistance species as beneficial ' biological control agents ' is a technique in biological pest control programs for : organic gardening , wildlife gardening , sustainable gardening , and sustainable landscaping ; in organic farming and sustainable agriculture ; and in restoration ecology methods for habitat restoration projects . 
 = = Further references = = 
 Robert S. Fritz and Ellen L. Simms ( editors ) ( 1992 ) . Plant resistance to herbivores and pathogens : ecology , evolution , and genetics . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Hartley , Sue ( 2010 ) The 300 Million Years War : Plant Biomass v Herbivores Royal Institution Christmas Lecture . 
 Howe , H. F. , and L. C. Westley . 1988 . Ecological relationships of plants and animals . Oxford University Press , Oxford , UK . 
 Pierre Jolivet ( 1998 ) . <unk> Between Insects and Plants . Boca Raton : CRC . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 052 @-@ 7 . 
 Richard <unk> & Ian T. Baldwin ( 1997 ) . Induced responses to herbivory . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Martin R. Speight ; Mark D. Hunter ; Allan D. Watt ( 1999 ) . Ecology of insects : concepts and applications . Oxford : Blackwell Science . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 745 @-@ 3 . 
 John N. Thompson ( 1994 ) . The coevolutionary process . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Wiens , D. ( 1978 ) . " Mimicry in plants " . Evolutionary Biology 11 : 365 – 403 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4615 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 _ 6 . 
 = John Balchen = 
 Admiral Sir John Balchen ( 2 February 1670 – 4 October 1744 ) ( sometimes written as Sir John <unk> ) was an officer of the British Royal Navy with a long and distinguished career during the late 17th and early 18th centuries . In the course of his service at sea , Balchen saw action in numerous battles against the French and Spanish navies across 60 years and three separate wars . He was twice captured by the French in action , both times being exonerated and commended for the defence of his ships against overwhelming odds . 
 Balchen died in the shipwreck of the 100 @-@ gun first @-@ rate HMS Victory off the Casquets in the Channel Islands during operations to deter French blockading of Spanish and Portuguese ports during the War of the Austrian Succession . A capable and efficient officer , Balchen never found the wealth and prestige fellow officers secured in other commissions , a fact which remained a source of frustration to him until his elevation to knighthood shortly before his death . 
 = = Nine Years ' War = = 
 Balchen was born in February 1670 , the only surviving child of the yeoman gentleman , John Balchen , and his wife , Ann <unk> . Home educated , Balchen took a commission in the Royal Navy aged 15 and , seven years later , gained promotion to lieutenant . For most of this period Balchen was stationed in the West Indies and , during his service there , was lucky in his health ; the West Indies command was considered very dangerous during this period , mortality rates amongst sailors stationed there being very high due to malaria and yellow fever . The high death rate led to rapid promotion for those who survived , and Balchen was made Post Captain at the relatively young age of 27 during the Nine Years ' War . Balchen had spent the war aboard HMS Dragon and HMS Cambridge under Admiral John Neville , who was impressed enough with his subordinate to give him command of the prize ship HMS Virgin , the safe conduct of which to England earned him the step to captain . 
 = = War of the Spanish Succession = = 
 As with the majority of the Royal Navy , Balchen was placed in reserve at the war 's conclusion and returned to England to await further deployment . Whilst there , he married Susannah <unk> , daughter of an army colonel . The marriage produced six children , two of whom survived into adulthood ; Frances , who later married Temple West ( Vice Admiral Temple West ) and George , who followed his father into the Navy . In 1701 , Balchen was again at sea , commanding the small fireships HMS Firebrand and then HMS Vulcan with Sir George Rooke 's fleet off the Spanish coast at the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession . He was probably engaged during the Battle of Vigo Bay in 1702 , where Rooke 's fleet captured a Spanish treasure fleet and was instrumental in the capture of the 56 @-@ gun <unk> , which he went on to briefly command as HMS <unk> . 
 In 1703 , Balchen was transferred to the 44 @-@ gun frigate HMS Adventure in the North Sea . This was an area of great importance to the British war effort due to the convoys carrying naval supplies from Scandinavia , which crossed it regularly . The commission , however , yielded few opportunities in the way of prize money . The next year , he was transferred to the 54 @-@ gun HMS Chester , with which he was dispatched to the West African Coast , a region considered almost as fatal as the West Indies . Surviving once again , Balchen remained in the Chester and was attached to the convoys bound for Portugal and Virginia . 
 Balchen suffered his first defeat on 10 October 1707 . Leaving the safety of Portsmouth harbour , his convoy was ambushed by a French squadron under Forbin and Duguay @-@ Trouin , in what became the Battle at the Lizard . Although the dozen French warships were larger and stronger than the convoy escorts , Balchen took his ship into battle with the other warship captains . This action allowed the merchant convoy time to disperse and escape . The ensuing battle was one @-@ sided , with the French warships battering three English ships into submission over several hours , including Balchen 's command , which had been boarded by three French ships of the line . One British warship escaped , but HMS Devonshire exploded with the loss of nearly 900 lives . The French captured just 15 merchant ships from the hundreds in the convoy , as most made English ports before their pursuers could catch them . 
 Briefly a prisoner in France , Balchen , as an officer , was allowed to return to England on parole , where a court martial exonerated him for the loss of his ship and commended him for a brave defence . In 1709 , he was formally exchanged for a French officer and returned to naval service , receiving command of the newly built 60 @-@ gun HMS Gloucester in August . Leaving Spithead on his first cruise in October , he had been at sea for just a few hours when Duguay @-@ Trouin again appeared with a squadron of five ships of the line . Unable to outrun his opponents , Balchen engaged the 74 @-@ gun flagship Lis before being forced to surrender after being dismasted and threatened with boarding . 
 Balchen was exchanged almost immediately and the court martial , once again , exonerated him from all blame for the loss of his ship . He was rewarded for his bravery with command of HMS Colchester in 1710 , in which , on 9 November , Balchen secured his first prize , a 20 @-@ gun French privateer which he outran in a gale . In 1712 and 1713 , Balchen was in the Mediterranean under Sir John Jennings and returned home in 1713 for a period of unemployment on shore . With the end of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1715 , Balchen was returned to sea in the 40 @-@ gun frigate HMS Diamond , which he used in the suppression of piracy in the West Indies until 1716 . The same year , he received the shore position commanding the guardship HMS Orford in the Medway . 
 = = War of the Quadruple Alliance = = 
 In 1718 , war once again broke out and experienced officers were immediately given sea postings , Balchen in the 80 @-@ gun HMS Shrewsbury in the fleet of Sir George Byng . Arriving in the Mediterranean , Vice @-@ Admiral Charles Cornewall made Shrewsbury his flagship and Balchen his flag captain , a position which remained until December of that year . In July 1718 , Shrewsbury had been engaged at the Battle of Cape Passaro , at which a Spanish fleet had been comprehensively defeated ; Balchen 's first great naval action and his first major victory . 
 In May 1719 , Balchen was given command of the 70 @-@ gun HMS Monmouth under Sir John Norris , and served in the Baltic and North Seas until 1722 . In 1722 , Balchen took over the guardship HMS Ipswich at Spithead and , in 1726 , returned to the Monmouth for further service in the Baltic under Norris and Sir Charles Wager . In 1727 Balchen was part of a mission to resupply besieged Gibraltar , although , by the time the fleet arrived , the siege had been broken . In 1728 , Balchen received promotion to Rear @-@ Admiral . In 1731 , after a period in command of the 60 @-@ gun HMS Dreadnought , Balchen took over the 80 @-@ gun HMS Princess Amelia and commanded her in support of a Spanish landing at Livorno . Balchen returned in December and , in 1734 , was promoted to Vice @-@ Admiral , spending the next five years at his estates in England . 
 = = War of the Austrian Succession = = 
 At the outbreak of the War of Jenkin 's Ear with Spain in 1739 , Balchen commanded a squadron of seven ships off the Spanish Atlantic Coast . Tasked with intercepting Spanish convoys , Balchen was almost caught by a superior Spanish squadron , which forced him to withdraw deeper into the Atlantic . For several weeks , this provoked rumours in Britain that his force had been destroyed , until he got word to the Admiralty of his hurried retreat . During the next two years , Balchen spent most of his time on convoy duty and came to resent younger and more active officers who made substantial fortunes from prize money . He confided to a friend in 1741 : 
 " [ We ] have Nobody spoke of Now but Mr. <unk> ; he has all the Glory , and success pursues him . The West Indie people will be so Rich there wont be Roome for them to purchase Lands ; whilst I am forced to drudge from place to place for Nothing . " 
 = = Loss of the Victory = = 
 In March 1743 Balchen received the command of the Greenwich Naval Hospital and £ 600 per annum as a pension . Balchen chafed at being forced to remain ashore and was not pleased when he was forcibly retired in April 1744 , aged 74 . Two months later , however , Balchen was recalled up to the Admiralty . A fleet of 25 British and Dutch ships had been raised in a hurry to rescue a British squadron and convoy under Sir Charles Hardy , which had been trapped in the Tagus by a French Brest squadron . Due to a shortage of officers of sufficient experience and seniority to command a fleet of this kind , Balchen was called up at short notice and rewarded with a knighthood . 
 Balchen 's fleet was successful in driving off the French , who retired in the face of his superior fleet without firing a shot , and Hardy 's convoy was escorted safely to Gibraltar . On the way to the Portuguese Coast , Balchen finally made his fortune in prize money , capturing six heavily laden French West Indiamen . On his return journey however , the fleet was sailing through the Western Approaches in early October when it was hit by a violent storm . Scattered across the Channel , they one by one returned to England in a battered and leaking condition until , a few days later , only HMS Victory was missing . Victory , Balchen 's flagship , was , at the time , one of the largest ships in the world , holding a broadside of 100 guns . She was also very new , having been completed less than seven years before . 
 <unk> were dispatched across the English Channel to search for the missing battleship , which was last seen on the horizon on 4 October . Captain Thomas Grenville of the frigate HMS Falkland landed at Guernsey in the Channel Islands to reprovision and there heard from locals that wreckage and part of a topmast had washed up on the island 's shores . Further investigation proved that the wreckage had indeed come from the Victory , which was believed to have run into the Casquets , a group of rocks nearby . Other wreckage was washed up on Jersey and Alderney , whose inhabitants had heard distress guns the night before the wreck but were unable to provide aid in the severe storm . Of the 1 @,@ 150 sailors aboard Victory , none was ever recovered . 
 ( In 2008 , the H.M.S. Victory was found approximately 100 km ( 62 miles ) from the Casquets . ) 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Balchen 's death was met with national mourning in Britain , where he was regarded as an expert and veteran commander of great talent in seamanship , tactics and ship construction . He was also very popular with sailors below decks , having fought for them in the Admiralty over issues such as allowing volunteer seamen to transfer ship when their captain did the same and giving trustworthy sailors shore visiting privileges . His widow was allowed a pension of £ 500 a year following her husband 's death and the consequent end of his income whilst his son George received a promotion to post captain . George , however , did not long outlive his father , dying of illness in Barbados the following year , aged only 28 . 
 A large memorial to Balchen 's memory was raised in Westminster Abbey , where it can still be seen . The relief commemorates Balchen 's career , that of his son and also the men lost on the Victory in 1744 who have no other permanent memorial . Balchen is remembered in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography as " a hard @-@ working , thoroughgoing professional , recognised for his readiness to accept duty whenever and wherever required . " 
 = Cyclone Keli = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Keli ( NPMOC / JTWC Designation : <unk> ) was the first recorded post @-@ season tropical cyclone to form in June within the South Pacific Ocean . The system formed on June 7 , 1997 , about 460 kilometers ( 285 mi ) to the north of Tokelau . The depression gradually developed over the next few days while moving southwestward . It was designated as Tropical Cyclone Keli early the next day . Cyclone Keli intensified , slowly reaching its 10 @-@ minute peak wind speeds of 150 km / h , ( 90 mph ) , which made it a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone on the Australian Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale . As it came under the influence of strong mid latitude westerlies and moved into an area of strong vertical wind shear , the cyclone started to weaken and was declared as extratropical on June 15 . 
 Cyclone Keli struck the islands of Tuvalu on June 12 and 13 , with extensive damage reported throughout the Islands with trees uprooted by wind and waves . On Nivalakita all buildings except for the church were flattened ; an estimated cost to rebuild all of the houses as they were before the cyclone hit was estimated at A $ 12 thousand ( US $ 10 thousand ) , while it was estimated that the cost of rebuilding the houses with an improved , cyclone @-@ resistant design would be about A $ 84 thousand ( US $ 63 thousand ) . The whole of <unk> <unk> was left uninhabitable , as coconut trees and other vegetation were swept away with no more than an area of jagged coral left behind . In Fiji , strong winds and rough seas were reported from the cyclone as it was moving to the north of Fiji , and while the cyclone was weakening it dropped 3 @.@ 76 inches ( <unk> ) of rain on American Samoa . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Keli was first noted as a depression , to the northeast of the New Zealand territory of Tokelau during June 7 , 1997 . Over the next couple of days the system moved towards the south @-@ west and gradually developed further , with the United States Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center ( NPMOC ) issuing a tropical cyclone formation alert for the system during June 9 . 
 The NPMOC subsequently designated the system as Tropical Cyclone <unk> and initiated advisories on the system early on June 10 , while the system was located about 475 km ( 295 mi ) to the east of Funafuti , Tuvalu . The system was subsequently named Keli by the Fiji Meteorological Service , after it had developed into a Category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale . During that day the system continued to move south @-@ westwards , towards the island nation of Tuvalu and passed near or over the island of Niulakita during June 11 . After it the system had passed over Niulakita , Keli rapidly intensified in an area of light vertical wind shear , as it moved slowly and performed a small cyclonic loop . 
 Early on June 12 , the FMS reported that Keli had peaked as a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone , with 10 @-@ minute sustained windspeeds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) . During that day the system started to weaken and came to within 65 km ( 40 mi ) of making a second landfall on Niulakita , before it accelerated south @-@ eastwards as it interacted with the Westerlies . The NPMOC also reported during that day that Keli had peaked with 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , which made it equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . During June 13 , the system continued to move south @-@ eastwards and passed about 50 km ( 30 mi ) to the southeast of Mata @-@ Utu in the island nation of Wallis and Futuna . Later that day Keli started to transition into an extratropical cyclone , during the following day the system passed within 200 km ( 125 mi ) of Apia , Samoa . During June 15 , the FMS reported that Keli had weakened into a tropical depression , while the NPMOC reported that it had degenerated into an extratropical cyclone . The system was subsequently last noted during June 17 , while it was located about 2 @,@ 140 km ( 1 @,@ 330 mi ) to the southeast of Adamstown in the Pitcairn Islands . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Heavy rain was reported in American Samoa with a rainfall total , of 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) reported at <unk> in American Samoa . The name Keli was retired after this usage of the name and was replaced with the name Kofi . 
 = = = Tuvalu = = = 
 Keli was the third and final tropical cyclone to impact Tuvalu during the 1996 @-@ 97 season , after Severe Tropical Cyclone 's Gavin and Hina affected the island nation during March 1997 . Ahead of the system impacting Tuvalu , storm and gale force wind warnings were issued for the islands of Niulakita and <unk> , while a strong wind warning was issued for the rest of the group during June 10 . During that day the system moved south @-@ westwards and passed near or over Niulakita later that day , before it performed a cyclonic loop and passed within 65 km ( 40 mi ) of Niulakita during June 12 . 
 As Cyclone Keli struck the islands of Tuvalu on June 12 and 13 , peak wind gusts of 165 km / h , ( 105 mph ) were reported , with extensive damage also reported throughout the Islands with trees uprooted by wind and waves . On Nivalakita all buildings except for the church were flattened with an estimated cost to rebuild the houses exactly as they were was estimated at A $ 12 @,@ 000 ( US $ 10 @,@ 000 1997 ) , while it was estimated that the cost of rebuilding the houses with an improved , cyclone @-@ resistant design would be about A $ 84 @,@ 000 ( 63 @,@ 000 USD 1997 ) . Also on Nivalakita communications were cut with the telephone operator having to resort to sending a Morse code message , however as the storm re @-@ curved and re @-@ hit Tuvalu on June 14 , it silenced the weak radio telegraph system . In <unk> <unk> the whole island was left uninhabitable as coconut trees and other vegetation were swept away with no more than an area of jagged coral left behind . 
 With effect from June 12 , a state of public emergency was declared for the whole of Tuvalu , by the then Governor @-@ General of Tuvalu , Sir <unk> <unk> . This was because there was only a limited amount of food available on Funafuti to cater for the whole of the island nation , while providing Niulakita with immediate relief supplies . This enabled the Tuvaluan embassy in Suva , Fiji to appeal to various overseas countries and organisations including Australia , New Zealand , the United Kingdom and the United Nations Development Programme to provide aid and assistance to the island nation . During June 14 , the Royal New Zealand Air Force deployed a transport plane carrying some relief materials including tarpaulins and water from New Zealand . The plane subsequently stopped in Noumea , New Caledonia and Nadi , Fiji to pick up further relief supplies that had been donated by Australia , Fiji and France . The crew of the plane subsequently conducted an aerial assessment of the damage on Niulakita , and reported seeing widespread damage , before they arrived at Funafuti Airport during June 15 . 
 = = = Wallis and Futuna = = = 
 Cyclone Keli was the third out of four tropical cyclones to impact the French Territory of Wallis and Futuna during a ten @-@ month period , after Cyclones Gavin and Hina had affected the island during March 1997 . There was almost no damage recorded in the <unk> from Keli , while rainfall totals of 171 @.@ 6 mm ( 6 @.@ 76 in ) and 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) were recorded at Hihifo and Aka <unk> on Wallis during June 11 . Wind gusts of up to 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) were recorded at Maopoopo on Futuna island during July 13 . 
 = = = Tonga = = = 
 Keli was the second of three tropical cyclones to affect Tonga during a ten @-@ month period , with Cyclones Hina and Ron affecting the island nation during March 1997 and January 1998 . Ahead of the system impacting Tonga , the FMS issued cyclone warnings for the Niuas and strong wind warnings for the rest of Tonga . As a result of the warnings a vessel that was heading to the island group had to be recalled , which was predicted to affect supplies on the islands when it was likely to be most needed . During June 13 , Keli caused some damage to the islands with plantations , breadfruit trees and other large trees devastated . The strong winds also destroyed several residences while causing damage to public buildings . 
 = Joseph H. Allen = 
 Joseph H. Allen ( September 5 , 1821 – April 24 , 1884 ) was an industrial businessman , an officer in the Civil War , and a town supervisor of Brunswick , New York . Allen was born in <unk> , Vermont , to parents of British descent and left home at an early age . After several business ventures , he became successful in the auger and hoe business , selling mainly to the American South . He successfully ran for supervisor of the Town of Brunswick in 1856 and justice of the peace in 1861 . At the beginning of the Civil War , his sales plummeted so he closed his business and enlisted in the Union Army . Allen was wounded multiple times during his service and ended his career at the rank of lieutenant colonel . He returned home to reopen his factory , which was instrumental to the industrial success of the hamlet of Eagle Mills in the mid to late 19th century . He died in 1884 at the age of 62 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Allen was the son of John and Sarah Allen . His father was a native of Connecticut and of English origin , and his mother was originally from Vermont and of Scottish descent . He left home when he was eight years old " to carve out a fortune for himself " , as Sylvester put it in his History of Rensselaer County , New York . He began work in an auger factory in Hamden , Connecticut , at an early age and continued until he was seventeen years old . At that time , he purchased a clock store , which he traded for horses in Vermont and Canada . He shipped his horses to the West Indies , but the ship was wrecked and his horses were lost , thus placing him badly in debt . However , he soon obtained credit , and again shipped a number of horses to the West Indies , this time successfully , enabling him to pay all his debts and even earning him a profit . 
 = = Before the war = = 
 Allen soon resumed his place in the auger factory in Connecticut , where he remained until September 1 , 1843 , when he moved to Troy , New York . There he entered into partnership with O. W. Edson in manufacturing augers . The partnership continued until the following January when Allen purchased his partner ’ s share and continued in this business until the factory burned down in 1850 . 
 In January 1851 , Allen purchased the Eagle flour mills , an historically important industrial building in the area , which eventually gave the hamlet of Eagle Mills its name . The factory had a long history of failed business attempts . It was built in 1821 by Daniel Sheldon to mill flour using wheat supplied from Troy . After brief success , the business closed and the building sat idle . It was sold to James Bumstead who reopened the building as a feed mill . He too had troubles and sold the building to James McChesney , who kept the building idle for some time before transferring the property to Catlin and Saxton , who began the manufacture of augers and bits . Also unsuccessful , Catlin and Saxton abandoned the business and James McChesney ( whose name was still on the deed ) sold the property to Groome and Shattuck , who began manufacturing monkey wrenches . This too failed and the property was sold to Paul Smith , a miller from nearby <unk> , who sold the property to Allen in 1851 because Smith later decided that he preferred to keep his mills consolidated in <unk> . 
 The factory was located on the rocky banks of the <unk> Kill , a creek that was commonly used for water power in the area . Allen had two new buildings erected and funneled creek water to them through tunnels in the bedrock underneath the buildings . He named his enterprise the Millville Manufacturing Company and converted the mill into an auger and bit factory . At one point , he experimented with producing cable chains and files , as well . But the company soon ran into legal difficulties and was dissolved . 
 Allen reopened the company in 1859 , having added machinery for the manufacture of hoes , and opened a retail store on site . He found a successful market in the South , where demand was high . His company , newly named the Planters ' Hoe Company , was a considerable success . However , as the nation came closer to civil war , demand dropped and sales in the South became impossible . The factory was closed in 1861 , not only due to poor sales , but because Allen enlisted in the Union Army . 
 = = Public and armed service = = 
 Allen 's presence was noticeable within Brunswick . In March 1853 , he presided over a meeting to incorporate the " Church of the Disciples of Christ at the village of Millville " , now known simply as Church of the Disciples of Christ . That summer , a church building was erected at a cost of about $ 1 @,@ 200 . In 1856 Allen became the supervisor of Brunswick , a position he was reelected to once and held until 1857 ; he ran as a Whig . He was also elected justice of the peace in 1861 , but he did not finish his term because he decided to serve in the Civil War ; this time he ran as a Democrat , and remained one for the rest of his life . 
 In early 1862 , the 125th Volunteer Infantry Regiment had been put together in Brunswick and a call by President Lincoln for more troops was answered by Allen that September . He enlisted in Company C of the 169th New York Volunteer Infantry and was chosen captain , having organized the company within six days . Most of the infantrymen came from Brunswick , though some came from surrounding towns . Residents of the town raised the money necessary to cover various " bounties and expenses " incurred by Allen 's soldiers while en route to war . 
 Allen participated in all the battles in which his regiment took part except a few minor ones , due to wounds he received in battle . During the Battle of Cold Harbor , the bones in his wrist were shattered , and he later incurred a flesh wound in the same wrist at the First Battle of Fort Fisher . He was also wounded in the leg near his ankle at Fort Fisher ; the musket ball remained there until his death . While recovering from injuries , he was reassigned to New York to recruit new soldiers . He was promoted to the rank of major in June 1864 , and , for " meritorious conduct " at Fort Fisher , he was recommended for promotion by President Lincoln and brevetted lieutenant colonel on March 13 , 1865 . 
 = = Post war and personal life = = 
 Allen returned to Brunswick after the war and reopened the Planters ' Hoe Company in association with George T. Lane . He ended the production of augers , which still made up a small percentage of production even after closing Millville Manufacturing . Allen put himself in charge of manufacturing and sales and he again secured a solid market share in the South . A prosperous trade resumed and was still strong at least until the 1880s . The company eventually expanded and began manufacturing lighter common hoes for the general public , adding to its heavy southern @-@ style line of hoes . The Planters ' Hoe Company was still a success as late as the 1890s , but it was extinct by the 1920s . 
 In addition to holding the offices of justice of the peace and town supervisor , it is also said that Allen was one of the foremost supporters of education in the town . On July 6 , 1847 , he married Sarah H. Payne , daughter of David H. and Catharine C. Payne , of Hamden , Connecticut . The couple had two children : Sarah and Cornelia May . 
 Allen died on April 24 , 1884 , and is buried in Eagle Mills Cemetery on Brunswick Road in Eagle Mills ; his wife died in 1907 and is buried next to him . Based on insignia carved on his gravestone ( specifically the Square and Compasses ) , Allen was a Mason . 
 = Global dimming = 
 Global dimming is the gradual reduction in the amount of global direct irradiance at the Earth 's surface that was observed for several decades after the start of systematic measurements in the 1950s . The effect varies by location , but worldwide it has been estimated to be of the order of a 4 % reduction over the three decades from 1960 – 1990 . However , after discounting an anomaly caused by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in 1991 , a very slight reversal in the overall trend has been observed . 
 Global dimming is thought to have been caused by an increase in particulates such as sulfate aerosols in the atmosphere due to human action . 
 It has interfered with the hydrological cycle by reducing evaporation and may have reduced rainfall in some areas . Global dimming also creates a cooling effect that may have partially counteracted the effect of greenhouse gases on global warming . 
 = = Causes and effects = = 
 It is thought that global dimming is probably due to the increased presence of aerosol particles in the atmosphere caused by human action . Aerosols and other particulates absorb solar energy and reflect sunlight back into space . The pollutants can also become nuclei for cloud droplets . Water droplets in clouds coalesce around the particles . Increased pollution causes more particulates and thereby creates clouds consisting of a greater number of smaller droplets ( that is , the same amount of water is spread over more droplets ) . The smaller droplets make clouds more reflective , so that more incoming sunlight is reflected back into space and less reaches the Earth 's surface . This same effect also reflects radiation from below , trapping it in the lower atmosphere . In models , these smaller droplets also decrease rainfall . 
 Clouds intercept both heat from the sun and heat radiated from the Earth . Their effects are complex and vary in time , location , and altitude . Usually during the daytime the interception of sunlight predominates , giving a cooling effect ; however , at night the re @-@ radiation of heat to the Earth slows the Earth 's heat loss , this causes storms and subsequent flood rains and flooding . 
 = = Research = = 
 In the late @-@ 1960s , Mikhail Ivanovich Budyko worked with simple two @-@ dimensional energy @-@ balance climate models to investigate the reflectivity of ice . He found that the ice @-@ albedo feedback created a positive feedback loop in the Earth 's climate system . The more snow and ice , the more solar radiation is reflected back into space and hence the colder Earth grows and the more it snows . Other studies found that pollution or a volcano eruption could provoke the onset of an ice age . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , <unk> <unk> , a geography researcher at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology , found that solar radiation striking the Earth 's surface had declined by more than 10 % over the three previous decades . His findings appeared to contradict global warming — the global temperature had been generally rising since the 70s . Less light reaching the earth seemed to mean that it should cool . <unk> published his findings " Secular variation of global radiation in Europe " in 1989 . This was soon followed by others : <unk> <unk> in 1990 " Trends of solar radiation , cloudiness and atmospheric transparency during recent decades in Estonia " , and Beate Liepert in 1994 " Solar radiation in Germany — Observed trends and an assessment of their causes " . <unk> has also been observed in sites all over the former Soviet Union . Gerry Stanhill who studied these declines worldwide in many papers ( see references ) coined the term " global dimming " . 
 Independent research in Israel and the Netherlands in the late 1980s showed an apparent reduction in the amount of sunlight , despite widespread evidence that the climate was becoming hotter . The rate of dimming varies around the world but is on average estimated at around 2 – 3 % per decade . The trend reversed in the early 1990s . It is difficult to make a precise measurement , due to the difficulty in accurately calibrating the instruments used , and the problem of spatial coverage . Nonetheless , the effect is almost certainly present . 
 The effect ( 2 – 3 % , as above ) is due to changes within the Earth 's atmosphere ; the value of the solar radiation at the top of the atmosphere has not changed by more than a fraction of this amount . 
 The effect varies greatly over the planet , but estimates of the terrestrial surface average value are : 
 5 @.@ 3 % ( 9 W / m ² ) ; over 1958 – 85 ( Stanhill and <unk> , 1992 ) 
 2 % / decade over 1964 – 93 ( <unk> et al . , 1998 ) 
 2 @.@ 7 % / decade ( total 20 W / m ² ) ; up to 2000 ( Stanhill and Cohen , 2001 ) 
 4 % over 1961 – 90 ( Liepert 2002 ) 
 Note that these numbers are for the terrestrial surface and not really a global average . Whether dimming ( or brightening ) occurred over the ocean has been a bit of an unknown though a specific measurement ( see below , Causes ) measured effects some 400 miles ( 643 @.@ 7 km ) from India over the Indian Ocean towards the Maldives Islands . Regional effects probably dominate but are not strictly confined to the land area , and the effects will be driven by regional air circulation . A 2009 review by Wild et al. found that widespread variation in regional and time effects . There was solar brightening beyond 2000 at numerous stations in Europe , the United States , and Korea . The brightening seen at sites in Antarctica during the 1990s , influenced by recovering from the Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption in 1991 , fades after 2000 . The brightening tendency also seems to level off at sites in Japan . In China there is some indication for a renewed dimming , after the stabilization in the 1990s . A continuation of the long @-@ lasting dimming is also noted at the sites in India . Overall , the available data suggest continuation of the brightening beyond the year 2000 at numerous locations , yet less pronounced and coherent than during the 1990s , with more regions with no clear changes or declines . Therefore , globally , greenhouse warming after 2000 may be less modulated by surface solar variations than in prior decades . The largest reductions are found in the northern hemisphere mid @-@ latitudes . Visible light and infrared radiation seem to be most affected rather than the ultraviolet part of the spectrum . 
 = = Pan evaporation data = = 
 Over the last 50 or so years , pan evaporation has been carefully monitored . For decades , nobody took much notice of the pan evaporation measurements . But in the 1990s in Europe , Israel , and North America , scientists spotted something that at the time was considered very strange : the rate of evaporation was falling although they had expected it to increase due to global warming . The same trend has been observed in China over a similar period . A decrease in solar irradiance is cited as the driving force . However , unlike in other areas of the world , in China the decrease in solar irradiance was not always accompanied by an increase in cloud cover and precipitation . It is believed that aerosols may play a critical role in the decrease of solar irradiance in China . 
 BBC Horizon producer David <unk> believes that many climate scientists regard the pan @-@ evaporation data as the most convincing evidence of solar dimming . Pan evaporation experiments are easy to reproduce with low @-@ cost equipment . There are many pans used for agriculture all over the world and in many instances the data have been collected for nearly a half century . However , pan evaporation depends on factors besides net radiation from the sun . The other two major factors are vapor pressure deficit and wind speed . The ambient temperature turns out to be a negligible factor . The pan evaporation data corroborates the data gathered by radiometer and fills in the gaps in the data obtained using <unk> . With adjustments to these factors , pan evaporation data has been compared to results of climate simulations . 
 = = Probable causes = = 
 The incomplete combustion of fossil fuels ( such as diesel ) and wood releases black carbon into the air . Though black carbon , most of which is soot , is an extremely small component of air pollution at land surface levels , the phenomenon has a significant heating effect on the atmosphere at altitudes above two kilometers ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) . Also , it dims the surface of the ocean by absorbing solar radiation . 
 Experiments in the Maldives ( comparing the atmosphere over the northern and southern islands ) in the 1990s showed that the effect of macroscopic pollutants in the atmosphere at that time ( blown south from India ) caused about a 10 % reduction in sunlight reaching the surface in the area under the pollution cloud — a much greater reduction than expected from the presence of the particles themselves . Prior to the research being undertaken , predictions were of a 0 @.@ 5 – 1 % effect from particulate matter ; the variation from prediction may be explained by cloud formation with the particles acting as the focus for droplet creation . Clouds are very effective at reflecting light back out into space . 
 The phenomenon underlying global dimming may also have regional effects . While most of the earth has warmed , the regions that are downwind from major sources of air pollution ( specifically sulfur dioxide emissions ) have generally cooled . This may explain the cooling of the eastern United States relative to the warming western part . 
 However some research shows that black carbon will increase global warming , being second only to CO2 . They believe that soot will absorb solar energy and transport it to other areas such as the Himalayas where glacial melting occurs . It can also darken Arctic ice reducing reflectivity and increasing absorption of solar radiation . 
 Some climate scientists have theorized that aircraft contrails ( also called vapor trails ) are implicated in global dimming , but the constant flow of air traffic previously meant that this could not be tested . The near @-@ total shutdown of civil air traffic during the three days following the September 11 , 2001 attacks afforded a unique opportunity in which to observe the climate of the United States absent from the effect of contrails . During this period , an increase in diurnal temperature variation of over 1 ° C ( 1 @.@ 8 ° F ) was observed in some parts of the U.S. , i.e. aircraft contrails may have been raising nighttime temperatures and / or lowering daytime temperatures by much more than previously thought . 
 Airborne volcanic ash can reflect the Sun 's rays back into space and thereby contribute to cooling the planet . Dips in earth temperatures have been observed after large volcano eruptions such as Mount Agung in Bali that erupted in 1963 , El <unk> ( Mexico ) 1983 , Ruiz ( Colombia ) 1985 , and Pinatubo ( Philippines ) 1991 . But even for major eruptions , the ash clouds remain only for relatively short periods . 
 = = Recent reversal of the trend = = 
 Wild et al . , using measurements over land , report brightening since 1990 , and Pinker et al. found that slight dimming continued over land while brightening occurred over the ocean . Hence , over the land surface , Wild et al. and Pinker et al. disagree . A 2007 NASA sponsored satellite @-@ based study sheds light on the puzzling observations by other scientists that the amount of sunlight reaching Earth 's surface had been steadily declining in recent decades , began to reverse around 1990 . This switch from a " global dimming " trend to a " brightening " trend happened just as global aerosol levels started to decline . 
 It is likely that at least some of this change , particularly over Europe , is due to decreases in airborne pollution . Most governments of developed nations have taken steps to reduce aerosols released into the atmosphere , which helps reduce global dimming . 
 Sulfate aerosols have declined significantly since 1970 with the Clean Air Act in the United States and similar policies in Europe . The Clean Air Act was strengthened in 1977 and 1990 . According to the EPA , from 1970 to 2005 , total emissions of the six principal air pollutants , including PM ’ s , dropped by 53 % in the US . In 1975 , the masked effects of trapped greenhouse gases finally started to emerge and have dominated ever since . 
 The Baseline Surface Radiation Network ( <unk> ) has been collecting surface measurements . <unk> was started in the early 1990s and updated the archives in this time . Analysis of recent data reveals that the surface of the planet has brightened by about 4 % in the past decade . The brightening trend is corroborated by other data , including satellite analyses . 
 = = Relationship to hydrological cycle = = 
 Pollution produced by humans may be seriously weakening the Earth 's water cycle — reducing rainfall and threatening fresh water supplies . A 2001 study by researchers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography suggests that tiny particles of soot and other pollutants have a significant effect on the hydrological cycle . According to <unk> Ramanathan , " the energy for the hydrological cycle comes from sunlight . As sunlight heats the ocean , water escapes into the atmosphere and falls out as rain . So as aerosols cut down sunlight by large amounts , they may be spinning down the hydrological cycle of the planet . " 
 Large scale changes in weather patterns may also have been caused by global dimming . Climate modelers speculatively suggest that this reduction in solar radiation at the surface may have led to the failure of the monsoon in sub @-@ Saharan Africa during the 1970s and 1980s , together with the associated famines such as the Sahel drought , caused by Northern hemisphere pollution cooling the Atlantic . Because of this , the Tropical rain belt may not have risen to its northern latitudes , thus causing an absence of seasonal rains . This claim is not universally accepted and is very difficult to test . However a 2009 Chinese study of 50 years of continuous data found that , though most parts of eastern China saw no significant change in the amount of water held by the atmosphere , light rains had decreased . The researchers then modeled the effect of aerosols and also concluded the overall effect was that water drops in polluted cases are up to 50 percent smaller than in pristine skies . They concluded smaller size impedes the formation of rain clouds , and the falling of light rain is beneficial for agriculture . This was a different effect than reducing solar irradiance , but still a direct result from the presence of aerosols . 
 The 2001 study by researchers at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography concluded that the imbalance between global dimming and global warming at the surface leads to weaker turbulent heat fluxes to the atmosphere . This means globally reduced evaporation and hence precipitation occur in a dimmer and warmer world , which could ultimately lead to a more humid atmosphere in which it rains less . 
 A natural form of large scale environmental shading / dimming has been identified that affected the 2006 northern hemisphere hurricane season . The NASA study found that several major dust storms in June and July in the Sahara desert sent dust drifting over the Atlantic Ocean and through several effects caused cooling of the waters , thus dampening the development of hurricanes . 
 = = Relationship to global warming = = 
 Some scientists now consider that the effects of global dimming have masked the effect of global warming to some extent and that resolving global dimming may therefore lead to increases in predictions of future temperature rise . According to Beate Liepert , " We lived in a global warming plus a global dimming world and now we are taking out global dimming . So we end up with the global warming world , which will be much worse than we thought it will be , much hotter . " The magnitude of this masking effect is one of the central problems in climate change with significant implications for future climate changes and policy responses to global warming . 
 Interactions between the two theories for climate modification have also been studied , as global warming and global dimming are neither mutually exclusive nor contradictory . In a paper published on March 8 , 2005 in the American Geophysical Union 's Geophysical Research Letters , a research team led by Anastasia <unk> of Columbia University 's Department of Applied Physics and Mathematics , New York , also showed that the apparently opposing forces of global warming and global dimming can occur at the same time . Global dimming interacts with global warming by blocking sunlight that would otherwise cause evaporation and the particulates bind to water droplets . Water vapor is the major greenhouse gas . On the other hand , global dimming is affected by evaporation and rain . Rain has the effect of clearing out polluted skies . 
 Brown clouds have been found to amplify global warming according to <unk> Ramanathan , an atmospheric chemist at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography in La Jolla , CA . " The conventional thinking is that brown clouds have masked as much as 50 percent of global warming by greenhouse gases through so @-@ called global dimming ... While this is true globally , this study reveals that over southern and eastern Asia , the soot particles in the brown clouds are in fact amplifying the atmospheric warming trend caused by greenhouse gases by as much as 50 percent . " 
 = = Possible use to mitigate global warming = = 
 Some scientists have suggested using aerosols to stave off the effects of global warming as an emergency geoengineering measure . In 1974 , Mikhail Budyko suggested that if global warming became a problem , the planet could be cooled by burning sulfur in the stratosphere , which would create a haze . An increase in planetary albedo of just 0 @.@ 5 percent is sufficient to halve the effect of a CO2 doubling . 
 The simplest solution would be to simply emit more sulfates , which would end up in troposphere - the lowest part of the atmosphere . If this were done , Earth would still face many problems , such as : 
 Using sulfates causes environmental problems such as acid rain 
 Using carbon black causes human health problems 
 <unk> causes ecological problems such as changes in evaporation and rainfall patterns 
 Droughts and / or increased rainfall cause problems for agriculture 
 Aerosol has a relatively short lifetime 
 The solution advocated is transporting sulfates into the next higher layer of the atmosphere - stratosphere . Aerosols in the stratosphere last years instead of weeks - so only a relatively smaller ( though still large ) amount of sulfate emissions would be necessary , and side effects would be less . This would require developing an efficient way to transport large amounts of gases into stratosphere , many of which have been proposed though none are known to be effective or economically viable . 
 In a blog post , Gavin Schmidt stated that " Ideas that we should increase aerosol emissions to counteract global warming have been described as a ' Faustian bargain ' because that would imply an ever increasing amount of emissions in order to match the accumulated greenhouse gas in the atmosphere , with ever increasing monetary and health costs . " 
 = Battle of Baia = 
 The Battle of Baia ( Romanian : <unk> de la Baia ) was fought on 15 December 1467 between the Moldavian Prince , Stephen the Great and Hungarian King , Matthias Corvinus . The battle was the last Hungarian attempt to subdue the independent Moldavia , as previous attempts had ended in failure . Corvinus invaded Moldavia as a consequence of Stephen 's annexation of Chilia — a fortress and harbour at the coast of the Black Sea , which at the time was controlled by Hungarian and Wallachian forces , though it had belonged to Moldavia centuries earlier . 
 The conflict ended with a bitter defeat for the Hungarians . This put an end to all Hungarian claims on Moldavia . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1359 , Bogdan I of Moldavia rebelled against Hungary and founded an independent Moldavia . However , the Hungarian attempts to seize control over Moldavia did not end there , and in 1429 , Sigismund , Holy Roman Emperor , and also King of Hungary , met with Władysław Jagiełło , King of Poland to try to persuade him to launch a common attack on Moldavia and divide the country in two equal parts — Polish and Hungarian . Sigismund argued that the Moldavian nation did not " owe allegiance to anyone , is accustomed to live by theft and brigandage and so is everyone 's enemy . " He also complained about not receiving any help for his struggle against the Turks . In the Annals of Jan Długosz , the Polish chronicler wrote the following on Władysław ’ s reply to Sigismund : 
 Wladislaw replies that it would not be right to wage war on the Wallachians , who confess the Christian faith and have given him and his kingdom obedience and submission ; indeed , to do this would be an act of savagery . Though some may live by brigandage , they cannot all be tarred with the same brush , nor can they be blamed for not helping King Sigismund against the Turks , because they had gone with the Poles to the given rendez @-@ vous on the Danube and got there on time , yet had to waste two months waiting there , and then return home . Rather does the blame for this attach to King Sigismund , who failed to turn up at the appointed time . The squabbling continues for several days , at the end of which Wladyslaw stubbornness compels Sigismund to abandon the plan and seek other ventures . 
 In 1442 , Hungary again had to renounce its claims on Moldavia . On 17 October 1451 , Prince Bogdan II was assassinated by Petru Aron , a pretender to the Moldavian throne . The country was thrown into civil strife which lasted until 1457 , when Stephen , son of Bogdan , gained the throne and ousted the boyars loyal to Aron . The latter fled to Poland , but was later forced to seek asylum in Transylvania , after Moldavia and Poland concluded a new treaty . Stephen ’ s objective was to regain the region of Budjak with the castles of Chilia and Cetatea Albă . The region had previously belonged to Wallachia , but had been incorporated into Moldavia in the late 14th century . Due to the decline of Moldavia during the civil war , the region reverted to Wallachia , with Chilia being co @-@ ruled by Hungary and Wallachia . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 In 1462 , Stephen sent a letter to his cousin , Prince Vlad III Dracula of Wallachia , asking him to return Chilia back to Moldavia — a demand that was most likely refused . On 22 June , when Vlad was fighting Sultan Mehmed II of the Ottoman Empire , Stephen launched an attack on Chilia , with some Turkish assistance , with the objective of capturing the fortress . The Wallachians rushed to the scene with 7 @,@ 000 men , and together with the Hungarian garrison , battled the Moldavians and the Turks for eight days . The Turks were defeated and Stephen was wounded by a piece of shrapnel — an injury which would hasten his death . In 1465 , when Dracula was imprisoned in Hungary , Stephen again advanced towards Chilia with a large force and siege weapons ; but instead of besieging the fortress , he showed the garrison , who favoured the Polish King , a letter in which the King requires them to surrender the fortress . The garrison complied with the King 's demand and Stephen entered the fortress escorted by Polish troops where he found “ its two captains , rather tipsy , for they have been to a wedding . ” Mehmed was furious about the news and claimed Chilia as being a part of Wallachia , which now was a vassal to the Porte , and demanded Stephen relinquish ownership . However , Stephen refused and recruited an army , forcing Mehmed , who was not yet ready to wage war , to accept the situation , if only for the time being . Długosz recalls that in the beginning of his reign , Stephen reformed his army by extending rights for men to bear arms : 
 This Stephen 's rule has been so strict and just that no crime has gone unpunished and people now obey his every order . He has insisted that not only the knights and nobility should bear arms , but that farmers and villagers do so as well , for everyone has a duty to defend his fatherland . If the Voivode learns that a farmer does not have a bow , arrows and a sword , or has mustered without a spear , the culprit is condemned to death . 
 In 1466 , Stephen regained Khotyn from Poland in a diplomatic victory , but in the same year , Corvinus became on bad terms with King Casimir IV Jagiellon of Poland , which frustrated the Hungarian king further , knowing that Moldavia was a Polish fief . One year later , in 1467 , the locals of Transylvania started an uprising in which Corvinus had a difficult time quelling the riots . He later found out that Stephen had supported the rioters , — probably in order to find and kill Aron . Długosz writes in his ‘ ’ Annals ’ ’ that in 1467 , a certain " <unk> " went to the court of Corvinus and promised to make Moldavia his vassal , if the King would in turn make him Prince of Moldavia . This was denounced by Romanian historian Nicolae Iorga , who argued that Corvinus started recruiting troops and took Aron with him to put him on the Moldavian throne . This is disputed by Długosz though , who in ‘ ’ Historiae <unk> ’ ’ , adds that Corvinus brought with him both Aron and <unk> , making unknown whom the king considered more worthy of the Moldavian throne . 
 = = = Preparations for war = = = 
 The Hungarians recruited an army of 40 @,@ 000 , many drawn locally from Transylvania . Many knights and Hungarian aristocrats followed , one of them being Stefan Báthory . With them , they brought 500 cannons and other heavy siege equipment . The Moldavians , being fewer in number and seeing that the Hungarians were determined to wage war , started to evacuate the population close to the Hungarian border and blockaded the passages by cutting down trees and placing them on the roads . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The Hungarians departed in the middle of October and reached the realm of Moldavia at the beginning of November , using a passage near Bacău . On 19 November , the Hungarians arrived at the <unk> River where they met some Moldavian resistance , but Corvinus , to ensure the " loyalty of his troops , avoids a pitched battle and limits his efforts to surprise attacks and ambushes , yet is himself prevented from foraging or doing further damage . " 
 The town was destroyed and the Hungarians headed for Bacău , which they also burned down ; then they continued to Roman and stayed there between 29 November and 7 December . According to a chronicle , Stephen sent envoys to negotiate a peace treaty , but the two factions could not agree and the war continued . Roman was put to flames and the Hungarians killed everyone they encountered , “ without considering their sex , age , or looks . ” After three days of marching and more pillaging , they reached Baia where Corvinus met with a Hungarian by the name of <unk> , who revealed to him the Moldavian position , their numbers ( 12 @,@ 000 ) , and their plan to attack before dusk . The Moldavians were encamped further north , between Moldova River and <unk> creek . Corvinus ordered the city to be fortified with “ ramparts , ditches and a ring of wagons , ” as the men were told to be prepared for battle and guards were sent to guard strategic points . 
 A peculiar report mentions that Stephen himself was captured by the Hungarians on 14 December , but that he managed to trick them into releasing him . On 15 December , when dusk was approaching , Stephen sent smaller detachments that set the town on fire from three different places : thereafter , noise and confusion set in . Stephen ordered his men to dismount and soon after they launched their attack and made battle until dawn . Descriptions of the battle say that the fire made the night equally light as the day and that many Hungarians were consumed by the flames . The two armies started to butcher each other at the gate of the city ; then the fighting continued onto the streets " with such a wrath , that nothing could be seen as more horrible than this . " The Moldavians got the upper hand of the battle and launched another attack against the royal guard , which consisted of 200 heavily armed knights , the aristocrats and Corvinus . Many Moldavians were killed in the tumult that followed , as Báthory and the rest of the knights tried to defend the entrance to the market . Corvinus was wounded by three arrows in the back and had to be “ carried from the battlefield on a stretcher , to avoid him falling into the hands of the enemy . ” 
 The retreating Hungarian army , on its way to Transylvania , was stopped by a blockade ; there they decided to bury the 500 cannons and other treasures , so the Moldavians would not be able to capture them . According to Długosz , Corvinus escaped the Moldavians due to the assistance of another Vlach ( Romanian ) , whom Stephen found and had executed because of treachery . The Moldavian @-@ German Chronicles say that someone named Isaia failed to launch the cavalry attack which would have blocked the path for the Hungarian retreat ; for this , he and others were later executed . Around 10 @,@ 000 Hungarians were said to have been killed ; most of the barons escaped with their king . A Hungarian chronicle mentions 7 @,@ 000 casualties for the Moldavians . This chronicle is disputed though , due to it being the only one mentioning the Moldavian casualties in numbers ; and because the Hungarians did not have the opportunity to calculate the numbers of their fallen enemy . The entire conflict , with the Hungarian invasion and retreat , took around forty days . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Some of the Hungarian standards that were captured came with a " huge booty of tents , waggons and guns , " which were sent to Casimir as proof of Stephen 's victory . Upon his return to Brașov on Christmas day , Corvinus took revenge on the people who had rebelled against him by torturing them to death ; thereafter he fined the Transylvanians a sum of 400 @,@ 000 florins , which they had to pay immediately , in gold . With this money he raised an army of foreign mercenaries , which would prove more loyal to him . In 1468 , Stephen campaigned in Transylvania , found Aron and had him executed . Stephen and Corvinus would later negotiate a peace treaty and become allies ; in 1475 , Corvinus sent 1 @,@ 800 soldiers that assisted Stephen in his victory at the Battle of Vaslui . 
 = New Zealand place names = 
 Most New Zealand place @-@ names are derived from Māori and British sources . Both groups used names to commemorate notable people , events , places from their homeland , and their ships , or to describe the surrounding area . The Māori did not have a collective name for New Zealand before European arrival , but post @-@ colonisation the name Aotearoa ( commonly translated as ' long white cloud ' ) was used to refer to the whole country . Dutch cartographers named the islands Nova Zeelandia and British explorer James Cook subsequently anglicised the name to New Zealand . 
 Many of the early Māori names were replaced by Europeans during the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Government amendments in 1894 and the establishment of the New Zealand Geographic Board in the mid @-@ 1940s led to the encouragement of original Māori names , although incorrect spellings and pronunciations persisted . Many names now have alternative or dual English and Māori names or , in a few rare cases , dual Māori names or dual English names . Most names have never been made official , but if they are mentioned in authoritative publications they are considered recorded names . Colloquial names in New Zealand result from an ironic view of the place 's entertainment value , or plays on advertising mottos , or are shortened versions of the full name . Some places tried to capitalise on the success of the The Lord of the Rings films by linking themselves to the movies . 
 = = Country and main islands = = 
 No known pre @-@ contact Māori name for New Zealand as a whole survives , although the Māori had several names for the North and South Islands ; including Te Ika @-@ a @-@ Māui ( the fish of Māui ) for the North Island and Te Waipounamu ( the waters of greenstone ) or Te Waka o Aoraki ( the canoe of Aoraki ) for the South Island . Until the early 20th century , Māori also referred to the North Island as Aotearoa , ( commonly translated as ' long white cloud ' ) ; in modern Māori usage this has become the name for the whole country . 
 The first European visitor to New Zealand , Dutch explorer Abel Tasman , named the islands Staten Landt , believing it formed part of the land which Jacob Le Maire had seen off the coast of Tierra del Fuego . Hendrik Brouwer proved the supposedly South American land an island in 1643 , and Dutch cartographers subsequently renamed Tasman 's discovery Nova Zeelandia , after the Dutch province of Zeeland . The Latin Nova Zeelandia became Nieuw Zeeland in Dutch , and British explorer James Cook subsequently called the archipelago New Zealand , an anglicised form of the Dutch name . 
 The 1840 Letters Patent established New Zealand as a British colony and claimed the " principal islands " of New Zealand , identified by their commonly known names at the time : the Northern Island ( the North Island ) , the Middle Island ( the South Island ) and Stewart 's Island or " South Island " . The letters patent attempted to rename the islands New Ulster , New Munster and New Leinster after the provinces in Ireland . New Ulster , New Munster and New Leinster were also used for the initial provinces of New Zealand , but the names did not endure . In the 1830s the South Island was used as an alternative to Middle Island and by 1907 it became the common name . The North and South Island names arose through common usage rather than official declaration and in 2009 it was revealed that they had never been formalised . 
 In 2013 , alternative names were formalised for the two main islands , as North Island or Te Ika @-@ a @-@ Māui , and South Island or Te Waipounamu , with either English or Māori name being used or a combination of both . 
 = = Māori names = = 
 Many Māori place names possess either historical or mythological significance . Their meaning is not always apparent from literal translations and they have been passed down through oral tradition . Before European arrival , place names commemorated notable or historical incidents , described features of the location or were derived from traditional Hawaiki names or myths . After European arrival many locations became known as Māori versions of European words or poorly pronounced contractions of the original Māori names . 
 Early Māori explorers Kupe , <unk> , and Toi named many of New Zealand 's coastal features . Like later European explorers , they named things after themselves , their family members and events that occurred at the newly discovered location . <unk> named Manukau Harbour after a <unk> @-@ stake that he used to claim ownership of the area , and <unk> Harbour after the para fern he ate there ( kai means food ) . The Māori name for Wellington Harbour , Te Whanganui a Tara , derives from Tara , a grandson of Kupe and ancestor of several local iwi . Names from other islands visited during the " Great Migration " have been used to identify some New Zealand landmarks , for example <unk> Island ( from Rarotonga ) and Tawhiti ( from Tahiti ) . Whakatane , <unk> Island , Taupo , Urewera , <unk> , and <unk> all commemorate incidents that occurred during the early arrivals , many of which are now forgotten . 
 <unk> and Mount <unk> are two of the few remaining names connected to places in Hawaiki . The use of Polynesian mythology in names is more apparent , with <unk> ( the forest god ) lending his name to <unk> and <unk> among others . Descriptive words are often used as part of a place name , with Ara ( road ) , <unk> ( mountain ) , Wai ( water ) , <unk> ( bay ) , Roto ( lake ) and nui ( big ) among some of the more widely used . Whanganui means " wide river @-@ mouth " and <unk> indicates good waters for catching <unk> , or flathead mullet . European arrival exposed Māori to Christianity , leading to the settlements of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> being named after the biblical Jerusalem , Bethany and Samaria . The <unk> , <unk> and <unk> settlements are Māori transliterations of London , Athens and California . Moriori , descendants of Māori , migrated to islands off the eastern coast of New Zealand and named them Rēkohu ( Misty Sun ) . Sometime before 1835 Māori settled at Rēkohu and confused the name of the settlement , <unk> , for the name of islands . It has been known as <unk> to Māori ever since . 
 = = = Post @-@ colonial recognition = = = 
 Early Europeans displaced most of the original Māori names with their own , although some Māori names persisted in the north and central regions of the North Island . The Royal Geographical Society of London was responsible for place names until 1894 when authority was given to the New Zealand Governor @-@ General . Prime Minister Joseph Ward moved an amendment in 1894 that gave preference to Māori names for any new features and allowed misspelt names to be altered ( although this did not always occur ) . In 1924 the Honorary Geographic Board of New Zealand was set up to advise on place names , and in 1946 the New Zealand Geographic Board ( NZGB ) was established and given power to change or implement Māori and English names . Anyone can propose a geographical name to the board , who consult local Māori and allow public submissions before determining if the name should be made official . Names can also be made official through an Act of Parliament and the NZGB is required to keep a public list of all the official New Zealand geographical names . 
 The NZGB encourages the use of original Māori names and has given some places official double names . These can be expressed as alternative names where officially either name could be used ( Mount Taranaki or Mount Egmont ) or dual names where both names should be used together ( Matiu / Somes Island ) . In 1998 , as a result of the settling of the Ngai Tahu Treaty claim , New Zealand 's tallest mountain officially became Aoraki / Mount Cook . There are also a few English dual names , with Wellington harbour also officially known as Port Nicholson . 
 Māori groups have campaigned to correct inaccurately spelled or pronounced Māori language place names . In 2000 , the local iwi suggestion to rename the Wellington suburb of <unk> to <unk> , referring to a <unk> ( sea @-@ monster ) that legend says lived in Wellington Harbour , was declined by the Geographic Board . More recently the NZGB recommended renaming the town of Wanganui to Whanganui as the town was originally named after the Whanganui River and the word <unk> is not in the Māori lexicon . The government decided in 2009 that both Whanganui and Wanganui would be accepted as alternative official names . The origin of Wanganui has been claimed to reflect the dialectal pronunciation of local Māori , who pronounce ' wh ' ( an " f " -like sound in other dialects ) as [ <unk> ] – a glottalised " w " . 
 = = European names = = 
 Tasman named a few geographic features as he sailed along New Zealand 's west coast . Many such as Murderers Bay did not last , while some like Cape Maria van Diemen ( the wife of the governor of Batavia ) and Three Kings Islands are still in use . Cook named many more on his voyage , including Bay of Islands , Bay of Plenty , Poverty Bay , Cape Farewell , Queen Charlotte Sound , Mount Egmont and Banks Peninsula . Cape <unk> commemorates a Māori attempt to kidnap one of Cook 's crew members . Dumont d ’ <unk> named French Pass after sailing through it . The explorers lent their names to many places , including Mount Tasman , Tasman Glacier , the Tasman Region , Cook Strait , Mount Cook and D 'Urville Island . The Coromandel , Chatham and Pegasus ships visited New Zealand 's shores between 1791 and 1820 and were used to name Coromandel Peninsula , Chatham Islands , Pegasus Bay and Port Pegasus . Stewart Island was named after the first officer aboard the Pegasus . 
 Most European names came during the 1840s to the 1910s and were given by surveyors who worked for colonising associations or provincial governments . Names acknowledged the colonising associations sponsors ( Hutt Valley , Wakefield , Port Chalmers , Ashburton ) , ships ( Bombay ) , government officials ( <unk> , Rolleston , Invercargill ) , politicians ( Foxton , Fox Glacier , Gisborne ) and church leaders ( Selwyn ) . Military heroes and famous battles were popular place names , with Auckland , Napier , Hastings , Havelock , Wellington , Picton , Marlborough , Nelson and Blenheim . British politicians and royalty lent their names to Russell , Palmerston , Cromwell , Queenstown and Alexandra , while Franz Josef is named after the Austrian emperor . Royal names are more popular for streets than towns or geographical features , although both Auckland and Wellington have Mount Victoria . Gore is named after governor Thomas Gore Browne and George Grey 's name is used for Greytown , Greymouth , Grey Lynn and many natural features . Relatively few names are derived from United Kingdom towns , with Dunedin ( after Edinburgh — Dùn <unk> in Scottish Gaelic ) , New Plymouth and the Canterbury Province among the most notable . 
 Many inland locations ( including Helensville , <unk> , <unk> , Bulls , Masterton and Levin ) were named after the early settlers . Mackenzie Country takes its name from a sheep stealer and King Country references the region where the Māori king defied colonial government for many years . Mountains and passes were named after their discoverers ( Haast , Lewis ) or scientists ( Newton , Lyell ) . Other names were descriptive , such as Woodville , Island Bay , Riverton , <unk> and Bluff . A few derive their names from descriptions in languages other than English or Māori , for example : Miramar , which means " sea view " in Spanish ; and <unk> , which means " beautiful " ( <unk> in <unk> ) " island " ( <unk> in Scottish Gaelic ) . 
 = = = Regional patterns = = = 
 Many Scottish names occur in Otago and Southland ( the <unk> , Invercargill , Wedderburn , <unk> ) and Scottish settlers also named Riccarton and the Avon River in Christchurch . Canterbury has an English flavour to its nomenclature with Christchurch and Oxford , but also contains Belfast and French names throughout the Akaroa area . Scandinavian migrants left their mark in the Seventy Mile Bush with Dannevirke and <unk> and some of the suburbs and streets of Auckland and Wellington reflect Australian immigration ( Footscray and Botany Downs ) . There is very little Asian influence in New Zealand place naming , with <unk> in Wellington and Cashmere ( Kashmir ) in Christchurch , reflecting British imperial connections rather than Indian influence . 
 = = Unofficial names = = 
 Many of New Zealand 's place names have never been officially approved by the NZGB . They either fall outside the board 's jurisdiction ( homesteads , lighthouses ) or were common names before the board was established and have never been officially formalised . Unofficial recorded names are defined as " names that have appeared in at least two publicly available authoritative publications or databases " . Recorded names include major cities ( Wellington , Auckland , Hamilton , Christchurch ) , mountains ( Mount Tasman , Mount Dampier ) , islands ( Auckland Islands , Great Barrier Island ) and many other geographical features . 
 New Zealand and various parts of it have acquired a range of colloquial names over the years . Unofficial late 19th century names for New Zealand included " <unk> " and " God 's Own Country " . The former occurred widely in the labour movement and an early labour newspaper was named the <unk> Worker . Premier Richard John Seddon ( in power 1893 @-@ 1906 ) popularised " God 's Own Country " . Both names fell out of popularity in the 20th century , although " God 's Own Country " ( or " <unk> " ) still occasionally appears . Latinate names for the country have included " Zealandia " and " Nova Zealandia " . 
 Many cities and towns have nicknames based on a prominent feature or one which promoters wish to emphasise . Christchurch is promoted as the " Garden City " and Auckland is commonly referred to as the " city of sails " . Various councils have come up with mottos to advertise their cities , with Hamilton going from " Where It 's Happening " to " More Than You Expect " in 2000 and Dunedin using the " I am Dunedin " slogan from 2001 until 2010 . Hamilton acquired the nickname " the Tron " after " <unk> : City of the Future " was suggested for a city slogan . Wellington is also known as the " windy city " due to its strong and unpredictable winds . 
 Following the release of Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings films , New Zealand has sometimes been called " Middle @-@ earth " after the fictional setting of the films . Wellington , the centre of the films ' production , was sometimes called Middle @-@ earth , and for about a week around the release of the first movie the local newspaper The Evening Post renamed itself to The Middle Earth Post . The town of <unk> , near the location of many of the Hobbiton scenes , unofficially renamed itself " Hobbiton " . The flourishing of the film @-@ industry in Wellington has led to the nickname " <unk> " , and a proposal to erect a " Hollywood " style sign near the airport was overturned due to public resistance and possible copyright infringements . 
 A number of towns have acquired ironic nicknames comparing them to the " more exciting " city of Las Vegas ; " <unk> " for Rotorua , " <unk> " for Ashburton and " <unk> " for Invercargill . Other areas have nicknames or popular designations based on abbreviations or mangling of the Māori name . New Zealanders will sometimes refer to the Taranaki Region as " The Naki " , Palmerston North as " <unk> " , Gisborne as " <unk> " , <unk> as " <unk> " , <unk> as " <unk> " , <unk> as " <unk> " and <unk> as " Pie @-@ cock " . 
 <unk> ( / <unk> / , as if saying " Why kick a moo @-@ cow " ) is a generic name for a small rural town or locality in New Zealand . 
 = Mirth & Girth = 
 Mirth & Girth is a posthumous portrait painting by School of the Art Institute of Chicago ( SAIC ) student David K. Nelson , Jr . , depicting the recently deceased , popular African @-@ American mayor of Chicago , Harold Washington wearing only a bra , G @-@ string , garter belt and stockings . After a brief showing at a May 11 , 1988 private student exhibition in the Art Institute , angry African @-@ American aldermen , including Ald . Allan Streeter , Ald . Bobby Rush and Ald . Dorothy Tillman , arrived with Chicago Police Department officers and confiscated the painting , triggering a First Amendment and race relations crisis and a civil lawsuit . 
 Free @-@ speech advocates condemned the seizure of the painting , while the aldermen maintained that the painting was an insult to Washington and should have been taken down . Some students at the SAIC showed their support for free speech by holding rallies in front of the school and at the Richard J. Daley Plaza , while other students criticized Nelson for poor timing in showing a racially insensitive image . 
 At some point between when the painting was confiscated and when it was returned , a 5 @-@ inch ( 13 cm ) gash was made on the canvas . Nelson filed and later won a federal lawsuit against the city , claiming that the painting 's confiscation and subsequent damaging violated his First Amendment rights . He and the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) settled with the city for $ 95 @,@ 000 ( 1994 ; $ 138 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) in compensation for the damaged painting after the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit upheld the lower court 's decision . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Harold Washington = = = 
 Harold Washington , the subject of the portrait , was elected in 1965 to the Illinois House of Representatives . After the death of Richard J. Daley in late 1976 , Washington won Chicago 's 1983 Democratic mayoral primary election . He was elected mayor , prevailing over Bernard <unk> in a racially polarizing general election . His first four @-@ year term was characterized by the Council Wars , a period of political conflict with the mostly white aldermanic majority in City Council . Seven Washington @-@ backed aldermanic challengers prevailed in the April , 1986 special municipal election , facilitating progress with Washington 's agenda . Washington died suddenly of a heart attack in his office . His death was followed by a period of mourning by Chicagoans , particularly in the African @-@ American community . 
 = = = Creation of painting = = = 
 Shortly after Washington 's death , Nelson ( who is white ) painted Mirth & Girth , a " full @-@ length frontal portrait of a portly grim @-@ faced Harold Washington clad in a white bra and G @-@ string , garter belt , and stockings " . The painting was approximately 4 feet ( 122 cm ) tall by 3 feet ( 91 cm ) wide . In the portrait , Washington is holding a pencil in his right hand . His aide , Alton Miller , initially mistook Washington 's slumping over his desk as an attempt to pick up a pencil that had fallen onto the floor . The title of the piece is believed to have been derived from the name of an organization for overweight gay men , " Girth and Mirth " . 
 In an interview with the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Nelson stated that he had painted Mirth & Girth over the course of one night , standing in his underwear . He said that he had painted it in response to how the city populace revered Washington shortly after his death . Nelson stated , " ( i ) n Chicago , at this time , Harold Washington is like an icon . He 's like a deity . " In particular , Nelson painted the portrait after seeing prints of " Worry Ye Not " , another poster that depicted a smiling Washington with a blue @-@ robe adorned Jesus Christ , looking down on the Chicago skyline . Nelson later testified that he had based the iconoclastic elements of the painting on a rumor that doctors at Northwestern Memorial Hospital had discovered female underwear beneath the suit Washington was wearing at the time of his death . Three weeks after the controversy erupted , in an interview with the New Art Examiner , Nelson explained that the portrait referenced an existing photograph of Washington holding a cigarette prop at an American Cancer Society event . 
 The caricature was not Nelson 's first . He had drawn a portrait of his mother as " Whistler 's Mother " for Mother 's Day . Nelson had also drawn a caricature of his father as the model depicted on boxes of Cream of Wheat . Nelson explained , " ( t ) his kind of irreverence and iconoclasm runs through all my artwork " . In an April Fools ' Day edition of a Weekly World News parody produced by Nelson , he illustrated SAIC president Edward Jones as an infant in the arms of a bare @-@ breasted Madonna . 
 = = Display and confiscation = = 
 = = = Initial display = = = 
 On May 11 , 1988 , Mirth & Girth was displayed at a private exhibition in one of the school 's main interior hallways . The painting was part of a set of six that Nelson was displaying in a judged three @-@ day student fellowship exhibition held to showcase upcoming graduates . Another of his works was a self @-@ portrait titled " I 'm Sensitive , and I Love All Humanity " , depicting Nelson holding little people of multiple nationalities . As soon as the exhibit opened , between 7 : 30 and 8 : 30 am , the painting drew enough negative attention for the Art Institute to post a security guard in front of the painting . Shortly thereafter , the school began to receive angry phone calls about the painting . 
 Soon after the exhibit opened , word of the controversy reached the Chicago City Council , which was in session . Alderman Bobby Rush ( then of the 2nd ward ) immediately put together a resolution that would cut off the city 's contribution to the Art Institute unless it apologized for displaying the painting . In part , the resolution read " Whereas , the artist David Nelson obviously exhibits some type of demented and pathological mental capacities ... " . Another resolution was written that asked the Art Institute to remove the painting immediately . After passing both items , a group of aldermen left to deliver the resolutions to the Art Institute . 
 Nelson returned to the painting about an hour after it was first displayed . He had forgotten a hammer and nails to hang the painting , and had left it leaning against the wall for an hour . Shortly after he returned , city aldermen , police officers and local reporters arrived at the scene , leading to a dramatic confrontation between aldermen and other students , while Nelson remained incognito nearby . 
 = = = Confiscation = = = 
 Aldermen Edward Jones ( 20th ) and William C. Henry ( 24th ) were the first aldermen to arrive from the City Council session . According to the federal lawsuit , Henry showed he had a gun , and then with Jones removed the now @-@ hung painting from the wall and placed it on the floor , facing the wall . After they left , another student rehung the painting . Three other aldermen , Allan Streeter ( 17th ) , Dorothy Tillman ( 3rd ) and Rush , arrived later . They took down the painting and attempted to remove it from the school , but were stopped by a school official . The aldermen then took the painting to the office of the school president Anthony Jones ( no relation to Edward Jones ) . The painting had a 5 in ( 13 cm ) gash , and it had been wrapped in brown paper . 
 Alderman Tillman threatened to burn the painting in President Jones ' office , but a Chicago Police Department ( CPD ) lieutenant present with the aldermen , Lt. Raymond Patterson , advised against this . Instead , another unnamed alderman called CPD superintendent Leroy Martin . Martin telephoned Patterson in Jones ' office and ordered Patterson to take the painting into police custody , telling Jones that the painting amounted to " incitement to riot " . Patterson overrode this direct order , citing his own powers as the lieutenant on the scene and hung up on Martin . A CPD sergeant accompanied Rush , Streeter and Tillman to a waiting police car with the wrapped painting in hand . Parts of the incident were later broadcast on television . 
 The incident was marked by a volatile shouting match between the aldermen and students , and met with condemnation from free @-@ speech advocates . As the aldermen escorted the painting to the police vehicle , a mass of students outside of the Art Institute jeered them , naming the aldermen " commies " , " fascists " , " brownshirts " and " philistines " . Seventeen bomb threats were recorded at the school after the controversy erupted . 
 = = Responses = = 
 = = = African @-@ American community = = = 
 Shortly after the incident , a black alderman told reporters that he believed the painting was the work of a Jewish artist . Nelson replied through a Chicago Tribune story that he " is not Jewish " . The remark was made in part because racial tensions had already been elevated a week earlier after the firing of Steve Cokely , a mayoral aide , by African @-@ American mayor and Harold Washington 's successor Eugene Sawyer . Cokely had accused Jews of " engaging in an international conspiracy for world control " . His firing caused a rift in segments of the black community , leading some to believe that Sawyer was also involved in the same conspiracy . 
 In a New York Times article published on May 13 , 1988 , Alderman Streeter reiterated his stance regarding the removal of the painting , saying that he would have " gone to jail to get that painting down " , calling it " an insult to a great man and an affront to blacks " . On May 16 , 1988 , Streeter appeared on the local public television station news program Chicago Tonight . He reinforced that Nelson had abdicated his " responsibility to his constituency " to " do what is right " . In the segment , he reaffirmed that he believed the aldermen had " a law , the law of common sense , the law of morality , the law of decency [ that ] transcends the First Amendment " . 
 Operation PUSH , an organization that pursues social justice and civil rights , threatened to impose " sanctions " on the Art Institute unless the Art Institute acted to prevent offensive portraits from being shown by students or contributing artists in the future . Separately , the Illinois Alliance of Black Student Organizations called for racial parity with regards to faculty and student enrollment within the school . One recent African @-@ American students alleged that there was an underlying attitude of racism at the school , while other black students distributed a flyer listing incidences of theft and advice given to foreign students about socializing with blacks . By contrast , another white graduate noted that school officials looked at students ' slides and paintings without knowing the race of the student . The school noted that 236 of its 1 @,@ 312 undergraduate students were minorities , a higher percentage than comparable private professional art schools . 
 On February 12 , 1994 , during a rally to raise money for the defendants ' mounting legal bills , Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan supported the three aldermen 's right to seize the painting , calling it " an act of righteous indignation " . Farrakhan referred to Washington as " a father figure for black people " , and described the painting and subsequent lawsuit " a total disrespect for our feelings and our community " . 
 = = = Free speech advocates = = = 
 On May 12 , 1988 , representatives from the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) picked up the painting and returned it to Nelson . Jay Miller , another representative for the ACLU , described the incident as " vigilante stuff " , noting that the action " was done in the name of one of the great civil libertarians of our time . Harold Washington had a 100 percent voting record in Congress and in the state Legislature on issues of civil liberties and civil rights . " In 1984 Washington had supported the civil rights of sculptor John Sefick after Sefick had created a satirical statue of Washington . By comparison , former mayor Michael Bilandic had ordered a Sefick statue satirizing his handling of Chicago 's crippling Blizzard of 1979 covered by a blanket , a decision that was later overturned in federal court . 
 Students from the SAIC protested on Columbus Drive the next day , holding signs that asked drivers to " honk for free speech " . Student leaders began to consult attorneys to file a lawsuit against the Chicago Police Department and the aldermen . Other groups of students planned a " be @-@ in " at the Richard J. Daley Plaza , but it was canceled after the students learned other groups might cause a confrontation . Some students felt that the school had been a victim of racial politics , and that the incident would be used to censor the Art Institute . 
 On Chicago Tonight , Daniel Polsby , a law professor at Northwestern University , cited federal statutes violated during the confiscation of the portrait . He then faulted Marshall Field 's reluctance to defend the First Amendment , further comparing the seizure of Mirth & Girth to then @-@ Arkansas governor Orval Faubus ' refusal to abide by the First Amendment and allow minorities to enroll in Little Rock Central High School . According to Polsby , Faubus ' rationale at the time was to preserve a delicate civil rights situation . Polsby called the aldermen 's action " crushingly ironic and terribly sad " . 
 = = = Reactions within the SAIC = = = 
 At the SAIC , students ' characterizations of the painting ranged from political caricature , to " whimsy " , to a commercial success . One student noted that Nelson was " known nationally now , which is every artist 's dream " . Another student noted that " ( a ) <unk> have to be responsible for what they make , and this guy is not being responsible " . In a meeting with 100 students after the incident , Anthony Jones , then @-@ president of the SAIC , assured the students that he stood behind their First Amendment rights . Regarding the painting , Jones said that the painting was in poor taste and should not have been displayed . 
 Members of the Art Institute Board met the day after the incident and agreed not to display Mirth & Girth any further . Chairman Marshall Field also issued a formal apology for displaying the painting and agreed to consider demands that the school both hire more black administrators and accept more black students . Field also published the apology in each of the city 's daily metropolitan newspapers . After the apology was issued , Polsby strongly criticized Field 's refusal to more aggressively stand up for the students ' First Amendment rights . 
 = = = Other reactions = = = 
 Members of the Council of Religious Leaders of Metropolitan Chicago , which included leaders from mainline Protestant , Roman Catholic and Jewish organizations from the city , issued a statement that expressed " moral dismay " over the painting . They further added that the display of the painting showed " a lack of sensitivity which we could have expected from those who were responsible for its showing " . 
 As for the painting 's critical reception , one local art reviewer mentioned that " the only thing [ the SAIC ] might have felt sheepish about was not having a staff that in four years could instill in Nelson a better grasp of figure painting " . In a newspaper interview , Nelson responded that the criticism was " the one thing that did make me kind of angry . I don 't think the painting was poorly executed , though it wasn 't my favorite painting . " In his book Arresting Images — <unk> Art and <unk> Actions , Stephen C. Dubin suggested that the painting represented a symbolic castration of Washington , reflecting more " traditional " reactions to African @-@ Americans in positions of power . 
 Nelson gave only a few interviews before leaving Chicago for the suburbs , and then Graceland to avoid the press . On the advice of his friends , Nelson stayed away from his graduation ceremony on May 14 , 1988 . He turned down a $ 15 @,@ 000 ( 1988 , $ 22 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) offer for the painting , calling it a " grossly inflated " price . He also turned down a separate opportunity to appear on Phil Donahue 's syndicated talk show , saying that he never watched the show and was genuinely uninterested in the offer . Other than the interview with WLUP , Nelson 's views were expressed by Harvey Grossman , the legal director for the ACLU . Through Grossman , Nelson said he would not press for the returning of the painting , as it had fulfilled its purpose of " drawing attention to his ' iconoclastic ' work " . 
 = = Nelson v. Streeter = = 
 On June 23 , 1988 , the ACLU filed a federal lawsuit on behalf of Nelson against the three aldermen who were seen on television handling the painting . It claimed the removal of the painting violated Nelson 's First Amendment right to freedom of expression , Fourth Amendment right to protection from unreasonable seizures , and Fourteenth amendment right against being deprived of property without a hearing . The ACLU sought $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1988 , $ 182 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) to compensate Nelson for damage to the painting , and to " punish " the aldermen and police for their actions . 
 Ald . Robert Shaw ( 9th ) called the suit " a slap in the face to the black community " . Rush questioned the motive of the suit , as himself , Tillman and Streeter all were supporters of Alderman Timothy C. Evans ( 17th ) , a political rival of mayor Eugene Sawyer . Rush specifically called the suit " frivolous " and " impetuous " , openly questioning whether the ACLU had filed the suit to enhance fundraising activities or for other political reasons . 
 The City of Chicago refused in February 1990 to pay mounting legal costs for the aldermen . The aldermen argued that they were performing their official duties " in protecting the security of the city during the turmoil created by the exhibit " when they removed the painting . The city contended that the aldermen had taken the action as individuals . Nelson refused a $ 10 @,@ 000 ( 1990 , $ 16 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) settlement at the time . 
 On August 11 , 1992 , U.S. District Judge George Lindberg dismissed the City of Chicago from the lawsuit , but ruled that Superintendent Martin must go to trial and that the three aldermen violated Nelson 's civil rights . Lindberg supported the recommendations regarding that issue Magistrate Judge Elaine <unk> 's had made in March 1992 . Tillman 's lawyer , James Chapman , recommended to Tillman that an immediate appeal be filed in federal court . 
 = = = Appellate court = = = 
 In the appeal , decided February 1 , 1994 , judges Richard Posner , Frank H. Easterbrook , and Michael Stephen Kanne affirmed Lindberg 's earlier decision . Writing for the court , Posner rejected claims of official immunity and said city officials had no right to enter private property and take " offensive " paintings off its walls . He also rejected the argument that removing paintings from walls was an official duty . 
 Posner also rejected the argument that the defendants were removing the painting to save Chicago from racial riots that the continued showing of the painting might have started , and in which it might have been destroyed . He found that Tillman herself threatened to burn the painting on the spot , and that there was no mob . In addition , the court found that because Nelson had not intended to provoke a riot , the First Amendment could still be used to protect his speech . 
 The appellate court also faulted the district judge for allowing " more than a year and a half elapsed before the filing and disposition of the motions for summary judgment " . Posner noted in his opinion that " the governing principles are clear , the facts have been explored exhaustively , and the defendants should be aware that efforts to mount a last @-@ ditch , no @-@ holds @-@ barred defense may simply increase their liability for the plaintiff 's attorney 's fees under 42 U.S.C. § 1988 . " He then affirmed the district court 's decision . 
 = = = Settlement and aftermath = = = 
 On September 20 , 1994 , the city and the ACLU reached a settlement . The ACLU agreed to drop claims against the city and Superintendent LeRoy Martin . In return , the city of Chicago agreed to pay Nelson and the ACLU $ 95 @,@ 000 ( 1994 , $ 138 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) for damage to the painting and to issue police procedures about what materials protected by the First Amendment may be seized . The elected officials also agreed not to appeal the district court 's ruling . Left unresolved were the hundreds of thousands of dollars of legal fees owed to lawyers defending Tillman , Rush and Streeter ; by September 1994 , $ 200 @,@ 000 ( 1994 , $ 292 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) in fees were owed by Tillman alone . Earlier in the year , the City Council 's Finance Committee voted against paying for the aldermen 's legal fees . The vote split along racial lines , 12 to 8 . 
 Grossman stated that the relatively small settlement showed that Nelson had proceeded with the lawsuit " on a matter of principle " . Tillman , however , called the settlement a " great victory " , saying , " we didn 't admit to anything , all the charges were dropped , we 're not paying anything ( in damages ) , and we preserve our rights to pursue efforts to have our legal fees paid " . At the time the lawsuit was settled , Nelson did not issue any statements . The Chicago Tribune reported that he was employed as an advertising artist at an undisclosed firm ; he continued to paint in his free time . As of 1994 , the painting had not been sold , exhibited , or repaired after the incident . 
 = Keeping Up with the Kardashians = 
 Keeping Up with the Kardashians ( abbreviated <unk> ) is an American reality television series that airs on the E ! cable network . The show focuses on the personal and professional lives of the Kardashian – Jenner blended family . Its premise originated with Ryan Seacrest , who also serves as an executive producer . The series debuted on October 14 , 2007 and has subsequently become one of the longest @-@ running reality television series in the country ; the twelfth season of the show premiered on May 1 , 2016 . 
 The series focuses mainly on sisters Kim , Kourtney , Khloé Kardashian , and their half @-@ sisters Kendall and Kylie Jenner . It also features their parents Kris and Caitlyn Jenner ( previously known as Bruce Jenner ) , and brother Rob Kardashian . The significant others of the Kardashian sisters have also appeared on the show , including Kourtney 's ex boyfriend Scott Disick and Khloé 's ex husband Lamar Odom . Caitlyn 's son Brody made cameo appearances in the early seasons before joining the show to appear regularly , along with his brother Brandon , and Brandon 's wife , Leah . Kim 's friend Jonathan <unk> and Khloé 's friend Malika Haqq have also been part of the show . 
 Keeping Up with the Kardashians has received very poor critical reviews since its premiere . It is often criticized for the high degree of emphasis on the " famous for being famous " concept , and for appearing to fabricate some aspects of its storylines . Several critics also noted the show 's lack of intelligence , and described the family as " self @-@ absorbed " and " desperate " for fame . However , some critics recognized the reality series as a " guilty pleasure " and acknowledged the family 's success . Despite the negative reviews , Keeping Up with the Kardashians has attracted high viewership ratings , becoming one of the network 's most successful shows and winning several audience awards . 
 The series ' success has led additionally to the creation of numerous spin @-@ off series , including : Kourtney and Kim Take Miami , Kourtney and Kim Take New York , Khloé & Lamar , Kourtney and Khloé Take The Hamptons , Dash Dolls , and , most recently , Rob and Chyna . The network has also broadcast several television specials featuring special events involving members of the family . 
 = = Background = = 
 Robert Kardashian ( 1944 – 2003 ) and Kristen Mary " Kris " Houghton ( born 1955 ) married in 1978 , and had four children together : daughters Kourtney ( born 1979 ) , Kim ( 1980 ) , and Khloé ( 1984 ) , and son Rob ( 1987 ) . The couple divorced in 1991 . In 1994 , Robert entered the media spotlight when he defended O. J. Simpson for the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman during a lengthy trial . In 1991 , Kris married retired Olympic decathlon champion Bruce Jenner ( born 1949 ; now known as Caitlyn Jenner after undergoing a gender transition in 2015 ) . Caitlyn and Kris had two daughters together , Kendall ( born 1995 ) and Kylie ( 1997 ) . Robert died in 2003 , eight weeks after being diagnosed with esophageal cancer . The Kardashian sisters began appearing in the media spotlight more often . In 2004 , Kim became a personal stylist for recording artist Brandy Norwood . She eventually developed into a full @-@ time stylist , and was a personal shopper and stylist for actress Lindsay Lohan . Khloé , Kim and Kourtney ventured further into fashion , opening a high fashion boutique Dash in Calabasas , California . Throughout Kim 's early career , she was involved in some high @-@ profile relationships including Norwood 's brother , singer Ray J , and later , singer Nick Lachey . In 2006 , Kourtney starred in her first reality television series , Filthy Rich : Cattle Drive . In February 2007 , a home sex video that Kim made with Ray J years earlier was leaked . Vivid Entertainment bought the rights for $ 1 million and released the film as Kim Kardashian : Superstar on February 21 . Kim sued Vivid for ownership of the tape , but dropped the suit in April 2007 settling with Vivid Entertainment for $ 5 million . It is often assumed that the release of the sex tape was a major contributor to the rising fame of Kim Kardashian and her family . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The idea of creating a reality series originated in 2006 when Kris Jenner showed an interest in appearing on a television show together with her family . Jenner commented : " Everybody thinks that [ my children ] could create a bunch of drama in their lives , but it 's something that I felt I didn 't even have to think about . It would be natural . " Producer Ryan Seacrest , who had his own production company , decided to develop the idea , having the popular family @-@ based show The Osbournes in mind . He hired a camera man to visit the Kardashian 's family home to film them having a Sunday barbeque : " They were all together — as crazy and as fun as loving as they are , " Seacrest described the family after seeing the tape . He later initiated the series by sharing the tape with E ! , an American cable network which features mostly entertainment @-@ related programming , and reality television series ; the show was eventually picked up . In August 2007 , it was announced that the Kardashian and Jenner families would star in a yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ titled reality show on E ! described as a " new non @-@ scripted family sitcom " , being produced by Ryan Seacrest and Bunim / Murray Productions . The series ' announcement came one week after Paris Hilton and her friend Nicole Richie announced that their popular E ! series , The Simple Life , was ending . 
 The show , entitled Keeping Up With the Kardashians , premiered on October 14 , 2007 . The reality series centers around the members of the Kardashian @-@ Jenner blended family , focusing on the sisters Kourtney , Kim and Khloé . Most episodes have very similar <unk> : the family " show [ s ] off their privileged lifestyle and maybe get into one or two minor family squabbles before ultimately wrapping things up with a monologue that reinforces the importance of family , " as noted by Caroline <unk> of Quartz . Harriet Ryan and Adam Tschorn of the Los Angeles Times described the reality series as a : " Hollywood version of The Brady Bunch -- the harmless high jinks of a loving blended family against a backdrop of wealth and famous connections " . Kim Kardashian described the beginning of filming the show , " When we first started [ the show ] , we came together as a family and said , ' If we 're going to do this reality show , we 're going to be 100 percent who we really are . ' " . She further commented on the show 's authenticity by saying that the network " has never once put anything out there that we haven 't approved of or accepted " . The series was renewed for a second season one month after its premiere due to high ratings . Seacrest described the show 's success : " At the heart of the series — despite the catfights and endless sarcasm — is a family that truly loves and supports one another [ … ] The familiar dynamics of this family make them one Hollywood bunch that is sure to entertain . " 
 The following year , Keeping Up with the Kardashians was picked up for a third season . In April 2012 , E ! signed a three @-@ year deal with the Kardashian family that kept the series airing through seasons seven , eight and nine . Keeping up with the Kardashians was later renewed for a tenth season which premiered on March 15 , 2015 . In February 2015 , it was announced that the show had been renewed for four more years , along with an additional spin @-@ off series , making it one of the longest @-@ running reality television series in the country . In terms of the show 's future , Kim Kardashian has commented that the reality series could go for an indefinite number of seasons saying that she : " hope [ s ] it goes on for as long as it can . " Keeping Up With the Kardashians , including its spin @-@ off series , has become the cable network 's flagship show and its most lucrative franchise . " It has changed the face of E ! " said Lisa Berger , the network 's executive producer . " We were a place to report on celebrity ; we weren 't a place to break and make celebrity , which is now the whole idea of the E ! brand . " The show 's success contributed significantly towards building the " Kardashian brand " , or " Kardashian Inc . " as it is called by The Hollywood Reporter . " These shows are a 30 @-@ minute commercial , " Khloé Kardashian admitted in 2011 , in response to a suggestion that the television series is used to promote their retail stores and endorsement deals . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 The reality series revolves around the children of Kris Jenner , and originally focused mainly on the children from her first marriage to deceased attorney Robert Kardashian : Kourtney , Kim , Khloé , and Rob . Kris ' children Kendall and Kylie from her subsequent marriage to American athlete Caitlyn Jenner ( previously known as Bruce ) have also been featured on the show since its beginning , along with Jenner 's son Brody from another marriage , although he appeared very few times during the early seasons , mostly being called by his step @-@ brother Rob to babysit their half @-@ sisters Kylie and Kendall . Kourtney 's boyfriend Scott Disick has also been appearing frequently on the show since the first season , as well as on the show 's spin @-@ offs . Cast members also include numerous friends and other acquaintances of the family members , most notably Malika Haqq and Jonathan <unk> who joined Keeping Up with the Kardashians in the second and third seasons , respectively . 
 Most of the Kardashian sisters ' significant others have appeared on the reality series . Kim 's relationship with football player Reggie Bush was featured on the show when they were dating ; after the breakup , Bush commented on appearing on the show saying that he never felt comfortable being followed by cameras , adding : " I do it because it 's important to [ Kim ] . " Rob 's relationship with singer Adrienne Bailon has also been documented on the show when they were dating from 2007 to 2009 ; although Bailon later admitted that the decision to appear on the show , and be associated with the family , hurt to her career . Kim 's ex @-@ husband Kris Humphries first appeared on the show during the premiere of the sixth season ; their relationship was chronicled throughout the season and ended with the couple 's wedding special " Kim 's Fairytale Wedding : A Kardashian Event " . They eventually went through a highly publicized divorce ; Kardashian 's former publicist later claimed that Humphries was allegedly set up to be portrayed on the show in a negative way and that the short @-@ lived marriage was staged for the cameras as a ploy to generate money . 
 Khloé married basketball player Lamar Odom during a fourth season premiere aired in 2009 . He later had a major role as part of the supporting cast of the series , though he did not appear regularly during the following seasons as he was attempting to repair his marriage with Khloé . Kim 's current husband Kanye West made his first appearance on Keeping Up with the Kardashians in July 2012 during the seventh season when he started dating Kim . However , West was seldom seen in subsequent seasons . He explained the reasons for not appearing on the show later : " You know , the amount of backlash I got from it is when I decided to not be on the show anymore . And it 's not that I have an issue with the show ; I just have an issue with the amount of backlash that I get . " He also criticized the show for its cinematography and further complained about the way how the show is filmed . In the eighth season , Caitlyn Jenner 's sons Brandon and Brody Jenner , as well as Brandon 's wife Leah , joined the cast for regular appearances . 
 = = Related programming = = 
 The success of the reality series resulted in the development of several spin @-@ off shows and other related programming . In April 2009 , E ! announced the first spin @-@ off of Keeping Up with the Kardashians entitled Kourtney and Khloé in Miami , which was later renamed Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami . The series followed the sisters who moved to Miami to open a new Dash boutique . Ted Harbert , president and CEO of Comcast Entertainment Group , considered the sisters capable of handling their own standalone series . " It 's a very simple formula that we took from scripted TV and applied to a reality show . [ … ] There are a lot of family sitcom elements to ' Kardashians , ' and we think that humor and warmth will carry over to Miami , " Harbert added . The show premiered on August 16 , 2009 to very high ratings ; the first episode brought in 2 @.@ 7 million total viewers and then became the most @-@ watched show on the network since The Anna Nicole Show in 2002 . The spin @-@ off was subsequently renewed for a second season which premiered on June 13 , 2010 , and later returned as Kourtney and Kim Take Miami for a third season on January 20 , 2013 . Additionally , a series of webisodes entitled Lord Disick : Lifestyles of a Lord were released following the show , which showcased Disick as he informed viewers how to live like a " king " . 
 In October 2010 , the network announced another spin @-@ off called Kourtney and Kim Take New York which followed the same format as its predecessor . The show debuted on January 23 , 2011 , and followed the sisters who opened a Dash location in New York City . The series returned for another season which premiered on November 27 the same year . In January 2011 , Khloé & Lamar , which featured Khloé and her husband Lamar Odom , became the third spin @-@ off of Keeping Up with the Kardashians . The show premiered on April 10 , 2011 , and lasted two seasons . In March 2014 , E ! announced the fourth spin @-@ off entitled Kourtney and Khloé Take The Hamptons . The series premiered on November 2 , 2014 , and followed Kourtney and Khloé who relocated to the Hamptons to work on opening a new Dash pop @-@ up store . The fifth spin @-@ off series called Dash Dolls premiered on September 20 , 2015 . The most recent reality series chronicles the daily life of the employees of the upscale Dash boutique in Los Angeles owned by the Kardashian family . 
 The network has also aired several television specials featuring important family events . A two @-@ part television event called " Kim 's Fairytale Wedding : A Kardashian Event " , showcasing the wedding between Kim and Kris Humphries , was broadcast on October 9 and 10 , 2011 as part of the sixth season ; the special was highly successful with a combined 10 @.@ 5 million viewers . A few days after Caitlyn Jenner ( then Bruce ) came out as a trans woman during a 20 / 20 interview with Diane Sawyer in May 2015 , E ! aired a two @-@ part special on Keeping Up with the Kardashians entitled " About Bruce " , in which another side of the story was told featuring family members who were not involved in the previous interview on 20 / 20 . The first part of the special debuted on May 17 , 2015 , and attracted 2 @.@ 92 million total viewers , a 40 % increase from the previous episode , while the second part aired the following day with similar viewership . I Am Cait , a separate documentary series , was announced immediately after the 20 / 20 interview . The eight @-@ part , one @-@ hour <unk> debuted on July 26 , 2015 , on E ! , and focused on how Jenner was handling the aftermath of the transition ; it also attempted to deal with various LGBT @-@ related issues . Jeff Olde , head of programming at E ! network , said that the series is " not at all a Kardashian spin @-@ off " , and that " we will not resort to spectacle , " trying to emphasize its distinct format that is entirely different from most programming on the network , including Keeping Up with the Kardashians . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Keeping Up with the Kardashians has been the subject of constant panning by critics since its inception . Brian Lowry , reviewing the show for Variety , said that the network : " widens its lens to encompass the whole irritating brood — including Kim ’ s sisters Khloé and Kourtney , mom @-@ manager Kris and <unk> Bruce Jenner , who now has the distinction of having two sets of useless rich kids featured in pointless reality shows . " Ginia Bellafonte of The New York Times compared the show to reality series Gene Simmons Family Jewels and exclaimed that : " the Kardashian show is not about an eccentric family living conventionally ; it is purely about some desperate women climbing to the margins of fame , and that feels a lot creepier . " Laura Burrows of IGN criticized the family for being too self @-@ seeking and using the given platform only to gain more notoriety for themselves . Following the conclusion of the second season of the series , Burrows wrote : " Those of us who watch this show [ … ] want to believe that these whores of attention have souls and would actually do something for their fellow man and not reap the benefits of their service , but two seasons ' worth of self @-@ absorbed <unk> speaks to the contrary . " 
 Roxana <unk> , reviewing Keeping Up with the Kardashians for The Washington Post , was extremely negative towards the reality series due to its absurdity , and commented that the show : " firmly captures all of Kim and Co . ' s dumbest instances from the series ' debut — from the simply self @-@ absorbed to the downright despicable . " Amaya Rivera , writing about the series for Popmatters , noted : " Indeed , there is something disturbing about the Kardashians ' intense hunger for fame . But even worse — it is downright boring to watch this family live out their tedious lives . " John Kubicek , the senior writer of BuddyTV , reviewed the premiere of the third season of the show and discussed the reason for the family 's success by saying that : " the Kardashians ' fame is a lot like Möbius strip or an M. C. Escher painting . " Harriet Ryan and Adam Tschorn of the Los Angeles Times described Keeping Up with the Kardashians as a : " Hollywood version of The Brady Bunch -- the harmless high jinks of a loving blended family against a backdrop of wealth and famous connections " . Jessica <unk> of The Washington Times said that series : " illustrates our nation ’ s moral , spiritual and cultural decay . " <unk> emphasized its negative influence and noted : " America of 50 years ago would regard Ms. Kardashian with a mixture of disdain and pity , embarrassed by the very idea of a young lady ’ s most private moments being broadcast for all the world to see . " 
 Goal <unk> <unk> , reviewing Keeping Up with the Kardashians for Psychology Today , emphasized the show 's influence saying that : " The Kardashians become more relatable the more famous they become . " <unk> also questioned their decision to appear on the show and added : " But if living life in the spotlight is so taxing and demands multiple justifications for the way your life is being lived and criticized , perhaps you can take the cameras out of your house . " Vinnie Mancuso , writing for The New York Observer , criticized the show and felt : " roughly one iota of <unk> pleasure from this endeavor , but for the most part this show is the 100 % drizzling <unk> . " David Hinckley of the New York Daily News , reviewing the tenth season , said that " even when you think something about the Kardashians could be interesting , it 's not , " adding that the " entertainment value [ of the show ] is like having spent 10 years in Rapid City , S.D. , watching the traffic lights change . " Amy Amatangelo of The Hollywood Reporter said that " in true Kardashian fashion , they managed to make everything about them , " after Caitlyn Jenner came out as a trans woman to her family in the " About Bruce " special aired as part of the tenth season . Amatangelo felt that the conversations " seemed a little too staged , too controlled , " and noted that " there was no attempt to educate the viewers about transgender issues . " 
 However , several critics were more positive towards the show . Tim Stack , writing for Entertainment Weekly , welcomed the show as a guilty pleasure and described the reality series as : " my favorite little slice of reality TV <unk> . " Lauren Le Vine of Refinery29 appreciated the success of the family which " achieved the American dream of making something out of nothing , " using the given platform . Libby Hill of The A.V. Club also acknowledged the show 's success and said : " Keeping Up With The Kardashians gives us real , joyous , ugly , unsavory , hilarious life , with all the polished sitcom trappings . And though the latter may have launched a multimedia empire , the former has made it last " . Maura Kelly of The Guardian evaluated the aftermath of the failed wedding of Kim Kardashian and Kris Humphries , which was documented on Keeping Up with the Kardashians , and subsequently caused public outrage , including an online protest petition to cancel the show . " Since Kim doesn 't exactly seem to be an exemplar of self @-@ awareness , I suppose it 's possible that she really believed she and Humphries would live happily ever after , " Kelly speculated whether or not the marriage was a publicity stunt . " But more likely , she and E ! are laughing all the way to the bank – 10 @.@ 5 million viewers tuned into " Kim 's Fairytale Wedding : A Kardashian Event " , after all , " Kelly summarized the controversy . Josh Duboff , writing for Vanity Fair , commented on the show 's long run and said that " it is near impossible to argue that their continued relevance , 10 years later , is anything other than awe @-@ inspiring and remarkable " . 
 = = = Viewership = = = 
 Keeping Up with the Kardashians has been a ratings success for E ! – in its first month it became the highest @-@ rated series aired on Sunday nights for adults 18 – 34 and was seen by 1 @.@ 3 million total viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . Lisa Berger , executive vice president of original programming and series development for E ! , said : " The buzz surrounding the series is huge , and viewers have clearly fallen for the Kardashians . [ … ] Seacrest and Bunim @-@ Murray 's unique ability to capture this family 's one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind dynamics and hilarious antics has made the series a fantastic addition to our prime @-@ time lineup . " The second season continued the success and was viewed by 1 @.@ 6 million viewers on average , which led to a third season renewal . The two @-@ hour fourth season premiere , which aired on November 8 , 2009 , and featured the wedding ceremony of Khloé and Lamar Odom , brought in then @-@ record ratings with 3 @.@ 2 million viewers . The subsequent season debuted with nearly 4 @.@ 7 million total viewers , which ranked as the highest @-@ rated season premiere of the show , as of August 2015 . It was also the second highest @-@ rated episode of Keeping Up with the Kardashians , second only to the previous season 's record @-@ breaking finale with 4 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 The seventh season premiere of the series , which aired on May 20 , 2012 in its earlier timeslot , continued to deliver high ratings attracting almost three million total viewers which exceeded the premiere of the previous season by 16 % . Kim Kardashian has explained the success of the show by saying that people tune in to watch the series because they can relate themselves to the members of the family ; in an interview with the V magazine she said : " You can see that soap operas aren 't on the air as much anymore . I think reality shows are taking over that genre , but I think the draw to our show is that we are relatable . " The eighth season debuted to 3 million viewers , up 6 % from the previous season , while the subsequent ninth season 's premiere was down by 20 % . The ninth season averaged 3 @.@ 3 million total viewers and almost 2 @.@ 2 million in the 18 – 49 years adult demographic , the most sought after by advertisers . It was the highest rated cable show in its timeslot . The series finished as the most @-@ social ad @-@ supported cable program and , as of March 2015 , Keeping Up with the Kardashians is the most @-@ watched show on E ! network . The first episode of the tenth season averaged 2 @.@ 5 million viewers , slightly less than the premiere of the ninth season . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Keeping Up with the Kardashians has been nominated for , and won , several television awards . The reality series has received nominations for a Teen Choice Award in the Choice TV : Celebrity Reality Show category eight consecutive times between 2008 and 2015 , winning the award in 2010 , 2013 and 2014 . The show also won a People 's Choice Award as Favorite TV Guilty Pleasure in 2011 . The Kardashian sisters have been nominated as part of the cast for five awards , winning four times ; Kim Kardashian has been nominated for three awards winning one in 2012 . In 2010 , Kris and Caitlyn Jenner received a Teen Choice Award nomination in a one @-@ time Choice TV : Parental Unit category . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 Keeping Up with the Kardashians premiered on October 14 , 2007 in the United States on the E ! cable network at 10 : 30 / 9 : 30 pm ET / PT . The half @-@ hour reality series continued to air every Sunday night in the same time slot , and the eight @-@ episode first season of the show concluded on December 2 . The subsequent season premiered the following year on March 9 in an earlier time slot at 10 : 00 / 9 : 00 pm with a repeated episode airing immediately afterwards . The season ended on May 26 , 2008 with an episode " Junk in the Trunk " , which featured the Kardashian siblings sharing the most memorable moments of the season . The third season commenced airing on March 8 , 2009 and concluded with two back @-@ to @-@ back episodes which aired on May 25 . The subsequent season premiered with a two @-@ hour long episode entitled " The Wedding " on November 8 , and ended on February 21 , 2010 ; some of the episodes aired throughout the season were extended to a full hour . 
 The fifth season of Keeping Up with the Kardashians began airing on August 22 , 2010 and concluded with another " Junk in the Trunk " episode on December 20 . The sixth season commenced on June 12 , 2011 and ended with a television special " Kim 's Fairytale Wedding : A Kardashian Event " which aired two extended episodes on October 9 and 10 . The show later returned on December 19 with the episode " Kendall 's Sweet 16 " . Starting with the seventh season , which premiered on May 20 , 2012 , the half @-@ hour reality series was extended to a full hour in a new 9 : 00 / 8 : 00 pm time slot . The season concluded on October 28 . The eighth season of the series started airing on June 2 , 2013 ; it became the longest season with 21 episodes and ended on December 1 . The ninth and tenth seasons aired in 2014 and 2015 , respectively . The latter season included a television special entitled " About Bruce " which aired on May 17 and 18 , 2015 . The eleventh season premiered on November 15 , one month after the previous season finished . The twelfth season of the show debuted on May 1 , 2016 . 
 = = Home video releases and streaming = = 
 In North America , the first three seasons of the reality series were distributed on DVD . The first season was released on October 7 , 2008 by Lions Gate Entertainment which obtained the home entertainment distribution rights for a variety of programming from Comcast Entertainment Group , including Keeping Up with the Kardashians . The second and third seasons of the series were released on November 10 , 2009 and August 17 , 2010 , respectively . In Australia , all seasons are released on DVD by Universal Sony Pictures . The latest addition , which includes the eleventh season of the show , was released on April 28 , 2016 . In the United Kingdom , the reality series is distributed by Universal Pictures UK . The DVD set of the seventh season , the latest addition , was released on June 24 , 2013 . The episodes of Keeping Up with the Kardashians are also available on numerous streaming video on demand services , such as Amazon Video , iTunes , Google Play , Microsoft Movies & TV , Hulu , and Vudu , as well as the E ! network 's own streaming service . 
 = Pareh = 
 Pareh ( Sundanese for " rice " ) , released internationally as Pareh , Song of the Rice , is a 1936 film from the Dutch East Indies ( modern day Indonesia ) . Directed by the Dutchmen Albert Balink and Mannus Franken , it featured an amateur native cast and starred Raden Mochtar and Soekarsih . The story follows the forbidden love between a fisherman and a farmer 's daughter . 
 Balink began work on the film in 1934 , working with the Wong brothers , who served as cinematographers . They gathered a budget of 75 @,@ 000 gulden – several times the budget of other local productions – and brought Franken from the Netherlands to assist in production . The film was edited in the Netherlands after being shot in the Indies . The film was a commercial and critical success with European audiences , but disliked by native ones ; despite this success , Pareh bankrupted its producers . 
 Pareh resulted in a change in the cinema of Dutch East Indies , which had been Chinese @-@ oriented for several years ; films began to make more effort at targeting local audiences . Balink later found commercial success with Terang Boelan ( 1937 ) . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider considers Pareh and Terang Boelan the two most important cinematic works from the Dutch East Indies during the 1930s . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Mahmud ( Rd . Mochtar ) , a fisherman , is in love with <unk> ( Soekarsih ) , a farmer 's daughter . However , local superstition dictates that their relationship will bring disaster . This seems to prove true after the village leader 's keris is stolen , but eventually Mahmud and <unk> are able to unite with the help of his fellow villagers . 
 = = Production = = 
 During 1934 and early 1935 , all feature films released in the Dutch East Indies had been produced by The Teng Chun , based on Chinese mythology or martial arts , and targeted at low @-@ class audiences , generally ethnic Chinese . This situation was created by the Great Depression , which had led to the Dutch East Indies government collecting higher taxes , advertisers asking for more money , and cinemas selling tickets at lower prices ; this ensured that there was a very low profit margin for local films . During this period cinemas in the country mainly showed Hollywood productions . 
 Albert Balink , a Dutch journalist , began work on what was to become Pareh in 1934 . Unlike The Teng Chun , the inexperienced Balink chose to target his film at Dutch audiences . He brought in two of the Wong brothers , Chinese filmmakers who had been inactive since making <unk> Theresia ( Sister Theresa ) in 1932 . The Wongs donated their studio – an old tapioca flour factory – as well as filmmaking equipment . Meanwhile , much of the funding came from other backers . According to the Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran , the money came from the cinema mogul <unk> , while EYE Film Institute records indicate that the film was backed by the Centrale Commissie voor <unk> en <unk> van <unk> and meant to promote migration from Java to Sumatra . 
 Balink and the Wongs spent most of two years compiling the necessary funds , with Balink in charge of general operations as the head of Java Pacific Film , a joint operation . Balink insisted on perfection and had a clear idea what kind of actor he wanted in the film . Unlike earlier filmmakers in the country , Balink invested time and money in searching for the best locations and actors possible , without considering whether a person was already a celebrity . Ultimately , most of those cast for Pareh had not acted before , including stars Mochtar and Soekarsih . 
 The role of Mahmud was filled when Balink was out with coffee with Joshua and Othniel Wong and saw a young man , tall , strong , and handsome – as he expected for the role – driving by . Balink called the Wongs and they got into their car , then chased and caught the young man . The man , Mochtar , a Javanese of noble descent , was told to use the title Raden for the film , which he and his family had already abandoned . According to the Indonesian anthropologist Albertus Budi Susanto , the emphasis on Mochtar 's title was meant as a way to draw a higher @-@ class audience . 
 Artistic direction and some of the screenwriting was handled by Mannus Franken , an avant @-@ garde documentary filmmaker from the Netherlands , whom Balink had brought to the Indies . Franken insisted on including ethnographic shots to better present the local culture to international audiences . Franken took an interest in the documentary and ethnographic aspects of the film , directing the shots for these portions , while the Wongs handled the general shots . According to Biran , this was reflected in the camera angles used . 
 Pareh , which had been recorded on 35 mm film using single @-@ system devices , was brought to the Netherlands for editing . There the original voices of the cast were dubbed by actors in the Netherlands , resulting in stilted language use and heavy Dutch accents . Though initially the filmmakers had planned on using gamelan music , the poor quality of the recording equipment in the Indies led to the soundtrack being redone , using European @-@ style music , in the Netherlands . 
 From start to finish the production of Pareh cost 75 @,@ 000 gulden ( approximately US $ 51 @,@ 000 ) , 20 times as much as a regular local production . After editing there were 2 @,@ 061 metres of film , equivalent to 92 minutes of runtime . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Pareh was screened in the Netherlands as Pareh , een <unk> van Java ( also noted as Het Lied van de <unk> ) beginning on 20 November 1936 . The film was also shown in the Indies . It was unable to recoup its costs and bankrupted the producers . The film was critically acclaimed in the Netherlands , partially owing to the emphasis of Franken 's involvement . Although it was a commercial success amongst the intelligentsia in the Indies , Pareh was a failure with lower @-@ class native audiences . Mochtar never viewed the film in full . 
 Historical reception of Pareh has generally been positive . Writing in 1955 , the Indonesian author and cultural critic Armijn Pane opined that Pareh was technically unparalleled in contemporary Indies cinema , with careful continuity and dynamic cuts . He was critical , however , of the film 's tendency to see the Indies ' native population through European eyes and depict them as " primitive " . The American film historian John Lent , writing in 1990 , described Pareh as a " meticulously detailed and costly " film which attempted to not only earn money , but show the local culture . The American visual anthropologist Karl G. Heider considers Pareh one of the two most important cinematic works from the Dutch East Indies during the 1930s ; Balink 's later work Terang Boelan ( Full Moon ; 1937 ) was the other . Heider , John H. McGlynn , and Salim Said note that the film was of acceptable technical quality but is best remembered for changing the path of cinematic developments in the country . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The release of Pareh was followed by a shift in genres popularised by the local cinema . The Teng Chun , who – together with Balink – continued to be the only active filmmaker in the country until 1937 , began focusing on more modern stories and those which would be popular with native audiences . Biran suggests that this was influenced by Pareh . Other filmmakers in the late 1930s , partially inspired by Pareh , began to improve the quality of the audio in their films . Pane notes that , following Pareh , films produced domestically no longer centred around ethnic European casts . 
 Mochtar and Soekarsih , who first met on the set of Pareh , married after appearing together in Terang Boelan . This later production included much of the same cast and was highly successful , leading to a renewed interest in filmmaking in the Indies . Terang Boelan proved to be the most successful local production until 1953 's Krisis ( Crisis ) , released after Indonesia had become independent . 
 = Pilot ( Will & Grace ) = 
 " Pilot " ( also known as " Love and Marriage " ) is the first episode of Will & Grace 's first season . It was written by David Kohan and Max Mutchnick , and directed by James Burrows . It originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on September 21 , 1998 . In the episode , Grace Adler receives an unexpected marriage proposal from her boyfriend . Her gay best friend Will Truman tries to support her , but finally tells her that she is making a big mistake , even though he risks losing their friendship . The situation gets complicated when Grace 's socialite assistant , Karen Walker , and Will 's flamboyantly gay friend , Jack McFarland , interfere . 
 Kohan and Mutchnick based the show on their own lives ; for example , Mutchnick , who is openly gay , based the relationship between Will and Grace on his real @-@ life relationship with a woman named Janet . When the pilot was pitched to NBC , the network was positive about the project . There was still some concern , however , that the homosexual subject matter would cause alarm , since the sitcom Ellen was canceled because ratings had plummeted after the show became " too gay " . Since airing , the pilot episode of Will & Grace has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 6 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 4 million viewing households . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with gay lawyer Will Truman ( Eric McCormack ) talking on the phone with his best friend , heterosexual Jewish interior designer Grace Adler ( Debra Messing ) , about their lives . The following day , Will hosts a poker game at his apartment with his friends , when Grace arrives and informs Will she just had an argument with her long @-@ term boyfriend , Danny ( Tom Verica ) . After the game is over , Will insists that Grace spend the night — much to the displeasure of Will 's flamboyantly gay friend , Jack McFarland ( Sean Hayes ) , who was planning to move in with Will temporarily . 
 Later at her office , Grace Adler Designs , Grace tells her socialite assistant Karen Walker ( Megan Mullally ) about her argument with Danny . Karen tells Grace to make up with him , explaining to Grace that Danny is a " good catch " . After staying another night with Will , Grace decides to end her relationship with Danny . However , when she tries to end things she receives an unexpected marriage proposal from him , which she accepts . After the proposal , Grace goes to Will 's apartment and asks for his blessing . Will attempts to be supportive of her decision , but finally tells her that Danny is not right for her . Grace informs Will that she does not need his blessing , and that she is going to marry Danny regardless . 
 Will shows up at Grace Adler Designs the following day to apologize . Karen reveals to Will that Grace has gone to City Hall to get married . However , Grace shows up at her office and informs Will that she left Danny at the altar . Will takes Grace out for a drink and reassures her that she will find someone eventually . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Will & Grace creators Max Mutchnick and David Kohan based the show on their own lives . Mutchnick , who is openly gay , based the relationship between Will and Grace on his real @-@ life relationship with a woman named Janet . Originally , Mutchnick and Kohan first went to the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) , who told them to create a television series about a new young love story , as Mad About You was going off the air . The character of Will was part of a sitcom Mutchnick and Kohan first pitched to NBC executives in 1997 . The original concept was an ensemble comedy featuring three couples , one of which was a gay man living with a straight woman . Warren Littlefield , the executive vice president of NBC at the time , was not excited about the first two couples , but wanted to learn more about the gay and straight couple , so Mutchnick and Kohan was sent to create a pilot script centering on those two characters . NBC went to sitcom director James Burrows to see what he thought of the homosexual subject matter and if an audience would be interested in the show . Burrows liked the idea and when he first read the script in November 1997 , he decided that he wanted to direct it . Burrows said , " I knew that the boys had captured a genre and a group of characters I have never read before . " The filming of the pilot began in March 1998 . The actors who played Will and Grace , Eric McCormack and Debra Messing , were positive about the series and they thought it had the potential to last on television . McCormack said , " When shooting was finished that night , Debra and I were sitting on the couch and looking at each other and I said , ‘ We ’ re gonna be on this set for a while . ’ And we sort of clasped hands , but we didn ’ t want to say anything beyond that and jinx it . " 
 NBC were positive about the project , but there was still some concern that the homosexual subject matter would cause alarm . Ellen DeGeneres ' sitcom Ellen that aired on ABC was canceled the year before Will & Grace premiered because ratings had plummeted after the show became " too gay " . Despite the criticism ABC received for DeGeneres ' coming out episode , " The Puppy Episode " , " there 's no question that show made it easier for Will & Grace to make it on the air , " said Kohan . He added , " Will & Grace had a better shot at succeeding where Ellen failed , however , because Will has known about his homosexuality for twenty years . He 's not exploring that awkward territory for the first time as Ellen did . The process of self @-@ discovery and the pain most gay men go through is fascinating , but the average American is put off by it . " Kohan also commented that rather than concentrating on Will 's sexuality , Will & Grace is using it as a device : " It 's like that When Harry Met Sally ... line when Billy Crystal says , ' A man and woman can never be friends , because sex always gets in the way . ' What we want to explore is what happens between a man and a woman when sex doesn 't get in the way . " 
 = = = Cast and characters = = = 
 Mutchnick said Will was originally going to be named Will Herman ( " her man " ) because the staff wanted to use names that " speak exactly to the essence " of the characters . However , they changed it to Truman ( " true man " ) since they thought it was more accurate , as Will " really lives his life in an honest way " . John Barrowman was one of the final candidates for the role of Will , but was rejected because he " wasn 't gay enough " . The part instead went to Eric McCormack , who revealed that taking the role was not difficult because he liked the concept of a gay show not being about the " issues " of being gay . Having played gay characters several times in his career , McCormack did not have a problem with it and thought his character could become a " poster boy for some gay movement " , like DeGeneres became a spokesperson with her character . He explained that when he first read the script , " what hit me immediately was that this was me . I mean , sexual orientation aside , Will was so much like me . He 's a great host , he 's relatively funny and he has great friends and he 's a good friend to them ... the gay issue just wasn 't really a big thing . " McCormack was also the first actor to be cast . In response to the relationship between Will and Grace , <unk> said that gay men and straight women have " more fun than anybody " in their relationships ; " Straight guys like me are jealous because of how much fun they have . We can show the audience part of that . " 
 Mutchnick , in regards of Debra Messing 's character , said : " Grace doesn 't fall into any of those categories that have stereotyped Jewish women . She 's strong , she 's pretty and she 's a proud Jewish woman . " Mutchnick revealed that Nicollette Sheridan was originally brought in to read the part of Grace , but even though she did a " great job " , her performance was " too desperate " . Mutchnick and Kohan decided to cast Messing in the role instead , who at the time was starring in ABC 's drama Prey . After her first meeting with them , Messing was not convinced she wanted the role . Messing revealed that Mutchnick and Kohan showed up at her home with a bottle of vodka ; " They poured me several shots , we spoke for several hours and they pitched me the show . I 'm a lightweight . I didn 't need much to be a little giddy . By the end of the evening , they said , ' Will you do it ? ' I said , ' Let 's talk tomorrow . ' " They called her the next day to inform her that they " loved her " and asked " if she 'd made up her mind " . Messing still did not make her mind up . However , the following day , she called Mutchnick and Kohan and accepted the role . In discussion of the character , Messing said : " I have a lot more confidence and I 'm much more relaxed . I feel comfortable that Grace will be a character I 'll enjoy doing for a long time . " She later , however , admitted that director Burrows was the reason for doing Will & Grace . Messing was the last actor to be cast . 
 Sean Hayes was cast in the role of Jack . When a NBC casting executive saw Hayes 's role in the indie gay romance film Billy 's Hollywood Screen Kiss , he sent the script to Hayes , who was attending the 1997 Sundance Film Festival in Utah . Even though Hayes enjoyed the script when he read it , he threw it away as he did not want to spend money on a plane ticket to Los Angeles for the audition . However , a few weeks later when Hayes was in Los Angeles , he was sent the script again and decided try out for the audition . If asked if he regrets accepting the role , Hayes said : " If you 're truly an actor , in the long run ... I don 't know that I would have done it either . I think of all the things that I still want to do , and I don 't know if I 'll get to do them . " However , he admits that he " love [ s ] " the idea that people assume that he is either gay or straight . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Hayes admitted that people believe he is Jack " 24 hours a day " . 
 Before Megan Mullally was given the role of Karen , she had previously been cast as a series regular on sitcoms such as The Ellen Burstyn Show , My Life and Times , and Rachel Gunn . Mullally guest starred on many other shows , including Ned & Stacey , on which she first worked with Messing . Mullally informed her agent that she did not want to do any more sitcoms or auditions for sitcoms , during the time that Will & Grace came around . " Because my feeling was , like , Look , I 've done it . It 's not clicking . It 's not for me . But he [ her agent ] was always arguing the point that the right thing hadn 't come along yet . " She initially auditioned for the role of Grace , but admitted that she did not want to audition for the part of Karen . When asked about Karen 's voice , Mullally revealed that the voice was an " instinctive thing " . She also said , " ... I think it was just a feeling that I had that it would be better for the pace of the show and it would be funnier in some way , but I didn 't know why . Karen has a lot of joy , even when she 's in a bad mood . She 's pretty much happy with who she is , and that is something I think is a great thing to play , because the character of Karen could have been very unlikeable , and I think she 's likeable because she has joy and she can be very childlike . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was first broadcast in the United States on NBC on Monday , September 21 , 1998 , in the 9 : 30 – 10 p.m. ( PST ) timeslot . In its original American broadcast , the pilot tied with Working for forty @-@ first place in ratings for the week of September 21 – 27 , 1998 . With a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 6 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 4 million viewing households , it was the fifteenth highest @-@ rated show on NBC the week it aired . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Joyce Millman of Salon Entertainment said the episode has " glimmers of class " and the jokes are " relatively sophisticated " . John Carman of the San Francisco Chronicle commented that Burrows 's direction was " sharp as usual " and the writing was " above average " . Brian Lambert of the St. Paul Pioneer Press said the pilot was " nicely staged by veteran director Jimmy Burrows , and coming from a couple producers , Max Mutchnick and David Cohan , who assisted Boston Common and Dream On , the show – which is to say the pilot episode ( everything could go to hell next week ) – has the best verbal interplay of any of the season 's new sitcoms . " William Horn from the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) thought the episode was a " wonderful " representation of a gay man 's life " regardless of whether he 's in a relationship in that very moment . I think it 's important that American audiences realize that lesbians and gay men are not simply all about sexual situations . " Ellen Gray of the Chicago Tribune was also positive about the show : " For those who believe that Hollywood 's engaging in a conspiracy to ' normalize ' a sexual orientation that many Americans still find abhorrent , Will & Grace will look like a candy @-@ coated poison pill . To those who think that Hollywood isn 't moving fast enough in offering sexual parity for gays , it may just look like poison . But ... there 's a large audience out there that 's somewhere in the mushy middle , an audience that might be ready to embrace Will & Grace . " 
 The actors ' performances were praised by several critics . Carman thought McCormack and Messing worked " nicely " together , and called the supporting cast " an asset " . Kay <unk> of the Seattle Times also praised McCormack , Messing and the supporting cast as " very funny " . Robert Laurence of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune wrote : " Messing and McCormack play wonderfully together , tossing lines back and forth as if they 'd been at it for years , making their relationship quite believable . Sean Hayes , as the flamboyantly gay Jack , adds to the mix . Jack is flighty , temperamental , good @-@ humored and highly likable . " A reviewer for USA Today said he thought it would be nice to see Will have a " full life of his own " , and not just serve as a " love @-@ life adviser " to Grace and Jack . " I know it won 't happen soon ; NBC is so skittish about the so @-@ called Ellen ' gay show ' stigma , it 's gone to Herculean lengths to avoid mentioning Will 's sexuality . But a grace period can only last so long . " 
 The episode received less positive reviews as well . Rahul <unk> of PopMatters wrote that while " the pilot lays the usual groundwork by showing how the characters ' lives are intertwined , it also demonstrates immediately the sitcom 's major drawback , that the stereotypical gay character is the stand @-@ out comic figure . " A reviewer for the Los Angeles Times said " there 's something not quite right about this show 's approach to homosexuality ... It has everything to do with Will 's attitude . It approaches asexual , his gayness appearing to exist solely as a device to give him the moral authority to repeatedly ridicule the mincing manner of his bandanna @-@ wearing homosexual friend , Jack , without being labeled homophobic . " <unk> 's Hana Lewis thought it was " regrettable " that the pilot 's jokes revolved " solely around gay stereotypes and sexual innuendo " . Some reviewers were also skeptical about the future of the show . One such review said , " If Will & Grace can somehow survive a brutal time period opposite football and Ally McBeal , it could grow into a reasonably entertaining little anomaly — that is , a series about a man and a woman who have no sexual interest in one another . But don 't bet on it . If it 's a doomed relationships viewers want , they 'll probably opt for Ally . " 
 = Wayzata Bay Center = 
 Wayzata Bay Center was an enclosed shopping mall in Wayzata , Minnesota , a suburb of the Twin Cities . Wayzata Bay Center once comprised 127 @,@ 000 square feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space , with approximately 30 stores on one level , but closed in 2011 after the city of Wayzata agreed upon constructing a new facility on the same land . The mall was once owned by Madison Marquette until residents of the city purchased the mall for $ 16 million in December 2004 . 
 Opened in 1967 , Wayzata Bay Center was constructed in two phases ; the first phase was completed in 1964 while the second phase was completed in 1967 . The mall initially featured several regional retailers , along with small businesses , but eventually made way for various national chains , including The Original Pancake House and True Value . After increasing vacancies throughout the center in the 2000s , a Minnesota construction firm purchased the center from United Properties for $ 16 million in 2009 . Following the firm 's purchase in 2011 , the mall was shut and torn down to make way for a mixed @-@ use retail and residential community center . 
 = = History = = 
 Wayzata Bay Center was constructed in two different phases in Wayzata , Minnesota . The center was built on top of several wetlands , which were filled in with dirt and concrete to create land suitable for development . The northern phase of the mall was completed in 1964 while the southern phase of the mall was finished in 1967 . The construction of the center cost $ 1 @.@ 5 million , contained 1 @,@ 200 parking spaces , and was anchored by a Country Club Market grocery store . For many years , the mall offered a seasonal trolley car that shuttled shoppers around the facilities ; this service was eventually discontinued in the late 1990s . The mall did not receive any significant remodeling or renovations until 1980 , when four outparcels were constructed in the parking lot of the mall . The outparcels were housed by several restaurants and a Goodyear location . 
 In 2002 , Wayzata Bay Center experienced several store closings within its facilities ; the vacancy rate of the mall increased from 13 to 33 percent in just two years . In June 2004 , the City of Wayzata announced plans to tear down half of the mall , renovating the remaining half , and constructing four condominium buildings on the property . Within the same plan included the possible addition of a grocery store to the mall ; Madison Marquette hinted at the opening of a Whole Foods Market or a Trader Joe 's store . However , these plans fell through when Madison Marquette sold the mall . Owners of The Foursome , a tenant of Wayzata Bay Center since 1967 , purchased the mall in December of the same year after the mall 's previous owner , a German @-@ based developer , abandoned any redevelopment plans for the site . After the redevelopment of the mall was approved in 2008 , The Foursome closed its 30 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 800 m2 ) location and moved to nearby Plymouth , Minnesota . Several other businesses closed in 2009 , resulting in an even higher vacancy rate at Wayzata Bay Center . 
 = = Closure = = 
 Despite regularly hosting several local events and art shows throughout the years , significant discussion of the mall 's closure occurred in 2004 and 2005 . The mall 's owner at the time , Madison Marquette , announced plans to " upgrade and enhance " the shopping center , to appear more attractive to businesses and customers . The supposed enhancement plans included removing the enclosed spaces of the mall , but these plans were never carried out . 
 After talks of closure for years , Wayzata Bay Center closed its doors on August 15 , 2011 . Demolition began shortly after in April 2012 , when all stores in the mall had either relocated or closed . The Original Pancake House , a restaurant , was the final tenant to close in the mall . The restaurant , a tenant of the center since 1994 , relocated to neighboring Plymouth , while Adele 's Frozen Custard , a tenant in the mall since 2009 , closed their Wayzata location entirely . Among the mall 's other final tenants were a True Value hardware store , a jewelry store , a health food store , and a furniture store . 
 When the center was demolished , development began for a senior living facility with mixed retail and office space use . After several months of delays and halts from the city council , construction of the development began in June 2013 . The new development , entitled The Promenade , is expected to be fully completed in 2016 . When the new project was complete , Presbyterian Homes , the company that purchased the land for redevelopment , referred to the project as " ambitious " and thanked the City of Wayzata for their cooperation throughout the process . The new development consists of several different uses , including senior housing , condominiums , a boutique hotel , and office and retail space . 
 = California State Route 46 = 
 State Route 46 ( SR 46 ) is an east – west state highway in the U.S. state of California . It is a major crossing of the Coast Ranges , connecting SR 1 on the Central Coast near Cambria and US 101 in Paso Robles with SR 99 at Famoso in the San Joaquin Valley . East of Paso Robles , where it carried U.S. Route 466 until 1964 , SR 46 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , though it is mostly a two @-@ lane highway . The highway from SR 1 to SR 41 near Cholame is an eligible State Scenic Highway , but has not been designated as such . 
 The road that is now SR 46 was built and improved during the 1920s and was fully paved by 1930 . The majority of SR 46 was originally designated as U.S. Route 466 ; however , after the latter was entirely removed from the U.S. Highway system , the eastern portion of the route became SR 46 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 46 begins at SR 1 southeast of Cambria , about one mile ( 2 km ) from the Pacific Ocean . It heads east as the Eric <unk> Highway across the Santa Lucia Range on a relatively straight roadway built in the 1970s , bypassing the steep , curvy Santa Rosa Creek Road . After passing near several wineries , this first segment ends at US 101 north of Templeton , where SR 46 turns north , overlapping the US 101 freeway through the valley formed by the Salinas River to central Paso Robles . Immediately after splitting from US 101 , SR 46 crosses the Salinas River , passing near the Paso Robles Municipal Airport , and then heads east through a hilly area with several wineries and the community of Whitley Gardens . It then runs partially alongside the Estrella River to a merge with SR 41 near Shandon and a rest area . There , it turns northeast , following Cholame Creek through Cholame Pass between the Cholame Hills and <unk> Range to the settlement of Cholame and the split with SR 41 . After crossing into Kern County , the highway continues to rise as it heads east up the Antelope Grade to a summit near Bluestone Ridge before descending through Polonio Pass into the Antelope Valley , an arm of the San Joaquin Valley . 
 Once it enters the San Joaquin Valley , SR 46 , known as the Paso Robles Highway , follows an almost perfectly straight eastward alignment , crossing SR 33 at Blackwells Corner , passing through the Lost Hills Oil Field , and intersecting I @-@ 5 about two miles ( 3 km ) past Lost Hills and the crossing of the California Aqueduct . SR 46 then passes through the <unk> Oil Field about seven miles west of Wasco . SR 46 and SR 43 overlap for a short distance in the city of Wasco , and then SR 46 passes over Calloway Canal and Friant Canal before it ends at SR 99 in Famoso . The county @-@ maintained Famoso Road continues east across SR 65 and into the Sierra Nevada foothills . 
 = = History = = 
 As part of the second state highway bond issue , approved by the state 's voters in 1916 , Route 33 was created , linking the San Joaquin Valley trunk ( Route 4 , now SR 99 ) near Bakersfield with the coast trunk ( Route 2 , now US 101 in Paso Robles , passing through the Coast Ranges via Cholame Pass . The road was not yet built in 1919 , when the Automobile Blue Book recommended only the county @-@ maintained " very poor road " ( now SR 58 ) via <unk> as a connection between the valley and Central Coast . By 1925 , the Cholame Pass highway had been improved , and paving was completed in December 1930 . An extension west to Route 56 ( now SR 1 ) near Cambria was added in 1933 ; however , it ran along Santa Rosa Creek Road , north of today 's alignment . 
 The state sign route system was established in 1934 , but the majority of Route 33 did not receive a state route designation , instead becoming part of the new U.S. Route 466 . However , US 466 turned southwest from Cholame Pass along Legislative Route 125 ( modern SR 41 ) to Morro Bay . Sign Route 41 , which followed Legislative Route 125 northeast of Cholame , continued along Route 33 west to the coast . However , Route 125 had still not been paved between Cholame and Atascadero by the 1950s , and so US 466 was moved to the longer but better @-@ quality Route 33 via Paso Robles , replacing SR 41 to Paso Robles and overlapping US 101 to Atascadero . As SR 41 had not been signed over the unpaved road west of Paso Robles , it was truncated to Cholame . US 466 was eliminated in the 1964 renumbering , becoming SR 46 east from Paso Robles . However , instead of going south and west to Morro Bay , SR 46 continued west to Cambria , and the road via Creston and Atascadero to Morro Bay ( which had since been paved ) became part of SR 41 . A new two @-@ lane expressway carrying SR 46 west from Paso Robles was built in the mid @-@ 1970s , replacing Santa Rosa Creek Road . 
 The two @-@ lane stretch from Paso Robles to Cholame was once known as " Blood Alley " for the large number of car crashes , mainly head @-@ on collisions , among the high volume of commuters , truckers , and tourists . Between 2000 and 2010 , a total of 38 people have died . As of 2016 , Blood Alley was widened to a four lane expressway from the junction of US 101 to just east of the west junction of SR 41 , near the town of Shandon . The east junction of the SR 46 - SR 41 split , is named after actor James Dean , who was killed in a car accident near this site on September 30 , 1955 . The current intersection is now marked as the James Dean Memorial Junction . The junction was officially dedicated as the James Dean Memorial Junction on September 30 , 2005 , as part of the State of California 's official commemoration of the 50th anniversary of Dean 's death . However , this is not the actual intersection where the accident occurred , contrary to popular belief . The accident scene is approximately 100 feet to the south of the current intersection , where the road use to be . The California Department of Transportation ( Caltrans ) carried out an interim safety project in December 1995 , mandating daytime headlights and installing thermoplastic striping and rumble strips . Caltrans has plans to start widening the section between SR 33 and I @-@ 5 in 2017 . There are also plans to upgrade SR 46 west of this segment and build an interchange at the James Dean Memorial Junction ( SR 41 North ) . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The numbers reset at county lines ; the start and end postmiles in each county are given in the county column . 
 = Discipline ( Nine Inch Nails song ) = 
 " Discipline " is a single by American industrial rock band Nine Inch Nails . It is the band 's first single since severing its ties with Interscope Records and publishing music independently . Unlike previous NIN singles , no physical release of the song was issued . The song was first released to radio stations on April 22 , 2008 , sent by Nine Inch Nails frontman Trent Reznor . 
 The MP3 download contains an embedded album art image , full lyrics , and the comment : " Go to <unk> May 5 " . Subsequently on May 5 , 2008 a new Nine Inch Nails album , The Slip , was revealed for download . " Discipline " charted on Billboard 's Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks and Hot Modern Rock Tracks charts , and was Nine Inch Nails ' sixth consecutive top ten single on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Nine Inch Nails front man Trent Reznor announced in 2007 that the band had completed its contractual obligations to its record label , Interscope Records , and would no longer be working with the company . Reznor also revealed that Nine Inch Nails would likely distribute music independently . Since the announcement , Nine Inch Nails released the 36 @-@ track instrumental album Ghosts I – IV in March 2008 on Reznor 's independent label The Null Corporation . After the release of Ghosts , Reznor began writing and recording what would become the next full @-@ length album , The Slip . 
 During recording sessions for The Slip , Reznor sent the track " Discipline " to radio stations himself on April 22 . The track was sent before the remainder of the album was completed , and less than 24 hours after the track had been mastered by Alan Moulder . On the same day , the track was also made available for download at the official Nine Inch Nails website for free , as well as multitrack files of the song for remixing . Reznor reflected on the quick turnaround by saying " that was fun [ ... ] you never could have done that before " , referring to his past career on major record labels . " Discipline " was the first Nine Inch Nails single to be released independently via The Null Corporation . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The largely electronic instrumentation of " Discipline " has been compared to Depeche Mode , Bauhaus , Siouxsie and the Banshees , and Giorgio Moroder . Rolling Stone magazine described the track as " the closest Reznor has ever come to disco , right down to a splashing high @-@ hat , boosted way up in the mix " . Eric Harvey of Pitchfork Media also compared the song to disco , saying that the song " eschews a typically monstrous chorus for an airtight industrial disco grind ventilated by an airy piano and falsetto cooing . " 
 Lyrically , Spin magazine wrote that " As is true of nine out of every ten NIN tracks , ' Discipline ' is about submission and domination " . Harvey compared " Discipline " to one Nine Inch Nails 's first singles , " Head Like a Hole " , saying " [ ' Discipline ' ] comes from a long @-@ established and now label @-@ free artist trying to reflexively reassert his position in the pop landscape , on his own terms . [ ... ] ' Discipline ' evinces Reznor 's desire for some sort of framework [ ... ] In relative terms , ' I need your discipline / I need your help ' is sure a long way from the nearly 20 @-@ year @-@ old ' Head Like a Hole ' refrain ' I 'd rather die / Than give you control ' . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Discipline " was released on April 22 , 2008 , and was the first single from The Slip . The song was also the first single released from the band under Reznor 's newly formed independent label , The Null Corporation . The ID3 tag of the downloadable track came with the message " Go to <unk> May 5 " , the day that The Slip would eventually be released as a free download . 
 " Discipline " was only made available for airplay and download ; a physical release was never issued . Though no music video was created for the song either , retail versions of The Slip included a DVD featuring a live @-@ rehearsal of the song by the Nine Inch Nails live band . The rehearsal video has since been posted on the band 's official Vimeo and YouTube pages . The song was written and composed by Trent Reznor , and produced by Alan Moulder and Atticus Ross . Like the entirety of The Slip , " Discipline " was released under a Creative Commons attribution @-@ noncommercial share @-@ alike license , in effect allowing anyone to use or rework the material for any non @-@ profit purpose , as long as credit is provided and the resulting work is released under a similar license . 
 " Discipline " reached number six and number 24 on Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks and Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks charts , respectively , and failed to top any charts . The song was the band 's sixth consecutive top ten single on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart , but had no involvement at Top 5 . The song also charted at number nine on Billboard 's " iLike Libraries : Most Added " chart , which tracks total downloads over the iLike online service . 
 Pitchfork Media 's review of The Slip called the track " another solid pop song about constraint from the guy who , following Prince , brought kinky sex odes to strip @-@ mall bars . " Spin magazine 's review of the album called " Discipline " " the most conventional tune " from The Slip . 
 = = Track list = = 
 " Discipline " ( Trent Reznor ) – 4 : 30 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Maryland Route 537 = 
 Maryland Route 537 ( MD 537 ) is a collection of unsigned state highways in the U.S. state of Maryland . These three existing highways and a former section of state highway are segments of old alignment of U.S. Route 213 ( US 213 ) , which is now MD 213 , in Chesapeake City in southern Cecil County . Some of the roads that became segments of MD 537 were constructed in the mid @-@ 1910s as part of the original state road between Elkton and Cecilton . Other portions of MD 537 were part of the approach roads to a bridge across the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal that was built in the mid @-@ 1920s and destroyed in 1942 . After the modern Chesapeake City Bridge and its approach roads were completed in 1949 , US 213 was moved to the new bridge and approach roads and MD 537 was assigned to the bypassed sections of US 213 . Much of MD 537 outside of Chesapeake City was transferred to county maintenance in the late 1950s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 There are three existing sections of MD 537 and one former section of the highway . MD 537A was and MD 537B is north of the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal , and MD 537C and MD 537D are south of the canal . This description runs north to south starting from the north end of the Chesapeake City area : 
 MD 537A ran 1 @.@ 61 miles ( 2 @.@ 59 km ) between a pair of intersections with US 213 ( Augustine Herman Highway ) , between which was a third intersection with the highway , north of Chesapeake City . The highway split from the U.S. Highway on a tangent along Knights Corner Road . MD 537A turned west onto Elk Forest Road , crossed to the west side of US 213 , and turned south onto Spears Hill Road . The highway followed that road to its southern terminus at US 213 north of Long Creek . 
 MD 537B begins at MD 285 , which heads east along Biddle Street toward Delaware and north along Lock Street toward Elkton . The highway heads south along Lock Street for 0 @.@ 06 miles ( 0 @.@ 097 km ) to Canal Road along the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal . The 0 @.@ 01 miles ( 0 @.@ 016 km ) of MD 537B closest to the canal is maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers instead of the Maryland State Highway Administration . MD 537B originally followed Lock Street a further 0 @.@ 57 miles ( 0 @.@ 92 km ) out of the town limits to MD 213 at the north end of the Chesapeake City Bridge along what is now MD 285 . 
 MD 537C runs 0 @.@ 49 miles ( 0 @.@ 79 km ) from the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal south to MD 213 . The highway begins at a dead end at the canal just north of 1st Street in the South Chesapeake City Historic District . MD 537C follows George Street through an intersection with the western end of MD 286 ( 2nd Street ) . The highway has an acute junction with the northern end of MD 342 ( St. Augustine Road ) and an orthogonal intersection with MD 537D . South of MD 537D , MD 537C reaches its southern terminus at right @-@ in / right @-@ out interchange ramps with northbound MD 213 at the south end of the Chesapeake City Bridge at the Chesapeake City town limit . 
 MD 537D begins at MD 342 and heads west as an unnamed road through an intersection with MD 537C . The highway passes under the Chesapeake City Bridge and curves south to an intersection with the right @-@ in / right @-@ out interchange ramps with southbound MD 213 . MD 537D reaches its southern terminus 0 @.@ 02 miles ( 0 @.@ 032 km ) south of the town limit of Chesapeake City . The roadway continues as county @-@ maintained Basil Avenue . MD 537D formerly continued south 0 @.@ 86 miles ( 1 @.@ 38 km ) along Basil Avenue to US 213 at Bohemia Manor High School . 
 = = History = = 
 The Cecilton – Elkton highway was one of the original state roads the Maryland State Roads Commission designated for improvement in 1909 . The portion of the highway from Elkton to the north town limit of Chesapeake City was constructed as a 14 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) macadam road between 1911 and 1914 . The highway through Chesapeake City and south toward Cecilton was completed as a 14 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) concrete road in 1915 . At that time , the main highway from the north used Knights Corner Road , Elk Forest Road , and Spears Hill Road , entered Chesapeake City along Hemphill Street , crossed the Chesapeake & Delaware Canal on a one @-@ lane bridge , turned west and crossed Back Creek on a wooden bridge , turned south onto Bohemia Street in South Chesapeake City , turned west onto Third Street , and turned south onto George Street to the south end of town , from which the highway followed Basil Avenue toward Cecilton . 
 In the 1920s , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers widened , straightened , and deepened the canal . As part of their work , the agency constructed a vertical lift bridge across the canal . Between 1924 and 1926 , the Maryland State Roads Commission constructed approaches to the new bridge on both sides of the expanded canal , eliminating two narrow and dangerous bridges and four right @-@ angle turns in Chesapeake City . The new route along George Street and Lock Street , which became part of US 213 in 1927 and is now MD 285 and MD 537 , entirely bypassed what is now MD 284 . After the tanker Franz Klasen ' destroyed the <unk> lift bridge on July 28 , 1942 , the Maryland State Roads Commission established a ferry service across the canal . Between 1946 and 1949 , the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers constructed the present tied arch Chesapeake City Bridge and new approach roads to the bridge . 
 US 213 was moved to the new Chesapeake City Bridge , and MD 537 was assigned to the bypassed portions of highway approaching and within Chesapeake City . On May 8 , 1958 , the Maryland State Roads Commission and Cecil County signed a road transfer agreement to turn maintenance of the approach roads outside the town of Chesapeake City to county maintenance . These roads included all of MD 537A , most of MD 537D , and much of MD 537B . The portion of MD 537B from US 213 to the north town limit was returned to state maintenance through an August 22 , 1961 , road transfer agreement . All three segments of MD 537 were resurfaced with bituminous concrete in 1976 . The intersection of MD 537B and MD 284 was transformed from a tangent intersection to the present orthogonal intersection in 1982 . The following year , the state highway numbers in Chesapeake City achieved their present form when the portion of MD 537B between MD 213 and MD 285 's then western terminus at the intersection of Biddle and Lock streets was renumbered as an extension of MD 285 . 
 = = Junction lists = = 
 The route progression in these tables is south to north . 
 = = = MD 537B = = = 
 The entire route is in Chesapeake City , Cecil County . 
 = = = MD 537C = = = 
 The entire route is in Chesapeake City , Cecil County . 
 = = = MD 537D = = = 
 The entire route is in Chesapeake City , Cecil County . 
 = Jermain Taylor = 
 Jermain Taylor ( born August 11 , 1978 ) is an American former professional boxer . He remains the last undisputed middleweight champion , having unified the WBA , WBC , IBF , WBO , The Ring magazine and lineal titles in 2005 by beating Bernard Hopkins . This made Taylor the first boxer to ever claim each title from all four major boxing sanctioning organizations . He is also a two @-@ time former IBF middleweight champion , having won the title for a second time in 2014 . 
 Taylor made his professional debut in 2001 and won his first 25 bouts , which included victories over former champions Raúl Márquez and William Joppy . Taylor , who began boxing officially at age 13 , earned numerous accolades throughout his amateur career , starting with his achievement of the 1996 Under @-@ 19 Championship . He went on to win a pair of Police Athletic League ( PAL ) Championships and National Golden Gloves titles and he finished second and third at the 1997 and 1998 United States Championships , respectively . In 1998 , Taylor won a bronze medal at the Goodwill Games . Then , in 2000 , he earned a spot on the U.S. Olympic boxing team , becoming the first boxer from Arkansas ever to compete in the Olympic Games . Competing at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney , Australia , Taylor ended up winning the bronze medal . 
 During his reign as unified middleweight champion , Taylor won a rematch against Hopkins and defeated Kassim Ouma and Cory Spinks , as well as fighting Winky Wright to a draw . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 In December 2000 , Taylor signed with boxing promoter Lou DiBella . Pat Burns became Taylor 's trainer as a professional and Ozell Nelson became an assistant . He made his professional boxing debut on January 27 , 2001 , at Madison Square Garden in New York City against Chris Walsh . Taylor managed to knock Walsh down twice with his right hand and won his debut after forcing a stoppage with 16 seconds left in the fourth and final round . He went on to fight six more times in 2001 , resulting in six more victories . Taylor continued his winning streak through 2002 and 2003 , before defeating Alex <unk> on March 27 , 2004 . Taylor 's next bout occurred on June 19 , 2004 against former IBF Light Middleweight Champion Raúl Márquez . Taylor controlled the fight by using his jab and right hand throughout the one @-@ sided contest . Near the end of the ninth round , Taylor landed a right uppercut that staggered Márquez . A follow @-@ up right hand put Márquez down just before the bell rung to end the round . Soon after Márquez arrived to his corner , his trainer told the referee to stop the fight , resulting in a technical knockout victory for Taylor . On December 4 , 2004 , Taylor fought former WBA Middleweight Champion William Joppy in his hometown of Little Rock . For the majority of the fight , Joppy made the more aggressive Taylor chase him , while landing few punches and seeming more content to frustrate Taylor . Taylor landed several punches early in the fight and knocked Joppy down in the fifth round en route to a unanimous decision victory with scores of 120 – 107 from all three judges . In his next bout , Taylor fought Daniel Edouard on February 19 , 2005 . In the third round , Taylor landed a 10 @-@ punch combination that hurt Edouard to the point that the referee decided to stop the fight . 
 = = = Fights with Hopkins = = = 
 Taylor fought Bernard Hopkins for the Undisputed Middleweight Championship on July 16 , 2005 at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas , Nevada . At age 40 , Hopkins entered the bout with a record 20 consecutive successful title defenses and had not lost a fight in 12 years . Hopkins entered the boxing match as a 3 – 2 favorite to win . Taylor was able to successfully use his jab to control the first two rounds of the fight , though neither fighter was taking any major risks . He tended to move forward , while Hopkins was patient and waited for openings in Taylor 's defense . In round five , a clash of heads opened a cut on the top of Taylor 's head . In the tenth round , Hopkins hurt Taylor with two right hands that made his legs wobble and forced him to clinch . Taylor won the bout by split decision with two judges scoring the fight 115 – 113 for Taylor and the other judge scoring it 116 – 112 for Hopkins . With the victory , Taylor became the new Undisputed Middleweight Champion , winning the WBC , WBO , IBF , WBA ( Super ) Middleweight titles and The Ring Middleweight Championship . Hopkins appealed the decision , but was denied by the Nevada State Athletic Commission . 
 On December 3 , 2005 , Taylor defeated Hopkins by unanimous decision in a rematch at the Mandalay Bay Resort & Casino in Las Vegas . In order for the rematch to occur , Taylor vacated his IBF Middleweight title on October 11 , 2005 . Days before the fight , tensions rose after Hopkins mocked Taylor 's speech impediment and called him a " phony champion . " Taylor responded by bringing a doll with Hopkins ' name on it to the final <unk> press conference to suggest that he was a " crybaby . " In a similar situation to the first fight , Hopkins started slowly and began pressuring Taylor in the later rounds . Hopkins ended the fight with a 101 – 60 advantage in power punches , while Taylor had success with his jab , outlanding Hopkins 64 – 29 . All three judges scored the bout 115 – 113 for Taylor . After the fight , Taylor said that he would welcome a challenge against the winner of a fight between former Undisputed Light Middleweight Champion Winky Wright and Sam Soliman . On December 10 , 2005 , Wright defeated Soliman by unanimous decision to retain his number one position in the WBC and WBA Middleweight rankings and take over the number one spot in the IBF Middleweight rankings . 
 = = = Middleweight Champion = = = 
 On June 17 , 2006 , Taylor fought Winky Wright at the FedEx Forum in Memphis , Tennessee . The WBC had ordered Taylor and Wright to begin negotiating on the fight on December 12 , 2005 and if the two sides could not agree , a purse bid would be ordered . An agreement was made 10 minutes before a purse bid was to take place . Ozell Nelson , unsatisfied with Taylor 's progression between the first and second Hopkins fights , helped convince Taylor to replace Pat Burns with hall of fame trainer Emanuel Steward . Taylor received $ 3 @.@ 75 million for the fight and Wright made $ 3 @.@ 5 million . Wright only paid sanctioning fees for the WBC belt , while Taylor paid fees to the WBC and WBO . Taylor did not pay the fees to the WBA amid controversy of the organization removing him from their rankings after questions of whether Taylor followed all procedures for the WBA before his rematch with Hopkins . He was reinstated at the top the organizations ' middleweight rankings , but his title remained under review . The bout was evenly competitive through the first 10 rounds , with Wright winning most of the early rounds before Taylor became more active in the latter part of the fight . By the ninth round , Wright had swelling above both his eyes . Wright was winning the bout going into the final round on two of the judges ' scorecards , but he was generally passive in the round . Two of the three judges gave the round to Taylor , which resulted in a draw . The scores for the fight were 115 – 113 for Taylor , 115 – 113 for Wright and 114 – 114 . 
 On December 9 , 2006 , Taylor fought Kassim Ouma at the Alltel Arena in North Little Rock , Arkansas . Taylor hurt Ouma early in the first round and continued to control the fight through the middle part of the fight with jabs and hooks . During the second half of the fight , Taylor gradually began to tire and suffered a cut over the left eye . He allowed Ouma to back him into the ropes often as the fight came to an end . However , Ouma was unable to be effective with his punches . Taylor won the bout by unanimous decision with scores of 117 – 111 , 115 – 113 and 118 – 110 . Afterwards , the WBA announced that Taylor was no longer the holder of its Middleweight Super Championship . On May 19 , 2007 , Taylor went up against former Undisputed Welterweight Champion Cory Spinks at the FedEx Forum in Memphis . Taylor dictated the fight by staying away from Spinks and landing one punch at a time . He hurt Spinks with a right hand in the seventh round . Spinks , with a much shorter reach , had difficulty getting within a closer range against his opponent . Taylor landed 101 of 319 punches , while Spinks landed just 85 of 542 . Taylor won the fight by split decision , with two judges scoring 117 – 111 and 115 – 113 in favor of him and the other scoring 117 – 111 for Spinks . 
 = = = Fights with Pavlik = = = 
 In his next bout , Taylor fought Kelly Pavlik on September 29 , 2007 at Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City , New Jersey . Pavlik began rising in popularity after an upset victory over Edison Miranda in a Middleweight Title Eliminator to determine the number one contender to fight Taylor . During their amateur careers , Taylor had defeated Pavlik on February 9 , 2000 in the opening round of the United States Olympic trials . In the second round of the bout , Taylor landed a right hand and followed @-@ up with several more punches which resulted in the first knockdown of the fight . Pavlik got up and managed to make it to the end of the round . Entering the seventh round , Taylor had a commanding lead on all three judges ' scorecards . With less than a minute remaining in the round , Pavlik landed a right cross that sent Taylor into a corner . Pavlik closed in and threw a left uppercut followed by a left and right hook and right uppercut . Two more left hooks dropped Taylor to the canvas as the referee stepped in to halt the fight . It was the first time Taylor had lost in his professional career and the first time he had ever been knocked down . One month later , Taylor exercised a rematch clause in his contract with Pavlik . The rematch took place at a weight of 166 pounds ( 75 kg ) , six pounds higher than the middleweight limit . Due to disappointing performances , Emanuel Steward was fired as Taylor 's trainer and replaced with Ozell Nelson . Fighting at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas on February 16 , 2008 , Taylor lost the rematch to Pavlik by unanimous decision . 
 = = = Super Middleweight = = = 
 After the two losses to Pavlik , Taylor moved up to the super middleweight division . On November 15 , 2008 , Taylor defeated Jeff Lacy by a dominant unanimous decision to earn a mandatory fight against the winner of a bout between Carl Froch and Jean Pascal for the vacant WBC Super Middleweight title , a fight that was won by Froch . On April 25 , 2009 , at the Foxwoods Resort Casino in Ledyard , Connecticut , Taylor fought Carl Froch for the WBC Super Middleweight title . Taylor was able to control the first two rounds of the fight . In the third round , Taylor knocked Froch down for the first time in his career with a right hand . Entering the final round , Taylor was ahead 106 – 102 on two of the judges ' scorecards , while Froch was ahead 106 – 102 on the other . During the round , Froch landed two right hands that sent Taylor to the canvas . He got up , but Froch quickly went after him , trapping him against the ropes and landing a barrage of hard and fast punches . Taylor could not recoup or defend himself , desperately curling up against the ropes . Around 10 clean hard shots from Froch landed before the referee stepped in to stop the bout with only a matter of seconds left in the final round , earning Froch the technical knockout victory . 
 = = = Super Six and retirement = = = 
 Taylor competed in the preliminary round of the Super Six World Boxing Classic , a tournament by Showtime , to find out who is the best boxer in the super middleweight division . 
 On October 17 , 2009 , in his first fight in the Super Six tournament at the O2 World Arena in Berlin , Germany , undefeated Armenian @-@ German former champion , Arthur Abraham , defeated Jermain Taylor by KO in the 12th round with less than 10 seconds left in the fight . Taylor was hospitalized with a severe concussion , suffering short term memory loss , unable to remember details of this bout . After being released from the hospital , Taylor released a statement saying that he 's doing just fine and wanted to congratulate Abraham on his victory and wish him well in the tournament . At the time of the stoppage , the judges scorecards read : 104 @-@ 102 , 107 @-@ 102 and 106 @-@ 102 , all in favour of Abraham . 
 In January 2010 , Taylor , one of the original members of the Super Six World Boxing Classic , officially withdrew from the tournament . The former Undisputed Middleweight Champion issued a statement in early 2010 saying , " I 'm going to take some time off from the sport of boxing and take myself out of the <unk> Sports World Boxing Classic tournament . It 's important that I give my body and mind some much needed rest , because I have been boxing for nearly 20 years , " said Taylor . " I plan on keeping myself in shape and making a return to the sport sometime in the future . This was not an easy decision for me , having discussed it with my family , trainer , friends and my adviser Al <unk> , because I 'm a very competitive person @-@ but I know this is the smart road for me to take . " Taylor was later replaced by Allan Green . 
 = = = Comeback = = = 
 On December 30 , 2011 , after 26 months away from the ring , Taylor finally returned and faced Jessie <unk> . In a fight scheduled for ten rounds , Taylor won via technical knockout in the eighth round . He then took on then @-@ undefeated Caleb Truax ( 18 @-@ 0 @-@ 1 ) on April 25 , 2012 in another fight scheduled for ten rounds . Taylor controlled most of the action and survived a knock @-@ down in round nine in order to win a unanimous decision victory . 
 Taylor then faced boxing veteran Raul Munoz on October 12 , 2012 . He made short work of Muñoz , winning via second @-@ round KO . 
 Taylor 's next bout was against Juan Carlos <unk> on December 14 , 2013 . Jermaine won with a seventh round TKO . 
 On October 4 , 2014 , Taylor fought Sam Soliman , in Biloxi , Mississippi for Soliman 's IBF Middleweight World Championship belt . After twelve grueling rounds , ( Soliman injured his knee badly midway through the fight ) and knocking Soliman down four times ( Soliman actually went down on his own from the knee injury , not primarily from punches from Taylor ) , Taylor won with a resounding unanimous decision . By regaining the belt he had lost to Pavlik in 2007 , Taylor became a two @-@ time middleweight world champion . 
 On February 6 , 2015 Taylor was scheduled to defend his title against Sergio Mora on ESPN2 's Friday Night Fights in Biloxi , Mississippi . However , the fight was cancelled after Taylor suffered an injury and was also later arrested and charged with multiple felonies following an incident on January 19 ( see Personal life below ) . The IBF subsequently stripped him of his title on February 6 , due to his inability to defend during his ongoing legal and mental health issues . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Taylor is married to former Louisiana Tech University basketball player Erica Taylor , who was selected in the second round of the 2005 WNBA Draft by the Washington Mystics . Jermain and Erica Taylor have three daughters . Taylor gained popularity in the state for frequently mentioning how proud he was to be from Arkansas . He is known to be an enthusiastic fan of the University of Arkansas Razorbacks and has visited the Arkansas campus to talk to the football team . Taylor <unk> sports a large Razorback on the back of his boxing robe and trunks for his fights . He was named " Arkansan of the Year " for 2005 by the Arkansas Times . In 2007 , Taylor was inducted into the Arkansas Sports Hall of Fame along with former NFL players Rod Smith and Willie <unk> . Taylor has modeled for Everlast , GQ and Vogue . 
 Lou <unk> resigned as Taylor 's promoter because he was concerned with Taylor 's health following the knockout from Arthur Abraham in the Super Six tournament . Taylor had been knocked out two times prior to the Abraham bout . 
 On August 26 , 2014 , Taylor was taken into police custody and charged with 2 felonies after officers say he shot his cousin during an altercation in his Little Rock , AR , home . Taylor was out on bond for his October 4 , 2014 bout versus Sam Soliman . On January 19 , 2015 , Taylor was arrested without incident and a gun was recovered . He was jailed on five felony counts of aggravated assault , three felony counts of endangering the welfare of a minor and a misdemeanor count of drug possession after he was found to have a small bag of marijuana . Taylor was remanded to the custody of the Pulaski County Regional Detention Facility in Little Rock in lieu of a $ 27 @,@ 000 bond . 
 On May 20 , 2016 , Taylor was given a suspended sentence of 19 years to be served concurrently , amounting to a six @-@ year suspended sentence for 3 cases . He was also sentenced to probation and will have to serve 120 hours of community service , pay a $ 2 @,@ 000 fine plus court costs , and will have to submit to regular drug screens . 
 = = Professional boxing record = = 
 = Brazilian monitor Rio Grande = 
 The Brazilian monitor Rio Grande was the second ship of the Pará @-@ class river monitors built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the late 1860s . Rio Grande participated in the Passagem de Humaitá in February 1868 and provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war . The ship was assigned to the Upper Uruguay ( Portuguese : Alto Uruguai ) Flotilla after the war . Rio Grande was scrapped in 1907 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Pará @-@ class monitors were designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for small , shallow @-@ draft armored ships capable of withstanding heavy fire . The monitor configuration was chosen as a turreted design did not have the same problems engaging enemy ships and fortifications as did the casemate ironclads already in Brazilian service . The oblong gun turret sat on a circular platform that had a central pivot . It was rotated by four men via a system of gears ; 2 @.@ 25 minutes were required for a full 360 ° rotation . A bronze ram was fitted to these ships as well . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . 
 The ships measured 39 meters ( 127 ft 11 in ) long overall , with a beam of 8 @.@ 54 meters ( 28 ft 0 in ) . They had a draft between of 1 @.@ 51 – 1 @.@ 54 meters ( 4 ft 11 in – 5 ft 1 in ) and displaced 500 metric tons ( 490 long tons ) . With only 0 @.@ 3 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) of freeboard they had to be towed between Rio de Janeiro and their area of operations . Their crew numbered 43 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Pará @-@ class ships had two direct @-@ acting steam engines , each driving a single 1 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 4 ft 3 in ) propeller . Their engines were powered by two tubular boilers at a working pressure of 59 psi ( 407 kPa ; 4 kgf / cm2 ) . The engines produced a total of 180 indicated horsepower ( 130 kW ) which gave the monitors a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) in calm waters . The ships carried enough coal for one day 's steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Rio Grande carried a single 70 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loader ( RML ) in her gun turret . The 70 @-@ pounder gun had a maximum elevation of 15 ° . It had a maximum range of 5 @,@ 540 meters ( 6 @,@ 060 yd ) . The 70 @-@ pounder gun weighed 8 @,@ 582 pounds ( 3 @,@ 892 @.@ 7 kg ) and fired a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) shell that weighed 81 pounds ( 36 @.@ 7 kg ) . Most unusually the gun 's Brazilian @-@ designed iron carriage was designed to pivot vertically at the muzzle ; this was done to minimize the size of the gunport through which splinters and shells could enter . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of the Pará @-@ class ships was made from three layers of wood that alternated in orientation . It was 457 millimeters ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) thick and was capped with a 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 in ) layer of peroba hardwood . The ships had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 0 @.@ 91 meters ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters amidships , decreasing to 76 millimeters ( 3 in ) and 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) at the ship 's ends . The curved deck was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . 
 The gun turret was shaped like a rectangle with rounded corners . It was built much like the hull , but the front of the turret was protected by 152 millimeters ( 6 in ) of armor , the sides by 102 millimeters and the rear by 76 millimeters . Its roof and the exposed portions of the platform it rested upon were protected by 12 @.@ 7 millimeters of armor . The armored pilothouse was positioned ahead of the turret . 
 = = Service = = 
 Rio Grande was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 8 December 1866 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 17 August 1867 and completed on 3 September 1867 . She arrived at Montevideo on 6 January 1868 and steamed up the Paraná River , although her passage further north was barred by the Paraguayan fortifications at Humaitá . On 19 February 1868 six Brazilian ironclads , including Rio Grande , sailed past Humaitá at night . Rio Grande and her two sister ships , Alagoas and Pará , were lashed to the larger ironclads in case any engines were disabled by the Paraguayan guns . Barroso led with Rio Grande , followed by Bahia with Alagoas and Tamandaré with Pará . The latter two ships were damaged as they sailed past the fortifications and had to be beached to prevent them from sinking . Rio Grande continued upstream with the other undamaged ships and they bombarded Asunción on 24 February . On 23 March Rio Grande and Barroso sank the steamer Igurey . Paraguayan soldiers in canoes attempted to board both ships on the evening of 9 July , but were only successful in getting on board Rio Grande where they were able to kill the ship 's captain and some of the crew . The remaining crewmembers locked the monitor 's hatches and Barroso was able to kill or capture almost all of the Paraguayans on deck . On 15 October she bombarded Angostura Fort in company with Brasil , Silvado , Pará and her sister Ceará . 
 After the war Rio Grande was assigned to the newly formed Alto Uruguai Flotilla , based at <unk> . She was docked in Ladário for rebuilding in 1899 , but this was never completed and she was scrapped in February 1907 . 
 = Kahaani = 
 Kahaani ( IPA : [ <unk> ] ; " Story " ) is a 2012 Indian Hindi mystery thriller film co @-@ written , co @-@ produced and directed by Sujoy Ghosh . It stars Vidya Balan as Vidya Bagchi , a pregnant woman searching for her missing husband in Kolkata during the festival of Durga Puja , assisted by Satyoki " Rana " Sinha ( Parambrata Chatterjee ) and Khan ( Nawazuddin Siddiqui ) . 
 Made on a shoestring budget of ₹ 80 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) , Kahaani was conceived and developed by Ghosh , who co @-@ wrote the film with Advaita Kala . The crew often employed guerrilla @-@ filmmaking techniques on Kolkata 's city streets to avoid attracting attention . The film was noted for its deft portrayal of the city and for making use of many local crew and cast members . Kahaani explores themes of feminism and motherhood in male @-@ dominated Indian society . The film also makes several allusions to Satyajit Ray 's films such as Charulata ( 1964 ) and Aranyer <unk> ( 1970 ) . 
 Kahaani was released worldwide on 9 March 2012 . Critics praised the screenplay , the cinematography and the performances of the lead actors . Following critical acclaim and word @-@ of @-@ mouth publicity , the film earned ₹ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( US $ 15 million ) worldwide in 50 days . The film won several awards , including three National Film Awards and five Filmfare Awards . The latter included trophies for Best Director ( Ghosh ) and Best Actress ( Vidya ) . A sequel , starring Vidya and Arjun Rampal , is in production . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A poison @-@ gas attack on a Kolkata Metro Rail compartment kills the passengers on board . Two years later Vidya Bagchi ( Vidya Balan ) , a pregnant software engineer , arrives in Kolkata from London during the Durga Puja festivities in search of her missing husband , Arnab Bagchi . A police officer , Satyoki " Rana " Sinha ( Parambrata Chatterjee ) , offers to help . Although Vidya claims that Arnab went to Kolkata on an assignment for the National Data Center ( NDC ) , initial investigations suggest that no such person was employed by the NDC . 
 Agnes D <unk> , the NDC 's head of human resources , suggests to Vidya that her husband resembled former employee Milan Damji ( Indraneil Sengupta ) , whose file is probably kept in the old NDC office . Before Agnes can provide any further help she is killed by Bob Biswas ( Saswata Chatterjee ) , an assassin working undercover as a life insurance agent . Vidya and Rana break into the NDC office and find Damji 's file , barely escaping an encounter with Bob , who is searching for the same information . Meanwhile , the attempts to obtain Damji 's records have attracted the attention of two Intelligence Bureau ( IB ) officials in Delhi — the chief Bhaskaran K. ( <unk> Chatterjee ) and his deputy Khan ( Nawazuddin Siddiqui ) . Khan arrives in Kolkata and reveals that Damji was a rogue IB agent responsible for the poison @-@ gas attack . In spite of Khan 's warnings , Vidya continues her search , fearing that Arnab 's resemblance to Damji may have led him into trouble . 
 The address on Damji 's record leads Vidya and Rana to a dilapidated flat . An errand boy from the neighbourhood tea stall identifies R. Sridhar ( <unk> Mukherjee ) , an NDC officer , as a frequent visitor to Damji 's flat . Bob attempts to kill Vidya , but fails , and is run over by a car during a chase . Examination of Bob 's mobile phone leads Vidya and Rana to an IP address sending instructions to kill her . They break into Sridhar 's office to verify his IP address , but he is alerted electronically and returns to his office . Vidya accidentally shoots Sridhar dead during a scuffle , which upsets Khan , who had wanted him alive . 
 Sridhar 's computer data reveals a code , which when deciphered reveals Bhaskaran 's phone number . Vidya calls Bhaskaran to tell him that she has retrieved sensitive documents from Sridhar 's office . She asks Bhaskaran to help find her husband in exchange for the documents , but Bhaskaran tells her to contact the local police . Vidya soon gets a call from an unknown number however , warning her that she should hand over the documents to the caller if she wishes to see her husband alive . Khan thinks the caller is Milan Damji . 
 Vidya goes to meet Damji , followed by Rana and Khan . Damji cuts the meeting short when Vidya expresses her doubt that he will be able to return her husband in exchange for the sensitive file , and he attempts to leave . Vidya tries to stop him , and in the ensuing struggle Damji draws a gun on her . Vidya disarms him using the prosthetic belly she has been using to fake her pregnancy , before shooting him with his own gun . She flees into the crowd before the police arrive , leaving a thank you note for Rana and a pen drive containing data from Sridhar 's computer , which leads to Bhaskaran 's arrest . Rana concludes that no Vidya or Arnab Bagchi ever existed , and that Vidya had been using the police and the IB to achieve her own ends . 
 Vidya is revealed to be the widow of Arup Basu ( Abir Chatterjee ) , an IB officer and Damji 's colleague , who was killed in the poison @-@ gas attack , which also caused Vidya to fall unconscious and suffer a miscarriage . In her mission to avenge his death , Vidya was helped by retired IB officer Pratap Bajpayee ( Darshan Jariwala ) , who suspected the involvement of a top IB official . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Vidya Balan as Vidya Venkatesan Bagchi 
 Parambrata Chatterjee as Satyoki " Rana " Sinha 
 Nawazuddin Siddiqui as A. Khan 
 Indraneil Sengupta as Milan Damji 
 <unk> Chatterjee as Bhaskaran K. 
 Saswata Chatterjee as Bob Biswas 
 Darshan Jariwala as Captain Pratap Bajpayee 
 Abir Chatterjee as Arup Basu 
 <unk> Mukherjee as R. Shridhar , chief technical officer at the NDC 
 <unk> Mukherjee as Inspector Chatterjee , a friendly inspector at the Kalighat Police Station . 
 Colleen Blanche as Agnes D <unk> 
 Nitya <unk> as Mr. Das , the guest house owner . 
 <unk> Mukherjee as <unk> , a worker at the guest house . 
 Pamela <unk> as Sapna , an employee at NDC . 
 Kalyan Chatterjee as Paresh Pal , a clay artist and a police informer . 
 Riddhi Sen as <unk> , a worker at a tea @-@ stall . 
 <unk> Akhtar as <unk> Tyagi , systems supervisor at the NDC 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Sujoy Ghosh approached novelist and script writer Advaita Kala with the idea for the film . Kala took inspiration from her experience in Kolkata , where she had moved in 1999 , akin to the protagonist in the film . She reported that despite facing a language barrier and the chaos and poverty of the metropolis , she was charmed by the warmth of the people , which was reflected in the film . Kala started writing in 2009 and finished the 185 @-@ page script by February 2010 . Her research included reading the books Open Secrets : India 's Intelligence Unveiled by Maloy Krishna Dhar and India 's External Intelligence : Secrets of Research and Analysis Wing ( RAW ) by V. K. Singh . 
 Ghosh , who co @-@ wrote the story and the screenplay , began to plan the film while awaiting the release of his previous film Aladin ( 2009 ) , but the dismal response to Aladin was a setback . He had to approach several producers to finance him for Kahaani , but was refused and discouraged from making the film owing to three factors : a pregnant woman as the lead star , a bunch of unknown Bengali actors as the supporting cast and Kolkata as a backdrop . <unk> Films were willing to produce the film , but wanted Ghosh to sign a three @-@ film deal , which he declined because he did not want that much commitment . 
 Bengali film actor <unk> Chatterjee encouraged Ghosh to shoot in Kolkata . Ghosh finally selected Kolkata for several reasons : the director 's acquaintance with the city , its mix of modernity and old @-@ world charm , and budget constraints . Kolkata is a cheaper location than Mumbai or Delhi , where most Bollywood films are shot . 
 Ghosh admitted in an interview that after his two preceding directorial ventures — Aladin and Home Delivery ( 2005 ) — performed poorly at the box office , Kahaani was his last chance to create a niche as a director . He added that the film 's plot twist came somewhat accidentally . Having described the skeleton of the story to a friend during its development , the friend called him back a few days later to enquire about his film . The friend had mistakenly imagined sequences which he assumed to be parts of the plot , from which the twist ending was derived . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Vidya Balan was the first choice of both writer Advaita Kala and director Sujoy Ghosh . Ghosh had planned for a long time to work with Vidya and approached her in 2010 . Unimpressed with the plot outline , Vidya refused , only changing her mind after having read the completed script . 
 Ghosh chose mostly Bengali actors as he wanted to make the characters as authentic as possible . The role of the Inspector Satyoki " Rana " Sinha was first offered to Chandan Roy Sanyal , but he could not take the part due to other commitments . Parambrata Chatterjee , a Bengali actor whose acting in the film The Bong Connection ( 2006 ) had impressed Ghosh at the Mumbai Academy of the Moving Image festival , was later offered the role in Kahaani . Chatterjee had earlier worked with Vidya in her début film Bhalo Theko ( 2003 ) . 
 The casting director <unk> Banerjee suggested Nawazuddin Siddiqui for the role of Khan . Siddiqui , who had only had minor roles in Bollywood up to that time , was surprised that for the first time he would not have to portray a beggar . Saswata Chatterjee , another Bengali actor , was surprised as well when he was offered the role of the contract killer Bob Biswas . He thought there were suitable actors in Hindi film industry for the role . He said that Ghosh had known him since childhood and was impressed with his acting , so he wanted him as Bob Biswas . 
 Ghosh went against the expectations of casting a popular actor from Bollywood . He signed Bengali actor Abir Chatterjee to play Vidya 's husband . According to Ghosh , popular Bollywood actors were not willing to work with him after his two previous flops . He also believed that audience might expect more screen @-@ time from a better @-@ known actor . Several other Bengali film and television actors , such as Indraneil Sengupta and <unk> Mukherjee , were cast in supporting roles . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Before the shooting of the film began , Vidya started to use a prosthetic belly to look as close to authentically pregnant as possible . According to news reports , she met doctors and pregnant women to learn about the typical lifestyle and nuances of a pregnant woman , and also made lists of rules and superstitions followed by pregnant women . Vidya said that during her college days she often used to imitate pregnant ladies during stand @-@ up acting among friends , an experience that helped her during the shooting . 
 While briefing Saswata Chatterjee about his character , the cold @-@ blooded killer Bob Biswas , Ghosh used the phrase " <unk> Bob " ( meaning polite Bob ) , which crystallised the notion of Bob 's manners . Further discussions led to the inclusion of paunch and a bald patch . Chatterjee devised the mannerism of rubbing his nails together as some Indians believe doing that helps prevent hair loss . The mannerism was well @-@ noted and praised by the viewers . Ghosh was surprised at how Bob Biswas was greeted by fans as a cult figure . He emphasised that the deliberate ordinariness of Bob Biswas was portrayed so convincingly by Chatterjee that the viewers can expect Bob to be around them at any time and any place . 
 Parambrata Chatterjee said in an interview that he did not identify with the Rana character , owing to the difference between his own urban upbringing and Rana 's rural background . Chatterjee visited police stations and did some research " on their work , mindset and other relevant things " to prepare for the role . The character Khan was envisaged as a ruthless , arrogant , expletive @-@ spewing officer who cares nothing about the emotional or social consequences of his behaviour . Siddiqui said that he was surprised on being offered the role , and wondered how he could portray the arrogance needed for the character . Ghosh built Khan as a character with lean physical build but full of mental strength , loyalty and patriotism . Khan smokes a relatively cheap brand of cigarette ( Gold Flake ) despite his high official post ; Siddiqui had smoked that brand of cigarette throughout his struggling days in Bollywood and thereafter . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place on the streets of Kolkata , where Ghosh often employed the art of guerrilla filmmaking ( shooting in real locations without any previous knowledge given to onlookers ) to avoid unwanted attention . The cinematographer Setu , who had assisted others in the past to shoot documentaries in Kolkata , said that unlike majority of Indian films , Kahaani was shot mostly without artificial light . The film was shot in 64 days , during which the Durga Puja festival of 2010 took place . Shooting locations in Kolkata included Kalighat Metro station , <unk> tram depot , <unk> , Howrah Bridge , Victoria Memorial , old houses of North Kolkata and others . The climax , which takes place on the night of Vijayadashami ( the last day of Durga Puja ) , was shot on the night of Vijayadashami in the premises of a <unk> ( publicly organised ) Durga Puja celebration in the Ballygunge neighbourhood of Kolkata . Most of the crowd in the climax were not actors . Some actors mingled with the crowd engaged in <unk> <unk> — their job was to appreciate the camera angles and accordingly apply sindoor ( vermilion ) on Vidya 's face so that accidental exposure of her eyes to sindoor could be avoided . 
 Ghosh chose the guest house in which the protagonist stays after noticing it during his visit to a neighbouring hotel in April 2010 . He booked it for 10 days for ₹ 40 @,@ 000 ( US $ 590 ) , and requested the guest @-@ house employees to keep the shooting schedule a secret . Choosing a room with windows overlooking a busy road , he proceeded to give it an old @-@ fashioned look by replacing the windows ' designer grilles with old @-@ fashioned wooden ones , and by painting the room with some rough patches . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 After Ishqiya ( 2010 ) , No One Killed Jessica ( 2011 ) and The Dirty Picture ( 2011 ) , Kahaani was Vidya 's fourth woman @-@ centric film to win widespread praise for her unconventional approach to portraying strong female roles . According to Zee News , Kahaani is a woman 's film about " role reversals , breaking of stereotypes , turning clichés inside out , a woman 's journey , and the way she carves a niche for herself in the male @-@ dominated <unk> of the society . " Trisha Gupta of The Indian Express also finds feminist themes in the film . For Ghosh , one aspect of his project " is a study of motherhood " ; the instinct of a mother to protect her baby inspired him to develop the story . 
 A recurring theme is the fleeting hint of romance between Rana and Vidya . Ghosh said that this delicate romance was " the most progressive thing " in the film — a suggestion that a man could fall in love with a pregnant woman . The director explained that the boy was initially " fascinated by someone who is literally a hero in his eyes " , as Rana was awed by the computer skills of Vidya . Gradually , the fascinated boy moves into a zone where he tries to protect her . 
 Some reviewers note that a major protagonist is Kolkata itself , which is " brimming with warm , sympathetic inhabitants " . A review in Rediff.com notes that the director pays a " fond yet understated tribute " to the city by incorporating imagery such as " yellow taxis , leisurely trams , congested traffic , claustrophobic metros , dilapidated brick houses , tapering alleys , <unk> , lal <unk> saris , piping hot <unk> " . According to the reviewer , Kahaani did not depend on the tropes of Kolkata culture typically used in Bollywood film — " O @-@ emphasizing accent , dramatic play of conch shells , <unk> / <unk> doi excesses . " The director acknowledges that Kolkata " becomes a central character " of the film . Gautaman Bhaskaran , writing for Gulf Times , notes that Kolkata imagery was polished up in the film ; noted Bengali director Srijit Mukherji argues that the portrayal of the city in Kahaani was akin to a " Lonely Planet exotica " on the city . <unk> Mukherjee of The Telegraph explains that Kolkata in Kahaani was cosmetic and lacked a deep menacing presence . Mukherjee argues the depiction of the city never matches the level of Satyajit Ray 's Calcutta trilogy , where " aided by bloodshed , greed and decadence , ... Calcutta ... , even though a place of dreams , desires and hope , slides irreversibly into chaos , anxiety and a moral crisis , taking its residents with it " . 
 Durga Puja , the autumnal festival to worship goddess Durga , plays a prominent role in the story . The allegorical yearly return of goddess Durga to slay the demon Mahishasura is alluded to at the end of the film . According to <unk> Mukherjee of The Telegraph , " Durga Puja , with its paraphernalia of idols , immersion processions , <unk> , even an entire crowd of women draped in white saris with red borders , is central to the film 's ... visual aesthetic . " A review in Rediff.com praised the depiction of the festivities in Kolkata , a city well known for its celebration of Durga Puja . 
 Ghosh acknowledges the allusions to Ray 's films . In one scene , Vidya asks the manager of the guest house why there is no hot water although the signboard had claimed " running hot water " . The manager explains that the sign refers for his errand boy , who runs to deliver hot water in a kettle whenever required . This alludes to a similar scene in Ray 's Joi Baba <unk> ( 1979 ) . In an interview with The Telegraph , Ghosh says that the way Vidya looks out and moves from window to window in the guest @-@ house room is reminiscent of Ray 's Charulata ( 1964 ) , where the actress Madhabi Mukherjee enjoys glimpses of the outside world through the blinds of windows . He also acknowledges the influence of Mahanagar ( 1963 ) , another Ray film noted for its portrayal of Kolkata . According to the director , he was inspired by particular scenes of Ray 's Nayak ( 1966 ) to plan the portrayal of complex emotional issues between Vidya and the police officer Rana , especially Rana 's awe in the presence of Vidya . Ghosh expresses his inspiration from Ray 's Aranyer <unk> ( 1970 ) in which Ray " wanted the audience to be inside the car with the four guys all the time . So the camera never leaves the car . " Ghosh shot a similar scene , hoping the audience would become " like Vidya 's fellow passenger . " 
 Besides Ray 's films , Ghosh also admits inspiration from what he calls " visually striking " films of the 1970s and 1980s , such as Deewaar ( 1975 ) . Critics have compared the fake @-@ pregnancy twist of Kahaani with the 2004 American psychological thriller Taking Lives . The sequences towards the end that explain the missing pieces of the mystery were compared with The Usual Suspects ( 1995 ) . Ghosh writes that the film was heavily influenced by the colour scheme of the <unk> <unk> , a <unk> watercolour by the Bengal School artist <unk> Tagore . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The musical score was composed by Vishal – Shekhar , and the lyrics for the film 's six songs were written by Vishal Dadlani , Anvita Dutt and Sandeep Srivastava . Several of R. D. Burman 's Hindi and Bengali compositions were used in the background . An album of the music was released on 22 February 2012 and subsequently on the digital music platform Apple iTunes India since its inception from mid @-@ 2012 . 
 The soundtrack received positive reviews , and was praised for its amalgamation of Bengali and Hindi lyrics . A review in CNN @-@ IBN states that the song " Ami <unk> <unk> " is able to partially convey the feel of Kolkata , and that the soundtrack " features right voices with the overall mood of the album " . Mumbai Mirror rated the album with 3 stars out of 5 . Reviewing the soundtrack for Indiatimes , Anand Vaishnav commented that " Kahaani , as an album , stays honest to the theme of the film " . 
 All lyrics written by Vishal Dadlani , Anvita Dutt and Sandeep Srivastava , except where noted . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Kahaani 's first @-@ look poster was launched on 2 December 2011 , and the official trailer on 5 January 2012 . The poster , portraying a pregnant Vidya Balan and lacking any romantic element , was well received . Critics ' expectations were low , owing to the director 's previous box @-@ office failures . Vidya appeared in public with a prosthetic belly to promote the film , and mingled with the public in railway stations , bus stands and markets . She often carried a sketch of her on @-@ screen missing husband , and asked people to help in finding him . Social @-@ networking website <unk> developed an online game , The Great Indian Parking Wars , which required players to park Vidya 's taxi on a street ; it was well @-@ received , reaching 50 @,@ 000 hits in 10 days . 
 On 5 March 2012 , prior to release , Kolkata Metro authorities objected to a scene in which Vidya is pushed by a man onto the tracks as a train arrives . They requested that the scene be removed , as it would remind people of the past suicides , which had tarnished the railway 's image . The filmmakers screened the scene for the authorities and explained that nothing in the film would affect the image of the Metro or prompt people to commit suicide . Convinced , the officials withdrew their objections , and the scene was retained , although it was removed from trailers . 
 Kahaani was released on 9 March 2012 , a day after International Women 's Day . It played on 1100 screens worldwide . CNN @-@ IBN reported that although Kahaani was ready before The Dirty Picture , distributors deferred its release , fearing that Vidya 's role of a sexy siren ( in The Dirty Picture ) after that of a pregnant woman might not be received well . STAR TV bought the exclusive right to broadcast the film for a price of ₹ 80 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) , which was the highest @-@ ever price paid for a female @-@ centric film in India . The Indian television premiere of the film was on Star India 's channel Movies OK on 3 June 2012 . The DVD of the film was released on 17 May 2012 across all regions in a one @-@ disc pack in NTSC format . Distributed by Shemaroo Entertainment , it contained additional content , such as behind @-@ the @-@ scene footage , video of celebration parties after its theatrical release , and music videos of the songs of the film . The VCD and Blu @-@ ray versions were released at the same time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kahaani garnered generally positive reviews from critics . According to review aggregator Review Gang the film received a rating of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , based on the reviews by professional critics . Good word of mouth publicity played a part in its popularity besides the positive reviews . The Telegraph called the film " a mind @-@ juggling medley of manipulation masquerading as a ' mother of a story ' " . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4 out of 5 stars , and praised Vidya 's acting . The Times of India commented " Once again , a ' pregnant ' Vidya , ironically displays more ' male ornaments ' ... than most heroes . " The reviews in Rediff , Indo Asian News Service , CNN @-@ IBN , Zee News , Hindustan Times , and The Hindu were unanimously positive , and noted script , direction , cinematography , and acting as strong points of the film . Noted film actress and multiple National Award winner Shabana Azmi lauded Vidya for her performance , " As an actor , I could see she [ Vidya ] was making all the right moves throughout the film . There was not a single artificial note in her performance . " Russell Edwards , the reviewer for Variety , praised the cast , cinematography , and direction , and commented that despite occasional glitches , the " adroit thriller ... maintains momentum and credibility . " 
 Many reviewers criticised the film 's climax and certain features , feeling that they deviated from its general style . Rituparna Chatterjee of CNN @-@ IBN noted that the climax of the film was a " huge <unk> " and explained , " The diabolic twist at that juncture got underplayed ... What follows is a <unk> ... the apologetic explanation of why she does what she does . Justifying her action comes across more as an effort to appease the Indian morality " . The Outlook review noted , " At times , Kahaani is too clever , at others extremely pedestrian like in the depiction of computer hacking and IB operations , not to speak of the ludicrous terrorist angle and the all @-@ too predictable Durga Puja setting for that mythology tie @-@ in . " It adds that the " spoon @-@ feeding " of reasons at the end dampens the intrigue factor . The review in Yahoo ! India comments that the Durga metaphor at the end was enforced , and that the film over @-@ indulged in Bengali stereotypes . Gautaman Bhaskaran , in his review in Gulf Times , noted that the sometimes @-@ handheld photography was " as irksome as the plot with a sleuth too many and cops galore . " 
 Though Kahaani received critical acclaim , it was a slow starter at the box office , opening to a poor response on the first day , but gradually picking afterwards . According to The Telegraph , the film earned almost ₹ 20 million ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) from the state of West Bengal within the first three days of its release . At multiplexes in Kolkata , occupancy increased from 47 % on Friday 9 March , the day of release , to 77 % on 10 March and to around 97 % on 11 March . Box Office India , a website on Indian film trade , reported that the film collected nearly ₹ 240 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 6 million ) in its first week , well beyond its production cost of ₹ 80 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) . It grossed ₹ 190 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 8 million ) in second week to make a two @-@ week total of around ₹ 430 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 4 million ) in India ; this led Box Office India to declare the film a " Super Hit " . The film was successful in the international box office as well , garnering ₹ 80 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) within 10 days of its release in seven markets — UK , US , UAE , Australia , New Zealand , Malaysia and Pakistan , according to Bollywood Hungama , a film @-@ related website . By the third week , according to CNN @-@ IBN , it had grossed ₹ 750 million ( US $ 11 million ) , including India and overseas market . Hindustan Times reported that Kahaani made a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @,@ 044 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 16 million ) within 50 days of its release . 
 Kahaani was nominated for , and won , many awards . The 58th Filmfare Awards nominated the film for six of their categories , where it won five , including Best Actress for Vidya and Best Director for Ghosh . Kahaani received thirteen nominations at the 19th Colors Screen Awards , and won five , including Best Actress and Best Story . At the 14th Zee Cine Awards , Kahaani won five awards , including Best Film ( Critics ) and Best Actress ( Critics ) , out of fifteen nominations . At the 2013 Stardust Awards ceremony , Kahaani was announced Hottest Film of the Year while Vidya received for the Best Actress in a Thriller or Action . Kahaani was awarded the Most Entertaining Film of the Year at the 3rd ceremony of the BIG Star Entertainment Awards . At the 60th National Film Awards , Ghosh won Best Screenplay ( Original ) , Namrata Rao won Best Editing , and Nawazuddin Siddiqui won a Special Jury award . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Following Kahaani 's success , Kolkata became a preferred destination for Bollywood filmmakers . They felt the landscapes of Mumbai and Delhi were overused for several decades , while Kolkata retained its unique visuals such as metro trains , rickety trams , hand @-@ pulled rickshaws , dingy <unk> , palatial mansions , dilapidated houses of North Kolkata , roadside eateries , ghats of river Ganga , British @-@ era buildings , restaurants and iconic structures and areas including Howrah Bridge , Kalighat Temple , <unk> Mosque , Kumortuli idol @-@ making district and Victoria Memorial . 
 <unk> Guest House , the lodge which hosted Vidya Bagchi in the film , became a local attraction . Several hundreds have visited it since the film 's release , to the extent that the owners planned to increase tariffs and renovate the rooms around a Kahaani theme . 
 The <unk> contract killer Bob Biswas became an Internet phenomenon , the subject of several jokes and pieces of pop art , which circulated through Facebook and Twitter . " <unk> , <unk> Bob Biswas ... Ek minute ? " ( " Hello , I am Bob Biswas ... do you have a minute ? " ) — the monologue he repeatedly uses just before murdering his victims — was used in different memes . A graphic novel and a television show based on Bob Biswas were being planned , as of March 2012 . 
 Two remakes of Kahaani were released in 2014 : a Telugu remake titled <unk> , and its Tamil version Nee Enge En Anbe , both directed by Sekhar Kammula and featuring Nayantara as the lead character . An English @-@ language remake , entitled Deity , will be directed by the Danish director Niels Arden Oplev and produced by <unk> Films , with production scheduled to begin in 2015 . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In March 2012 , Sujoy Ghosh announced that he intended to develop Kahaani into a series . He was inspired by Satyajit Ray 's Feluda detective series and wanted to continue the stories of Vidya Bagchi on similar lines , with Vidya Balan reprising the role . The shooting of Kahaani 2 was scheduled to begin in 2013 , but in July 2013 differences arose between Sujoy Ghosh and other co @-@ producers . In February 2014 , Vidya announced that the sequel was not happening due to these differences , but two years later , Ghosh confirmed that the film was in pre @-@ production with Vidya set to reprise her role . The sequel , entitled Kahaani 2 , began filming in March 2016 with Vidya and Arjun Rampal in lead roles . 
 = The Diary of a Nobody = 
 The Diary of a Nobody is an English comic novel written by the brothers George and Weedon Grossmith , with illustrations by the latter . It originated as an intermittent serial in Punch magazine in 1888 – 89 and first appeared in book form , with extended text and added illustrations , in 1892 . The Diary records the daily events in the lives of a London clerk , Charles Pooter , his wife Carrie , his son Lupin , and numerous friends and acquaintances over a period of 15 months . 
 Before their collaboration on the Diary , the brothers each pursued successful careers on the stage . George originated nine of the principal comedian roles in the Gilbert and Sullivan operas over 12 years from 1877 to 1889 . He also established a national reputation as a piano sketch entertainer and wrote a large number of songs and comic pieces . Before embarking on his stage career , Weedon had worked as an artist and illustrator . The Diary was the brothers ' only mature collaboration . Most of its humour derives from Charles Pooter 's unconscious and unwarranted sense of his own importance , and the frequency with which this delusion is punctured by gaffes and minor social humiliations . In an era of rising expectations within the lower @-@ middle classes , the daily routines and modest ambitions described in the Diary were instantly recognised by its contemporary readers , and provided later generations with a glimpse of the past that it became fashionable to imitate . 
 Although its initial public reception was muted , the Diary came to be recognised by critics as a classic work of humour , and it has never been out of print . It helped to establish a genre of humorous popular fiction based on lower or lower @-@ middle class aspirations , and was the forerunner of numerous fictitious diary novels in the later 20th century . The Diary has been the subject of several stage and screen adaptations , including Ken Russell 's " silent film " treatment of 1964 , a four @-@ part TV film scripted by Andrew Davies in 2007 , and a widely praised stage version in 2011 , in which an all @-@ male cast of three played all the parts . 
 = = Authorship and origin = = 
 The Diary of a Nobody was the work of George Grossmith and his brother Weedon Grossmith , the sons of a court reporter and part @-@ time stage entertainer , also named George . The younger George followed his father , first as a reporter and later on the stage ; the 7 @-@ years @-@ younger Weedon studied at the West London School of Art and had some success as a portrait painter before becoming a comic actor . The brothers were fascinated with the stage at an early age . In 1864 , at 17 and 10 , they hosted a complex programme of musical and dramatic entertainment in their parents ' garden at Haverstock Hill . This included a 20 @-@ minute burlesque version of Hamlet , in which George played the title role ; Weedon was Ophelia . 
 By 1877 the younger George Grossmith had established himself as a comic piano sketch entertainer in provincial institutes and literary societies . In that year he was seen by Arthur Sullivan and , separately , by W. S. Gilbert , in performances of their one @-@ act comic opera Trial by Jury . Impressed , they engaged him to play the comic lead in their new , full @-@ length work , The Sorcerer . Thereafter , Grossmith created the leading comic role in each of Gilbert and Sullivan 's long @-@ running comic operas until The Yeomen of the Guard , which closed in 1889 . While appearing in the operas , Grossmith continued his piano entertainment career at private parties and matinees , writing and composing his own material . He became the most successful comic entertainer of his day , writing numerous operettas , around 100 piano sketches , some 600 songs and short piano pieces , and three books . For Punch magazine in 1884 he provided a series of short sketches based on his experiences as a court reporter at Bow Street Magistrates ' Court . In 1889 , Grossmith ended his connection with Gilbert and Sullivan to pursue his piano sketch career full @-@ time and continued to perform until 1908 . He died in 1912 . 
 As an artist Weedon Grossmith exhibited at the Royal Academy and at the Grosvenor Gallery . He also contributed illustrations to Punch and the prestigious Art Journal . He was nevertheless dissatisfied with his financial prospects as an artist , and by 1885 was pursuing an alternative career as an actor . He continued his career on the stage with considerable success until 1918 , making his name playing roles he described as " cowards , cads and snobs " , and as browbeaten small men under the thumb of authority . He wrote several plays , of which The Night of the Party ( 1901 ) was his most successful , and from 1894 was engaged in the management of two West End theatres . He died in 1919 . The literary scholar Peter Morton , who published an annotated edition of the Diary in 2009 , suggests that many of the events depicted in it were drawn from the brothers ' own home experiences , and that Weedon , " something of a scapegrace compared with his perfectionist brother " , was the model for Lupin . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The diary begins on 3 April of an unstated year , and runs for approximately 15 months . In a short prologue , readers are informed that Charles Pooter and his wife Caroline ( Carrie ) have just moved to a new home at " The Laurels " , <unk> Terrace , Holloway . Mr Pooter is a City of London clerk with Perkupps , possibly an accountancy or private banking firm ( though their business is not explicitly stated ) . The couple 's 20 @-@ year @-@ old son William works as a bank clerk in Oldham . The first entries describe the Pooters ' daily lives and introduce their particular friends , such as their neighbour Gowing , the enthusiastic bicyclist Cummings , and the <unk> from Sutton . From the beginning a pattern is set whereby the small <unk> of the Pooters ' daily lives are recounted , many of them arising from Pooter 's unconscious self @-@ importance and pomposity . Trouble with servants , tradesmen , and office juniors occur regularly , along with minor social embarrassments and humiliations . 
 The rare formal social events in the Pooters ' lives are particular magnets for misfortune . They receive an invitation from the Lord Mayor of London to attend a ball at the Mansion House for " Representatives of Trade and Commerce " . After days of keen anticipation they are dismayed , when they arrive , to find that the gathering is undistinguished . Pooter is <unk> upset to be greeted familiarly by his local ironmonger , even more so when this tradesman appears to be on social terms with some of the more important guests . Pooter <unk> in champagne and humiliates Carrie by collapsing on the dance floor . 
 In the summer their son arrives from Oldham and informs his parents that he wishes henceforth to be called by his middle name , " Lupin . " He has been dismissed from his bank post for idleness ; although dismayed , Pooter sees this as a chance to get his son into Perkupps . Lupin joins the couple for their annual holiday week in Broadstairs , but relationships are strained by Lupin 's " fast " habits . On their return , Pooter 's efforts to find Lupin a job at first prove fruitless . The boy is interested in amateur dramatics and joins an organisation called the " Holloway Comedians " . With the help of Pooter 's employer Mr. Perkupp , Lupin finally secures a clerical position with a firm of stockbrokers in November . He then shocks his parents by announcing his engagement . 
 Lupin 's fiancée , Daisy <unk> , is the sister of one of his theatrical friends and is , he says , " the nicest , prettiest , and most accomplished girl he ever met " . Pooter is disappointed when he meets her : " She is a big young woman ... at least eight years older than Lupin . I did not even think her good @-@ looking " . Nevertheless , in her honour the Pooters give a large dinner @-@ party , to which Pooter invites Mr Perkupp . The party becomes boisterous ; Mr Perkupp arrives at a particularly raucous moment , and decides not to stay . Pooter believes the party has failed , and is despondent , although Carrie deems it a great success . However , within a few days , Lupin informs them that the engagement is off . 
 In the following weeks Lupin often brings the Holloway troupe back to " The Laurels " . These occasions are graced with the unexplained presence of a complete stranger , Mr Padge , who regularly occupies the best chair as if of right . Lupin opts out of the family 's Christmas celebrations , and then announces , to everyone 's astonishment , that the engagement to Daisy is back on . Christmas passes happily enough , despite a supper party which degenerates into a food fight instigated by Daisy . 
 In the New Year , Pooter is promoted to senior clerk at Perkupp 's , and his salary raised by £ 100 a year , but his achievement is overshadowed by Lupin 's announcement that he has just profited by £ 200 through a timely shares speculation . Lupin persuades his father , and Gowing and Cummings , to invest small sums in <unk> <unk> , the source of his gains . The Pooters meet a new friend of Lupin 's , Mr Murray Posh , who Pooter thinks is somewhat over @-@ familiar with Daisy and might , he warns Lupin , be a rival for her hand . Lupin pooh @-@ <unk> this notion . Later , Pooter learns that he and his friends have lost their investment ; indeed , Lupin 's stockbroking firm has collapsed entirely and its principal has fled . Lupin is thus unemployed ; worse , that same day the engagement of Daisy <unk> to Murray Posh is announced . Lupin 's only consolation , he tells his father , is that he persuaded Posh to invest £ 600 in <unk> <unk> . However , in Pooter 's eyes the situation is redeemed when Mr Perkupp offers Lupin a clerkship . 
 April begins with another social disaster . The Pooters receive an invitation to a ball given by the East Acton Rifle Brigade , which they imagine will be a glittering occasion . It turns out to be shabby and down @-@ at @-@ heel ; furthermore , having liberally supplied fellow @-@ guests — among them Mr Padge — with food and drink which he thinks is free , Pooter is presented at the end with a large bill that he can barely afford to pay . Other social events also turn sour : a lunch party with Mr <unk> , the father of an old friend , is marred by some unfortunate comments by Pooter on the <unk> family portraits . On another occasion they meet a loud and over @-@ opinionated American , Mr <unk> Huttle who , Pooter realises , is like a mature version of Lupin . 
 Lupin is sacked from Perkupps for persuading their top client , Mr <unk> , to take his business to another firm . Pooter is mortified , but the new firm rewards Lupin with £ 25 commission and a job at £ 200 a year . Lupin resumes his friendship with Murray Posh and Daisy , who is now Mrs Posh . Lupin moves to lodgings in Bayswater , where Pooter and Carrie are invited to dine and where they Murray 's sister , known as " Lillie Girl " , a woman of around 30 . Pooter learns that Murray Posh has settled £ 10 @,@ 000 on both Daisy and " Lillie Girl " . 
 Pooter is summoned to meet <unk> Huttle , who offers Perkupps a new client to replace Mr <unk> . Perkupp is so grateful to Pooter for this introduction that he buys up the freehold of " The Laurels " and presents the deeds to Pooter . As the couple celebrate , a letter arrives from Lupin announcing his engagement to " Lillie Girl " : " We shall be married in August , and among our guests we hope to see your old friends Gowing and Cummings " . 
 = = Publication and reception history = = 
 The Diary made its initial appearance as an intermittent serial in the satirical weekly magazine Punch . The first of the 26 instalments was announced in the issue of 26 May 1888 with a brief editorial note : " As everybody who is anybody is publishing Reminiscences , Diaries , Notes , Autobiographies , and Recollections , we are sincerely grateful to ' A Nobody ' for permitting us to add to the historic collection " . The diary entry dates are several weeks behind the dates on which they appear in Punch . The Punch serialisation ended in May 1889 with the diary entry for 21 March , which records the Pooters and their friends celebrating the minor triumph of Lupin 's appointment as a clerk at Perkupps . That was the intended end of the diary ; however , when the writers were preparing the manuscript for publication as a book , they added a further four months ' entries to the text , and included 26 illustrations by Weedon Grossmith . 
 In June 1892 J.W. Arrowsmith Ltd published the Diary in book form , although its critical and popular success was not evident until the third edition appeared in October 1910 . After the First World War the book 's popularity continued to grow ; regular reprintings and new editions ensured that thereafter the book was never out of print . Audiobook versions have been available since 1982 . The writer Robert McCrum , in a personal list of " The 100 greatest novels of all time " published in The Observer newspaper , listed the Diary at number 35 . 
 = = = Early indifference = = = 
 The Punch serialisation attracted little critical comment ; The Athenaeum 's literary critic thought the series " may have escaped unnoticed amid better jokes " . When the Diary was published as a book , Punch heralded it in its issue of 23 July 1892 as " very funny " , adding : " not without a touch of pathos " . However , apart from a warmly approving report in The Saturday Review , the book 's initial critical reception was lukewarm . The Review 's critic thought the book " admirable , and in some of its touches [ it ] goes close to genius " , with a natural and irresistible appeal : " The Diary has amused us from cover to cover " . This contrasted with the negative judgement of The Athenaeum , which opined that " the book has no merit to compensate for its hopeless vulgarity , not even that of being amusing " . It questioned the tastefulness of jokes aimed almost exclusively at the poverty of underpaid city clerks , and concluded : " Besides , it is all so dull " . The Speaker 's critic thought the book " a study in vulgarity " , while The New York Times , reviewing the first American edition , found the work largely incomprehensible : " There is that kind of quiet , commonplace , everyday joking in it which we are to suppose is highly satisfactory to our cousins across the water ... Our way of manufacturing fun is different " . Although details of sales figures are not given , Arrowsmiths later acknowledged that the early editions of the book did not have a wide public impact . 
 = = = Growing reputation = = = 
 By 1910 the Diary was beginning to achieve a reputation in London 's literary and political circles . In his essay " On People in Books " , published earlier that year , the writer and humourist Hilaire Belloc hailed the Diary as " one of the half @-@ dozen immortal achievements of our time ... a glory for us all " . Among others who recorded their appreciation of the work were Lord Rosebery , the former prime minister who told Arrowsmiths that he thought he had " purchased and given away more copies than any living man ... I regard any bedroom I occupy as unfurnished without a copy of it " . Another essayist @-@ cum @-@ politician who added his tribute was Augustine Birrell , who in 1910 occupied the cabinet post of Chief Secretary for Ireland . Birrell wrote that he ranked Charles Pooter alongside Don Quixote as a comic literary figure , and added a note of personal pride that one of the characters in the book — " an illiterate charwoman , it is true " — carried his name . Arrowsmiths printed these appreciations as prefaces in the 1910 and subsequent issues . The 1910 edition proved immediately popular with the reading public , and was followed by numerous reprintings . In its review of this edition The Bookman ' s critic wrote of Charles Pooter : " You laugh at him — at his small absurdities , his droll mishaps , his well @-@ meaning fussiness ; but he wins upon you and obtains your affection , and even your admiration , he is so transparently honest , so delightfully and ridiculously human " . 
 In its review of the book 's fourth edition , published in 1919 , The Bookman observed that the book was now a firm favourite with the public . " It has had many imitators ... but not one of them has rivalled the original , and they have all faded away " . The reviewer recommended the book 's " quaint drollery , its whimsical satire and delightfully quiet irony " . In Canada , Queen 's Quarterly magazine 's sympathetic reception of the book contrasted with that of the New York Times nearly 30 years previously . It praises the understated but lovable self @-@ portrait of Pooter , and adds that " It is not till the second or third reading — and you are bound to reread it — that the really consummate art of this artless book becomes apparent " . The literary critic D. B. Wyndham Lewis summarised the Pooters as " warm , living , breathing , futile , half @-@ baked , incredibly alive and endearing <unk> " . 
 = = = Acclaim = = = 
 The novelist Evelyn Waugh had been familiar with the Diary since his childhood . It was a great favourite of his parents — Arthur Waugh used to read passages aloud to his family , and Evelyn 's biographer Selena Hastings has drawn attention to the distinctly <unk> elements in the Waugh household . Evelyn Waugh was initially contemptuous of the book , but grew to admire it , to the extent of writing in his 1930 essay " One Way to Immortality " that it was " the funniest book in the world " . He added : " Nobody wants to read other people 's reflections on life and religion and politics , but the routine of their day , properly recorded , is always interesting , and will become more so as conditions change with the years " . Morton posits that several of the leading characters in Waugh 's early novels , though socially far removed from the Pooters , share the bafflement of Charles and Carrie with the problems of a changing world . In his 1945 novel Brideshead Revisited , Waugh has Lady Marchmain comforting her family by reading aloud from the Diary " with her beautiful voice and great humour of expression " . Morton suggests that one of the work 's attractions to Waugh was his personal identification with Lupin , and the way in which the disapproved son ( as Waugh saw himself ) repeatedly manages to turn adverse circumstances to his ultimate advantage . 
 At about the time that Waugh was discovering his affection for the Diary another writer , J. B. Priestley , was extolling it as an exemplar of English humour ; Jerome K. Jerome , Priestley asserted , never wrote anything as good : " [ P ] <unk> Mr Pooter , with his simplicity , his timidity , his goodness of heart , is not simply a figure of fun but one of those innocent , lovable fools who are dear to the heart " . In a 1943 essay , George Orwell considered the book an accurate account of English life in the 1880s . In describing Pooter he revived the Don Quixote analogy but saw this English equivalent as a sentimentalised version of the original , one who " constantly suffers disasters brought upon him by his own folly " . In the years after the Second World War the book 's stock remained high ; Osbert Lancaster deemed it " a great work of art " , and similar enthusiasm was expressed by a new generation of writers and social historians . Gillian Tindall , writing in 1970 , thought the Diary " the best comic novel in the language " , and lauded Pooter as " the presiding shade " of his era . This accolade was echoed a further generation on by A. N. Wilson , who wrote in his study of the Victorian era : " Who is to say that Oscar Wilde and Aubrey Beardsley are more typical of the [ 1890s ] than the lower @-@ middle class Charles and Carrie Pooter ? " Wilson also observed the extent to which the Pooters had become recognised as " arbiters of the greatest good taste " , as the late 20th @-@ century English middle classes sought to acquire or preserve authentic Victorian features in their carefully crafted " period " homes . A Spectator article of 2008 remarks on how such houses as " The Laurels " , the humble habitats of 1890s City clerks , had by the 21st century become desirable £ 1 million @-@ plus homes in what it terms " banker land " . 
 = = Literary and cultural influence = = 
 Peter Bailey , in his study " White Collars , Gray Lives " ( 1999 ) , traces the beginnings of literary interest in the lower @-@ middle classes to the " disquieting irruption of a new breed of petty bourgeois shop and office workers " that faced Victorian writers in the last quarter of the 19th century . The Grossmiths ' Diary was a typical satire of its time ; it probed the lower @-@ middle class lives of the Pooters and poked fun at their pretensions and petty concerns . Tony Joseph calls the Diary " a sharp analysis of social insecurity " . Although many writers had themselves come from humble backgrounds , they often sought to disguise their origins through scorn : " putting the boot in on the lower middle classes " , says Bailey , " has long been the intellectual 's blood sport " . However , the quarter @-@ century following the publication of The Diary of a Nobody saw a tendency to mix mockery with sympathy , even approval . In the works of writers such as George Gissing , H. G. Wells , Arnold Bennett and E. M. Forster , characters emerged who , despite the recognisably <unk> aspects of their lives , were by no means entirely absurd . Bennett and Wells could poke fun at figures such as " <unk> Machin " , " Mr Polly " or " Mr Lewisham " , while at the same time celebrating their fortitude , energy and determination to look for better things . In cases such as these , writes Bailey , " disdain could change to admiration and national self @-@ identification , as the Little Man ... was transposed into Everyman , a model of cheerful resilience in times of crisis . " 
 During the past century , the fictitious diary has developed as an accepted means of comedic expression ; the original has , says Morton , " been fertile ground which has germinated many seeds " . An early example is Anita Loos 's novel of 1925 : Gentlemen Prefer Blondes : The Illuminating Diary of a Professional Lady in which the protagonist , Lorelei Lee , records her flirtatious adventure in prose that " follows the mannerisms of colloquial speech " and suggests innocence or ignorance yet , the critic Elyse Graham observes , " burlesques , in excoriating detail , the vernacular of the American middle class " . The diary genre became particularly popular in the late 20th century . In 1978 – 81 Christopher Matthew produced three volumes of diaries recording the daily life of " Simon Crisp " , a bachelor would @-@ be man @-@ about town of the era . The title of the first , The Diary of a Somebody , is a direct reference to the Grossmith original . Reviewing this volume in The Spectator , Benny Green points out several parallels with the original , in both character and event . Matthew 's book , says Green , is amusing , but the Grossmiths ' book is superior ; it is " affecting as well as comical , in a way that the Matthew pastiche is not " . In 1982 came the first appearance of Sue Townsend 's teenage creation , Adrian Mole , whose passage into young manhood and early middle age is charted in a long series of diaries . The more middle @-@ aged he becomes , says Morton , the more he resembles Pooter . 
 Keith Waterhouse 's Mrs Pooter 's Diary of 1983 is an adaptation of the Grossmith original that shifts the narrative voice to Carrie Pooter . In 1996 Helen Fielding used the imaginary diary format for Bridget Jones 's Diary , which records the daily paraphernalia of a single woman 's life . The New York Times critic wrote that it " captures neatly the way modern women teeter between ' I am woman ' independence and a pathetic girlie desire to be all things to all men . " This diary began as a weekly column in The Independent , and was later published in books which sold more than 15 million copies in 40 countries . In the 1990s the satirical magazine Private Eye lampooned John Major , British prime minister 1990 – 97 , in " The Secret Diary of John Major aged 473 ⁄ 4 " , a hybrid of the Adrian Mole diaries with The Diary of a Nobody , which made much fun of Major 's lower @-@ middle class origins . 
 The social historian James Hammerton defines " <unk> " as " the dependent weakness and inflated social pretension of white @-@ collar workers , constructed in the workplace but expressed just as powerfully at home " . Jon Wilde of The Guardian observes this characteristic in a number of British TV comedy creations of the late 20th and early 21st centuries : Captain Mainwaring , Victor Meldrew , and Peep Show 's Mark Corrigan are all examples of characters " whose blinkered view of themselves is forever in sharp contrast to how they are perceived by the world " . Charles Pooter , says Hammerton , was a metaphor for lower middle @-@ class pretension , pomposity and self @-@ importance , set up for mockery by the " elites " . However , by the mid @-@ 20th century changes in the perception of masculine roles in lower middle @-@ class society had stifled the mockery , as men increasingly embraced domesticity . Hammerton remarks that the Grossmiths " would surely appreciate the irony in seeing features of the lower middle @-@ class existence they mocked so mercilessly becoming the more universal model for 20th century family life " . Bailey remarks on how the poet John Betjeman presented the Pooters " not as objects of ridicule but of envy , snug and secure in their suburban retreat " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In September 1954 a stage version of the Diary , by Basil Dean and Richard Blake , was presented at London 's Arts Theatre with a cast that included George Benson and Dulcie Gray as the Pooters and Leslie Phillips as Lupin . Anthony Hartley , writing in The Spectator , classed this production as " fair @-@ to @-@ middling " , with sympathetic performances from the principals : " [ I ] t is a precondition of this kind of play that everybody concerned should have a heart of gold : only in the case of Mr. Pooter 's employer , Mr. Perkupp , do we actually hear the metal chinking . " In 1986 Waterhouse presented an adaptation of his " Mrs Pooter " text at the Garrick Theatre , with Judi Dench and Michael Williams . This version was revived in 1993 at the Greenwich Theatre in a production by Matthew Francis . Clive Swift and Patricia Routledge played Charles and Carrie , in what Paul Taylor in The Independent described as " essentially a two @-@ hander ... in which all the other folk ( including Lupin Pooter , the uppish , worrying son ) are either imagined characters or , at times , impersonated by the Pooters " . In March 2011 the Diary was the subject of an even less orthodox production at the Royal & <unk> Theatre , Northampton . Adapted by Hugh Osborne , with an all @-@ male cast led by Robert Daws , this supposes that Pooter has arranged for his diaries to be performed by amateur actors . Quentin Letts of the Daily Mail found this " an evening of some of the cleverest , fastest entertainment I have seen for months " . Lyn Garner in The Guardian found it " a show of some charm – though one that , like Pooter himself , does not quite have the credentials to be quite so pleased with itself " . 
 The first adaptation for screen was Ken Russell 's short ( 40 minutes ) film for the BBC film unit in 1964 . Russell shot this in the style of the silent films of Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin , with the text narrated in a voice @-@ over . The BBC screened two subsequent adaptations : in 1979 a version dramatised by Basil Boothroyd , and in 2007 a four @-@ part dramatisation Andrew Davies , directed by Susanna White and first shown on BBC Four as part of the channel 's Edwardian season . The Guardian 's critic wrote of the latter that Hugh Bonneville was " immaculate as the ignored <unk> [ Pooter ] . " 
 BBC Radio 4 has broadcast at least three dramatisations of the Diary . In September 2004 , Stephen Tompkinson and Annette Badland played the main roles in an adaptation by Kelvin <unk> . In July 2012 , Johnny Vegas and Katherine Parkinson starred in Andrew Lynch 's adaptation . In March 2015 , BBC Radio 4 Extra broadcast an audio version of the 1986 Keith Waterhouse adaptation , with Judi Dench and Michael Williams in the lead roles . 
 = Imleria badia = 
 Imleria badia , commonly known as the bay bolete , is an edible , pored mushroom found in Europe and North America , where it grows in coniferous or mixed woods on the ground or on decaying tree stumps , sometimes in prolific numbers . Both the common and scientific names refer to the <unk> or chestnut @-@ coloured cap , which is almost spherical in young specimens before broadening and flattening out to a diameter up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) . On the cap underside are small yellowish pores that bruise dull blue @-@ grey when injured . The smooth , cylindrical stipe , measuring 4 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , is coloured like the cap , but paler . Some varieties have been described from eastern North America , differing from the main type in both macroscopic and microscopic morphology . 
 First described scientifically by Elias Fries in 1818 , the bay bolete was reclassified as Xerocomus badius in 1931 , and it is still listed thus in several sources . Modern molecular phylogenetic studies show Xerocomus to be polyphyletic ( not descended from a common ancestor ) , and the bay bolete is not particularly closely related to species in that genus . Often considered a poor relation of the cep ( Boletus edulis ) , I. badia is nevertheless regarded as a choice edible mushroom by some authors , such as food expert Antonio Carluccio , and is sold in markets in Europe and central Mexico . Its mushrooms are less often infested by maggots than other boletes . Several European studies have demonstrated that the mushroom can bioaccumulate some trace metals from the soil , such as mercury , cobalt , and nickel . Additionally , the mushroom contains a pigment that concentrates radioactive caesium ; specimens collected in Europe following the 1986 Chernobyl disaster had 137Cs concentrations several times greater than those collected before the incident . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The bay bolete was first named as Boletus castaneus <unk> badius ( i.e. a subspecies of Boletus castaneus ) by Elias Magnus Fries in 1818 . Fries later renamed it as a variety of Boletus castaneus in 1828 , before assigning it distinct species status in his 1832 work Elenchus Fungorum . The fungus has been transferred to several genera in its taxonomic history : Rostkovites by Petter Karsten in 1881 ; Viscipellis and Ixocomus by Lucien Quélet in 1886 and 1888 , respectively ; and Suillus by Otto Kuntze in 1898 . In 1931 , Edouard @-@ Jean Gilbert reclassified it in the genus Xerocomus , and many sources still list it thus . Review of Xerocomus strongly suggested it was polyphyletic , and the genus was not accepted by some mycologists . The stickiness of its wet cap distinguishes the species from others classified in Xerocomus , and hence it was left in Boletus until Alfredo Vizzini placed it in its own genus in 2014 . Genetic analysis published in 2013 shows that Imleria badia is related to B. pallidus and B. <unk> ; the three species form a clade known informally as the badius clade within a larger group ( informally called <unk> ) in the suborder Boletineae . Other clades within the group include the Tylopilus , porcini ( = Boletus sensu stricto ) and Strobilomyces clades , as well as two other groups composed of members of various genera including Xerocomus ( the taxa designated as Xerocomus species in this clade are not Xerocomus species and require new taxonomic designations ) and Xerocomellus . 
 The species Boletus limatulus , originally published by Charles Christopher Frost in 1874 , was later redescribed , " with a slight tinge of irritation at the time , energy and gasoline spent " , as a variety of I. badia by Wally Snell in 1945 ( as Xerocomus badius var. limatulus ) . The taxon name comes from the Latin limatulus , " rather polished " or " refined " . Varieties glaber and macrostipitatus were described from Nova Scotia , Canada , in 1976 . 
 The starting date of fungal taxonomy had been set as January 1 , 1821 , to coincide with the date of the works of Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries , the " father of mycology " . Rolf Singer argued that setting the starting date earlier to Christiaan Persoon 's 1801 publication of Synopsis would make a name change necessary , as he had originally given what is now known as <unk> badius the combination Boletus badius <unk> and if the bay bolete was classified in the genus Boletus , the name would be unavailable and the names Boletus glutinosus <unk> or B. spadiceus <unk> . ( non Fr . ) would have to be used instead . 
 The species name is the Latin adjective badia , meaning " chestnut brown " . The common name is likewise derived from the colour of the cap , likened to the coat of a bay horse . Alternate common names of a similar derivation include bay @-@ brown bolete and bay @-@ capped bolete , and it is known as bolet bai in French . It is also known as the false cep . Variety glaber was named for its smooth ( Latin : glaber , " without hairs " ) stipe , and macrostipitatus for its large ( Latin : macro , " large " ) stipe . 
 = = Description = = 
 Imleria badia fruit bodies have a chestnut to dark brown cap , which is almost spherical in young specimens before broadening and flattening out to a diameter of up to 15 cm ( 6 in ) . The cap margin is acute , and cap surface velvety when young and slightly sticky when wet or old . The cap cuticle is difficult to separate from the flesh underneath . On the cap undersurface , the pores are initially cream to pale yellow , but become greenish yellow or olive with age . They stain dull blue to bluish @-@ grey when bruised or cut , and are easily removed from the flesh . The pores are initially circular , becoming more angular with age , and number about one or two per millimetre . The tubes are 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long , and are adnate to depressed around the area of attachment to the stipe . 
 The flesh is mostly whitish or yellowish in some places ; underneath the cap cuticle , it is brownish @-@ pink or reddish brown . Initially firm , it begins to soften under the cap in older mushrooms . In some parts of the cap , such as the junction of the cap and the stipe , the flesh stains pale blue when injured or exposed to air , particularly in damp weather . This change is sometimes faint , and not persistent , as it eventually reverts to its original colour . The stipe is 4 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , and is similar in colour to the cap but paler , and sometimes with a rose @-@ coloured tinge . Its surface has faint longitudinal ridges , a fine powdering , and fine reticulations ( a net @-@ like pattern of ridges ) at the apex . It often has a whitish region at the base and the top , and white mycelium at the base . Unlike the bulbous stipe of many other boletes , the stipe of B. badius remains relatively slim and cylindrical . The flesh of the stipe gets tougher with age . Its smell has been described as fruity . 
 The spore print is olive to olive @-@ brown . The smooth spores are somewhat oblong to slightly ventricose ( fattened in the middle ) , and measure 10 – 14 by 4 – 5 µm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored and measure 25 – 35 by 8 – 10 µm . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the faces of the tubes ) are fuse @-@ shaped and ventricose , with dimensions of 50 – 60 by 10 – 14 µm . 
 Variety B. b. macrostipitatus differs from the main form by its grey @-@ orange cap , shorter stipe measuring 5 – 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) , longer spores ( 15 – 18 by 4 – 5 µm ) , and longer pleurocystidia ( 30 – 55 by 10 – 14 µm ) . The variety B. b. glaber has a smooth ( glabrous ) stipe , and smaller pleurocystidia ( 35 – 40 by 10 – 15 µm ) and cheilocystidia ( 25 – 30 by 9 – 12 µm ) . 
 Several chemical tests can be used to help identify the mushroom . A drop of ammonium hydroxide solution turns the cap cuticle a greenish to bluish colour . Application of iron ( II ) sulphate solution causes the flesh to stain a dull bluish @-@ green , while the pores turn golden brown with a drop of dilute potassium hydroxide . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The similar colouration may cause confusion with Boletus <unk> , but the latter species is usually more robust , and has a reticulated stipe . Additionally , B. <unk> has the largest spores in the Boletaceae , up to about 30 µm in diameter . Another lookalike is Austroboletus gracilis , but this species does not have a blue bruising reaction , and its pore surface is initially white before turning pinkish . Compared to I. badia , B. <unk> fruit bodies have narrower stipes , paler brown , dry caps , and wider pores that do not stain blue on bruising . This latter species is not as good to eat . In western North America , I. badia is replaced by the similar B. <unk> , which also grows both on the ground and on rotten wood . The European species Xerocomus <unk> can be mistaken for I. badia , but it has a paler yellow @-@ brown cap flushed with pinkish @-@ red , and is not sticky when wet . 
 = = Ecology , distribution and habitat = = 
 Although the bay bolete is predominantly a mycorrhizal species , it does have some saprophytic tendencies and may be able to use this lifestyle in certain circumstances . The ectomycorrhizae formed between I. badia and spruce ( Picea abies ) have active hyphal sheaths and a higher potential to store nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , magnesium , iron , and zinc than other mycorrhizal types , indicating the fungus is well adapted to acidic stands and its mycorrhizae are very efficient in uptake and storage of <unk> . <unk> with Monterey pine ( Pinus radiata ) have also been described . 
 The bay bolete is common in coniferous and less commonly mixed woodlands in Europe , from the British Isles , where it is abundant throughout through August – November , east to the Black Sea Region in Turkey . In Asia , the species has been recorded from Jordan mainland China , and Taiwan . The North American distribution extends from eastern Canada west to Minnesota and south to North Carolina , where the mushroom fruits from July to November . It also grows in central Mexico . The variety B. b. macrostipitatus is found from eastern Canada south to Maine and New York , while variety B. b. glaber is known from the Atlantic Maritime Ecozone of eastern Canada . Fruit bodies appear singly or scattered on the ground , or on decaying tree stumps , and can be well hidden by pine needles and ferns . Fruiting tends to peak generally three or four days after rain during warm weather . Numbers can be prolific , especially in highland areas that are humid and shady . It is commonly found under white pine , spruce , and hemlock , although it also occurs under deciduous trees , especially beech . It also occurs in grassy or mossy areas at or near forest margins ; Italian restaurateur and cook Antonio Carluccio recalled picking them in the grounds of Blenheim Palace . It does not occur on calcareous ( chalky ) soils . 
 I. badia fruit bodies are less affected by insects than other boletes . <unk> mites such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> silvestris and <unk> <unk> consume them , as do squirrels . Several microbial pathogens can damage the fruit bodies , and have had an effect on populations in China , including soft rot caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and black mould caused by Mucor , Sepedonium , Paecilomyces , and <unk> species . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Often considered a poor relation of the cep ( Boletus edulis ) , the bay bolete is nevertheless highly regarded as a choice edible mushroom by some authors such as Carluccio . In central Mexico , it is collected from <unk> @-@ Popo <unk> National Park and sold in neighbouring markets . It may cause an allergic reaction in some people , and the blue discolouration upon bruising can be offputting , although the staining disappears from white flesh when it is cooked . The flavour is milder than its better @-@ known relative . Younger specimens are best for eating , though more mature ones can be suitable for cutting up and drying . The tendency for the pores to absorb water means that wiping rather than washing is recommended before use in the kitchen . Unlike most boletes , I. badia can be eaten raw ( though only young mushrooms should be used ) . Otherwise it can be fried in butter , or used with meat or fish recipes . Mushrooms can also be frozen , dried , or pickled in cider vinegar , wine , or extra virgin olive oil , and later used in sauces or soups . 
 The fruit bodies can be used to make mushroom dyes . Depending on the mordant used , colours ranging from yellow , orange , gold , and green @-@ brown can be obtained . Without mordant , a yellow colour is produced . 
 = = Research = = 
 In laboratory experiments , extracts of I. badia fruit bodies have been shown to have significant antioxidative properties in vitro . Fruit bodies contain the compound theanine , an amino acid and a glutamic acid analogue found in green tea . Efforts have been made to establish a protocol for producing theanine by growing the fungus mycelium using submerged fermentation . Several indole compounds have been detected in fruit bodies . <unk> mushrooms contain tryptophan ( 0 @.@ 68 mg per 100 g dry weight ) , tryptamine ( 0 @.@ 47 ) , serotonin ( 0 @.@ 52 ) , kynurenine sulphate ( 1 @.@ 96 ) , and <unk> acid ( 1 @.@ 57 ) . Due to their temperature sensitivity , cooking significantly changes the contents and composition of indole compounds : cooked mushrooms contained tryptophan ( 1 @.@ 74 mg / 100 g dw ) , 5 @-@ <unk> ( 6 @.@ 55 ) , melatonin ( 0 @.@ 71 ) , and <unk> ( 2 @.@ 07 ) . Fruit body extracts have been shown to slow the growth of certain tumour cell lines in cell culture . 
 Polish studies found that although the mushroom bioaccumulates mercury and cobalt from the soil , occasional consumption of mushrooms should not cause maximum allowable intake doses to be exceeded . Similar conclusions about safety were made in a Polish study of the mushroom 's ability to accumulate organochlorine compounds . Different methods of preparation for consumption affect the leaching rate of cadmium , lead , and mercury . After the 1986 Chernobyl disaster , several studies showed I. badia bioaccumulates radioactive caesium , 137Cs . 137Cs is produced in nuclear power plants following the chain decay of 235U to <unk> , and has a half @-@ life of thirty years . A German study showed that mushrooms collected from 1986 to 1988 had radiocaesium contents that were 8 @.@ 3 to 13 @.@ 6 times greater than mushrooms collected before the accident in 1985 . This caesium @-@ sequestering effect is caused by a brown pigment , the polyphenol compound norbadione A , which is related to a family of mushroom pigments known as pulvinic acids . <unk> A has been investigated for its ability to provide a protective effect against the damaging effects of ionizing radiation . Tests with cell cultures and mice show that although it has some protective effect , it is toxic to cells in higher doses . A new series of alkali chelators based on the structure of norbadione A has been reported . The mushroom may have potential as a bioremediation agent to clean up contaminated sites . 
 = Stella power stations = 
 The Stella power stations were a pair of now @-@ demolished coal @-@ fired power stations in the North East of England that were a landmark in the Tyne valley for over 40 years . The stations stood on either side of a bend of the River Tyne : Stella South power station , the larger , near Blaydon in Gateshead , and Stella North power station near Lemington in Newcastle . Their name originated from the nearby Stella Hall , a manor house close to Stella South that by the time of their construction had been demolished and replaced by a housing estate . They operated from shortly after the nationalisation of the British electrical supply industry until two years after the Electricity Act of 1989 , when the industry passed into the private sector . 
 These sister stations were of similar design and were built , opened , and closed together . Stella South , with a generating capacity of 300 megawatts ( MW ) , was built on the site of the Blaydon Races , and Stella North , with a capacity of 240 MW , on that of the former Lemington Hall . They powered local homes and the many heavy industries of Tyne and Wear , Northumberland and County Durham . The large buildings , chimneys and cooling towers were visible from afar . Their operation required coal trains on both sides of the river to supply them with fuel and river traffic by flat iron barges to dump ash in the North Sea . After their closure in 1991 , they were demolished in stages between 1992 and 1997 . Following the stations ' demolition , the sites underwent redevelopment : the North site into a large business and industrial park , the South into a housing estate . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The British demand for electricity increased after the Second World War . In the North East of England this led to the expansion of existing power stations at Dunston and Billingham in the late 1940s , the two new Stella power stations , and the construction of two more large stations built at Blyth later in the 1960s . This new generating capacity quickly met the demand for power . The British Electricity Authority were granted permission to construct the Stella North and Stella South power stations in 1951 . The two stations were originally projected to cost around £ 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 The site chosen for Stella North was the Newburn Haugh , which was the site of Lemington Hall . Lemington Hall was demolished in 1953 during the construction of Stella North . Stella South was built on the Stella Haugh , the site of the Battle of Newburn in 1640 . A cannonball from the battle was on display in the South station for many years , after having been dredged from the river bed . Between 1887 and 1916 , the Stella Haugh had been the site of the annual Blaydon Races , which stopped after a riot broke out following allegations of race fixing . Just before the construction of the South station the <unk> had two uses . Blaydon Rugby Club 's ground had been there since 1893 , but in 1950 it was compulsorily purchased by the British Electricity Authority for £ 1 @,@ 000 . The club moved to a new ground in <unk> , which it still uses . Newcastle University Boat Club had owned a boathouse on the site since 1929 , but in 1951 the British Electricity Authority requisitioned it , forcing the club to move upstream to its current location in Newburn . 
 The addition of various power lines was needed to connect the power stations to the National Grid . These included a 275 kilovolt ( kV ) connection from Stella to West Melton , and another 275 kV connection from Stella to Carlisle . The towers for these connections were to stand at 115 feet ( 35 m ) , rather than the 85 feet ( 26 m ) towers of the existing grid system . The line from Stella to Carlisle , which was to consist of 250 towers spaced at 320 meters over a distance of around 60 miles ( 97 km ) , came up against opposition when first proposed . The Northumberland County Planning Authority launched a public enquiry in 1951 , and Hexham Rural District Council held a meeting . The Ministry of Agriculture and other outdoor associations voiced their concerns , as it was feared that the line would interfere with good farming land . An alternative route was proposed , but in view of its additional cost of £ 72 @,@ 000 it was turned down , and the Ministry of Fuel and Power gave the line the go @-@ ahead . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Both of the stations were designed by Newcastle upon Tyne @-@ based architects L J <unk> & Partners , and construction work began in 1951 . The Cleveland Bridge Company were contracted to construct the steel frames for the stations ' main buildings , including their turbine halls , boiler houses , workshops and stores buildings . Various other companies were contracted for the construction of other parts of the station . Sir Robert McAlpine & Sons were contracted for site clearance , provision of the foundations for the main and ancillary buildings , as well as the diversion of streams and sewers . Davenport Engineering Co. were responsible for the construction of the North station 's cooling towers , as well as the stations ' ancillary buildings . P.C. Richardson & Co. built the stations ' brick chimneys . Aiton & Co. installed the stations ' low @-@ pressure piping equipment . Underwater electrical work was carried out by British Royal Navy frogman Lionel " Buster " Crabb , chosen for the dangerous job because he wore a rubber diving suit at a time when most divers used canvas . 
 The first generating sets of the stations became operational on 20 December 1954 . However , it was not until 1956 that all four of the North station 's units were commissioned , and 1957 before all five of the South station 's units generated electricity . The cost of the two stations in total came to around £ 40 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . 
 On the morning of 14 December 1955 , during the stations ' construction , switchgear exploded in the South station 's substation , closing down the generators . Dunston power station could not take the extra load and it also shut down , creating a total blackout on Tyneside . Around 400 @,@ 000 people were affected by the fault , including 20 @,@ 000 miners trapped in over a hundred collieries . Power was fully reconnected by that <unk> but the failure caused an interruption of work and services worth more than £ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , as well as the loss of 300 megawatts of electricity . 
 = = = Post @-@ commissioning = = = 
 Although developed by the British Electricity Authority , the stations were first operated by the Central Electricity Authority , following the Electricity Reorganisation ( Scotland ) Act 1954 . From 1957 they were operated by the Central Electricity Generating Board ( CEGB ) , following the Electricity Act 1957 . 
 In 1961 , Stella North was presented with the Hinton Cup , the CEGB 's " good house keeping trophy " . The award was presented by Sir Christopher Hinton , the first chairman of the CEGB . The station 's achievement was attributed to the fact the station 's annual efficiency had never been less than 29 @.@ 1 % . The station also won the North East regional award for the second year in a row in 1961 . In March 1967 , Stella South 's male first aid team won a national first aid competition in Harrogate , organised by the CEGB . Over 150 teams took part . 
 In 1966 , Stella North was at the centre of a legal case in which three men were found guilty of conspiracy to defraud after trying to sell the CEGB poor quality coal when contracted to deliver high quality coal . The three men involved were <unk> <unk> , a salesman for a coal firm ; J.W. Patterson , a sampler at the power station , and M. Ridley , a contractor . Their scheme was for Patterson to substitute samples of reasonably good coal for the samples of poor coal taken from the lorries . However they were found out only two days after starting the scheme , when a foreman at the station saw Patterson dropping a bag of cement into the sampling bin , and reported the incident . Ridley was found to have planned the fraud , and was jailed for a year , while <unk> was fined £ 150 and Patterson £ 75 . 
 = = Design and specification = = 
 The main visible features of the stations were their large boiler houses , turbine halls , cooling towers and pairs of chimneys ; other facilities on both sites included offices , coal sorting areas , small fire stations and workshops . The power stations had the " brick @-@ cathedral " style of design popular for power stations in the 1930s and 1940s and , as of 2009 , still tenuously surviving at Battersea power station in London . 
 The main buildings of the South station had a total length of 130 m ( 430 ft ) and a width of 81 m ( 266 ft ) ; their tallest point , the roof of the boiler house , was 44 m ( 144 ft ) high . The main buildings of the North station were of a similar length and height , but in total slightly narrower as the station had one less generator unit . This also meant it had a smaller generating capacity ; it was sometimes erroneously termed the South station 's " B " station . 
 The boiler houses and turbine halls were all @-@ welded steel structures , consisting of box @-@ type main columns and roof girders , clad with brick and glazed in parts . Each of their four chimneys was made of brick and stood 120 m ( 390 ft ) tall , weighing about 5 @,@ 000 tonnes . The North station 's four 73 m ( 240 ft ) cooling towers were made from reinforced concrete and were of the typically hyperbolic , natural @-@ draft design . 
 The South station had five generating sets and the North station had four . Each generating set had a bunker for 1 @,@ 250 tonnes of coal , fed by a conveyor from the coal store . This conveyor belt system was built by E. N. Mackley & Co , Gateshead . Each bunker fed coal into a pulveriser , manufactured by Raymond . From here it was fed into a boiler in powder form and burned . All of the boilers were suspended from the boiler houses ' steel frames , and were made by Clarke Chapman Group Ltd , Gateshead . The boilers were forged in Sheffield , the first of the nine arriving at Stella South in 1953 . At 62 tonnes , the boilers were at the time the largest ever made in the UK . The boilers were of the radiant @-@ heat type , comprising a water @-@ cooled combustion chamber , controlled @-@ type superheater and an <unk> . Each of the boilers had an evaporation rating of 550 kL / h , a steam pressure of 950 psi and a steam temperature of 925 ° F. Each boiler was equipped with two forced and two induced Howden fans , twenty @-@ two electrically operated Clyde soot blowers , an automatic control system made by Bailey and Sturtevant electrostatic precipitators . Each station was designed to burn 2 @,@ 000 tonnes of bituminous coal a day . 
 Each boiler powered a turbo generator , made by Parsons , Newcastle upon Tyne . These were three @-@ cylinder reaction type steam turbines operating at 3 @,@ 000 rpm , generating 60 MW of electricity . The stations used them because of a Statutory Order of the Ministry of Supply in November 1947 that all turbo alternators made for the home market could only be of 60 MW at advanced steam conditions . Stella South had a total generating capacity of 300 MW and Stella North originally 240 MW ( later recorded as only 224 MW ) . The stations were the first to use silica removal beds in their turbines , a development which became standard within the CEGB 's power stations for some time . In 1967 , one of the sets at Stella South became the world 's first in commercial operation to use <unk> excitation . The set was modified by Parsons to use A.C. <unk> and silicon diode rectifiers . The stations ' switchgear was manufactured by A. Reyrolle & Company . 
 The power stations were illuminated by what was then the most powerful lighting installation in North East England . The North station was lit up by 60 flood lights , 15 on each of four towers ; the South station also had four towers , but each held 26 flood lights . The Central Electricity Authority justified the use of 194 flood lights over the two sites as " economical , safe and much more efficient than lighting the stations at street level " . 
 = = Operations = = 
 = = = Coal transportation = = = 
 The stations were in the heart of the North East coal field , which at the time of their opening had hundreds of collieries . Coal was delivered straight to the stations by rail . The Newcastle and Carlisle Railway was used for the South station , where 22 railway sidings were built . Trains could only enter the sidings when travelling in a westerly direction . 
 The Scotswood , Newburn and Wylam Railway ( SN & WR ) supplied the North station , trains reaching the power station via a junction at Newburn . Despite the SN & WR 's closure on 11 March 1968 , and the rerouting of the Newcastle & Carlisle Railway through Dunston in 1982 , the track between Scotswood and Newburn was retained for supplying the North station , as well as for rail access to the neighbouring Ever Ready battery factory and Anglo Great Lakes Graphite Plant . The tracks outlived the power stations , and were finally lifted when the Ever Ready factory shut down in 1992 . Part of the line serving the station is now a well @-@ used section of the Hadrian 's Way National Trail . 
 A small home fleet of locomotives was used to shunt the coal wagons once they had arrived at the stations . Originally this included Robert Stephenson and Hawthorns 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0ST <unk> and No.21 , and Sentinel <unk> Engine No.25 was used exclusively at the North station , but was converted to diesel @-@ hydraulic by Thomas Hill of Kilnhurst in 1967 , becoming Thomas Hill 188 . It returned to the station but was taken out of use in 1983 and scrapped by C F Booth of Rotherham . After the closure of the stations , engine No.21 was sent to be preserved at the Tanfield Railway site , near Sunniside in Gateshead . During the 1970s the steam locomotives were replaced by diesel locomotives . These included a Fowler 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 and CEGB No. 24 Vanguard 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 CEGB No. 24 has since been sent to <unk> Barn Railway for preservation . 
 The stations were picketed during the UK miners ' strike of 1972 , stopping coal deliveries to them . 
 = = = Cooling system = = = 
 Water is essential to a thermal power station to produce the steam needed to turn the steam turbines and generate electricity . Water cycled through the Stella stations ' systems was taken from the River Tyne ; after use it was cooled before being discharged back into the river . The North station 's water cooling system consisted of four large 60 @-@ cubic @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 100 cu ft ) natural draft cooling tower units , 73 m ( 240 ft ) tall and made of reinforced concrete . The South station used a syphon cooling system instead of cooling towers , consisting of five 300 @-@ cubic @-@ metre ( 11 @,@ 000 cu ft ) units , made up of five underground pipes , each 2 @.@ 1 metres ( 6 ft 11 in ) in diameter , with valves and screens . 
 = = = Ash removal = = = 
 Fly ash and bottom ash are two by @-@ products from the burning of coal in power stations . Ash from the Stella stations was taken out to sea by three flat iron barges : Bobby Shaftoe , Bessie Surtees and Hexhamshire Lass . All three were built by Charles Hill & Sons of Bristol , in 1955 . Bessie Surtees was the first to be put into service , in April 1955 . On each trip , each ship took up to 500 tonnes of ash from the stations down the river and dumped it in the North Sea , 4 @.@ 8 km ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) off the coast . Originally , they carried ash waste from Dunston power station as well . Their frequent passages made them a common sight on the Tyne . Each was 46 m ( 151 ft ) long and 10 m ( 33 ft ) wide , weighed 680 tonnes , and had a crew of seven . They were managed by Stephenson Clarke Shipping Ltd but owned by the CEGB . The ships went further up the Tyne than did any other , and so needed a shallow draft . The entire load of ash was dumped through two hydraulically operated doors in only a few minutes . 
 As early as the 1960s , the power stations ' operating hours were decreased due to the opening of the much larger Blyth power station in Northumberland . This meant that less ash was produced by the Stella and Dunston stations ; so by the end of the 1960s , the CEGB sold Hexhamshire Lass and Bobby Shaftoe . The former went to a firm in Fareham , Hampshire , where it worked as a sand dredger until scrapped in 1993 ; the latter to a French dredging company . 
 After the closure of Dunston Staithes in 1980 , the Swing Bridge downstream of the stations seldom had to be opened . ( Because Bessie Surtees was low lying , it was able to pass underneath the bridge at low tide . ) However , on 15 December 1975 , Bessie Surtees collided with the Swing Bridge , forcing it to close for the rest of that weekend . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 When built , the power stations were fitted with electrostatic precipitators , to reduce the amount of smoke and dust emitted from the stations ' chimneys . At the time , this was the most up @-@ to @-@ date method to prevent pollution from power stations . 
 Despite these precautions , pollution from the power stations was still a factor . In 1954 , consideration was given to scrapping the plan to build the Union Hall housing estate in Lemington because of probable pollution from nearby power stations . This was mainly because some of the houses were as high as , if not higher than , the power stations ' chimneys . At times , this meant the estate being exposed to as much as 1 @.@ 25 parts per million of sulphur dioxide . However the estate was still built , as these peak conditions were thought unlikely to occur on more than 18 days in a year . 
 Smoke was not the only thing emitted from the power station . In July 1956 , the discharge of cooling water from the stations was noted to have increased the water temperature of the river by 1 @.@ 5 ° C between Ryton and Scotswood . However , this was found to not be too deleterious , as it did not seem to affect the passage of migratory fish . In fact , because of the stations ' introduction of warm water into the river , basking sharks were known to be attracted to the area . 
 From the start , the power stations ' fly ash was dumped in the North Sea , and 800 @,@ 000 tonnes of fly ash were dumped between the Stella and Blyth stations in 1976 . By 1991 , National Power 's licence had been restricted to dumping only 50 @,@ 000 tonnes of ash a year from the Stella power stations . By this point the North East coast was the only place in Europe to dump fly ash at sea . Fly ash dumping had been found to make sea bed inert , with much life being smothered and killed by the fly ash . It was also found to create problems for the fishing industry , when their trawlers caught large lumps of it . The licence for Stella was terminated in May 1991 , with the stations ' closure . Blyth power stations ' licence was terminated by the end of 1992 , ending fly ash dumping in the North Sea . 
 = = Closure and demolition = = 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1980s closure of the stations was being considered , and in 1984 , was considered for a combined heat and power scheme . After the privatisation of the Central Electricity Generating Board in 1989 , the stations passed into the ownership of National Power . After almost 37 years of use they were decommissioned in May 1991 as outdated and uneconomical to operate . They had been overtaken technologically , and had lower generating capacity than newer plants such as Drax . Their closure coincided with that of a large number of coal mines in the North East of England , just after the privatisation of both the electricity industry and the National Coal Board in the early 1990s . 
 Following the closure of the power stations at Stella , as well as those at Dunston and Blyth ( in 1981 and 2001 respectively ) , the northern part of North East England has become heavily dependent upon the National Grid for electricity . However , in the South of the region there are still two large power stations , at Hartlepool and Wilton . 
 The stations ' closure also forced the Tyne Sea Scouts , who had operated from the North station since 1978 , to seek new accommodation . The scouts had moved into the station when their boat house in Blyth was deemed unsafe and demolished . They had been provided with two site offices , storage in the power station complex , and permission to keep their boats at the North station 's jetty , at the end of which they had a slipway built . 
 = = = Demolition = = = 
 The large buildings and structures of the stations were demolished in stages throughout the 1990s . The four cooling towers were demolished by explosives on 29 March 1992 , in front of thousands of spectators . St Paul 's Developments then bought the two sites from National Power in 1993 . Both stations were demolished by T. W. Ward Industrial Dismantling of Barnsley , which started with the South station , whose twin chimneys were destroyed on 29 October 1995 by 82 kilograms ( 181 lb ) of explosives . Its turbine hall followed , before the boiler house went on 1 February 1996 . Stella North then stood alone for almost a year before its turbine hall was demolished on 27 January 1997 and its bunker bay building was demolished on 22 June . The boiler house followed straight after , but its complete destruction took three attempts . Most of it went on 22 June ; the rest followed over the next two days . Its two chimneys , the last obvious reminder of the Stella power stations , were pulled down a month later on 27 July . 
 The power stations were among the last remaining heavy industrial buildings in modern Tyneside , and their demolition was felt by many <unk> to have marked the end of industrial Tyneside . The National Trust was then uninterested in the preservation of modern structures such as this . 
 = = Redevelopment = = 
 = = = North site = = = 
 = = = = <unk> power station proposal = = = = 
 In 1997 there had been plans for a £ 130 million combined cycle gas turbine power station on the site of the Ever Ready battery factory to the West of the site of the North station . AES Electrical applied to the Department of Trade and Industry for permission to build the station , which would have been twice as efficient as the coal @-@ fired Stella stations and the first major electricity generation site built in Tyne and Wear in over 40 years . The station would have had a generating capacity of 350 MW . It would have taken three years to build , and created 400 construction jobs , as well as 40 full @-@ time jobs after construction . But the proposal was opposed by the coal mining industry and dropped . 
 = = = = Newburn Riverside = = = = 
 Shortly after the North station was demolished , its site was reclaimed along with the site of the neighbouring Anglo Great Lakes Graphite Plant . The plant had made high @-@ purity graphite for use in <unk> nuclear reactors , and operated using the North station 's available excess generating capacity , as large quantities of cheap electricity were essential for production . It was demolished around the same time as the stations , and left the site littered with graphite blocks . At 93 ha ( 230 acres ) , the reclamation of the two neighbouring sites was one of the UK 's largest land reclamation schemes ; it was completed in 2000 . This made way for an industrial / business park , Newburn Riverside , the first phase of whose construction was completed in 2005 . As of 2009 it was still expanding , and expected to provide 5 @,@ 000 jobs and £ 116 million of private sector investment once completed . The park has a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) cycle route and nature trail around its edge , which takes visitors , walkers and cyclists beside the river and past the point in which the North station 's cooling towers once stood . One of the buildings in the business park was named Stella House , as a tribute to the power station . It is occupied by One NorthEast , the regional development agency for the North East of England . In early 2012 , Stella House became the National HQ of the NHS Business Service Authority following the winding down of One NorthEast . Little else commemorates the power stations , but they are briefly mentioned in a plaque on Stella Road near the South station 's site marking the Blaydon Races : " Official racing started in 1861 on Blaydon Island which lay North of here . The song was written in 1862 . From 1887 to 1914 the race course was on Stella <unk> , the site of the former power station . " 
 As well as the <unk> , the other key occupiers of the Newburn Riverside site are DEFRA , North East Ambulance Trust , MacFarlane Packaging , True Potential LLP , Northumberland and Tyne & Wear Strategic Health Authority and Stannah <unk> . 
 = = = South site = = = 
 Following the completion of the South station 's demolition in 1996 , thousands of pounds were spent on a number of security measures ; the site was fenced off , <unk> was installed , warning signs were put up and security patrols took place . However , large sections of the fencing were stolen and the warning signs were ignored . Ultimately this led to one man being trapped on the site for five hours on 22 May 1997 . He had been looking for scrap metal and power cables , and had climbed through a small hole into an underground room , from which he had to be rescued by fire crews . The site was then designated a danger zone . The derelict site was vandalised in July 1999 , when people hurled burning tyres into the sub @-@ station , creating a fire and damaging cables worth £ 150 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Riverside Crescent = = = = 
 As of 2007 , the 14 ha ( 35 acres ) site of the South station is under redevelopment , after having sat as a brownfield site for almost 10 years . St Paul 's Developments , the site developer , had often applied for planning permission to build housing and leisure facilities on the site over the course of six years , only to be refused . It was finally granted permission to begin building a £ 4 @.@ 7 million housing estate on the site in 2007 . Named Riverside Crescent , this is being constructed by Barratt and Persimmon . It will have 522 residential units , from two @-@ bedroom flats to five @-@ bedroom houses , as well as 1 @.@ 6 ha ( 4 @.@ 0 acres ) of open space , a riverside walkway and a restaurant . A new bus link to Blaydon will improve transport links . The plans for the residential development first went on display at Stella RC Primary School on 5 October 2005 . Other proposals for the site had included industrial development , which met opposition , and restoration to grassland , seen as unfeasible . 
 Despite the demolition in 1996 of all of the above @-@ ground structure of the South station , foundations , culverts and more remained . These needed to be removed before construction could start . The removal of these underground structures was completed in early 2007 , whereupon construction of the houses began immediately . 
 = = = Remnants = = = 
 Due to the significant reclamation on the two sites very little evidence remains of the power stations , other than a small number of bricks and steel rods . Some minor structures have survived to the North West of the North station 's site , including a road bridge over the rail line which served the station , a brick wall , and a concrete staircase . More obvious remains of the power stations are their three large sub @-@ stations that still supply the local region . Much of this electrical power is generated in Scotland 's <unk> power station , transported via a 275 kilovolt ( kV ) and a 400 kV connection . 
 = = Cultural use = = 
 The power stations were a strong local landmark . Their chimneys could be seen along a roughly 13 @.@ 8 km ( 8 @.@ 6 mi ) long section of the Tyne valley ; from Bensham near Gateshead down to Heddon @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Wall in Northumberland : almost no other building was present to obstruct the view . 
 When still in operation , the power stations appeared in films and television programs shot in the Newcastle area . They appeared in Payroll , a movie made in 1961 , starring Michael Craig . One of two security van operators lives in Stella park , a housing estate above the power station . It is prominently in the background whenever the van operator 's home is shown . In 1985 , the Stella power stations are seen briefly in a shot in <unk> , a movie made by Amber Films . They appear during a scene where the two protagonists , Ray and Betty , are travelling from Sunderland to Newcastle . ( Lynemouth power station , a North East power station still in operation , is more prominent in the film . ) In Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads ? , a British sitcom broadcast between 1973 and 1974 , the stations themselves did not appear in the series , but in the end credits their ash boat , Bessie Surtees , could be seen passing Spiller 's Wharf near Byker . In 1981 , it was featured in Swing Bridge Videos ' Check it Out , a short film about youth unemployment in the west end of Newcastle . In the mid @-@ 1990s , the decommissioned stations were photographed by north eastern artist John <unk> as part of his work The Secret Intelligence of the Silent . This piece was exhibited at the Laing Art Gallery in 2012 as part of the exhibition <unk> Now . 
 = Belarus = 
 Belarus ( / <unk> / bel @-@ ə @-@ <unk> ; Belarusian : <unk> ́ <unk> , tr . <unk> , IPA : [ <unk> ] ; Russian : Беларусь , tr . <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> ] ) , officially the Republic of Belarus , formerly and sometimes known as Byelorussia is a landlocked country in Eastern Europe bordered by Russia to the northeast , Ukraine to the south , Poland to the west , and Lithuania and Latvia to the northwest . Its capital is Minsk ; other major cities include Brest , Hrodna ( Grodno ) , Homiel ( Gomel ) , <unk> ( Mogilev ) and Vitsebsk ( Vitebsk ) . Over 40 % of its 207 @,@ 600 square kilometres ( 80 @,@ 200 sq mi ) is forested . Its strongest economic sectors are service industries and manufacturing . Until the 20th century , different states at various times controlled the lands of modern @-@ day Belarus , including the Principality of Polotsk ( 11th to 14th centuries ) , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth , and the Russian Empire . 
 In the aftermath of the 1917 Russian Revolution , Belarus declared independence as the Belarusian People 's Republic , which was conquered by Soviet Russia as the Socialist Soviet Republic of Byelorussia , which became a founding constituent republic of the Soviet Union in 1922 and was renamed as the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic ( Byelorussian SSR ) . Belarus lost almost half of its territory to Poland after the Polish @-@ Soviet war of 1919 @-@ 1921 . Much of the borders of Belarus took their modern shape in 1939 when some lands of the Second Polish Republic were reintegrated into it after the Soviet invasion of Poland and were finalized after World War II . During WWII , military operations devastated Belarus , which lost about a third of its population and more than half of its economic resources . The republic was redeveloped in the post @-@ war years . In 1945 Belarus became a founding member of the United Nations , along with the Soviet Union and the Ukrainian SSR . 
 The parliament of the republic declared the sovereignty of Belarus on 27 July 1990 , and during the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Belarus declared independence on 25 August 1991 . Alexander Lukashenko has served as the country 's president since 1994 . Lukashenko continued a number of Soviet @-@ era policies , such as state ownership of large sections of the economy . Elections under Lukashenko 's rule have been widely criticized as unfair by the international community ; and according to many countries and organizations , political opposition has been violently suppressed . Belarus 's Democracy Index rating was the lowest in Europe until 2014 ( when it was passed by Russia ) , the country is labelled as " not free " by Freedom House , " repressed " in the Index of Economic Freedom , and is rated as by far the worst country for press freedom in Europe in the 2013 – 14 Press Freedom Index published by Reporters Without Borders , which ranks Belarus 157th out of 180 nations . 
 In 2000 Belarus and Russia signed a treaty for greater cooperation , with some hints of forming a Union State . Over 70 % of Belarus 's population of 9 @.@ 49 million resides in urban areas . More than 80 % of the population is ethnic Belarusian , with sizable minorities of Russians , Poles and Ukrainians . Since a referendum in 1995 , the country has had two official languages : Belarusian and Russian . The Constitution of Belarus does not declare any official religion , although the primary religion in the country is Eastern Orthodox Christianity . The second most widespread religious group , Roman Catholicism , has a much smaller following ; nevertheless , Belarus celebrates both Orthodox and Catholic versions of Christmas and Easter as national holidays . Belarus is the only country in Europe which retains capital punishment in law and in practice . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Belarus is closely related with the term Belaya Rus ' , i.e. , White Rus ' . There are several claims to the origin of the name White Rus ' . An ethno @-@ religious theory suggests that the name used to describe the part of old Ruthenian lands within the Grand Duchy of Lithuania that had been populated mostly by early Christianized Slavs , as opposed to Black Ruthenia , which was predominantly inhabited by pagan Balts . 
 An alternate explanation for the name comments on the white clothing worn by the local Slavic population . A third theory suggests that the old Rus ' lands that were not conquered by the Tatars ( i.e. , Polatsk , <unk> and <unk> ) had been referred to as " white . " Other sources claim that , before 1267 , the land not conquered by the Mongols was considered " White Rus ' " . 
 The name Rus ' is often conflated with its Latin forms Russia and Ruthenia , thus Belarus is often referred to as White Russia or White Ruthenia . The name first appeared in German and Latin medieval literature ; the chronicles of Jan of Czarnków mention the imprisonment of Lithuanian grand duke Jogaila and his mother at " <unk> Russiae , <unk> dicto " in 1381 . In some languages , including German and Dutch , the country is generally called " White Russia " to this day ( <unk> and Wit @-@ <unk> respectively ) . 
 The Latin term " Alba Russia " was used again by Pope Pius VI to recognize the Society of Jesus there 1783 , exclaiming " <unk> <unk> Jesu in Alba Russia <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . " The first known use of White Russia to refer to Belarus was in the late @-@ 16th century by Englishman Sir Jerome Horsey , who was known for his close contacts with the Russian Royal Court . During the 17th century , the Russian Tsars used " White Rus " to describe the lands added from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania . 
 The term Belorussia ( Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> , the latter part similar but spelled and stressed differently from <unk> ́ я , Russia ) first rose in the days of the Russian Empire , and the Russian Tsar was usually styled " the Tsar of All the Russias " , as Russia or the Russian Empire was formed by three parts of Russia — the Great , Little , and White . This asserted that the territories are all Russian and all the peoples are also Russian ; in the case of the Belarusians , they were variants of the Russian people . 
 After the Bolshevik Revolution in 1917 , the term " White Russia " caused some confusion as it was also the name of the military force that opposed the red Bolsheviks . During the period of the Byelorussian SSR , the term Byelorussia was embraced as part of a national consciousness . In western Belarus under Polish control , Byelorussia became commonly used in the regions of Białystok and Grodno during the interwar period . 
 The term Byelorussia ( its names in other languages such as English being based on the Russian form ) was only used officially until 1991 , when the Supreme Soviet of the Byelorussian SSR decreed by law that the new independent republic should be called Republic of Belarus ( Республика Беларусь spelled in Russian ) , as well its abridged form should be " Belarus " . The law decreed that all the forms of the new term should be transliterated into other languages from their Belarusian language forms . The use of Byelorussian SSR and any abbreviations thereof were allowed from 1991 – 93 . Conservative forces in the newly independent Belarus did not support the name change and opposed its inclusion in the 1991 draft of the Constitution of Belarus . 
 Accordingly , the name Byelorussia was replaced by Belarus in English and to some extent in Russian ( although the traditional name persists in that language as well ) ; likewise , the adjective Belorussian or Byelorussian was replaced by Belarusian in English ( though Russian has not developed a new adjective ) . Belarusian is closer to the original Russian term of <unk> . Belarusian intelligentsia in the Stalin era attempted to change the name from Byelorussia to a form of <unk> because of the supposed connection with Russia . Some nationalists object to the name for the same reason . Several local newspapers kept the old name of the country in Russian in their names , for example <unk> Pravda v <unk> , which is the localized publication of a popular Russian newspaper . Also , those who wish for Belarus to be reunited with Russia continue to use Belorussia . Officially , the full name of the country is " Republic of Belarus " ( <unk> Беларусь , Республика Беларусь , Respublika Belarus listen ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 From 5000 to 2000 BC , <unk> cultures predominated . In addition , remains from the Dnieper @-@ Donets culture were found in Belarus and parts of Ukraine . Cimmerians and other pastoralists roamed through the area by 1 @,@ 000 BC , and by 500 AD , Slavs had taken up residence , which was circumscribed by the Scythians who roamed its outskirts . Invaders from Asia , among whom were the Huns and Avars , swept through c . 400 – 600 AD , but were unable to dislodge the Slavic presence . 
 The region that is now Belarus was first settled by Baltic tribes in the 3rd century . Around the 5th century , the area was taken over by Slavic tribes . The takeover was partially due to the lack of military coordination of the Balts but the gradual assimilation of the Balts into Slavic culture was peaceful in nature . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
