 " There 's only one Batman ! That 's been said many times and has always been true , for no other man has ever rivaled Batman as a champion of the law , nor matched his superb acrobatic skill , his scientific keenness , his mastery of disguise and detective skill ! But now , in one suspenseful surprise after another , Batman finds he has a great rival in the mysterious and glamorous girl ... The Batwoman ! " 
 She was a costumed crime @-@ fighter like Batman , yet in many ways not an exact counterpart . For example , the contents of her utility purse were actually weapons disguised as stereotypical feminine products such as lipstick , cosmetic compacts , charm bracelets , and hair nets . Batwoman appeared regularly in the pages of Batman and Detective Comics through the early 1960s . Although letters from fans indicated Batwoman had become popular with readers , editor Julius Schwartz considered the heroine , as well as other Batman @-@ related characters , to be inappropriate for the new direction he planned to take the Batman universe . Following the revamp to Detective Comics in 1964 , Batwoman was removed from the series . The ' new ' Batgirl , Barbara Gordon , not only replaced Batwoman as Batman 's female counterpart , she surpassed the original heroine in popularity . Batgirl also proved to be more appropriate for her time period and the realistic approach DC Comics began taking with its characters . Unlike Batwoman , Gordon 's Batgirl used a utility belt and various gadgets similar to Batman 's , in addition to being a skilled martial artist and possessing a doctorate in her civilian identity . Despite requests from readers to revive Batwoman , DC 's editorial staff initially declined to bring the character out of retirement , considering the fact that she was specifically created to be a love interest for Batman . 
 ... Batwoman and Bat @-@ Girl were there because romance seemed to be needed in Batman [ and Robin ] ' s life . But thanks to the big change and a foresighted editor , these hapless females are gone for good . In their place stands a girl who is a capable crime @-@ fighter , a far cry from Batwoman who constantly had to be rescued by [ sic ] Batman . 
 However , with the launch of the Batman Family comic book series in 1975 , readers continued to request for Batwoman to appear in new stories . One reader states : 
 it is totally beyond me why you ignored Batwoman in your first two issues ... I can understand your reluctance to go back to the days where everybody in Gotham had a Bat @-@ identity , but you can 't wipe out Batwoman that easily ... I was counting on her making the scene in a new story , perhaps coming out of retirement to offer assistance to your Dynamite Duo [ Batgirl and Robin ] . 
 Batwoman was brought back in Batman Family # 10 ( 1979 ) as " Batgirl 's guest heroine " when she comes out of retirement to assist Batgirl in defeating Killer Moth and Cavalier . However , in Detective Comics # 485 ( August – September 1979 ) , Batwoman is killed by the League of Assassins ( assisted by the Bronze Tiger ) . Editor Dennis O 'Neil later stated in an interview , " we already had Batgirl , we didn 't need Batwoman . " The issue marked the final appearance of the Earth @-@ 1 Kathy Kane . An Earth @-@ 2 version appeared in Brave and The Bold # 182 ( January 1982 ) . This Kathy Kane retired from crime @-@ fighting when that world 's Batman married Catwoman . She comes out of retirement to help a grown @-@ up Robin and Earth @-@ 1 Batman battle Hugo Strange . 
 The Kathy Kane version of Batwoman was restored to modern continuity by writer Grant Morrison in flashback sequences in various issues of his run on the Batman @-@ related titles , most explicitly in Batman Incorporated # 4 ( 2011 ) . This issue reveals the origin of the original Batwoman in current DC Universe continuity ; she is Bruce 's aunt by marriage . After she was widowed , she and Bruce fought side by side and were lovers for a time until it appeared she was killed . In that time , she worked reluctantly as a member of the spy organisation Spyral , which had employed her to uncover Batman 's identity . Her biological father was also revealed to be the Nazi scientist Otto Netz ( Doctor Dedalus ) . In 2013 , in Morrison 's final Batman Incorporated issue , Morrison then reveals that Kathy is alive working as an assassin for Spyral . Kathy then makes a few fleeting appearances in Grayson ( 2014 – 2016 ) , referred to primarily as Agent Zero . In Grayson # 8 , during a fraught encounter between Dick Grayson and acting Spyral head Mr Minos , Kathy shows up to assassinate him . 
 = = = Kate Kane ( 2006 – present ) = = = 
 The limited series Infinite Crisis ( 2005 ) , written as a sequel to the 1985 maxi @-@ series Crisis on Infinite Earths , altered DC Comics continuity . Subsequently , all comic book titles published by DC Comics skip forward one year and a new maxi @-@ series entitled 52 retroactively chronicles the 52 weeks which directly followed Infinite Crisis . When DC editors called for a redesign of Batwoman , comic book artist Alex Ross drew inspiration from the modified Batgirl costume he designed for Barbara Gordon , seven years prior to Kate Kane 's debut in the limited comic book series 52 . Ross and comic book author Paul Dini initially planned to revive the former Batgirl Barbara Gordon using an updated version of the character 's original costume , with red accents in place of the traditional yellow . However , since Gordon served as one of a very small number of disabled superheroes of DC Comics as Oracle , DC 's editorial staff decided to revitalize the original Batwoman instead . In an interview with Newsarama , Ross states " They had me change the mask and hair to make it a bit more Batwoman , rather than Batgirl ... I pointed out to them that the mask makes her look like the Huntress a little overall — but there weren 't many options . The original mask that I had in there when it was to be a Batgirl design was the complete head cover that we 've seen , so they did need something different from that . " 
 Unlike the Silver Age Kathy Kane , who was romantically attracted to Batman , the new version of Kane is a lesbian . Her sexual orientation was announced at the same time the character was revealed in the spring of 2006 . Stories appeared on television news outlets such as CNN , general news magazines such as USA Today , and gay culture magazines such as Out . The modern Katherine " Kate " Kane made her first comic book appearance in issue # 7 of the maxi @-@ series 52 ( 2006 ) , where Kane is revealed to have been romantically involved with Renee Montoya , a former Gotham City Police detective ( who later takes up the mantle of the Question after the original hero dies ) . When questioned about the editorial decision to make Batwoman a gay character in an interview with Wizard Entertainment , DC Comics Senior Vice President and Executive Editor Dan DiDio stated " It was from conversations we ’ ve had for expanding the DC Universe , for looking at levels of diversity . We wanted to have a cast that is much more reflective of today ’ s society and even today ’ s fanbase . One of the reasons we made her gay is that , again when you have the Batman Family — a series of characters that aren ’ t super @-@ powered and inhabit the same circle and the same city — you really want to have a point of difference . It was really important to me to make sure every character felt unique . " 
 Batwoman 's sexual orientation initially gathered mixed reviews , ranging from praise to outrage . A reviewer at Out asserts " Batwoman will be the highest profile gay superhero to ever grace the pages of DC Comics . " Although several LGBT organizations such as GLAAD have praised DC Comics for attempting to diversify their characters , some have observed that Batwoman is not the first gay or lesbian character to appear in comic books , nor is she the only lesbian to be associated with the Batman series . 
 In the character 's civilian identity as a socialite , Katherine Kane is acquainted with Bruce Wayne and is friends with a doctor named Mallory . She is presented as having porcelain white skin , several tattoos , and a clothing style defined as punk @-@ psychobilly @-@ goth in her civilian persona . The character is also Jewish , and celebrates Hanukkah with Renee Montoya during the events of 52 . Her father is an ex @-@ colonel and in Detective Comics # 854 , it is stated she is the cousin of Bette " Flamebird " Kane . The younger Kate also has a stepmother named Catherine Kane , making Catherine the aunt of Bette . At the 2008 New York Comic Con , it was announced that Batwoman would be among the characters appearing in a new Justice League comic book written by James Robinson . That year , Batwoman briefly took over as the lead character in Detective Comics , starting with # 854 @.@ with DC saying at the 2009 New York Comic Con that she would be DC Comics ' highest profile gay superhero . Detective Comics # 854 would introduce Alice , a new villain for Kate who is also revealed to be her twin sister , Elizabeth Kane . 
 From 2010 , the character began appearing in the self @-@ titled series Batwoman . After an introductory " zero " issue in 2010 , the series launched fully in 2011 with Batwoman # 1 along with DC 's company @-@ wide renumbering of its titles that year . Writers J.H. Williams III and W. Haden Blackman chose to expand Kate 's supporting cast both in terms of her family ( the Kanes , including Elizabeth , Bette and other relatives ) , and the " Batman Family " she is more loosely connected to . Issue seventeen was also a milestone as it featured Kate proposing to her girlfriend , Maggie Sawyer . 
 In September 2013 , co @-@ authors J.H. Williams and W. Haden Blackman announced that they would leave Batwoman after the December issue because of conflicts with DC over storylines . They remarked that they were not allowed to expand Killer Croc 's back story , keep their original ending , or show Kate and Maggie getting married . This announcement follows a February 2013 announcement that Batwoman # 17 will feature the proposal between Kate and Maggie . DC Comics announced that Batwoman cannot get married because " heroes shouldn 't have happy personal lives " . 
 In December 2014 , it was announced that the series would be cancelled in March at issue forty , along with twelve other series . 
 In 2016 , it was announced that Batwoman would be one of the lead characters in the DC Comics Rebirth revamp of Detective Comics , which returned to its original numbering with issue # 934 . 
 = = Fictional character biography = = 
 = = = Kathy Kane = = = 
 In the original pre @-@ Crisis continuity , Kathy Kane , a wealthy Gotham City heiress and former circus performer , decides to use her skills and resources to become a costumed crime @-@ fighter . This is partly out of altruism and partly to attract the romantic attentions of Batman . During the Silver Age of Comics , Batwoman guest @-@ starred occasionally in Batman stories published from 1956 to 1964 . While Batman wished for Kane to retire from crime @-@ fighting due to the danger , she remained his ally , even when she temporarily became a new version of Catwoman . In 1961 , Batwoman was joined by her niece Betty Kane , the Bat @-@ Girl . Kathy and Betty were romantically interested in Batman and Robin , respectively . Robin seemed to return Bat @-@ Girl 's affection , while Batman remained aloof . In 1964 however , DC dropped Batwoman , as well as Bat @-@ Girl , Ace the Bat @-@ Hound , and Bat @-@ Mite from the Batman titles , which were undergoing a revamp under editor Julius Schwartz that eliminated many of the sci @-@ fi elements that were introduced in the 1950s . However , Batwoman continues to make appearances in stories published during the next few years in the Batman @-@ Superman team @-@ up book World 's Finest . The character would later reappear in the late 1970s , made guest appearances in the Batman Family and Freedom Fighters comic book series , often fighting crime alongside Barbara Gordon , who had become the new Batgirl . In a story depicting Batwoman as a retired crimefighter , she becomes the owner of a circus , which she keeps until killed by the League of Assassins and the brainwashed Bronze Tiger . 
 During this period , DC began heavily using the Multiverse storytelling device which posited that the publisher 's earliest stories ( from the Golden Age of Comic Books ) took place on the parallel world of Earth @-@ Two . DC visited the concept of an older Batwoman in Brave and the Bold # 182 ( 1982 ) , in a story titled " Interlude on Earth @-@ 2 " . In this story , which features pre @-@ Crisis Earth @-@ One Batman accidentally arriving on Earth @-@ Two to battle the Earth @-@ Two Hugo Strange alongside the adult Earth @-@ Two Dick Grayson ( Robin ) , Batwoman is portrayed as middle @-@ aged and still in love with the now @-@ deceased Commissioner Bruce Wayne of Earth @-@ Two . Later , the conclusion of the publisher 's 1985 maxi @-@ series Crisis on Infinite Earths altered DC Universe continuity , subsequently changing the character histories of Batwoman and Bat @-@ Girl . In the new continuity , Kathy Kane did exist , though her persona as Batwoman had been erased . Bat @-@ Girl never existed either , but a superheroine named Flamebird was introduced who had a somewhat similar costume and similar name , " Bette Kane " . 
 Despite the erasure of both Kathy Kane as Batwoman and Betty Kane as Bat @-@ Girl , there were references to both heroines in post @-@ Crisis publications . In Alan Moore 's Batman : The Killing Joke , Batman stares at a photograph that portrays Bat @-@ Girl , Batwoman , Ace the Bat @-@ Hound , and Bat @-@ Mite — characters that did not exist in continuity at the time . In Planet Krypton # 1 , which was part of The Kingdom storyline , a Hypertime ghost of Batwoman haunts the Planet Krypton restaurant . Batman briefly recognizes her as " Kathy " , but then quickly denies knowing her . Kathy , sans her Batwoman identity , was also referenced in a few post @-@ Crisis publications . According to The DC Comics Encyclopedia : The Definitive Guide to The Characters of the DC Universe ( 2004 ) , Kathy was described as a wealthy former circus stuntwoman that had inherited her father 's fortune and later became acquainted with Bruce Wayne as a Gotham socialite . She eventually became a crime fighting ally to Batman , although she never used the Batwoman name . The encyclopedia entry explains that she eventually purchased a circus and was murdered by a member of the League of Assassins ; however , Bronze Tiger was not her killer . Her murder was again recalled in Suicide Squad # 38 . During the Beast Boy miniseries , Flamebird tried to post bail for Beast Boy with money " borrowed from Aunt Kathy . " Flamebird further mentioned that " Aunty Kathy 's in Gotham " in Teen Titans # 39 . 
 The introduction of Kate Kane as the new Batwoman following the continuity @-@ altering events of Infinite Crisis in 2005 allowed the company to revisit elements of the Kathy Kane character it did away with following Crisis on Infinite Earths ; Batman writer Grant Morrison explicitly set out to treat Batman 's entire publication history as his backstory . In Detective Comics # 824 ( 2006 ) , the Penguin refers to Kate Kane as the new Batwoman , implying for the first time since 1985 that there was an earlier Batwoman . Later Kathy appears in a flashback story in Batman # 682 ( 2009 ) , in a panel showing Batman and the original Batwoman kissing , with Robin showing his distrust of her and Bat @-@ Girl . In this story , Kathy is referred to as " Katy " Kane . In Batman # 686 , Batman 's butler Alfred mentions that Bruce Wayne was once romantically involved with Kathy . 
 Grant Morrison later chose to heavily reimagine Kathy Kane in 2011 for his Batman Incorporated series . It is established that Kathy Kane was born Katherine Webb , and that she had been an aspiring independent film director prior to marrying a millionaire named Nathan Kane , the son of Roderick and Elizabeth Kane and brother of Martha ( Kane ) Wayne , Bruce Wayne 's mother . Nathan and Kathy were madly in love with one another , and it was Nathan who ended up buying Kathy her circus as a birthday present . After Nathan 's untimely death , Kathy was approached by a young man known only as Agent @-@ 33 , who recruited her into a covert spy organization called Spyral . As part of her first assignment , Kathy was tasked with tracking down Batman and discovering his true identity . Donning a female variation of Batman 's costume in order to gain his attention , she embarked on a career as a costumed crime @-@ fighter while attempting to get close to Batman . Her plan succeeded but the two fell in love with one another , despite Kathy legally being Wayne 's aunt . As a result , she refused to reveal his identity to her superiors at Spyral . Later , Kathy was confronted by the head of Spyral , a Nazi supervillain named Dr. Dedalus ( Otto Netz ) who claimed to be her real father and threatened to expose her to Batman unless she continued her mission . Heartbroken , she broke off her relationship with Bruce in order to save him from Dedalus ' plan . In the present , Batman and the South American vigilante El Gaucho are told by the villainess <unk> that El Gaucho was responsible for Kathy 's murder , as he had originally been Agent @-@ 33 prior to becoming a superhero . Batman tells Gaucho that <unk> must be lying since Kathy had been killed by the League of Assassins , but Gaucho claims that there is some truth in her accusations , and that Batman wouldn 't understand . In the follow @-@ up one @-@ shot Batman Incorporated : Leviathan Strikes , students of an assassin training facility masquerading as St. Hadrian 's Finishing School For Girls in England are shown wearing variations of Kathy 's Batwoman costume , with the original masks replaced by skulls . Later , these women are shown to be agents of Spyral , dedicated to hunting down Talia al Ghul , whose organisation Leviathan is waging war with Batman . Kathy reappears alive in the concluding issue of Batman Incorporated , in which she shoots Talia al Ghul dead in the Batcave . Identifying herself as St Hadrian 's headmistress and requesting Batman not to go looking for her , she thanks Batman for leading Talia into her trap and reports to Spyral headquarters that one more international criminal has been killed . 
 Later , when Dick Grayson fakes his death and goes to work for Spyral , he works under the direction of the scheming Mr <unk> , who during a tense confrontation with Dick is assassinated by Kane , who is identified only as the current Agent Zero ; she is the real head of Spyral . When Dick tries to leave the organisation behind , he knows he cannot because of the " Hypnos " implanted in his brain which allow him to hypnotise others and disguise his appearance , but also permit Spyral to monitor him always . Kathy , face disguised by hypnos , pursues Dick to Gotham and tells him to take the day to say goodbye to his friends but that he cannot leave Spyral . He travels to Gotham City and reveals he is alive to Robin , Red Robin , Red Hood and Batgirl , and communicates with them by secret code . Acting on Dick 's orders , they hack the Spyral hypnos so that on their next encounter , Dick can see Agent Zero 's true face . Dick 's hypnos reveal Agent Zero 's identity , but not the name Kathy ; it surrenders up the alternative name Luka Netz , Kathy 's birth name . It is later revealed that her full name is Katrina " Luka " Netz and that she has an antagonistic relationship with her sister , Frau Netz ( Elisabeth Netz ) . 
 = = = Kate Kane = = = 
 = = = = Origins and early career = = = = 
 In 52 # 7 , Kate Kane is introduced ( although she is referred to as Kathy on several occasions ) . No Origins titles have been presented for Kate Kane ; her fictional backstory is presented in Detective Comics through the use of exposition and flashbacks . In their early childhood , Katherine Rebecca " Kate " Kane and her sister Elizabeth " Beth " Kane were identical twins and were very close to each other . On their twelfth birthday , Kate and Beth were taken by their mother , Gabrielle " Gabi " Kane , to an expensive restaurant for chocolate and waffles , their favorite dish . On the way to the restaurant , a group of gunmen attacked the family and took them hostage , killing their bodyguard in the process . After learning of her family 's kidnapping , Kate 's father Colonel Jacob " Jake " Kane led a rescue mission to save his captured family , which ended with Kate 's mother executed and Beth apparently killed after being caught in the crossfire between the kidnappers and soldiers . Years later , Jake marries Catherine Hamilton Kane . Kate is attending the United States Military Academy , where she receives excellent grades and ranks at the top of her class . However , when it is alleged that she is in a lesbian relationship with another student , Kate 's commanding officer asks her to disavow the allegation . Telling the officer that she refuses to lie and violate the code of the Academy , Kate admits to being lesbian and is forced to leave the school . When she confronts her father with the news , he supports her and affirms that she upheld her honour and integrity . She then moves back to Gotham City where she attends college and pursues a wild social lifestyle . Kate is eventually pulled over for speeding by a young Renee Montoya , who was just a traffic cop at this point . The two date for several months and break up following a fight where Kate berates Renee for keeping her sexuality hidden from her colleagues and family ; after Renee expresses concern about Kate 's lack of direction , when it 's revealed she 's not been attending college . While attempting to call Renee and apologize for her behavior , Kate is attacked by a mugger who wants her wallet and cell phone . Using her military training , Kate easily defeats the criminal just as Batman arrives and helps her off the ground . She is then shown fixated by the Bat Signal as Batman flees the scene . 
 Inspired by her encounter with the caped crusader , Kate begins fighting crime using stolen military body armor and weaponry . After being confronted by Jake , Kate accepts his offer for assistance and begins an intense two years of training across the globe . Upon returning to Gotham , Kate discovers that her father has created a Batsuit for her , along with an arsenal of experimental weaponry based on Batman 's known gadgetry and a bunker hidden in the Kane home . The first reference to the modern Batwoman is made by the Penguin in Detective Comics # 824 who suggests Batman bring a date to the opening of his club , asking , " Why don 't you bring that new Batwoman ? I hear she 's kind of hot . " In 52 # 7 ( 2006 ) the new Batwoman is introduced . Kane is revealed to have been intimately involved with former Gotham City police detective Renee Montoya and is heiress to one of the wealthiest families in Gotham , owning that which the Wayne family does not . In her third appearance in issue # 11 of 52 entitled " Batwoman Begins , " Kane assists Montoya and her partner the Question in a mystery revolving around a warehouse owned by Kane 's family . When Montoya and the Question are attacked sometime later by Whisper A <unk> 's shapeshifting minions , Kane intervenes as Batwoman and rescues them . 
 In 52 # 28 ( 2006 ) , after Montoya learns that the " Book of Crime , " a sacred text of Intergang , contains a prophecy foretelling the brutal murder of the " twice named daughter of Kane , " she and the Question return to Gotham , joining forces with Batwoman in issue # 30 in order to avert Intergang 's plans . Batwoman later appears in a story written by Greg Rucka for the DC Infinite Holiday Special ( 2006 ) . As Batwoman continues the case , she is joined by Nightwing , who has recently returned to Gotham and becomes infatuated with her . On Christmas Eve , he gives her an ' official ' Batarang . She also celebrates Hanukkah with Renee , and the two kiss shortly before Christmas . This story introduced some of Kane 's background , including the fact that she is Jewish . In issue # 48 of 52 ( 2007 ) , when Intergang realizes that the image of Batwoman in the Crime Bible and the cited " twice @-@ named daughter of Cain " were one and the same , they ransack Kane 's apartment , kidnapping her with the intention to sacrifice her . Montoya arrives too late to stop the ritual , finding Kate bound and gagged to an altar as prophet Bruno Mannheim plunges a knife through her heart . In the ensuing confrontation , the freed Batwoman pulls the knife out of her own chest to stab Mannheim , and then collapses in Renee 's arms . She survives her wounds after Renee stops the bleeding in time , however , and as she recuperates in her penthouse , Renee , disguised in her new alter ego as the Question , shines the Bat @-@ Signal into her apartment and asks , " Are you ready ? " 
 = = = = 2007 – 2009 : Countdown , Final Crisis = = = = 
 Batwoman subsequently appears in the fifty @-@ two issue weekly series Countdown , intended to act as a prelude to DC 's summer crossover event the following year . Batwoman appears in Countdown # 39 ( 2007 ) , after the Question confronts Trickster and Pied Piper , having trailed them from the Penguin 's <unk> Lounge nightclub . Batwoman also makes an appearance in the miniseries Crime Bible : The Five Lessons of Blood ( 2007 ) alongside the Question . Batwoman is seen again on the final page of Grant Morrison 's Final Crisis # 3 ( 2008 ) , one month after the Anti @-@ Life Equation was released , as a new Female Fury along with Wonder Woman , Catwoman , and <unk> . Her costume bears resemblance to the dead Fury Mad Harriet . She is also seen in Final Crisis : Revelations # 3 attacking the Question after having just been infected with the Anti @-@ Life Equation . 
 = = = = 2009 – 2010 : Detective Comics lead feature = = = = 
 Following the events of Final Crisis and Battle for the Cowl , in which Bruce Wayne has supposedly died and is replaced by Dick Grayson , Kate becomes the lead of Detective Comics from issue 854 to 863 . In the first story , entitled " Elegy " , Batwoman is seen investigating the arrival of a new leader of the Religion of Crime to Gotham . She briefly meets Batman ( it is intentionally left ambiguous whether or not it is Dick Grayson or Bruce Wayne ) to discuss her findings . Kate demonstrates greater knowledge of the Religion of Crime , and even corrects Batman by saying there 's 13 and not 12 covens of the religion in Gotham . Batman concedes the case to her , and comments on the length of her hair ( though panels on the same page reveal the long red wig hides her actual hair , styled short ) . 
 Aspects of her personal life are also revealed , including her relationship with her ex @-@ colonel father ; serving as Batwoman 's ally , whom she addresses as " sir . " The strain of her late night vigilante activity has also taken a toll on her romantic relationships . Her lateness and night time absences are interpreted by her girlfriend as an on the side liaison with another woman . She breaks the relationship off as she believes Kate is not ready to commit to an exclusive relationship . A past traumatic incident is also alluded to which she claims still haunts her . As she vaguely describes the experience , her face is shown superimposed on the page over a restrained girl with a bag over her head . She later tracks down the new leader of the Religion of Crime : an elaborately costumed woman named Alice . Over the course of the conflict that ensues , Batwoman observes that Alice only speaks in quotations from Lewis Carroll , believing herself to be Alice Liddell . Alice denies a connection to the Mad Hatter . 
 While attending a party thrown for the Gotham Police Department , Kate meets and flirts with detective Maggie Sawyer , and runs into her cousin Bette Kane ( better known as the Teen Titans member Flamebird ) . Kate is apparently unaware of her cousin 's vigilante activities , and inadvertently hurts her feelings when she cuts her off in the middle of a conversation to answer her cell phone . While dancing with Maggie , Kate discovers that Alice has kidnapped her father and plans to destroy Gotham by spreading a deadly airborne chemical from a hijacked airplane , thus succeeding where Mannheim failed . Batwoman boards the plane and defeats Alice 's subordinates , eventually stopping the plot and rescuing her father in the process . However , Alice is accidentally thrown from the plane , only to be caught by Batwoman . Alice then shocks her by saying that Batwoman has " Our father 's eyes , " apparently revealing that she is in fact Kate 's sister Beth ( who was believed to have been killed years ago ) . With Batwoman stunned by the revelation , Alice stabs her in the wrist with a knife . Batwoman is forced to release her grip , sending Alice to her apparent demise in the river below . 
 In the aftermath of this discovery , Kate locks herself in her crime lab and tries to come to terms with what just happened , while the police struggle in vain to find any sign of Alice 's corpse . These scenes are depicted amongst numerous flashback sequences that comprise most of the issue . Throughout them , back story is provided from her childhood that depicts Kate , her twin sister Beth , and their mother being kidnapped . While Kate 's father is able to rescue her , it appears as though both her sister and mother have been killed by the time he arrives . 
 Batwoman appears in the miniseries Cry for Justice , a set @-@ up for a new ongoing Justice League title . When the Justice League of America splits up following Bruce Wayne 's death and a disastrous confrontation with the Shadow Cabinet , Green Lantern Hal Jordan leads a group of superheroes to Gotham in order to track down the supervillain known as Prometheus . Kate is shown stalking the heroes from the rooftops after they encounter Clayface . Batwoman later contacts both Leagues at the JLA Watchtower , informing them she encountered and engaged supervillain Delores Winters , who mysteriously collapsed and died right as she was about to be taken into custody . The heroes request that Kate bring the body up to them , but she declines , telling them that she is much too busy due to a rash of criminal uprisings going on in Gotham . Firestorm is then sent to retrieve the corpse from Kate and bring it to the team , who discover that Dolores was forced into fighting by means of a mind control device . In a text piece included in Justice League : Cry for Justice # 6 , writer James Robinson revealed that Batwoman was initially intended to be part of his new Justice League line @-@ up , but this plan fell apart after Cry For Justice was shortened into a miniseries rather than an ongoing title . This explains why Batwoman is present on the cover of the first issue , and why she was initially said to be a member of the team when the book was first announced . 
 Later , Kate appears as part of Batman and Robin : Blackest Knight . Batwoman is kidnapped by cultists and taken to London in order for her to once again be sacrificed . She is sealed within a coffin and taken underground to the last remaining Lazarus Pit in order for the ritual to begin . She is saved by the timely intervention of Dick Grayson and British superheroes Knight and Squire . After learning that Grayson plans on placing Bruce Wayne 's corpse into the pit in order to revive him , Kate strongly protests , but he simply ignores her . True to Kate 's warnings , Bruce ( in reality an insane clone created by Darkseid ) emerges from the Pit and attacks the heroes . As the battle takes place , the cultists who kidnapped Kate detonate explosives surrounding the Pit , causing a massive cave @-@ in . Grayson discovers Kate , buried alive and with extensive injury to her spine and legs , and tries to help her . Kate is healed after being placed inside the Pit , and she returns to Gotham with the others . Before leaving to return to her home , Grayson flirts with Kate by telling her that he has a thing for red @-@ haired crime @-@ fighters ( a reference to his previous love interests , Barbara Gordon and Starfire ) , apparently unaware of Kate 's sexuality . 
 Batwoman also begins hunting down a crazed serial killer known as the Cutter , who has been abducting young women and cutting off parts of their face in order to create the perfect woman . He eventually kidnaps Bette , but Kate tracks the killer to his lair and attacks him . During the fight , Batwoman reveals her identity to Bette when she mentions her tennis career , and in the aftermath Bette is seen in her Flamebird outfit , saying that she wants to be Kate 's new partner . 
 = = = = 2010 – 2015 : self @-@ titled series = = = = 
 In 2010 , DC announced that Batwoman would star in a series with art by J. H. Williams III , who would also co @-@ write the series with writer W. Haden Blackman . Artist Amy Reeder Hadley would also contribute art , alternating story arcs with Williams . The series ' introductory " zero issue " was released on November 24 , 2010 . The launch of Batwoman # 1 was originally scheduled for February 2011 , then delayed until spring ; in early March it was announced that Batwoman # 1 would be released sometime in Fall 2011 . In September 2013 , J. H. Williams III announced that he together with Blackman quit the series after alleging creative difference with the producers , citing a sudden change to not allow Batwoman to marry her partner as Williams and Blackman had planned . 
 Batwoman appears as a member of an all @-@ female team of heroes created by Wonder Woman to repel a faux @-@ alien invasion of Washington DC masterminded by Professor Ivo . After the battle is over , Kate asks Wonder Woman if she 'd like to accompany Kate and the other heroines to a bar in order to celebrate , but Wonder Woman politely turns them down in order to attend the college graduation ceremony of her old friend , Vanessa <unk> . 
 In Batman Inc . Batwoman later appears while tracking down a gangster named Johnny Valentine , who is wanted for his connection to the murders of three marines . She tracks him to a local circus , the same one once owned by her predecessor , Kathy Kane . While chasing Valentine through a haunted house , Batwoman is attacked by what appears to be Kathy 's ghost . Batwoman struggles with and eventually defeats the " ghost " , who is revealed to be nothing more than a blonde @-@ haired female assassin clad in a wig and a replica of Kathy 's costume . Kate realizes that she recognizes the assassin , and asks her father to run a facial @-@ recognition scan . While Kate restrains her attacker , her father reveals that Valentine is connected to a supervillain operating out of South America , and tells Kate that she needs to get down there to find out what is going on . 
 = = = = 2016 – present : return to Detective Comics = = = = 
 When a group of mysterious villains begin targeting Gotham 's vigilantes , Batman recruits Batwoman to help run a " boot camp " for young heroes , consisting of Red Robin , Orphan , Spoiler and Clayface . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 The 1996 limited series Kingdom Come by Mark Waid and Alex Ross presents a Batwoman portrayed as a Batman admirer from Jack Kirby 's Fourth World . Her costume mixed Kirby @-@ esque elements with those of the original costume . The character rode a giant bat @-@ winged dog named Ace . 
 Batman : Dark Knight Dynasty ( 1997 ) features Vice @-@ President Brenna Wayne who becomes Batwoman in order to stop Vandal Savage . Wayne discovers a conspiracy against her family after investigating the last thirteen generations of the Wayne family . 
 The Kingdom : Planet Krypton ( February 1999 ) references the Silver Age Batwoman . The Kingdom introduced the concept of Hypertime , in which characters who had been removed from continuity still exist in alternate timelines . A Planet Krypton theme restaurant ( modeled after Planet Hollywood ) finds itself " haunted " by silent " Hypertime ghosts " of characters who are no longer part of DC continuity . Batman comes face to face with Batwoman and says , " Kathy ? " Later , Batman says there is no possible way he could know her . 
 JLA : The Nail ( 1998 ) by Alan Davis features Selina Kyle adopting a Batwoman costume based on the costume worn by Kathy Kane . The 2004 sequel , JLA : Another Nail , features her fashioning her own Batwoman persona . 
 Superman / Batman # 24 ( November 2005 ) presents a world where the genders of the characters are reversed with Helena Wayne as Batwoman . DC later placed this alternate reality as " Earth 11 " in the post @-@ Infinite Crisis multiverse . 
 In the Teen Titans storyline " Titans Tomorrow " ( 2005 ) , Bette Kane is Batwoman , and wears a costume similar to Kathy 's pre @-@ Crisis one . In the follow up storyline , " Titans of Tomorrow ... Today ! " ( 2007 ) , Bette Kane remains Flamebird and former Batgirl Cassandra Cain becomes Batwoman . 
 In the Flashpoint universe , Kate Kane is a member of Team 7 , an elite unit of soldiers led by Grifter . Kate , along with most of the team , is killed during a botched attack on a <unk> training camp in Flashpoint : Lois Lane and the Resistance # 2 ( July 2011 ) . 
 In Batman ' 66 # 2 , Kathy Kane is Bruce 's Wayne 's date to a concert by <unk> . She later rescues Batman from an attack by the Siren that causes him to experience a series of bizarre hallucinations . During the hallucinations Batman briefly sees Kathy as a woman wearing the Silver Age Batwoman costume . 
 In the comic book adaptation of Injustice : Gods Among Us , Batwoman ( Kate Kane ) appears as a member of Batman 's Insurgency . She is also married to Renee Montoya in this continuity . At the end of the Year Three series she and Huntress fight Wonder Woman of Superman 's Regime , with the latter being accidentally killed by the Amazon ; while Wonder Woman is shocked by this , a furious Kate beats her into submission . Her grudge towards Wonder Woman continues into Year Four , where she also suffers the death of Renee after she overdosed on enhancement pills . When the Regime and the Greek Gods battle at the Hall of Justice , Kate gets revenge on Wonder Woman by strangling her with her own Lasso of Truth , recreating Huntress ' experience . However , while she acknowledged she wants Diana dead , she lets her live as a sign that she is a better person . In Year Five , when an underground resistance is built up and named after the Joker , she confronts them in their hideout and tells them the Joker is not a man who should be honored . 
 In Batwoman : Futures End # 1 , five years into the future , Kate Kane was turned into a vampire and unable to control her thirst for blood , she began attacking people . She was eventually killed , when her sister Beth drove a stake through her heart . 
 In DC Bombshells , which take place in an alternate history version of World War II , there are four versions of the character : 
 Kate Kane operates in Gotham City as the hero , Batwoman , while also being the mysterious # 52 of the Gotham Knights baseball team . She gets to save the Wayne family from a mugger , making her a true hero to the eyes of a young Bruce Wayne . Kate has had some military experience and currently runs her father ’ s company , handling it through the Depression . She is also in a relationship with Detective Maggie Sawyer . She is later enlisted by Amanda Waller to fight in the war along with several other heroines . Before she leaves Gotham , Kate makes her cousin Bette , another baseball player from the rival Gotham Griffins team , the new protector of the city . 
 Katherine Webb , a member of the Kane family and the aunt to both Kate and Bette , is the Headmistress of Pinkney Orphanage . She was left in charge of the orphanage by Kate before she left Gotham . Headmistress Webb is a xenophobic woman , who uses the orphans to make robots in order to protect the country from foreigners , whom she characterizes as " evil " . She is later defeated by a team of Batgirls , including Bette , who come to the orphanage to save the orphans . 
 Kathleen " Kathy " Duquesne , an auto mechanic and the leader of a team of Batgirls , who protect the city during Batwoman 's absence . Along with Kathy , the team includes Nell Little , Harper Row and later on <unk> Yeoh and Bette Kane . Upon meeting Bette , Kathy immediately recognizes her as a baseball player and later figures out her real identity as well as her connection to Batwoman but promises to keep it a secret . The Batgirls save the orphans of Pinkney Orphanage from the devious Headmistress and later expand their team , welcoming Tim Drake , Cullen Row and Felicity Smoak , and creating a Bat family . 
 Sonia <unk> appears as an officer of Gotham City Police Department , partnered with Crispus Allen and working with Maggie Sawyer to aid Batwoman into her fight against crime in the city . 
 = = In other media = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 In the The Batman animated series , the name ' Batwoman ' was occasionally used . In the two @-@ parter " Batgirl Begins " , Barbara Gordon wanted to be called ' Batwoman ' before settling with the Batgirl name . The episode " Artifact " shows Martha Wayne mistakenly identified as ' Batwoman ' along with Thomas Wayne as Batman and their son ( instead of Dick Grayson ) as Red Robin . 
 Batwoman appears in the Batman : The Brave and the Bold episode " The Criss Cross Conspiracy ! " , voiced by Vanessa Marshall . Though visually based on the Kathy Kane Batwoman , the character is never actually called ' Batwoman ' and is also original character Katrina Moldoff , the heiress to the Moldoff Circus fortune . On his <unk> page , Brave and the Bold director Ben Jones confirmed that the decision to rename the character was brought about after DC Comics voiced concerns about the episode 's depiction of the character having a negative impact on the new Batwoman comic book series , the first issue of which launched less than a month after the episode 's initial air date . She is portrayed as a thrill seeker and a trained circus acrobat whom Batman dislikes due to her crime fighting occasionally endangering innocent bystanders . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Batwoman appeared in the direct @-@ to @-@ video animated film Batman : Mystery of the Batwoman , voiced by Kyra Sedgwick . In this storyline , which conforms to the continuity of the DC animated universe , Batwoman is a new vigilante operating in Gotham City who is willing to use lethal force to achieve her goals . She targets the illegal operations of the Penguin and crime bosses Rupert Thorne and Carlton Duquesne . Viewed as a threat , Batman investigates Batwoman in an attempt to uncover her identity and bring her , as well as her targets , to justice . In his investigation , Batman suspects three different women to be Batwoman : Gotham Police Detective Sonia <unk> ( voiced by Elisa Gabrielli ) , Dr. Roxanne " Rocky " Ballantine ( voiced by Kelly Ripa ) and Kathleen " Kathy " Duquesne ( voiced by Kimberly Brooks ) . ( The name Kathy Duquesne is a thinly @-@ veiled reference to Kate Kane . In the DVD and Blu @-@ ray special features , the producers explain that DC didn 't want the filmmakers to use Kate Kane in a family @-@ friendly movie due to the violence associated with her character . ) It 's eventually revealed that all three women have been posing as Batwoman with grudges against the crime bosses , each acting at a different point to draw suspicion from all three of them . 
 Batwoman makes a cameo in Batman vs. Robin . During one of Batman 's nightmares , she 's one of the fallen bodies next to Damian Wayne 's Batman . 
 Batwoman appears in Batman : Bad Blood . She is voiced by actress Yvonne Strahovski . This version of Batwoman has military training but is berated by Batman for using live guns and ammunition in combat . She is shown flirting with Renee Montoya , who comes to her house at the end of the movie . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 The Kate Kane version of Batwoman appears in DC Universe Online video game , voiced by Christina J. Moore . 
 Kate Kane 's Batwoman appears as a DLC playable character in Lego Batman 3 : Beyond Gotham . 
 Kate Kane is featured in Batman : Arkham Knight . She is heard on Bruce Wayne 's answering machine where she mentions her marriage to Maggie Sawyer , ( confirming that she is indeed a lesbian in the Arkham @-@ Verse ) . Kate mentions that Bruce taught her the importance of keeping up appearances , hinting that she has already become Batwoman . 
 = SS Irish Oak ( 1919 ) = 
 The SS Irish Oak was an Irish @-@ operated steamship which was sunk in the North Atlantic during World War II by a German submarine . 
 As the West Neris she had been built in the US and operated by the United States Shipping Board . In 1941 , she was chartered by Irish Shipping Limited , to transport wheat and fertilizer from North America to Ireland . Sailing as a clearly marked neutral vessel , not in convoy , she was nonetheless torpedoed and sunk by U @-@ 607 on 15 May 1943 midway between North America and Ireland . The crew were rescued . 
 At the time there were conflicting reports that she had not and allegations that she had warned a nearby convoy of the presence of a U @-@ boat . The British nationality of her captain became an issue in the Irish general election of June 1943 , there were diplomatic exchanges between the United States and Ireland , and questions raised in the British House of Commons . The U @-@ boat 's captain received a mild reprimand . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Southwestern Shipbuilding of San Pedro , California , was organized in 1918 to build cargo ships for the United States Shipping Board . As Yard No. 11 , the ship was built to Design 1019 , launched on 24 August 1918 and completed in December 1919 . Her displacement was 5 @,@ 589 tons , length 410 feet 5 inches ( 125 @.@ 10 m ) , with a beam of 54 feet 3 inches ( 16 @.@ 54 m ) , and a depth of 27 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 28 m ) . 
 Propelled by a triple expansion steam engine built by the Llewellyn Iron Works of Los Angeles , with cylinders of 24 @.@ 5 inches ( 62 cm ) , 42 @.@ 5 inches ( 108 cm ) and 72 inches ( 180 cm ) bore and 48 inches ( 120 cm ) stroke , the ship could make 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ) . 
 = = West Neris = = 
 West Neris had been built for the United States Maritime Commission ( USMC ) and operated by the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , her port of registry being New Orleans . 
 In 1928 , she was sold to the Mississippi Steamship Company . She was sold back to the USSB in 1933 . With the abolition of the USSB , she was transferred to the United States Shipping Board Bureau in 1935 , and laid up in New Orleans . During this period the ship was neglected and the condition of her engine deteriorated . In 1937 she was transferred to the United States Maritime Commission . On 26 September 1941 she was chartered to Irish Shipping Ltd , through United States Lines at £ 3 @,@ 245 per month . 
 = = Irish Oak = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II Ireland had very few ships , and the United States instructed its ships not to enter the " war zone " . Acting for the Irish Government , Minister Frank Aiken negotiated the charter of two oil @-@ burning steamships from the United States Maritime Commission ’ s reserve fleet . These were the West Neris and the West Hematite . Two Irish crews travelled to New Orleans to take over the ships , which they did on 9 September 1941 . 
 The West Neris was renamed Irish Oak and West Hematite was renamed Irish Pine . Both were chartered by government owned Irish Shipping Limited ( ISL ) and managed by the Limerick Steamship Company , with their port of registry changed to Dublin . The Irish Oak was captained by Matthew Moran of Wexford ; the Irish Pine by Frank Dick of <unk> , with Samuel McNamara of Belfast as Chief Engineer . 
 = = = Initial sailing , convoys and delays = = = 
 <unk> to carry wheat and phosphate fertilizer , both ships sailed initially from New Orleans for St John 's in October 1941 , to take on cargoes of wheat bound for Ireland . Since insurers such as Lloyd 's of London charged higher premiums for ships not in convoy , the Irish Oak and the Irish Pine were painted war @-@ time camouflage in preparation for sailing in @-@ convoy . Irish Pine joined Convoy SC 56 and arrived in Dublin on 11 December 1941 . In contrast , Irish Oak experienced a number of serious mishaps and setbacks : Chief Engineer R. Marsh , of Dublin , suffered a heart attack and was hospitalised in New Orleans ; another engineer , O ’ Keefe of Dún Laoghaire , was severely burned in a boiler room blow @-@ back and hospitalised in St John ; and a locally recruited Greek replacement engineer caused difficulties , was reported to the Canadian authorities by the captain , and jailed . 
 Initially Irish Oak sailed with Convoy SC 52 , which departed from Sydney , Nova Scotia on 29 October 1941 . On 3 November the convoy was attacked by U @-@ 202 and U @-@ 203 and lost four ships ; it turned back for Sydney and arrived on 5 November . But neglect had left the Irish Oak in poor condition . Ships from SC 52 were merged with Convoy SC 53 and Irish Oak sailed with it , but had to return to Sydney . Her next attempt was with Convoy SC 55 , which departed Sydney on 16 November 1941 and arrived at Liverpool on 5 December , but again engine problems struck and she was towed to Saint John , New Brunswick . Irish Oak remained in St. John for four months while efforts were made to repair her engine . Eventually she had to be towed to Boston for repairs . The voyage from New Orleans to Dublin - including repairs - took nine months : Irish Oak berthed in Dublin on 6 July 1942 . 
 = = = Out of convoy sailings = = = 
 The crew of the Irish Oak became acutely uneasy after her engine failed and she was left behind by SC 55 , dead in the water , to wait for a tugboat ; this , coupled with the experiences of other Irish ships , especially in OG 71 , the " Nightmare Convoy " in August 1941 , resolved Irish crews and owners to sail as neutrals , out @-@ of @-@ convoy . Thereafter Irish ships were clearly marked and fully lit , usually sailing out @-@ of @-@ convoy on a direct course , and they always answered SOS calls for assistance . Irish ships rescued 534 men ; yet lost 20 % of their seamen . 
 Irish Shipping Limited built up its fleet to 15 ships . Two ships were lost , Irish Oak , and Irish Pine , on which 33 lives were lost . The ISL ships alone saved some 166 lives . 
 = = = The Stornest = = = 
 At 04 : 44 on 14 October 1942 , in very bad weather , Irish Oak received a distress call from British ship Stornest , a straggler from convoy ONS 136 , torpedoed by U @-@ 706 . Irish Oak answered the call and altered course . Six minutes later Stornest radioed Irish Oak that they were abandoning ship in life @-@ rafts , having lost their lifeboats in the heavy seas . Irish Oak continued to relay <unk> 's SOS and spent ten hours searching for survivors in a westerly gale . The rescue tug <unk> , the anti @-@ submarine trawler <unk> and two corvettes from convoy ONS 137 joined the search , to no avail . Stornest 's crew of 29 and ten gunners were lost at sea . 
 A week later Captain Matthew Moran was fatally injured while boarding at the Dublin quayside , when the gangway collapsed beneath him . He was replaced by Captain Eric Jones ( see Crew ) . 
 = = = Encounter with U @-@ 650 = = = 
 On 14 May 1943 , Irish Oak was en route from Tampa , Florida , to Dublin with a cargo of 8 @,@ 000 tons of phosphate fertiliser . Smoke from an allied convoy was visible ahead in the distance ; in general Irish ships were sailing out @-@ of @-@ convoy at this time . 
 At <unk> German U @-@ boat U @-@ 650 came alongside . There was no contact or exchange between the vessels . They continued alongside each other all afternoon . At nightfall Irish Oak turned on her lights , in accordance with her neutral status . Apparently satisfied , U @-@ 650 departed during the night . Irish Oak continued sailing astern of Convoy SC 129 . 
 As it happened , on the same day U @-@ 642 reported that an aircraft carrier ( the escort carrier HMS Biter with the 5th Escort Group ) was joining the convoy ; in fear of the aircraft , the stalking U @-@ boats were ordered to " break off operations against convoy " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As dawn broke next morning , 15 May 1943 , a torpedo hit Irish Oak at 8 : <unk> ( 12 : 19 German Summer Time ) . Two torpedoes were launched , one missed , the other struck her port side and exploded . 
 At the time it was uncertain which submarine had launched the torpedoes . Its periscope remained visible as lifeboats were lowered . The submarine waited until the lifeboats were well clear before firing a coup de grâce at 9 : 31 am . Irish Plane , Irish Rose and Irish Ash responded to the SOS . The survivors were located by Irish Plane at 4 : 20 pm . 
 Irish Oak lies in position 47 ° 51 ′ N 25 ° 53 ′ W , almost midway between Newfoundland and Ireland . 
 = = = Landfall = = = 
 The survivors landed at Cobh on 19 May . They were welcomed by Samuel Roycroft , a director of both the Limerick Steamship Company and of Irish Shipping Limited . They lunched at the Imperial Hotel , Cork . On arrival in Dublin on 21 May , they were welcomed by Peadar Doyle , the Lord Mayor , and hosted to lunch at Leinster House , home of the Dáil Éireann ( Ireland 's parliament ) , on 24 May . 
 It was common practice for crews ' wages to be stopped when a ship was sunk . Famed Labour leader James Larkin raised the issue of the survivors ' treatment in the Dáil Éireann . Citing the crew member who was told by the Labour exchange to ' go and get his record card ' , which was lost when Irish Oak sank , he suggested that the Dáil Éireann ask the German Consul @-@ General to send a submarine to retrieve it . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = British = = = 
 At the time it was not known which submarine had sunk Irish Oak . The survivors knew only that it was not U @-@ 650 . In the House of Commons Sir William Davidson called for a formal protest , because Irish Oak had not warned the convoy , and Douglas Lloyd Savory called for an end of coal exports to Ireland . 
 No official action was taken : Ireland was exporting food to Britain at the time . Also , Paul Emrys @-@ Evans revealed that the convoy knew about the U @-@ boat ; the British stance was that , as it already knew of the presence of both Irish Oak and U @-@ 607 , there was no need for Irish Oak to have warned the convoy . 
 = = = Irish = = = 
 During World War I the South Arklow Lightvessel Guillemot , operated by the Commissioners of Irish Lights , had given warning of a U @-@ boat . In consequence on 28 March 1917 UC @-@ 65 surfaced , ordered the crew into their lifeboat , and sank the Guillemot . Against this background the sinking of Irish Oak became a hotly debated issue . 
 The Irish Government 's stance was that Irish Oak had not warned the Allied convoy of a U @-@ boat presence , as stated by Éamon de Valera in the Dáil , and by Irish Shipping Limited . De Valera went on to say that it was " ... no business of Irish ships to give any information to anyone " . 
 A rumour to the contrary was picked up by the Irish Labour Party . James Everett asked : " Was information given to the British convoy that a submarine was sighted the night before ? " Discussion in the Dáil during the run @-@ up to the General Election , focused on the possibility that a warning had been transmitted and demands were made to know the nationality of the captain ( a British subject ) : 
 Bill Norton : " Would the Taoiseach state the nationality of the master of the ship ? " 
 Éamon de Valera : " I do not know it . " 
 James Hickey : " I think the Taoiseach should take a deep interest in finding out the nationality of the captains of our ships . " 
 William Davin : " Is the Taoiseach aware that a recommendation was submitted that Irish nationals should get preference for these ships ? " 
 Norton , Hickey and Davin were Labour Party members . 
 Luke Duffy , secretary of the Labour Party , said that the " ... government was guilty of duplicity and near belligerency behind a facade of neutrality . They had placed foreign nationals on the bridge of Irish ships ... " . The party issued an advertisement condemning the " criminal conduct of the Fianna Fáil Government in sending brave men to their doom on the Irish Oak " . 
 Responding to allegations that Irish Oak had acted in such a way as to endanger her neutral status , Irish Shipping Limited stated : 
 " ... whether ... any information had been conveyed to a British convoy that a submarine had been sighted . The company states in the most explicit manner that there is no foundation whatever for the suggestion contained in the question . No such message was sent . 
 Seán <unk> ( Fianna Fáil Party ) placed a counter advertisement in the Irish Times titled " Licence to Sink , " saying that the Labour Party sought to justify the sinking of the Irish Oak ; " But for these ships many of our people might have been hungry , would have been idle " ... " If our people were hungry and idle they would be more ready to listen to their pernicious doctrines " . 
 After the election William Davin complained of " the unfounded allegations and the slanderous and libellous statements made against members of this { sic Labour } Party " ... " had the audacity to charge members of this Party , during the recent election campaign , with having condoned the sinking of the Irish Oak . Could anything be more scandalous , or more untrue ? " 
 Although Labour increased its representation and de Valera 's Fianna Fáil party lost seats in the General Election , Éamon de Valera remained in power with the support of the Farmers ' Party . 
 = = = American = = = 
 It was not known at the time which submarine had sunk Irish Oak , only that it was not U @-@ 650 . Irish Shipping Limited was negotiating a lease of the SS Wolverine from the United States . The U.S. State Department intervened , asking why Ireland had not protested to Germany for the sinking . 
 The Irish replied that they protested other sinkings when the attacker was known . They protested the attacks on the colliers Glencullen and Glencree . They referred to the attack on the MV Kerlogue by two unidentified aircraft , initially denied by the British but admitted when shell fragments of British manufacture were found . 
 No further American ships were leased or sold to Ireland . 
 = = = German = = = 
 Not until after the war was it learned U @-@ 607 had sunk Irish Oak . This action , and U @-@ 607 's report , were not well received . Her Captain , Oberleutnant zur See Wolf Jeschonnek , claimed Irish Oak was a Q @-@ ship with false Irish markings , sailing without lights . 
 " The Second Lieutenant excused the sinking by saying that " IRISH OAK " was obviously a " Q " ship . He alleged that she was sailing at night without lights , zigzagging , and travelling at fourteen knots , although she appeared capable of barely half that speed . " 
 Flag Officer U @-@ boats said it ought not to have happened , but could be attributed to an understandable mistake by an eager captain . " The precise observance of Irish neutrality and of all Flag Officer U @-@ boats ' strict orders in this connection is the duty of all U @-@ boat captains and is in the most immediate and pressing interests of the German Reich " . 
 U @-@ 607 was sunk , while in convoy with two other U @-@ boats , in the Bay of Biscay on 13 July 1943 by a Sunderland flying boat of 228 Squadron Royal Air Force , assisted by a Halifax of 58 Squadron . Oberleutnant Jeschonnek and six of his crew were taken prisoner ; the rest perished . 
 Nine days after the sinking of Irish Oak , on 24 May 1943 , Admiral Dönitz ordered a U @-@ boat withdrawal from the Atlantic . Of their operational fleet , 41 U @-@ boats – or 25 % – had been lost in Black May , against a total of 50 Allied merchant ships destroyed . The Battle of the Atlantic was over . 
 = = Crew = = 
 The crew of the Irish Oak when she was sunk on 15 May 1943 , all of whom were rescued : 
 Eric Jones had been captain of the SS <unk> when it was sunk by gunfire from U @-@ 46 on 4 September 1940 . He then captained the SS <unk> , which was bombed on 17 October 1941 . 
 Thomas Donohue ( Second Mate ) went on to captain MV Kerlogue , replacing Desmond Fortune who was unable to walk following the RAF attack on it . 
 James Burke ( Radio Officer ) had served on SS Oropesa which was torpedoed and sunk by U @-@ 96 , with 106 lives lost . 
 = = Official Numbers , Code Letters and Call Signs = = 
 Official Numbers , a forerunner to IMO Numbers , were : 
 West Neris - United States Official Number <unk> . 
 Irish Oak - United Kingdom Official Number <unk> . 
 Code Letters : 
 West Neris - <unk> until 1933 . 
 Call signs , the replacement of code letters from 1934 : <unk> from 1934 . 
 Irish Oak - <unk> . 
 = = Other ships named Irish Oak = = 
 In 1949 , Irish Shipping Limited acquired a new Irish Oak ( Official Number <unk> ) . Built for ISL by J. <unk> and Sons Ltd . , South Shields ; Bill Norton complained that it was to be British built . It would be immortalised in Frank McCourt ’ s book “ ’ Tis ” . In 1967 she was sold to <unk> Shipping of Greece and renamed Vegas . In 1979 , en route from Piraeus to Vietnam , she ran aground near Jeddah , was re @-@ floated but sold for breaking up . 
 In 1973 , Irish Shipping Limited acquired another Irish Oak , a bulk carrier motor ship with a diesel engine . Irish Oak , 16 @,@ 704 GRT , 25 @,@ 649 DWT , was in service with Irish Shipping until 1982 . 
 = Jim Gannon = 
 James Paul " Jim " Gannon ( born 7 September 1968 ) is a former footballer who is now manager of National League North side Stockport County . He started and finished his career as a player in Ireland , but made most of his professional appearances in the English Football League at Stockport County , where supporters elected him as a member of the Hall of Fame . 
 Gannon began his playing career at Dundalk , but moved to English club Sheffield United in 1989 . The next year he transferred to Stockport County , following a short loan spell with Halifax Town . He spent the next ten years at Stockport , becoming one of the club 's most loyal servants , and helped the club to second @-@ place finishes in both the Second Division and Fourth Division , as well as two Football League Trophy finals . After leaving the club in 2000 , he spent a season with Crewe Alexandra , before returning to Ireland with Shelbourne , winning two League of Ireland Premier Division titles in his three years there . 
 Starting a career in management , he took charge of his first club Dundalk in 2004 . After a season in Ireland he returned to Stockport County as manager . There he led the club to promotion from League Two via the play @-@ offs in 2008 . Leading County to safety in League One despite a ten @-@ point deduction for entering administration , he lost his job as part of a cost @-@ cutting measure . Heading to Scottish Premier League side Motherwell , he managed the club in the Europa League , but left after just 25 games in charge . He took charge of Championship side Peterborough United in 2010 , but stayed at the struggling club for only two months , turning down a four @-@ year contract . In January 2011 he was appointed manager of Port Vale , but lasted just ten weeks in the job . He returned to Stockport in November 2011 , as the club 's director of football and manager , before being sacked in January 2013 . He took charge at Northwich Victoria in December 2013 . He spent just over two years with Northwich before returning to manage Stockport County for the third time in January 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gannon was born in Southwark , South London and moved with his family to Ireland at a young age . He considers himself to be ' a working class Irish Catholic ' . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1987 he received his start in higher level football with Irish club Turlough O 'Connor 's Dundalk . Whilst with the club he played in both the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup , in a highly successful period in the club 's history . During his spell at the club they did the Irish double , winning both the FAI Cup and topping the League of Ireland Premier Division in 1987 – 88 . His performances for Dundalk earned him a £ 70 @,@ 000 move to Sheffield United in April 1989 . However he was unable to break into the first team at Bramall Lane . He spent a brief time in 1989 – 90 on loan at struggling Halifax Town , making two appearances for the " <unk> " . 
 = = = Stockport County = = = 
 In 1990 he moved to Stockport County , who paid United between £ 40 @,@ 000 and £ 75 @,@ 000 for his services . He remained at the club for ten years , during which the club would win promotion on two occasions , and make four Wembley appearances . On 10 March 1993 , Gannon verbally abused Stoke City player Mark Stein , who reacted by assaulting Gannon . Gannon made a formal complaint to the police and as a result Stein was later required to appear in court for the attack . The two players ' confrontation continued the following month after Gannon 's then @-@ girlfriend spat at Stein in a post @-@ match interview . Stein was given a conditional discharge after the court accepted he was under " extreme provocation " from what he claimed was racial abuse . During his early days at the club Gannon was criticised by supporters for his performances , but he soon won them over after moving from centre @-@ half to become a goalscoring midfielder . Stockport fans named him ' The Ghost ' , due to his knack of ' ghosting ' in at the back of the box to score from crosses . He was also nicknamed ' Big Jimbo ' . 
 In 1990 – 91 , County achieved promotion from the Fourth Division as runners @-@ up . In 1992 he made his first trip to Wembley Stadium , as Stockport lost 1 – 0 to Stoke City in the Football League Trophy final . During the same season , Stockport also reached the Third Division play @-@ off Final , but were defeated at Wembley . The following year , County again reached the League Trophy Final , but lost 2 – 1 to Port Vale . In January 1994 Gannon joined Notts County on a brief loan spell to help him overcome some personal problems . Returning to Stockport , he finished the season with his fourth trip to Wembley in two years , as County were denied promotion from the Second Division by a 2 – 1 defeat to Burnley . The team finally achieved promotion from the division in 1996 – 97 as runners @-@ up . This promotion was built on a strong defence , of which Gannon and fellow centre @-@ back Sean Connelly were a major part . The following season , County achieved an eighth @-@ place finish in the First Division . He played under the management of Danny Bergara , Dave Jones , Gary Megson , and Andy Kilner . 
 On 21 March 2000 , during a game with Manchester City , he ruptured his anterior cruciate ligaments , keeping him out of action for several months . He was awarded a testimonial against Manchester City in August 2000 , but got into a dispute with the club over the financial arrangements . He then left the club in November 2000 , and issued employment tribunal proceedings for unfair dismissal . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 The following month he joined Dario Gradi 's Crewe Alexandra on non @-@ contract terms . After ten games with Crewe , he returned to Ireland . 
 Following a break from football to obtain qualifications in accountancy , Gannon signed with Shelbourne in August 2001 . Despite being appointed as captain upon his arrival , he initially struggled to get into the first team during the 2001 – 02 League Championship winning season , and considered a move back to England . However he found himself a key member of the defence when new manager Pat Fenlon took over . Under Fenlon , Gannon helped the " <unk> " to a second @-@ place finish in 2002 – 03 , and also played in the 2002 – 03 UEFA Champions League qualifying rounds , scoring past Hibernians in a 2 – 2 draw at the Ta ' Qali National Stadium . He did not feature extensively in the club 's 2003 League Championship winning side . 
 Gannon holds a unique record , having scored in all four English divisions , the FA Cup , the Football League Cup , the Full Members Cup , the English League play @-@ offs , the League of Ireland , the FAI Cup , the League of Ireland Cup , and the UEFA Champions League . He has received two distinguished honours from Stockport 's supporters since leaving the club – being elected to the Stockport Hall of Fame and as Honorary Vice President of the Hatters Independent Supporters Club . His 479 club appearances puts him in third spot in Stockport 's all @-@ time appearance list and his 65 goals are ninth in their scoring records . 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = Dundalk = = = 
 In June 2004 he was appointed to his first managerial post , taking charge of Dundalk , who were also the first club in Gannon 's professional playing career . The side finished sixth in the League of Ireland First Division in the 2004 season . On 14 November 2005 , Gannon confirmed his resignation from Dundalk after his position had been called into question as his chief supporters , vice @-@ chairman Tom Baldwin and chief executive Sean Connolly , left the club . This left Dundalk without a manager for their final match of the 2005 season , in which they had already secured a comfortable mid @-@ table position in Ireland 's second tier of association football . Prior to Gannon 's departure , the team had drawn ten consecutive matches . 
 = = = Stockport County = = = 
 = = = = 2005 – 06 = = = = 
 In November 2005 , Gannon was appointed as director of Stockport County 's centre of excellence for girls . After the resignation of Chris Turner as Stockport County manager on Boxing Day 2005 , Gannon was appointed as caretaker manager with the team nine points adrift of safety at the bottom of League Two , facing potential relegation from the Football League . 
 County went undefeated in Gannon 's first four league games in charge . After three weeks , this upturn in results saw Gannon offered the job full @-@ time , which allowed him to guide County to safety . The club won more than twice as many points in the second half of the season than they did in the first . Believing that safety would be assured on the final day of the season , he was proved correct as they managed to avoid relegation with a final day draw with champions Carlisle United . Comparisons were made to Sam Allardyce . As a committed Stockport fan , and already a legend at the club for his ten years as a player , he was loved by many County supporters . After delaying talks , he accepted a one @-@ year rolling contract in the summer . 
 = = = = 2006 – 07 = = = = 
 At the beginning of the 2006 – 07 season , Gannon and Stockport announced they had drawn up a five @-@ year plan to take the club to the Championship . Results on the field followed this statement of intent , with Gannon leading County to a League record nine consecutive victories without conceding a goal . Gannon lodged a complaint with The Football Association against Bristol Rovers when a fixture was postponed due to a waterlogged pitch , as he felt not enough was done to ready the pitch , and also a complaint with regard to the referee 's handling of the situation . Gannon was later incensed with the FA when the same referee was allowed to take charge of the postponed fixture , which Rovers won 2 – 1 . Gannon also branded approaches from Manchester City and Liverpool questionable and unprofessional after the two Premier League clubs swooped for youngsters being trained in Stockport County 's development squads . 
 During the season , Gannon and Stockport began to form a close relationship with Alan Lord , the founder of Football Development School <unk> . Anthony Pilkington , who began to feature in County 's first team in the second half of this season , was developed through Lord 's school . At the end of the season , Lord was taken on at County as a scout and development team coach ; he would later follow Gannon to Motherwell . 
 County missed out on the League Two play @-@ offs due to results on the final day of the season , missing out on goal difference despite a 5 – 0 victory over Darlington . 
 = = = = 2007 – 08 = = = = 
 The 2007 – 08 season started with a friendly marking the death of Danny Bergara , the manager who had brought Gannon to County as a player in 1990 . The friendly was against Cardiff City , managed by Dave Jones , who also managed County whilst Gannon was a player at the club . 
 On 12 February , Gannon had to leave his father critically ill in hospital in Ireland to lead his team out to a 4 – 1 victory over Rotherham United . Later in the year Gannon publicly criticised Paul Ince and the MK Dons after he felt the " Dons " were poor sports in their 3 – 2 victory over County that ensured Ince 's side promotion out of the division . 
 County finished the 2007 – 08 season fourth in the league , and subsequently won their play @-@ off semi @-@ final against Wycombe Wanderers 2 – 1 on aggregate . The club had previously visited Wembley four times , and Gannon had played on all four occasions . He did as a manager what he could never do as a player , and guided Stockport victory at Wembley . The 3 – 2 win over Rochdale earned Gannon 's club promotion to League One . He refused to give a post @-@ match interview to Sky Sports following a nine @-@ month dispute with the company over a broken <unk> . Nevertheless , having quickly taken Stockport from the foot of League Two and into League One on a meagre budget , Gannon had established himself as one of the most highly rated young managers in the lower leagues . In the summer he sold Liam Dickinson to Derby County for £ 750 @,@ 000 – a player signed by previous manager , Chris Turner from Woodley Sports for a nominal fee just over two years previous . 
 = = = = 2008 – 09 = = = = 
 Gannon led County to an impressive start to the season following their promotion , and they spent Christmas in the play @-@ off places with the best away record in the division . The new year started uncomfortably for Gannon ; with media speculation linking him with a move away from Edgeley Park , and the club announcing they were in financial difficulty , he took interviews reassuring fans of his intent to stick by County . Gannon stuck to his one @-@ year rolling deal after rejecting new contract offers from the club . 
 After a touch @-@ line argument with then @-@ club captain Gareth Owen , Gannon gave a forthright interview explaining that disciplinary action would be taken , and Owen would be stripped of the captaincy . Owen , who was later released by the club , did not play another game for County . Meanwhile , Gannon was left threatening police action over a strong challenge that left Stockport striker Matty McNeil unconscious and in hospital . 
 On 24 February 2009 Stockport agreed to allow Gannon to hold talks with Brighton & Hove Albion , who were seeking to fill the managerial position left vacant by Micky Adams . He suggested that his family would play a large part in his decision to move clubs , with Stockport 's financial troubles looming but uprooting his family to move to Brighton being undesirable . Gannon was made favourite to be given the job by several bookmakers , and he met with Brighton chairman Dick Knight on the 25th , before announcing on the 26th that he had chosen not to take the job . Knight had indicated that Gannon was his first choice for the job , and former Stockport players now at Brighton had shown their desire for Gannon to be given the job . However , Gannon turned down the opportunity and vowed stay with at the Edgeley Park club . 
 During the final weeks of the season , County were placed into Administration and docked 10 points , leaving them placed dangerously close to the relegation places . On 6 May 2009 , soon after the final game of the season , Gannon was made redundant as manager of Stockport along with assistant boss Peter Ward . This was done by the administrators in order to slash the wage bill . 
 = = = Motherwell = = = 
 As speculation of a move to Hibernian came to nothing ( despite his being installed as the bookmaker 's favourite ) , Gannon instead was confirmed as manager of Scottish Premier League side Motherwell at the end of June 2009 , two days before the club 's Europa League first round qualifying tie against Llanelli of Wales . To do this he fended off competition from Aidy Boothroyd , Lawrie Sanchez , and Steve Staunton . At the start of his reign he had a limited squad , and had to draft in youth players for the Llanelli game . The club had sold off some of their best players , whilst loan deals had ended for others . He also brought in Peter Ward as assistant manager . 
 " He has a very very good tactical sense , he is a great motivator of players , he works particularly well with young players and brings them on , which is important at a club the size of Motherwell , and he has boundless enthusiasm " . 
 After taking the job , Gannon said that he hoped to bring in up to six players , most of them from England to bolster a squad threadbare after summer exits . On 2 July , his first game in charge in the Europa League first round qualifying first leg , Motherwell lost 1 – 0 against Llanelli . However , on the away leg in Wales , the " <unk> " recorded a 3 – 0 win to send them into the next round . Motherwell then beat <unk> Vlorë 8 – 2 on aggregate after an 8 – 1 victory in the home leg . Motherwell were then knocked out by Romanian side FC Steaua București 6 – 1 on aggregate . Gannon was sent to the stand in Motherwell 's Europa League match against Bucharest ; however Gannon later stated he did not know why he , or his assistant manager were sent off by Spanish referee Carlos Clos Gómez . His first league victory was a 3 – 1 win over Kilmarnock at Fir Park . 
 Gannon was named Manager of the Month for October 2009 , but he warned of a clear out in the January transfer window . His young team impressed , but proved to be inconsistent . Gannon had a dispute with the SFA head of referee development Hugh Dallas , following Gannon 's criticism of Scottish referees . Gannon had claimed the standard of refereeing was " bringing the game into disrepute " . He suggested a league table for referees . He then felt the official response to his criticisms to be disrespectful . Following this he temporarily refused to speak to the media , claiming he did not wish to cause further controversy . He also criticised his predecessor Mark McGhee , after McGhee speculated in the press on possible transfers of Motherwell players . As well as this he had a public @-@ falling out with club captain Stephen <unk> . 
 On 28 December , Gannon was sacked by Motherwell , with the club indicating that Gannon was " not fully committed to the club " as the reason for their decision . He had been rumoured to be looking for other jobs . Gannon was reportedly working under a temporary contract , and was yet to sign a longer term deal as had been expected . Though the board were satisfied with results on the pitch , they felt that the relationship between Gannon and the directors had broken down . Dubbed a ' loose Gannon ' , it was seen that either he or club captain <unk> would leave the club . Despite this he was praised for his signings from the English leagues , and for the good open passing football his young side could play whilst at their best . Motherwell went on to finish the season in fifth place under Craig Brown . 
 = = = Peterborough United = = = 
 On 2 February 2010 Gannon was appointed manager of Peterborough United , following the sacking of Mark Cooper . The " Posh " lay bottom of the Championship , nine points adrift of safety . He aimed to restore ' pride ' in the club , and offered a fresh start to unsettled players . He won his first game in charge , leading The Posh to a 1 – 0 victory over QPR on 6 February . His contract due to expire in the summer , the club were keen to tie him down to a longer deal . There soon came confusion over the exact role of the manager and others at the club in terms of recruiting new players . 
 He utilised unique tactical formations , which earned him comparisons to Martin O 'Neill . He was particularly experimental with the front line , and was willing to use the loan market to bring in fresh talent . On 24 March , it was announced Gannon would leave Peterborough at the end of the season . Unable to avoid relegation despite a vast upturn in results , he announced that family commitments made him unwilling to stay for longer . Gannon had been satisfied with the board 's contract offer , but his family still resided in Stockport . He was replaced by Gary Johnson on 6 April , following Gannon 's own recommendation of Johnson . Though Gannon insisted that this was not ultimately his decision , but instead was down to the board . Striker Liam Dickinson was sad to seem him go , and told the media that Gannon would have little trouble finding a new management post . 
 = = = Port Vale = = = 
 In January 2011 , Gannon was one of three candidates reported to have impressed in interviews for the vacant Port Vale job , making him one of the favourites for the position . However , Paul Simpson 's dismissal at Stockport County led to hopes of a return to the club for some County fans . Therefore , he was installed as the bookies favourite to become the next Port Vale manager , and also the bookie 's favourite for the Stockport job . Gannon was confirmed as the manager of Port Vale on 6 January 2011 , succeeding Micky Adams at the helm of the promotion chasing club , signing a contract that lasted until summer 2012 . Saying that finishing outside of the top seven would be a failure , the Cheshire @-@ based manager 's first task after ' burying the hatchet ' with Gareth Owen was to look for a new striker . Two weeks into his reign club captain Tommy Fraser left the club by mutual consent , as signs of what would be an unhappy relationship between club and manager quickly came to the surface . Gannon then brought in Romaine Sawyers and <unk> Brown on loan from West Bromwich Albion , Jay O 'Shea on loan from Birmingham City , Exodus Geohaghon on loan from Peterborough United , and striker Tom Pope on loan from Rotherham United . 
 Losing four of his first five games in charge , Gannon was forced to respond to criticism over his team selections and substitutions , and announced plans to expand the club 's non @-@ playing staff . On 1 February the players met with the Chairman and rumours spread that Gannon had ' lost the dressing room ' , as comparisons were made with the tenure of Brian Clough in The Damned United . Yet the next day an O 'Shea volley gave Vale a 1 – 0 win over promotion rivals Rotherham United to give Gannon his first win in charge at the club . However tension remained , as proven at the end of the month when it was reported that Gannon left the team bus on a pre @-@ match journey after rowing with assistant manager Geoff Horsfield . Gannon had previously told the press his staff were ' underqualified ' , though insisted any changes would be ' implemented at a later stage ' and that Horsfield was a ' great assistant ' . It was later reported in the national media that Horsfield had requested a day off to deal with a family matter , Gannon then granted him permission but subsequently wrote a letter to the board complaining of his conduct . An unnamed director then handed the letter to Horsfield , who confronted Gannon over the issue , brandishing the letter as proof when Gannon denied its existence . This came on the same day that local paper The Sentinel ran an editorial that questioned his loan signings , his decision to drop Gary Roberts and branded his tactics and team selections as baffling . Having returned to the team to steer his side to a 2 – 1 victory over Aldershot , Gannon said " there 's been misrepresentation in the media over my part in this . I 'm completely the innocent party " . The club informed Horsfield that he would face a disciplinary hearing , whilst Gannon would not be asked to defend his actions and would merely provide a witness statement . The club took no action , and after Horsfield spent two weeks at home the pair returned to work as before . He continued to exploit the loan market , signing Dominic Blizzard from Bristol Rovers , a midfielder who played under him at Stockport . 
 Results continued to go against the Vale though , as on 19 March they lost 3 – 0 at Accrington Stanley , and as a result dropped out of the play @-@ off zone for the first time in the season . Ugly post @-@ match scenes at the Crown Ground saw Geohaghon confront fans who singled him out for abuse , whilst Gannon was ushered quietly out of the back door . Roberts told the media " I don 't think the manager likes me and , to be honest , I don 't like him " . Rumours circulated that Gannon would soon be on his way out . These rumours were proved accurate two days later , as Gannon 's departure was confirmed by the club . Hugely unpopular with Vale supporters , his sacking was " quick and with little emotion " , whilst his poor man @-@ management skills helped to earn him the dubious honour of having the shortest reign in the club 's history . Despite this he did receive credit for spotting the potential talent in a teenage Sam <unk> , and for bringing Tom Pope to the club . Gannon himself made a statement on his website declaring his disappointment in the club 's decision to terminate his contract after such a short period of time , and also bemoaned that he " wasn 't able to add many new players [ to the squad ] " . The " Valiants " continued to struggle under caretaker manager Mark Grew , winning just two of their remaining ten games , and finishing 2010 – 11 in eleventh place . 
 = = = Return to Stockport County = = = 
 Following the resignation of Dietmar Hamann in November 2011 , speculation came of a return to Stockport County for Gannon ; when questioned on the possibility , club chairman Lord Snape stated that should he apply for the position then " he 'd merit very serious consideration " . In the thirty months since Gannon 's departure , the club had seen five full @-@ time managers come and go , suffered relegation into the Conference National , and had not won back @-@ to @-@ back games since February 2009 . On 14 November , he was revealed as the club 's director of football , a position leaving him " responsible for all football matters including 1st team selection and transfers " ; Willie McStay remained at the club , as his assistant . When he took charge Stockport were seventeenth in the league , just two points above the relegation zone , having won just three of their opening twenty games . He stated that his aim for 2011 – 12 was to avoid letting the club slip to a third successive relegation . 
 After losing his first five games in charge , including a 7 – 0 thumping from Grimsby Town at Blundell Park , Gannon admitted that the club 's finances limited his ability to change personnel . He also stated that " if I didn 't take the job , this club would 've had a real chance of dying ... I 'm not proud to be the manager of a club that loses 7 – 0 ... but this is my team now ... It has always been my club , so it 's my responsibility to make things better , and over time we will . " He released striker Antonio German , defender Chris Blackburn , and seven goal top @-@ scorer Nick Chadwick in the January transfer window . He then signed defender Joe Connor on non @-@ contract terms , and teenagers Aaron Cole and Danny Rowe on loan . His first win in his second spell at the club came on New Year 's Day , in a 3 – 2 victory over Barrow at Edgeley Park . He then re @-@ signed former players Paul Turnbull and Matty Mainwaring on loan . Worried by the situation at crisis clubs Darlington and Kettering Town , Gannon cancelled the contracts of veterans Matt Glennon , John Miles , Mark Lynch , and Ryan McCann . He brought in 23 @-@ year @-@ old Telford defender Sean Newton and 18 @-@ year @-@ old Sunderland keeper Lewis King on loan , whilst signing 19 @-@ year @-@ old Lancaster City midfielder Danny Hattersley on a permanent transfer . The " Hatters " secured their Conference status with two games to spare , after a 1 – 1 home draw with Braintree Town on 14 April , having lost just twice in the league at Edgeley Park since Gannon 's return . Stockport finished the campaign in 16th place , 10 points above the drop and 20 points below the play @-@ off zone . 
 In preparation for the 2012 – 13 season , Gannon signed defenders Sean Newton and James Tunnicliffe , and took back Paul Turnbull on loan once again . However he was disappointed to lose striker Tom Elliott , who rejected a contract offer to switch to Cambridge United . He also appointed long @-@ time associate Alan Lord as his assistant . However County found themselves struggling in the league , and Gannon blamed the predicament on the board 's decision to slash the wage budget in the summer . An angry Lord Snape told the press that " I 'm getting pretty fed up of watching part @-@ time teams beat Stockport County . Changes are going to be made unless things improve . Jim Gannon 's pretty good at telling me how this club should be run . Well I 'm going to tell him that I 'm not impressed by the way the team is being run . If we lose a couple of our next games , we 're in a relegation battle with a much bigger budget than most of the teams down there with us , which quite frankly is not good enough . " Fourteen months into his second spell at Edgeley Park and with County sitting in the relegation zone , Gannon was relieved of his duties as Stockport manager on 16 January 2013 following the 3 – 1 home defeat by Mansfield Town . 
 = = = Northwich Victoria = = = 
 On 9 December 2013 it was announced that Gannon would become the new manager of Northern Premier League Division One North side Northwich Victoria . He replaced Lee Ashcroft , who resigned as manager and became director of football after picking up a ten match ban for sexist abuse . The " <unk> " ended the 2013 – 14 season in ninth place . They reached the play @-@ offs in the 2014 – 15 campaign , losing to Bamber Bridge at the semi @-@ final stage . He took the club on a successful FA Cup run in the 2015 – 16 campaign , leaving them as the lowest rank team in the competition when they were knocked out by League Two side Northampton Town in the Second Round . Northwich had led 2 – 0 with eight minutes to play before a late comeback from Northampton . 
 = = = Third spell at Stockport County = = = 
 Gannon became manager of Stockport County , now in the National League North , for the third time in his career on 18 January 2016 . Gannon started off well , taking the team to the Cheshire Senior Cup final and up to ninth in the table with a sequence of seven games unbeaten , including five victories , in the run up to Easter . 
 = = Managerial style = = 
 Gannon is one of few managers in the lower leagues to hold a full UEFA Pro Licence . 
 <unk> himself on playing flowing football in the lower leagues of the English game , Gannon has repeatedly spoken out against clubs he feels play too physically , and referees he feels do not give his players enough protection . As a manager in England , Scotland and Ireland , his teams have picked up fair play awards . He has stated that this fair play approach is based on his belief that it is " good principles that lead to good football " . 
 " My philosophy is good passing football , it is how I believe the game should be played and it brings out the best in players . It inspires them and motivates them to play football in the right manner . " 
 Gannon has also been called a ' tactical maverick ' due to his unusual formations . These formations include 3 – 4 – 1 – 2 , 4 – 3 – 2 – 1 , 4 – 1 – 2 – 3 , and his preferred set @-@ up of 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 . He has stated that he prefers formations that use four lines of players ( as opposed to three lines in the classic 4 – 4 – 2 ) due to the added depth in defence and presence in midfield , and was inspired to use the formations by Carlo Ancelotti . He has also stated that he prefers the 4 – 3 – 3 formation to the 4 – 4 – 2 formation , and has criticised the way he perceives 4 – 4 – 2 to be ' ingrained in the culture ' of English football . He is known to be extremely thorough and meticulous in preparing his players for games . 
 Of an outspoken nature , he has had public <unk> out with players , referees , chairmen , opposition players and managers , and authorities . The Guardian surmised this by saying that " the feeling about Gannon is that it is His Way or the Highway . " 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Playing statistics = = = 
 Sourced from Jim Gannon profile at the English National Football Archive ( subscription required ) 
 = = = Managerial statistics = = = 
 As of match played 27 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = As player = = = 
 Dundalk 
 League of Ireland Premier Division champion : 1987 – 88 
 FAI Cup winner : 1988 
 Stockport County 
 Football League Second Division runner @-@ up : 1996 – 97 
 Football League Fourth Division runner @-@ up : 1990 – 91 
 Football League Trophy runner @-@ up : 1992 , 1993 
 Shelbourne 
 League of Ireland Premier Division : 2001 – 02 , 2003 
 League of Ireland Premier Division runner @-@ up : 2002 – 03 
 = = = As manager = = = 
 Stockport County 
 Football League Two play @-@ offs winner : 2008 
 Cheshire Senior Cup winner : 2016 
 Individual 
 Scottish Premier League Manager of the Month : October 2009 
 = Tim Cross = 
 Major General Timothy Cross , CBE ( born 19 April 1951 ) is a retired British Army officer and military logistics expert . He was commissioned in 1971 into the Royal Army Ordnance Corps and went on to serve in Germany , Northern Ireland and Cyprus , interspersed with staff duties and further education . He was posted to Paris in 1984 , where he was involved in the development of the MILAN anti @-@ tank weapon , before returning to his regiment as a company commander . He took command of 1 Ordnance Battalion in 1990 and was tasked with running logistics for 1st Armoured Division during the Gulf War . He went on to serve as Commander , Logistic Support for 3rd Infantry Division in 1992 . 
 Cross served his first of three tours in the Balkans , attached to the Implementation Force ( IFOR ) , in 1995 – 1996 . His second was in 1997 , with the Stabilisation Force ( SFOR ) , where he commanded 101 Logistic Brigade , and his third in 1999 with the Kosovo Force ( KFOR ) . During his tour with KFOR , he was responsible for co @-@ ordinating multinational troops and civilian agencies in establishing refugee camps in the aftermath of the Kosovo War . He was later appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) for his service with KFOR . Cross was promoted to major general ( two @-@ star rank in NATO terms ) in 2000 and served as Director General , Defence Supply Chain until 2002 , when he became involved in planning for the forthcoming invasion of Iraq . He was the most senior British officer involved in the planning and in the Coalition Provisional Authority . 
 His last command was as General Officer Commanding , Theatre Troops , Iraq . Since retiring from the Army in 2007 , Cross has been critical of the planning for Iraq after the removal of Saddam Hussein 's government , giving evidence to the Iraq Inquiry that he urged politicians to delay the invasion and calling the post @-@ war planning " woefully thin " . He serves as an advisor to the House of Commons Defence Select Committee and to several private companies , and is a visiting lecturer at several British universities . A convert to Christianity , he is a licensed lay reader in the Church of England and affiliated with several Christian organisations . Cross is married , with three children . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cross is the son of Sidney George and Patricia Mary Cross . Having always wanted to be a soldier , he applied to join the Army at the age of fourteen , but was rejected due to his age . He joined the Army Cadet Force in 1964 and , after his secondary education , was accepted to study at Welbeck Defence Sixth Form College , before attending the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in 1969 . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 Cross started at Sandhurst in 1969 and was commissioned into the Royal Army Ordnance Corps as a second lieutenant on 30 July 1971 . His first tour was in West Germany , with the British Army of the Rhine ( BAOR ) in 1971 , after which he undertook an in @-@ service degree at the Royal Military College of Science ( now part of the Defence College of Management and Technology ) . He was promoted to lieutenant in 1973 . Having graduated as a Bachelor of Science in 1975 , he served a tour with 22 Air Defence Regiment , Royal Artillery , with responsibility for the regiment 's new Rapier missiles . Promoted to captain in 1977 , he went on to train as an Ammunition Technical Officer ( ATO ) and was posted to Northern Ireland in 1978 , where he was involved in explosive ordnance disposal along with inspection duties . 
 Returning to the BAOR in 1979 , Cross served as Adjutant to 1 Ordnance Battalion , before a tour in Cyprus , attached to the United Nations peace @-@ keeping force in 1981 . He studied for an MSc in guided weapons at Staff College , Camberley from 1982 to 1983 and was promoted major on 30 September 1983 . Between 1984 and 1985 , he was posted to Paris as a British liaison to the MILAN anti @-@ tank missile programme , after which he rejoined 1 Ordnance Battalion as the company commander of 12 Ordnance Company . He was promoted to lieutenant @-@ colonel on 30 June 1988 . Returning to Staff College , Camberley later that year as a member of the Directing Staff , he was heavily involved in the modernisation of the Command and Staff Course . In 1990 , Cross returned again to Germany to take command of 1 Ordnance Battalion , in which he had previously been adjutant and a company commander , and , in a double @-@ hatted post , was appointed Commander Supply , 1st Armoured Division . In the latter role , he was posted to Kuwait and later Iraq , as part of Operation Granby during the Gulf War . 
 After Iraq , Cross was appointed the first Commander , Logistic Support for 3rd Infantry Division in late 1992 . During a re @-@ organisation of the Army in 1993 , the Royal Army Ordnance Corps was amalgamated to become part of the newly formed Royal Logistic Corps ( RLC ) , into which Cross transferred and was promoted to colonel . Having completed the Higher Command and Staff Course earlier in 1995 , he returned to 3rd Division and served in Bosnia as part of NATO 's Implementation Force in 1995 and 1996 . 
 = = High command = = 
 Cross was promoted to brigadier on 30 June 1996 . He was appointed Director , Materiel Supply and Distribution ( Army ) , a post which became Director , Materiel Support ( Army ) in 1997 as a result of re @-@ organisation , based in Andover , Hampshire . At the end of 1997 , he took command of the British National Support Element in the Balkans , responsible for supplying the British contingent of the NATO @-@ led Stabilisation Force ( SFOR ) . At the same time , he commanded the Combat Service Support Group , later renamed 101 Logistic Brigade . He returned to the UK in April 1998 , only to be told that he would be returning to the Balkans in January 1999 as part of the Kosovo Force ( KFOR ) . In this role , he was responsible for the humanitarian effort in the aftermath of the Kosovo War , establishing and maintaining refugee camps in Macedonia and Albania . He was tasked with commanding multinational troops , as well as coordinating the humanitarian efforts of personnel from the British Department for International Development , United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) and multiple non @-@ governmental organisations . Speaking about his service with KFOR , he later called it a " challenging and demanding deployment " and " the first time that I have come face to face with a large @-@ scale humanitarian crisis . " He went on to say that the most challenging part was the military working alongside large numbers of civilian agencies and that the Army needed to learn how to better work with such organisations — a need he said was " widely recognised " outside the military . In recognition of his service in the Balkans , Cross was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 2000 New Year Honours List . 
 From January to August 2000 , Cross attended the Royal College of Defence Studies , after which he was promoted to major general ( two @-@ star rank ) and appointed Director General , Defence Supply Chain . While Director General , he was responsible for the establishment of the United Kingdom 's Joint Force Logistic Component for the forthcoming operations in Iraq and became involved in planning for the invasion of the country . In early 2003 , he became the British representative to the United States Department of Defense 's Office for Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance , later the Coalition Provisional Authority following the invasion , and one of three deputies to American Lieutenant General Jay Garner . 
 Cross was involved in coordinating the reconstruction of the country following the fall of Saddam Hussein 's government , and was the most senior British officer involved in post @-@ war planning for the country . Shortly after the invasion of Iraq , he appeared on BBC Breakfast with Frost , speaking to presenter Peter Sissons about his role . He praised the military campaign and went on to talk about the challenges of rebuilding the country , saying " I think in relative terms we are not as badly off as me might have feared " , but agreed that there were insufficient " people on the ground " to ensure security in the aftermath of the invasion and removal of Saddam Hussein 's government . He was later deeply critical of the planning made for post @-@ war Iraq , and stated that he attempted to raise the issue of insufficient planning with politicians . However , he was never " overly concerned " by warnings from aid agencies of a massive humanitarian crisis in the aftermath of the invasion which , in the event , never materialised , though he admitted he had been too optimistic about the state of the Iraqi infrastructure . In the Breakfast with Frost interview , he drew an analogy with London , " if you imagine going into London and every Ministry building is completely empty of furniture , completely empty of people , most of the windows blown out , just trying to find the people who work in those Ministries , the equivalent of the Home Office and [ finding ] out who worked there , getting them back to work , beginning to pay their salaries which we 're now beginning to do , and encouraging them to come back and work with us is bound to take a bit of time . " 
 Cross was given the honorary title of Colonel Commandant , Royal Logistic Corps on 5 April 2003 . On 9 October 2004 , he was appointed General Officer Commanding , Theatre Troops , Iraq — commander of all British Army combat personnel in the Iraq War . He retired from active service on 20 January 2007 , retaining the honorary title of Colonel Commandant , Royal Logistic Corps and , in April 2007 , was given the further ceremonial appointment of Honorary Colonel , 168 Pioneer Regiment ( Volunteers ) , Royal Logistic Corps . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Cross has lectured both in the UK and elsewhere since his retirement and is a visiting professor at several British universities including the University of Nottingham , University of Reading and Cranfield University . He serves as an advisor to a number of organisations . Since 2007 , he has been army advisor to the House of Commons Defence Select Committee , as well as a defence advisor for Fujitsu and other companies . He is a non @-@ executive chairman at <unk> Ltd , a British security company , and serves as a director at the Centre for International Humanitarian Cooperation and the Humanitarian International Services Group . 
 Following his retirement , Cross attacked US foreign policy on Iraq , calling the plans " fatally flawed " shortly after General Sir Mike Jackson — Chief of the General Staff at the time of the invasion and also recently retired — called the same plans " intellectually bankrupt " . In a 2009 interview , Cross praised the planning for the invasion and the removal of Saddam Hussein , but said that he " was very keen that we thought through carefully the postwar aspects of what we were going to do once the military campaign was over . And I think it 's now very public knowledge that that was not well handled . It was not well thought through , it was not well executed . And we lived with the consequences of that . " 
 On 7 December 2009 , Cross publicly testified before the Iraq Inquiry , having previously argued that the proceedings should be held in public as , eventually , they were . He gave evidence about the post @-@ war planning done prior to the invasion of Iraq , stating that he had urged Prime Minister Tony Blair and his aide , Alastair Campbell , to delay the invasion two days prior to the beginning of the conflict . Cross told Sir John Chilcot , the inquiry chairman , that preparations for Iraq after the removal of Saddam Hussein were " woefully thin " . He went on to tell the inquiry that " although I was confident that we would secure a military victory , I offered my view that we should not begin that campaign until we had a much more coherent postwar plan . " 
 In an interview for The Independent in January 2010 , Cross , speaking again about post @-@ war Iraq , claimed " A lot of senior generals were frustrated that they didn 't have sufficient resources " , and singled out both Blair and Clare Short , Secretary of State for International Development at the time of the invasion , as well as criticising the system in which funding was allocated for the Iraq campaign . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cross , a resolute Christian , converted to Christianity while on leave from a posting to Cyprus in 1981 . He visited Jerusalem over the Easter weekend and was inspired by a retired British Army officer he met there to convert . After converting , he considered leaving the Army , but has said in interviews that he reconciled his beliefs with his military service , contending that " the British Army as a community [ ... ] recognises the issue of spirituality and goodness and righteousness and justice and evil and wrong probably far more than most " . He is a licensed lay reader in the Church of England and has involvement with a number of Christian organisations , including as a trustee of the British and Foreign Bible Society and a former president of the Armed Forces Christian Union . In an interview for the Christian Broadcasting Network in 2009 , he said " The moral component of fighting power is about leadership , it 's about ethics , it 's about culture , it 's about how do you get people to fight and embedded within that is an element of justice and righteousness . [ I ] f you lose the moral component , you lose everything . I think we – collectively in the West – have gone through 30 - 40 years really of pretending that this moral component is not important , and that I don 't need to have a biblical foundation in my life . And I challenge that . " He has written on the subject in the British Army Review , an in house publication aimed at generating professional debate , where he described ideas of a secular Army as ' tripe ' and ' dangerously wrong ' and the rewrite of the motto of the Girl Guides , removing reference to God , as ' vapid and anodyne ' . 
 He married Christine in 1972 . The couple live in Surrey and have two sons — one of whom is serving in the Royal Navy — one daughter and two grandchildren . Cross lists his interests as golf , sailing , walking , reading and writing — having written chapters and introductions for several books and papers . 
 = Priya Cooper = 
 Priya <unk> Cooper , OAM ( born 2 October 1974 ) is an Australian world champion disabled swimmer , winning nine Paralympic gold medals as well as world records and world championships . She competed in the Australian 1992 , 1996 and 2000 Summer Paralympics swimming team with an S8 classification . She was twice the co @-@ captain of the Australian Paralympic team , including at the 2000 Paralympic Games in Sydney , and carried the Australian flag at the closing ceremonies for the 1992 and 1996 Summer Paralympics . Cooper has cerebral palsy and spends much of her time in a wheelchair . She attended university , working on a course in health management . After she ended her competitive Paralympic career , she became a commentator , and covered the swimming events at the 2002 Commonwealth Games . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Priya <unk> Cooper was born on 2 October 1974 in Perth , Western Australia . She was born with cerebral palsy , and spends 75 % of her time in a wheelchair . As a youngster , her mother encouraged her to try out several sports , including tap dancing and ballet . 
 With her father 's encouragement , Cooper first started swimming in her backyard pool when she was six years old . Her first swimsuit was a bikini . Her father taught her to swim while making her wear big yellow <unk> . She started competitive swimming at school carnivals . In the first one she competed in , she finished sixth in the F @-@ division 50 m butterfly . She was informed about disabled athletes by a teacher at school . Her initial reaction to learning about disabled sport was to question if she was " disabled enough " to compete . She made her first national team appearance when she was in year 12 in school , after winning twelve gold medals in national swimming meets . By that time , Cooper had already begun serious training , waking up at 4 a.m. to get pool time . 
 = = Competitive athletic career = = 
 Cooper is a world champion disabled swimmer , winning nine Paralympic gold medals as well as world records and world championships . She represented Wheelchair Sports Western Australia at the 1991 National Wheelchair Games , winning nine gold medals . Her home pool was the Swan Park Leisure Centre in Midvale , Western Australia . She had a number of coaches over the course of her competitive career , including Matthew Brown and Frank Ponta . 
 Cooper made her Paralympic debut at the 1992 Summer Paralympics in Barcelona , at the age of 17 . She was in danger of not going to the 1992 Paralympics because of funding issues for the Australian Paralympic Federation . The Federation made an emergency appeal for funding from the public in order to cover the cost of transporting the Australian team to Barcelona . A variety of small donations allowed Cooper and other Australian athletes to compete . She won three Gold and two Silver medals , and broke two World records and three Paralympic records . She was offered a non @-@ residential Australian Institute of Sport Athletes with a Disability swimming scholarship in 1993 and supported until 2000 . 
 She was a co @-@ captain of the Australian team at the 1996 Summer Paralympics , where she competed in six individual events and two relay events in the S8 class , winning five gold medals , four individual and one team , and one silver and one bronze medal . She set several world records at the 1996 Paralympic Games in Atlanta in the 200 m medley and the 400 m freestyle swimming events . She also set personal bests in the 100 m backstroke and 100 m freestyle . Her world record time in the 400 m freestyle was 5 : 11 @.@ 47 , her 100 m backstroke time was 1 : 23 @.@ 43 , and her 100 m freestyle time was 1 : 12 @.@ 08 . 
 In 1998 , Cooper competed at the Paralympic Swimming World Championships in Christchurch , New Zealand . She set a world record in the 400m freestyle at the event . She set another world record in the S8 classification , with an 800m freestyle time of 10 : 40 @.@ 03 , three seconds faster than the previous record . She also won a gold medal in the 200m individual medley , with a finish that was half a second away from beating her own previous world record . 
 Cooper competed in the Sporting <unk> and Disabled Association @-@ sponsored 1998 Queensland Championships in five swimming events . She and Brad Thomas were invited to attend as special guest competitors . While attending , Cooper also hosted a coaching clinic with Thomas . 
 In 1999 , Cooper moved to Sydney , the location of the 2000 Summer Paralympics , to prepare for the games . She had been living there for eighteen months at the time of those games . Her family continued to live in Perth and the move was an adjustment period for her . She helped to make several instructional videos for Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games ( <unk> ) to help train volunteers for the games . In preparation for the 2000 Paralympics , the Australian Paralympic Committee created a CD to help with fundraising . She participated in this by choosing the song " Ashes " by The <unk> and singing it onstage during the CD 's launch . 
 At the 2000 Summer Paralympics , her last games , she was the co @-@ captain of the Australian Paralympic team . Coming into the 2000 Games , there were some concerns that she would not be able to compete because of a shoulder injury . She was worried about how receptive Australians and the world would be in terms of disabled sport prior to the Paralympics being hosted in Australia . She was surprised when the Paralympic Games started at how supportive Australians and international visitors were of athletes at the 2000 Paralympic Games . She won the 400 m freestyle and took three bronze medals in the 100 m freestyle , 4 x 100 m freestyle relay and 4 x 100 m medley relay events . After the Games , Cooper believed that they had a long reaching societal impact in terms of creating a better image for disabled people around the country and helping to increase acceptance of them as part of Australian society . She also believed that the Games would help increase spectatorship for Paralympic sports around the country . 
 Cooper 's swimming style relied on upper body strength , with her legs trailing behind her . Despite her love of water , Cooper had a fear of swimming in the open water of the ocean . To help overcome this fear , she competed in the 2002 open water 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) Rottnest Channel Swim in Western Australia . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Cooper was selected to carry the Australian flag at the closing ceremonies for the 1992 and 1996 Summer Paralympics . She was awarded a Medal of the Order of Australia in 1993 , was named the 1995 Paralympian of the Year , was the Young Australian of the Year for Sport in 1999 , received an Australian Sports Medal in 2000 , and was inducted into the Western Australian Hall of Champions in 2006 . In 1998 , Cooper won a Dairy Farmers Sporting Chance award in swimming . That year , she also won a Curtin University of Technology John Curtin Medal . In 1999 , she won the APC Merit Award . 
 Cooper was chosen to officially open the Perth Hockey Stadium at Curtin University in 2009 . She attended the tenth anniversary celebrations for the Sydney Olympic and Paralympic Games held at Sydney Olympic Park in 2010 . 
 In October 2015 , she became the fourth Paralympian to be inducted into the Sport Australia Hall of Fame . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cooper studied at Curtin University , where she graduated with a degree in health promotion and media . She was also a public speaker , attending events to talk about disabilities . Cooper had a volunteer position , where she worked as a scriptwriter for a radio station in Perth . 
 At the age of 27 Cooper became a commentator for the 2002 Commonwealth Games , covering the swimming events . She is a Therapy Focus Ambassador , and a member of the Disabilities and <unk> Council . She is actively involved in raising funds for several charities , and was part of the Great <unk> Push event held in East Fremantle , Western Australia , a charity event that raised funds for the Starlight Children 's Foundation and the Children 's Leukaemia and Cancer Research Foundation . 
 Cooper is married to Paralympic swimmer Rodney <unk> and has two children . 
 = XYZ Affair = 
 The XYZ Affair was a political and diplomatic episode in 1797 and 1798 , early in the administration of John Adams , involving a confrontation between the United States and Republican France that led to an undeclared war called the Quasi @-@ War . The name derives from the substitution of the letters X , Y and Z for the names of French diplomats Hottinguer ( X ) , Bellamy ( Y ) , and Hauteval ( Z ) in documents released by the Adams administration . 
 An American diplomatic commission was sent to France in July 1797 to negotiate problems that were threatening to break out into war . The diplomats , Charles Cotesworth Pinckney , John Marshall , and Elbridge Gerry , were approached through informal channels by agents of the French Foreign Minister Talleyrand , who demanded bribes and a loan before formal negotiations could begin . Although such demands were not uncommon in mainland European diplomacy of the time , the Americans were offended by them , and eventually left France without ever engaging in formal negotiations . Gerry , seeking to avoid all @-@ out war , remained for several months after the other two commissioners left . His exchanges with Talleyrand laid groundwork for the eventual end to diplomatic and military hostilities . 
 The failure of the commission caused a political firestorm in the United States when the commission 's dispatches were published . It led to the undeclared Quasi @-@ War ( 1798 to 1800 ) . Federalists who controlled the government took advantage of the national anger to build up the nation 's military . They also attacked the Jeffersonian Republicans for their pro @-@ French stance , and Elbridge Gerry ( a nonpartisan at the time ) for what they saw as his role in the commission 's failure . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the wake of the 1789 French Revolution , relations between the new French Republic and the American administration of President George Washington became strained . In 1792 France and the rest of Europe went to war , a conflict in which Washington declared American neutrality . However , both France and Great Britain , the major naval powers in the war , seized ships of neutral powers ( including those of the United States ) that traded with their enemies . With the Jay Treaty , ratified in 1795 , the United States reached an agreement on the matter with Britain that angered members of the Directory that governed France . The French Navy consequently stepped up its efforts to interdict American trade with Britain . By the time John Adams assumed the presidency in early 1797 , the matter was reaching crisis proportions . In March 1797 , not long after assuming office , President Adams learned that Charles Cotesworth Pinckney had been refused as U. S. minister because of the escalating crisis , and that American merchant ships had been seized in the Caribbean . Popular opinion in the United States on relations with France was divided along largely political lines : Federalists took a hard line , favoring a defensive buildup but not necessarily advocating war , while Republicans expressed solidarity with the Republican ideals of the French revolutionaries and did not want to be seen as cooperating with the Federalist Adams administration . Jefferson looked at the Federalists as monarchists who were linked to Britain and therefore hostile to American values . 
 = = Commission to France = = 
 In late May 1797 Adams ' cabinet met to discuss French relations and to choose a special commission to France . Adams initially proposed that John Marshall and Elbridge Gerry join Pinckney on the commission , but his cabinet objected to the choice of Gerry because he was not a strong Federalist . Francis Dana was chosen instead of Gerry , but he declined to serve , and Adams , who considered Gerry one of the " two most impartial men in America " ( he himself being the other ) , submitted his name to the United States Senate in Dana 's stead without consulting his cabinet . Adams , in introducing the matter to Congress , made a somewhat belligerent speech in which he called for a vigorous defense of the nation 's neutrality and expansion of the United States Navy , but stopped short of calling for war against France . Congress approved this choice of commissioners , and Adams instructed them to negotiate similar terms to those that had been granted to Britain in the Jay Treaty . The commissioners were also instructed to refuse loans , but to be flexible in the arrangement of payment terms for financial matters . Marshall left for Europe in mid @-@ July to join Pinckney , with Gerry following a few weeks later . The political divisions in the commission 's makeup were reflected in their attitudes toward the negotiations : Marshall and Pinckney , both Federalists , distrusted the French , while Gerry ( who was then opposed to political parties ) was willing to be flexible and unhurried in dealing with them . 
 The French Republic , established in 1792 at the height of the French Revolution , was by 1797 governed by a bicameral legislative assembly , with a five @-@ member Directory acting as the national executive . The Directory was undergoing both internal power struggles and struggles with the Council of Five Hundred , the lower chamber of the legislature . Ministerial changes took place in the first half of 1797 , including the selection in July of Charles Maurice de Talleyrand as foreign minister . Talleyrand , who had recently spent a few years in the United States , was openly concerned about the establishment of closer ties between the U. S. and Britain . The Directory , generally not well @-@ disposed to American interests , became notably more hostile to them in September 1797 , when an internal coup propelled several anti @-@ Americans into power . These leaders , and Talleyrand , viewed President Adams as hostile to their interests , but did not think that there was significant danger of war . In part based on advice imparted to French diplomats by Thomas Jefferson , Talleyrand decided to adopt a measured , slow pace to the negotiations . 
 The American commission arrived in Paris in early October , and immediately requested a meeting with Talleyrand . After an initial brief meeting ( in which Talleyrand only provisionally accepted the commissioners ' credentials ) , a longer meeting was held a week later . Talleyrand sought from the commissioners an explanation for the speech Adams had made in May , which had angered Directory members ; his motivation was to determine how favorably the commissioners were disposed to the negotiations . If they responded in an unfavorable manner , the Directory would refuse to accept their credentials . The commissioners first learned of Talleyrand 's expected demand on October 14 through an indirect channel . They decided that no explanation would be given for Adams ' speech . 
 = = = Initial meetings = = = 
 What followed were a series of meetings that took place outside formal diplomatic channels . On October 17 , Nicholas Hubbard , an Englishman working for a Dutch bank used by the Americans ( and who came to be identified as " W " in the published papers ) , notified Pinckney that Baron Jean @-@ Conrad Hottinguer , whom Hubbard described only as a man of honor , wished to meet with him . Pinckney agreed , and the two men met the next evening . Hottinguer ( who was later identified as " X " ) relayed a series of French demands , which included a large loan to the French government and the payment of a £ 50 @,@ 000 bribe to Talleyrand . Pinckney relayed these demands to the other commissioners , and Hottinguer repeated them to the entire commission , which curtly refused the demands , even though it was widely known that diplomats from other nations had paid bribes to deal with Talleyrand . Hottinguer then introduced the commission to Pierre Bellamy ( " Y " ) , who he represented as being a member of Talleyrand 's inner circle . Bellamy expounded in detail on Talleyrand 's demands , including the expectation that " you must pay a great deal of money . " He even proposed a series of purchases ( at inflated prices ) of currency as a means by which such money could be clandestinely exchanged . The commissioners offered to send one of their number back to the United States for instructions , if the French would suspend their seizures of American shipping ; the French negotiators refused . 
 Not long after this standoff , Talleyrand sent Lucien Hauteval ( " Z " ) to meet with Elbridge Gerry . The two men knew each other , having met in Boston in 1792 . Hauteval assured Gerry of Talleyrand 's sincerity in seeking peace , and encouraged him to keep the informal negotiations open . He reiterated the demands for a loan and bribe . 
 A week later ( notably after the signing of the Treaty of Campo Formio , which ended the five @-@ year War of the First Coalition between France and most of the other European powers ) , Hottinguer and Bellamy again met with the commission , and repeated their original demands , accompanied by threats of potential war , since France was at least momentarily at peace in Europe . Pinckney 's response was famous : " No , no , not a sixpence ! " The commissioners decided on November 1 to refuse further negotiations by informal channels . Publication of dispatches describing this series of meetings would form the basis for the later political debates in the United States . 
 = = = Later negotiations = = = 
 The commissioners soon discovered that only unofficial channels were open to them . Over the next several months , Talleyrand sent a series of informal negotiators to meet with and influence the commissioners . Some of the informal avenues were closed down ( Gerry , for instance , informed Hauteval that they could no longer meet , since Hauteval had no formal authority ) , and Talleyrand finally appeared in November 1797 at a dinner , primarily to castigate the Americans for their unwillingness to accede to the demand for a bribe . 
 In late November Talleyrand began maneuvering to separate Gerry from the other commissioners . He extended a " social " dinner invitation to Gerry , which the latter , seeking to maintain communications , planned to attend . The matter heightened distrust of Gerry by Marshall and Pinckney , who sought guarantees that Gerry would limit any representations and agreements he might consider . Despite seeking to refuse informal negotiations , all of the commissioners ended up having private meetings with some of Talleyrand 's negotiators . 
 The commissioners eventually divided over the issue of whether to continue informal negotiations , with the Federalists Marshall and Pinckney opposed , and Gerry in favor . This division was eventually clear to Talleyrand , who told Gerry in January 1798 that he would no longer deal with Pinckney . In February Talleyrand gained approval from the Directory for a new bargaining position , and he maneuvered to exclude Marshall from the negotiations as well . The change in strategy alarmed a number of American residents of Paris , who reported the growing possibility of war . Around this time Gerry , at Talleyrand 's insistence , began keeping secret from the other commissioners the substance of their meetings . 
 All three commissioners met with Talleyrand informally in March , but it was clear that the parties were at an impasse . This appeared to be the case despite Talleyrand 's agreement to drop the demand for a loan . Both sides prepared statements to be sent across the Atlantic stating their positions , and Marshall and Pinckney , frozen out of talks that Talleyrand would only conduct with Gerry , left France in April . Their departure was delayed due to a series of negotiations over the return of their passports ; in order to obtain diplomatic advantage , Talleyrand sought to force Marshall and Pinckney to formally request their return ( which would allow him to later claim that they broke off negotiations ) . Talleyrand eventually gave in , formally requesting their departure . Gerry , although he sought to maintain unity with his <unk> , was told by Talleyrand that if he left France the Directory would declare war . Gerry remained behind , protesting the " impropriety of permitting a foreign government to [ choose ] the person who should negotiate . " He however remained optimistic that war was unrealistic , writing to William Vans Murray , the American minister to The Netherlands , that " nothing but madness " would cause the French to declare war . 
 Gerry resolutely refused to engage in further substantive negotiations with Talleyrand , agreeing only to stay until someone with more authority could replace him , and wrote to President Adams requesting assistance in securing his departure from Paris . Talleyrand eventually sent representatives to The Hague to reopen negotiations with William Vans Murray , and Gerry finally returned home in October 1798 . 
 = = Reaction in the United States = = 
 While the American diplomats were in Europe , President Adams considered his options in the event of the commission 's failure . His cabinet urged that the nation 's military be strengthened , including the raising of a 20 @,@ 000 man army and the acquisition or construction of ships of the line for the navy . He had no substantive word from the commissioners until March 1798 , when the first dispatches revealing the French demands and negotiating tactics arrived . The commission 's apparent failure was duly reported to Congress , although Adams kept secret the mistreatment ( lack of recognition and demand for a bribe ) of the diplomats , seeking to minimize a warlike reaction . His cabinet was divided on how to react : the general tenor was one of hostility toward France , with Attorney General Charles Lee and Secretary of State Timothy Pickering arguing for a declaration of war . Democratic @-@ Republican leaders in Congress , believing Adams had exaggerated the French position because he sought war , united with hawkish Federalists to demand the release of the commissioners ' dispatches . On March 20 , Adams turned them over , with the names of some of the French actors redacted and replaced by the letters W , X , Y , and Z. The use of these disguising letters led the business to immediately become known as the " XYZ Affair " . 
 The release of the dispatches produced exactly the response Adams feared . Federalists called for war , and Democratic @-@ Republicans were left without an effective argument against them , having miscalculated the reason for Adams ' secrecy . Congress authorized the acquisition of twelve frigates , and made other appropriations to increase military readiness . Despite calls for a formal war declaration , Adams steadfastly refused to ask Congress for one . On July 7 , 1798 , Congress annulled the 1778 Treaty of Alliance , and two days later authorized attacks on French warships . 
 = = = Partisan responses = = = 
 Federalists used the dispatches to question the loyalty of pro @-@ French Democratic @-@ Republicans ; this attitude contributed to the passage of the Alien and Sedition Acts , restricting the movements and actions of foreigners , and limiting speech critical of the government . Federalists were otherwise divided on the question of war , and the Democratic @-@ Republicans painted hawkish Federalists as warmongers seeking to undermine the republic by military means . 
 Elbridge Gerry was placed in a difficult position upon his return to the United States . Federalists , spurred by John Marshall 's accounts of their disagreements , criticized him for abetting the breakdown of the negotiations . These bitterly harsh and partisan comments turned Gerry against the Federalists , and he eventually ended up joining with the Democratic @-@ Republicans in 1800 . 
 = = Political reaction in France = = 
 When news reached France of the publication of the dispatches and the ensuing hostile reaction , the response was one of fury . Talleyrand was called to the Directory to account for his role in the affair . He denied all association with the informal negotiators , and enlisted the assistance of Gerry in exposing the agents whose names had been redacted , a charade Gerry agreed to participate in . In exchange Talleyrand confirmed privately to Gerry that the agents were in fact in his employ , and that he was , contrary to statements made to the Directory , interested in pursuing reconciliation . President Adams later wrote that Talleyrand 's confession to Gerry was significant in his decision to continue efforts to maintain peace . Gerry , in his private report on the affair to Adams in 1799 , claimed credit for maintaining the peace , and for influencing significant changes in French policy that lessened the hostilities and eventually brought a peace treaty . 
 The warlike attitude of the United States and the start of the Quasi @-@ War ( a naval war between the two countries that was fought primarily in the Caribbean ) convinced Talleyrand that he had miscalculated in his dealings with the commissioners . In response to the diplomatic overtures he made to William Vans Murray in The Hague , President Adams sent negotiators to France in 1799 who eventually negotiated an end to hostilities with the Treaty of <unk> ( whose negotiations were managed in part by Marshall , then Secretary of State ) in September 1800 . This agreement was made with First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte , who had overthrown the Directory in the Coup of 18 Brumaire in November 1799 , and it was ratified by the United States Senate in December 1801 . 
 = Return to the Nightosphere / Daddy 's Little Monster = 
 " Return to the Nightosphere " and " Daddy 's Little Monster " are the fifth and sixth episodes of the fourth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . " Return to the Nightosphere " was written and storyboarded by Ako Castuera and Jesse Moynihan , whereas " Daddy 's Little Monster " was written and storyboarded by Rebecca Sugar and Cole Sanchez . Both episodes ' stories were developed by series creator Pendleton Ward , Patrick McHale , and Kent Osborne . Originally airing on Cartoon Network on April 30 , 2012 , both episodes feature the return of Martin Olson as Hunson Abadeer . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In " Return to the Nightosphere " , Finn and Jake discover that they are trapped in the Nightosphere , a hellish dimension ruled by Hunson Abadeer , Marceline 's ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) father , although they cannot seem to remember how they arrived . " Daddy 's Little Monster " features Finn and Jake discovering that Hunson Abadeer has turned Marceline into a giant demon . The duo manage to save Marceline . 
 " Daddy 's Little Monster " features two songs : " Not Just Your Little Girl " and " Political Rap " . The latter of the two , which went on to become particularly popular with fans of the series on the Internet , was written by Moynihan and intended for the episode " Return to the Nightosphere " . Together with other episodes of Cartoon Network programming , the episodes helped make the network the number one television destination for boys aged 2 – 11 , 6 – 11 , and 9 – 14 on Monday nights . Both episodes received largely positive critical reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = " Return to the Nightosphere " = = = 
 Finn and Jake awake in a prison cell full of bananas , confused and unaware of how they arrived at their location . A demonic prison guard tells them that they are in the Nightosphere , the hellish realm ruled by Marceline 's ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) father , Hunson Abadeer ( voiced by Martin Olson ) . The two set off to locate Marceline 's father and navigate back to their home dimension . Traversing the Nightosphere , Finn and Jake learn that they need to seek an audience with Hunson Abadeer if they want to leave . Eventually , they reach a line composed of demons who seek petitions from their demonic overlord . Just then , a storm cloud appears in a mist , slaying all the demons present ; Finn and Jake barely escape death . 
 Afterwards , the two follow the cloud to a castle . There , the cloud condenses into a demonic form , presumably Hunson Abadeer . While running through the castle , Finn and Jake find a portal back to Ooo , and the two jump in , with <unk> in pursuit . Finn wounds the demon with his sword . At that moment it is revealed that the demon is not Hunson Abadeer , but rather Marceline , who has for some unknown reason , been transformed into a hideous demon . She musters enough strength to forbid Finn and Jake from coming back to the Nightosphere , and , after the two are teleported back to their dimension , she closes the portal . 
 = = = " Daddy 's Little Monster " = = = 
 In the tree fort , Jake charges his cell phone and discovers footage that he filmed prior to Finn and him waking up in a jail cell in the Nightosphere ; apparently , Marceline had invited Finn and Jake to party in the Nightosphere , wherein she was given a demonic amulet by Hunson , which turned her into a being of pure evil . 
 Determined to save Marceline , Finn and Jake disguise themselves as demons and sneak back into the Nightosphere by creating a portal that sends them to the seat of government for Marceline 's regime . Marceline , in her evil demon form , listens to the requests of her subjects , often ignoring what they seek and instead punishing them with macabre torture . Finn and Jake are spotted by Marceline , who gives chase . After narrowly avoiding their demonic friend , the duo run into the now @-@ benign Hunson Abadeer , who explains that he only wanted Marceline to follow in his footsteps and rule the hellish realm . 
 Finn and Jake later rile up the apathetic demon masses by performing a " political rap " , which instigates anarchy . Finn manages to rip the amulet off of Marceline , which renders her unconscious . To escape the rebellious demon masses , Finn puts the amulet on and pushes Marceline and Jake through the portal . Hunson Abadeer arrives on the scene and rips the amulet from Finn 's neck , sending Finn falling back through the portal . Marceline is initially disappointed in her father for tricking her into ruling the Nightosphere to make him proud , but they reconcile when Hunson reassures Marceline that he is proud of her , no matter what she does , and that he actually enjoys Finn and Jake . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Return to the Nightosphere " was written and storyboarded by Ako Castuera and Jesse Moynihan , whereas " Daddy 's Little Monster " was written and storyboarded by Rebecca Sugar and Cole Sanchez . Both episodes ' stories were developed by series creator Pendleton Ward , Patrick McHale , and Kent Osborne . Both episodes were directed by Larry Leichliter , with Nick Jennings serving as art director . 
 For " Return to the Nightosphere " , Moynihan designed a special pan , showcasing the landscape of the Nightosphere . His drawings , however , got lost three times during production , although they were finally located . Moynihan later noted on the season four DVD commentary for the episode that he had an ambition to design extremely long pans ; he had created a similar one for the second season episode " Death in Bloom " . As for " Daddy 's Little Monster " , an original version of the episode featured Hunson Abadeer pretending to be sick so that Marceline would feel sorry and take over his job , however this was later discarded . The beginning of the episode features Finn and Jake reviewing footage captured on Jake 's camera phone . Ward noted that it was difficult to keep the action lively , while also framing the scene as if it were stationary phone footage . 
 " Daddy 's Little Monster " features several songs , including " Not Just Your Little Girl " , written by Sugar . Sugar and Sanchez originally tried writing the song — which was originally to be called the " Cone Zone " — together , but Sugar eventually completely rewrote it . When it came time to storyboard the episode , Sanchez with the help of former storyboard artist and then @-@ creative director Adam Muto , storyboarded the scene , and Ward asked Sugar to record a quick demo of the song for reference . She filmed herself recording the demo , but jokingly noted that she asked " Pen and Cole to face the other way " out of embarrassment . The political rap featured in " Daddy 's Little Monster " , written by Moynihan , was originally intended for " Return to the Nightosphere " , but was cut for time . Sugar , however , liked the song so much that she insisted it be added to " Daddy 's Little Monster " . Moynihan was pleased with the largely positive critical reception the rap had from fans of the series . 
 Martin Olson , the father of voice actress Olivia Olson , reprises his role as Hunson Abadeer in this episode , as well as " Daddy 's Little Monster " ; Olson had previously appeared in the second season premiere " It Came from the Nightosphere " and the third season episode " Memory of a Memory " . The episode was also the first to give a name to Marceline 's father : Hunson Abadeer . According to Moynihan , the name was inspired by the name that his brother had given their family 's car when they were growing up . The two later used it for a band that only recorded one song . To create the demonic effect of Marceline talking while possessed with the amulet , Olivia Olson and her father were required to say their lines in tandem . She later explained : " We were going back @-@ and @-@ forth , line to line … We were screaming back and forth at each other , and trying to match pitches and stuff . Then , hearing the after product of both of our voices blended together was pretty fun . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Return to the Nightosphere " and " Daddy 's Little Monster " first aired on Cartoon Network on April 30 , 2012 . Together with other episodes of Cartoon Network programming , the episodes helped make the network the number one television destination for boys aged 2 – 11 , 6 – 11 , and 9 – 14 on Monday nights , according to Nielsen ratings . The episodes first saw physical release as part of the complete fourth season DVD in October 2014 . 
 Phil Dyess @-@ Nugent of The A.V. Club awarded both " Return to the Nightosphere " and " Daddy 's Little Monster " an " A " , noting that , " If the last few episodes of Adventure Time … struck anyone as being a little short on adventure , or , at least , action , tonight ’ s epic two @-@ parter went a long way toward making up for it . " He applauded the installments <unk> of dark humor , as well as its fixation with striking visual designs , describing the titular Nightosphere as " a goofed @-@ up Hieronymous Bosch landscape " . In regards to " Daddy 's Little Monster " , Dyess @-@ Nugent noted that the high @-@ point was the " freestyle political rap " that Finn and Jake ad @-@ lib to get the demons to help them . 
 In an interview with The Mary Sue on August 2 , 2013 , Olivia Olson claimed that both " Return to the Nightosphere " and " Daddy 's Little Monster " were the most fun episodes for her to record , largely due to the manner in which she and her father had to record their lines in tandem . 
 = Giffnock = 
 Giffnock ( / <unk> / ; Scots : Giffnock ; Scottish Gaelic : <unk> , Scottish Gaelic pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is an affluent suburban town in East Renfrewshire set in the Central Lowlands of Scotland . It lies 3 @.@ 7 miles ( 6 @.@ 0 km ) east of Barrhead , 5 @.@ 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 0 km ) east @-@ southeast of Paisley and 5 @.@ 3 miles ( 8 @.@ 5 km ) northwest of East Kilbride , at the southwest of the Greater Glasgow conurbation . Giffnock is mentioned in documents as early as the seventeenth century as a scattered agricultural settlement . In the late eighteenth century , Archibald Montgomerie , the Earl of Eglinton , was forced to partition the land into a number of smaller properties . 
 The urbanisation and development of Giffnock began in the mid to late nineteenth century with the construction of several sandstone quarries , and this prompted the development of the first railway link with nearby Glasgow . Large @-@ scale quarrying continued in Giffnock for almost a century . However , the quarrying ceased by the 1920s , and other uses were found for the quarries . An additional railway service began at the start of the twentieth century , closely followed by the arrival of Glasgow Corporation Tramways . Giffnock 's relative closeness to Glasgow coupled with the local industry and good transports links helped it to develop into a suburban town , as many wealthy merchants chose to construct villas in its smog @-@ free environs and commute daily to the city . 
 Although heavy industry died out in the area during the early twentieth century , as part of Scotland 's densely populated Central Belt , Giffnock has continued to grow as a dormitory town , supported by its position within the Greater Glasgow area , from roughly 1 @,@ 425 residents in the early twentieth century to 16 @,@ 178 in 2001 . Expansion continues due to several new housing developments ; however , much of the land is now urbanised or designated parkland , leaving little room for further expansion . 
 = = History = = 
 The Scottish Gaelic name for Giffnock is <unk> and is of partially Brythonic and Gaelic origin . ' Cefn ' ( i.e. ' <unk> ' ) comes from the Brythonic meaning ' ridge ' and the Gaelic <unk> ( i.e. ' nock ' ) meaning " hill " . In Gaelic , <unk> or og is a diminutive , and thus when added to <unk> gives Giffnock the meaning of " Little Ridge " . 
 The first written mention of Giffnock came in 1530 , when James V presented <unk> ( <unk> ) Mill and the surrounding lands to Hugh Montgomerie , 1st Earl of Eglinton . The settlement of Giffnock first appeared as <unk> , in an atlas created by Dutch cartographer Joan Blaeu in 1654 , the first atlas of Scotland . Giffnock was primarily a scattered farming community until the late 1780s , when Archibald Montgomerie , 11th Earl of Eglinton was forced to partition the land into a number of small properties for sale to raise finances . 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 In 1835 , the first sandstone quarry in Giffnock opened . Before long , the town became known for this industry , and at its peak , there were four quarries in Giffnock , three surface quarries and one underground quarry , which together employed over 1 @,@ 000 men . The quarries produced two types of sandstone : " liver rock " and " moor rock " . " Liver rock " was particularly popular with masons thanks to its lack of stratification , which made the stone easy to work with . In 1854 , a coal mining firm managed by civil engineers Hugh Baird and Robert Stevenson took over the running of the quarries and by 1866 the Busby Railway was built , allowing them to transport the stone by rail . Originally , a lower level line was laid from Giffnock railway station into the Orchard Quarry to facilitate the extraction of the stone . 
 Sandstone from the Giffnock quarries was primarily used within the nearby city of Glasgow and can be found in older parts of the University of Glasgow and the interior of Kelvingrove Art Gallery . A small amount of trade was done with Belfast , and some of the finer " liver rock " was even transported as far as America and South Africa to build both buildings and monuments . 
 Quarrying in Giffnock continued until 1912 when , due to flooding and the high cost of extracting stone , work ceased . Numerous ventures tried to revitalise the quarries for other purposes , including the cultivation of mushrooms in the tunnels . As the pits began to fill with water , it became an issue that needed to be resolved . In the early 1930s , William <unk> & Co began tipping slag from the production of steel into the Giffnock quarries . The slag tipping continued until 1969 , when Derek Crouch Limited began scrap metal extraction , which lasted until the late 1970s . Today the ground is a wasteland . 
 Coal mining was also carried out in Giffnock , between 1850 and 1926 . The coal produced was of a very poor quality and was of little value to householders . The main use of Giffnock coal was with commercial and industrial customers such as Busby Gas Works . 
 = = = Urbanisation and expansion = = = 
 The opening of Giffnock railway station in 1866 allowed business people to build sandstone villas and commute daily to the city . At the time , it was much more desirable to live in Giffnock than to live in the smog @-@ polluted city . By the early 1890s , residential Giffnock began to grow around the railway station and Eastwood Toll , and by 1892 gas was introduced to the area . Gas street lamps were erected by Busby and District Gas Company in 1893 ; however , these were supported by a voluntary subscription that many households refused to pay , leaving many areas unlit . It was not until October 1896 , when Eastwood Parish Council took over street lighting , that the area was consistently lit at night . 
 In 1903 , a second railway station was opened in Giffnock , Whitecraigs railway station . The station lay on the Lanarkshire and Ayrshire Railway , originally built to provide a through route from the Lanarkshire coalfields to ports such as Ardrossan on the Ayrshire coast . 
 The growth of Giffnock was furthered in 1905 by the arrival of the first Glasgow Corporation Tramways tram in the town . The addition of this tram link and the nearby Whitecraigs railway station helped the popularity of Giffnock as a weekend destination and lead to the opening of Rouken Glen park in 1906 by Archibald Corbett ( later Lord Rowallan ) , the M.P. for Tradeston . The Giffnock tramline was one of Glasgow Corporation Tramways 's most profitable routes ; up to 15 @,@ 000 travelled to Giffnock on a Sunday to visit Rouken Glen . 
 During the great housing boom of the late 1930s , Giffnock began to grow rapidly . Between 1930 and 1940 , as many as 3 @,@ 000 dwellings were constructed , and the population rose dramatically , from 1 @,@ 425 to 3 @,@ 471 in 1939 and 9 @,@ 144 in 1951 . 
 On 7 May 1941 , during the Greenock Blitz of World War II , the Nazi German Luftwaffe dropped a group of bombs over Giffnock , but only two houses were destroyed . On 10 May 1941 , Rudolf Hess , a prominent Nazi politician and deputy to Adolf Hitler parachuted out of his Messerschmitt Bf <unk> near <unk> . Hess had flown solo to Scotland in an attempt to negotiate peace with the United Kingdom . He was detained by the Home Guard in the battalion headquarters in the Giffnock Scout hall , where he was questioned by Major Donald , the Assistant Group Officer of the Glasgow Royal Observer Corps before being transferred to Maryhill Barracks in Glasgow the following day . The wreckage of Hess 's aircraft was salvaged by 63 Maintenance Unit ( MU ) between 11 and 16 May 1941 . Part of the aeroplane is now in London 's Imperial War Museum . 
 Proposals were put forward in 2008 to expand the town with the building of 178 houses on <unk> Quarries next to Huntly Park , involving the Park closing for a period of two years . However , following 2 @,@ 000 objections from local people and the opposition of the Scottish Government 's reporter , East Renfrewshire Council abandoned the plans in October 2011 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Giffnock is represented by several tiers of elected government . Giffnock Community Council forms the lowest tier of governance whose statutory role is to communicate local opinion to local and central government . It is one of ten community councils of the East Renfrewshire council area . 
 East Renfrewshire Council , the unitary local council , is based in Giffnock and is the Executive , deliberative and legislative body responsible for local governance . The Scottish Parliament is responsible for devolved matters such as education , health and justice , while reserved matters are dealt with by the Parliament of the United Kingdom . 
 Giffnock forms part of the county constituency of East Renfrewshire , electing one member of parliament ( MP ) to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . Kirsten Oswald of the SNP was elected as MP for East Renfrewshire in the 2015 General Election . Before the constituency 's creation in 2005 , Giffnock lay in the Eastwood Constituency . For the purposes of the Scottish Parliament , Giffnock forms part of the Eastwood Constituency , which is represented by Kenneth Macintosh MSP , of the Labour party . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 55 ° 48 ′ 9 ″ N 4 ° 17 ′ 43 ″ W ( 55 @.@ 803 ° , − 4 @.@ 30 ° ) Giffnock is situated in Scotland 's Central Lowlands . The community lies 3 @.@ 7 miles ( 6 @.@ 0 km ) east of Barrhead , 5 @.@ 3 miles ( 8 @.@ 5 km ) northwest of East Kilbride and 4 @.@ 3 miles ( 6 @.@ 9 km ) south @-@ southwest of Glasgow . The territory of Giffnock is contiguous with Glasgow and forms part of Greater Glasgow , the United Kingdom 's fifth largest conurbation . 
 Giffnock is situated on the plateau that encircles Glasgow . It is at edge of the area that defines the basin that Glasgow has developed within . The underlay is composed mainly of sedimentary rocks and freestone from the Strathclyde and Clackmannan groups of early to mid Carboniferous age ( 354 to 316 million years ) . The relatively soft and easily eroded rocks have resulted in the landform in the area being mostly flat with gentle undulations . The area of Giffnock is typically around 45 metres ( 148 ft ) to 50 metres ( 160 ft ) above sea level , with the highest point in the area reaching 60 metres ( 200 ft ) . 
 Giffnock experiences a temperate maritime climate , like much of the British Isles , with relatively cool summers and mild winters . Regular but generally light precipitation occurs throughout the year . 
 Giffnock 's built environment is characterised by its mixture of nineteenth and twentieth century single and two story dwellings , most of which are semi @-@ detached or terraced . Towards the south of Giffnock the properties are generally grander two story detached villas , commonly built with local sandstone many of which are now listed buildings . Giffnock is a postal district within the post town of Glasgow in the G postcode area . Giffnock consists of postcode district <unk> , which also extends beyond the town boundary to include neighbouring settlements <unk> , Thornliebank , <unk> , <unk> and Arden . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the United Kingdom Census 2001 , the census locality ( town and sub @-@ area ) of Giffnock had a total resident population of 16 @,@ 178 , or 18 % of the total of East Renfrewshire . The median age of males and females living in Giffnock was 39 and 43 respectively , compared to 37 and 39 years for those in the whole of Scotland . Fifty six percent were married , 3 @.@ 5 % were cohabiting couples , 6 @.@ 9 % were lone parent families and 28 @.@ 7 % of households were made up of individuals . 
 The place of birth of the towns residents was 94 @.@ 4 % United Kingdom ( including 87 @.@ 8 % from Scotland ) , 0 @.@ 6 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 9 % from other European Union countries and 4 @.@ 2 % from elsewhere in the world . Compared with the average demography of Scotland , Giffnock has higher proportions of people born outside the Europe and people over pensionable age . 
 Of residents 16 – 74 , 39 @.@ 6 % were in full @-@ time employment , 12 @.@ 1 % in part @-@ time employment , 8 @.@ 9 % self @-@ employed and 2 % unemployed compared with Scotland as a whole which has 40 @.@ 3 % , 11 @.@ 1 % , 6 @.@ 6 % and 4 % respectively . Additionally , in Giffnock 4 @.@ 2 % students have jobs while 5 @.@ 2 % do not , 16 % are retired , 5 @.@ 7 % look after their home or family , 3 @.@ 9 % are permanently sick or disabled , and 2 @.@ 4 % are economically inactive for other reasons . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The area has a number of high @-@ volume road links to neighbouring Glasgow . The <unk> main Glasgow to Kilmarnock road passes through the centre of the town and crosses the <unk> from Paisley to East Kilbride at the Eastwood Toll . The nearest motorway is the <unk> , of which Junction 4 at Darnley is the interchange for Giffnock . 
 Giffnock lies within the Strathclyde Partnership for Transport Passenger transport executive and is served by three railway stations , all of which are managed by First ScotRail : 
 Giffnock railway station , opened on 1 January 1866 , lies on the East Kilbride branch of the Glasgow South Western Line , which runs from Glasgow Central station 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north @-@ northeast . 
 Whitecraigs railway station , opened on 1 May 1903 , lies on the Neilston branch of the Cathcart Circle 5 @.@ 2 miles ( 8 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ southwest of Glasgow Central . 
 <unk> railway station , opened on 1 May 1903 , lies on the Neilston branch of the Cathcart Circle 5 @.@ 2 miles ( 8 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ southwest of Glasgow Central . 
 The closest airport is Glasgow International , 6 @.@ 8 miles ( 10 @.@ 9 km ) northwest of Giffnock . This is followed by Glasgow Prestwick International airport and then Edinburgh International Airport . 
 Giffnock is serviced by a number of bus routes by various operators . The main bus link to the city is the number 38 line operated by FirstGroup , which runs at least every 10 minutes throughout the day . 
 = = Education = = 
 The first evidence of education in Giffnock is of a small private school that operated in the lodge house at the <unk> Hotel . Due to the increased population , the first public school opened in 1902 in the Tower Rooms of Giffnock United Free Church , known now as the <unk> Parish Church . 
 Giffnock has a number of high schools , including St Ninian 's High School , a co @-@ educational Roman Catholic High School which was built in 1984 and is Scotland 's top @-@ performing state school . St Ninian 's was the first state @-@ funded school in Scotland to abandon the Standard Grade examination system in favour of the Higher Still system , using Access 3 , Intermediate 1 and Intermediate 2 for pupils in third and fourth year , while maintaining <unk> in fifth year and Advanced <unk> in sixth year . The school roll was 1784 as of September 2011 . 
 Furthermore , Giffnock has a library and three primary schools : Giffnock Primary School , <unk> Primary school and <unk> Primary School , non @-@ denominational feeder primary schools for <unk> High School . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Until the end of the nineteenth century , Giffnock had no church buildings , and religious meetings took place in the waiting room of Giffnock Railway Station and , later , in the clubhouse at Eastwood Golf Course . <unk> Parish Church , designed by HE Clifford and completed in 1899 , was the first church built within Giffnock . Now a category B listed building , the Church is built in a Gothic revival style of architecture and is built mainly of locally quarried stone . Also located in Giffnock is Giffnock Synagogue , founded in 1938 and home to the largest Jewish religious congregation in Scotland . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 In 1936 the Tudor Cinema was constructed in Giffnock by Alex <unk> . It opened in December as a " superb suburban cinema " . The Tudor was an Art Deco style building and is considered Glasgow 's first " entertainment complex " , featuring a ballroom and restaurant as well as the 2 @,@ 400 @-@ seat cinema . 
 Giffnock has numerous parks , including Rouken Glen , Huntly Park and Eastwood Park , where the East Renfrewshire Council offices are based . There remains some ancient woodland in Giffnock , which could be as old as 8 @,@ 000 years . 
 The lands of Rouken Glen Park originally belonged to the Scottish Crown . Ownership shifted to the Earl of Eglinton when James V presented the land to Hugh Montgomerie , 1st Earl of Eglinton on the marriage of his son in 1530 . The area of the estate was farmed until the end of the 18th century and , in 1858 , the estate was purchased by local merchant Walter Crum . Alexander Crum inherited the estate in 1879 and is responsible for the layout of Rouken Glen as it is today . On his sudden death in August 1893 , the house passed into the hands of his brother , William Graham Crum , who later sold the estate to Archibald Cameron Corbett , MP ( later Lord Rowallan ) on 19 May 1905 . In 1906 the estate was given to the City of Glasgow by Lord Rowallan , with the provision that it be for the " citizens of Glasgow for all time " . Rouken Glen Park was officially opened on Saturday , 25 May 1906 by Lord Rowallan . 
 Eastwood Park Leisure Centre has a 25 @-@ metre ( 82 ft ) swimming pool , two additional smaller pools and two gyms . Activities in the leisure centre include casual swimming , swimming lessons , pool fun sessions , fitness classes , a sauna and gym sessions . Greenbank Garden , an 18th @-@ century house and garden owned by the National Trust for Scotland , is located between Clarkston and Newton Mearns , near Giffnock . The house has a 2 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 ha ) walled garden , sixteen rooms and barns and stables . This building is protected as a Category A listed building . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 One of the United Kingdom 's most successful athletics clubs , Giffnock North AAC , was originally formed as a football club in 1943 . Now they are one of the largest athletics clubs in the United Kingdom and 3 time winner of the Scottish athletics ' Club of the Year ' award . 
 In 1905 the Whitecraigs Golf Club was founded . The course was originally designed by Willie Fernie , who was The Open Championship winner in 1883 and also designed the Ailsa course at Turnberry . Alterations to the course were made in the 1930s by James Braid , who won The Open Championship five times between 1901 and 1910 . 
 Many golfing events have been hosted by the Whitecraigs Golf Club . The club was visited by the United States Ryder Cup teams of 1929 and 1933 . The teams included many golfing legends such as Walter Hagen , Gene Sarazen and Horton Smith . Whitecraigs hosted the World Seniors ' Golf Championship in 1976 . In 1983 , Jack Nicklaus visited the club to play an exhibition match and run a clinic . 
 Whitecraigs Rugby Club is a rugby union team based at Newton Mearns , near Giffnock . As of the 2011 – 2012 season , the team competes in the Scottish Premiership Division A. 
 = = Public services = = 
 Giffnock forms part of the Western water and sewerage regions of Scotland . Waste management is provided by the East Renfrewshire local council . Water supplies are provided by Scottish Water , a government @-@ owned corporation of the Scottish Government . Giffnock 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is Scottish Power . The NHS board is NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde . Strathclyde Fire and Rescue is the statutory fire and rescue service . The nearest fire station is in the neighbouring settlement of Clarkston 
 Policing in Giffnock is provided by Police Scotland . The Strathclyde Partnership for Transport , a public body in Scotland , has direct operational responsibilities , such as supporting ( and in some cases running ) local bus services and managing integrated ticketing in Giffnock and other areas from the former Strathclyde region . Transport Scotland manages the local rail network . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Gordon Brown , politician and former Prime Minister 
 Aiden <unk> , Ireland international footballer 
 Andrew Robertson , Scotland international footballer 
 Calum Gallagher , footballer 
 = Sheriff Hill = 
 Sheriff Hill is a suburb in the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead in Tyne and Wear , England . It lies on the B1296 road 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Gateshead , 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) south of Newcastle upon Tyne and 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of the historic city of Durham . According to the 2001 UK census it had a population of 5 @,@ 051 . 
 Historically part of Gateshead Fell in County Durham , Sheriff Hill was the site of a battle between William the Conqueror and Malcolm III of Scotland in 1068 . A road was built through Gateshead Fell in the early 13th century , attracting some settlers . A procession of bishops , sheriffs and noblemen known as the Sheriff 's March took place on the road in 1282 and continued biannually until the 1830s . By then , Gateshead Fell had been enclosed and a village had grown around the road , largely populated by an influx of tinkers , coalminers working at Sheriff Hill Colliery and workers at the local pottery , mill and sandstone quarry . By the turn of the 20th century these industries were in steep decline . The local authority built a large council estate at Sheriff Hill to alleviate dangerous overcrowding in Gateshead , effectively turning the area into a residential suburb . It ceased to be an independent village on 1 April 1974 when it was incorporated into the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead under the terms of the Local Government Act 1972 . 
 Now part of the local council ward of High Fell , the suburb is economically disadvantaged compared with other areas of the borough and nationally , with high levels of unemployment . Sheriff Hill was the site of one of Gateshead 's largest boarding schools but as of 2012 , the only remaining educational establishment is Glynwood Primary School . The suburb also contains the Queen Elizabeth Hospital – the largest hospital in Gateshead , a small dene and a small park . The principal landmark is St John the Evangelist Church , one of three Grade II listed buildings in the area and one of two remaining churches . The southern end of Sheriff 's Highway – the main road through the suburb , is more than 500 feet ( 150 m ) above sea level , making it the highest point in Gateshead . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Until the 19th century , Sheriff Hill was part of Gateshead Fell , a " windswept , barren and treacherous heath " that took its name from the town of Gateshead and the fell or common land contiguous with it . In 1068 , Malcolm III of Scotland marched across the Scottish border to challenge the authority of William the Conqueror . Malcolm , accompanied by native insurgents and foreign supporters , was met by William 's men in the area of Sheriff Hill and was decisively beaten . In the 13th century , a road through Gateshead Fell became the main trade route between Durham and Newcastle and as its importance grew , two public houses – the Old Cannon and The Three Tuns , were built along with a small number of houses . 
 The settlement 's name derives from the Sheriff 's March ; an ancient , biannual procession first held in 1278 . An inquisition at Tynemouth declared that the King of Scotland , the Archbishop of York , the Prior of Tynemouth , the Bishop of Durham and Gilbert de <unk> , Earl of Angus should meet the justices before they entered Newcastle from the south . A procession was held before the meeting ; on the appointed day the procession started in Newcastle , crossed the River Tyne to Gateshead and made its way up the steep road . The meeting place was initially at Chile Well but subsequently the procession came to " light and go into the house " . The house was the Old Cannon public house , where drink was served at the sheriff 's expense . When the judges arrived , the procession returned to Newcastle . 
 In 1647 , Gateshead Fell was surveyed and was found to consist of 1 @,@ 300 acres ( 530 ha ) of land . A number of small , isolated settlements had developed around the road at modern @-@ day Deckham , Wrekenton , Low Fell and Sheriff Hill . The few cottages and properties at Sheriff Hill were of such poor quality that in 1713 , the total of ninety @-@ one cottages returned only £ 8 9s 6d in rent . The rental rate declined over the years and eventually , poverty rates were so high that several tenants paid no rent . The houses were extremely unappealing ; many were essentially mud huts – earth mounds carved into dwellings and roofed with sod . The length of the road that ran through Sheriff Hill was called Sodhouse Bank . By the middle of the 18th century , the area had become a wild and frightening place and when theologian John Wesley arrived in 1785 , he found a " pathless waste of white " . 
 = = = Industrial growth and enclosure = = = 
 The road through Gateshead Fell was turnpiked by the Durham to Tyne Bridge Road Act in 1747 . Although it had brought some early settlers to the area , the development of industry allowed the formative settlement to grow . In 1740 , John Warburton opened a pottery at Carr Hill which is credited with introducing white earthenware to Tyneside . Encouraged by Warburton 's success , Paul Jackson established the Sheriff Hill Pottery in 1771 at the northern end of the turnpike road and by 1775 was advertising his earthenware in the Newcastle Journal . Jackson 's pottery , which became a local centre of pottery production , attracted settlers to the area and became a source of pride to local residents . 
 In 1793 , Sheriff Hill Colliery , or " Ellison Main Colliery " , opened at the summit of Gateshead Fell on the boundary between Sheriff Hill and Low Fell . The colliery had two shafts – the Fanny and Isabella Pits – and provided employment for over 100 men and boys . In 1809 , an Act ordered the enclosure of Gateshead Fell . Commissioners were appointed to settle claims and apportion Gateshead Fell accordingly . Plans were laid for the requisition and construction of wells , quarries , drains , roads and watering places – including a well at Blue Quarries . New roads , today known as Blue Quarries Road , Church Road and Windy Nook Road , were built . The last allotment land disputes were settled in 1830 and Gateshead Fell was entirely enclosed , formally creating the villages of Sheriff Hill , Low Fell , Deckham , Carr Hill and Wrekenton . After the enclosure , Sheriff Hill was a rural settlement before becoming a village . 
 In 1819 , an explosion tore through the Sheriff Hill Colliery killing thirty @-@ five people . Other industries were flourishing in the area ; in 1823 " Heworth Windmill " or " Snowden 's Mill " , a gristmill worked by around thirty employees , was built and " Blue Quarries " , a sandstone quarry , was opened in 1820 and provided employment for stonemasons , quarrymen and their apprentices . While not as extensive as Kell 's Quarries at Windy Nook , Blue Quarries produced " Newcastle <unk> " of excellent quality and world renown . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 By the turn of the 20th century , the industries at Sheriff Hill were in decline . In the 1890s the Old Mill closed , as did Sheriff Hill Pottery in 1909 . In the 1920s Blue Quarries was filled in and Sheriff Hill Colliery , the longest surviving industrial operation , closed in 1926 . The only surviving reminders of the suburb 's industrial past are street names such as " Pottersway " and " Blue Quarries Road " . 
 The industries that had disappeared were replaced by tracts of housing . While most of the sod cottages were torn down after enclosure , the remaining dwellings were in such poor condition that in 1883 , Gateshead 's Medical Health Officer described their standard as one of abject squalor . Some private housing estates were built in Sheriff Hill around 1900 , including the Egremont Estate – a distinctive estate dating from around 1910 where the houses have flat roofs with steps leading to them as an architectural feature , and also at <unk> Hill , where there are some irregularly arranged vernacular houses built from locally quarried stone and slate which give the area " the character of a small , rural farmstead " . These developments did little to alleviate the unsanitary conditions and the chronic overcrowding in the village and across the borough . In light of these problems Gateshead Council , after having previously refused in 1911 and 1917 , decided to purchase 65 acres ( 26 ha ) of land in Carr Hill and Sheriff Hill under the Housing Act 1919 at a cost of £ 19 @,@ 000 in February 1919 . 
 This led to the building of the first council housing estate in Gateshead . Alderman Hodkin laid the foundation stone on 27 October 1920 ; as work commenced the Alderman demonstrated the authority 's concerns , telling the local newspaper that : " we can build houses , but we cannot build homes . Only the people themselves can do that and I hope that the spirit of ‘ esprit de corps ’ will prevail and this will be a model estate " Demand was high – there were 427 applicants for the first twenty eight houses built – and the council built further tracts of housing in a broad triangle between Sodhouse Bank , Ermine Crescent and The Avenue , although central government withdrew its promised funding . By 1936 , most of the social housing available as of 2012 was in existence and provides accommodation to over half of the population of the suburb . 
 Sheriff Hill is now a residential suburb of Gateshead ; in 1974 it was incorporated into the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead by the implementation of the Local Government Act 1972 , before which it was considered part of County Durham . It is bordered by Low Fell to the west , Deckham to the north , Beacon Lough to the south and Windy Nook and Carr Hill to the east . 
 = = Government = = 
 Sheriff Hill comprises part of the High Fell council ward of the Metropolitan Borough of Gateshead . The ward covers approximately 2 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 77 sq mi ) , has a population of 8 @,@ 952 , and is represented on Gateshead Council by three councillors . 
 Sheriff Hill is represented in Parliament as part of the Gateshead constituency ; the sitting Member of Parliament ( MP ) is Labour representative Ian Mearns , who was elected at the May 2010 general election with a majority of 12 @,@ 549 votes over Liberal Democrat Frank Hindle . The swing from Labour to the Liberal Democrats was 3 @.@ 9 % . 
 Before May 2010 , the area was part of the Gateshead East and Washington West constituency , which was abolished in that year 's boundary changes . The MP for Gateshead East and Washington West from 2005 to 2010 was Sharon Hodgson , who campaigned in the newly formed constituency of Washington and Sunderland West . Hodgson succeeded Joyce Quin , who retired on 11 April 2005 . 
 Sheriff Hill is part of the North East England constituency of the European Parliament , which elects three MEPs to the parliament in Brussels . As of 2009 , the constituency 's MEPs are Stephen <unk> of the Labour Party , Martin <unk> of the Conservative Party and Fiona Hall of the Liberal Democrats . 
 = = Geography and topography = = 
 Sheriff Hill is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south of Gateshead town centre and 255 miles ( 410 km ) from London . The underlying geology is predominantly sandstone , grindstone and clay . At the southern end of the suburb the land reaches an elevation of over 500 feet ( 150 m ) above sea level , which is the highest point in the borough . In 1829 , the view of Newcastle and the River Tyne from the hill was said to be " uncommonly grand " and it inspired local artist Thomas Miles Richardson to paint his first notable picture , " View of Newcastle from Gateshead Fell " in 1816 . In spite of the extensive rebuilding in the 20th century , the natural topography still affords panoramic views , particularly to the east towards the coast and north as far as the Cheviot Hills , from several vantage points . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Sheriff Hill , in common with much of the north east of England , has a temperate climate . The mean highest temperature is 12 @.@ 8 ° C ( 55 @.@ 0 ° F ) , which is slightly lower than the England average of 13 @.@ 1 ° C ( 55 @.@ 6 ° F ) . The mean lowest temperature , 7 @.@ 2 ° C ( 45 @.@ 0 ° F ) , is somewhat higher than the England average of 5 @.@ 6 ° C ( 42 @.@ 1 ° F ) . The total annual rainfall is 643 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 25 @.@ 32 in ) , significantly lower than the national average for England of 838 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 33 @.@ 02 in ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 According to the United Kingdom Census 2001 , Sheriff Hill has a population of 5 @,@ 051 – 53 % of whom are female , slightly above the national average , and 47 % are male . 2 @.@ 5 % of the population are from a Black or other Minority Ethnic Group ( BME ) , compared to 9 @.@ 1 % of the national population . Of the BME group , 41 % are from the Asian or Asian – British ethnic group . 
 18 @.@ 9 % of all households are single @-@ parent households , the fifth highest proportion in Gateshead compared with the Gateshead average of 11 @.@ 5 % and the UK average of 9 @.@ 5 % . 32 @.@ 1 % of households have dependent children , compared with 29 @.@ 5 % nationally and 28 @.@ 4 % in Gateshead . The Index of Multiple Deprivation , which divides England into 32 @,@ 482 areas and considers quality of life indicators to measure deprivation , splits Sheriff Hill into two areas , one of which was in the top five percent of deprived areas in England in 2007 . 
 Sheriff Hill compares unfavourably with the wider Gateshead area in respect of adults with educational qualifications . 50 @.@ 7 % of adults in the suburb have no educational qualifications , compared with 38 @.@ 4 % across Gateshead and with the England average of 28 @.@ 9 % . 25 @.@ 2 % of adults have five or more GCSEs or equivalent at grades A * to C compared with 46 @.@ 6 % across England , and 11 @.@ 5 % of adults in the suburb have two or more A @-@ Levels or equivalent compared with the England average of 28 @.@ 2 % and 18 @.@ 6 % across Gateshead . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 According to the 2001 UK census , 82 @.@ 7 % of residents in Sheriff Hill describe themselves as Christian . This is marginally higher than the regional average of 80 @.@ 1 % and substantially higher than the national average of 71 @.@ 7 % . The second most prevalent religion is Islam ; some 0 @.@ 57 % of residents identify as Muslim . Around 0 @.@ 1 % identify as Buddhist and the same proportion identify as Jewish . Just 0 @.@ 05 % identify as Hindu . All of these figures are below the national average . Of the remaining residents , 0 @.@ 1 % adhere to a religion other than those stated , 11 @.@ 2 % have " no religion " and 5 @.@ 1 % did not state any religion . 
 There are two churches in the suburb today . The Anglican Church of St John is located in Church Road and the Sheriff Hill Methodist Church , a member of United Methodist Free Churches , is located at the junction of Kells Lane and Sheriff 's Highway and is shown on the 1939 ordnance survey maps . It is a modern , brick building of semi @-@ circular design . 
 = = Economy = = 
 While the original settlement at Sheriff Hill developed through the growth of industry in the area , the suburb today is predominantly residential with no significant industry . The suburb was once considered affluent , but as of 2012 , almost half of the working age population are economically inactive and less than half of households own a car . The area has than higher levels of unemployment in comparison with Gateshead and England : at Broadway , Pottersway and the Avenue , only 23 @.@ 8 % of adults have full @-@ time employment and 10 @.@ 09 % have part @-@ time jobs . Around 3 @.@ 1 % of the population are self @-@ employed . Those in employment work outside the area , except those employed in the suburb 's public houses , betting shops or fast @-@ food outlets . Other small shops provide some local employment , but few are open for any length of time as they cannot compete with larger retailers elsewhere in Gateshead . 
 = = Health = = 
 Sheriff Hill was once the site of a lunatic asylum , which was opened in the 1830s and situated on Sour Milk Hill Lane . Sheriff Hill Lunatic Asylum tended 86 patients in 1844 and continued to attract admissions until its closure in 1860 . Soon after , work began on a 38 – bed isolation hospital at what is today Queen Elizabeth Avenue . The first building was completed in 1878 and others were added later . The 4 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) site was enclosed by a large stone wall tipped with barbed wire and broken glass , and by 1903 the hospital comprised a main block with an administrative building in the centre with a ward block on each side , another three @-@ ward block , a porter 's lodge , a steam disinfecting building , a laundry and a mortuary . The hospital had a maximum capacity of 78 patients , who were tended by two resident doctors and 10 nurses . 
 During the period 1918 to 1939 , the isolation hospital remained the sole medical provision in Sheriff Hill . Faced with an increase in population , Gateshead Council decided that a new general hospital should be built . In March 1938 , preliminary work started on the Queen Elizabeth Hospital on the site of the isolation hospital ; the foundations were laid in 1939 but the outbreak of World War II delayed the building work . The new hospital was opened by Queen Elizabeth , wife of King George VI , on 18 March 1948 . It is the largest hospital in Gateshead and has since been expanded , most notably with the opening of the North East NHS Surgery Centre in 2008 , which cost £ 13 @.@ 3 million . 
 According to official data , Sheriff Hill residents experience comparatively poor health ; 13 @.@ 7 % of the adult population are considered clinically obese , around 38 % of adults smoke compared with the UK average of 25 @.@ 9 % of adults , and 37 % of adults are binge drinkers . The average life expectancy for men is 77 @.@ 9 years , the same as the UK average , but for women is 78 years ; four years below the UK national average . 
 = = Education = = 
 In 1875 , Sheriff Hill Board School was opened on Church Road . The school was open to pupils aged 5 <unk> , and the curriculum focused upon " the three Rs " and included some other subjects such as needlework and biblical instruction . Attendance was compulsory but truancy was rife – such was the scale of the problem that prizes and awards were presented to encourage attendance . The school closed in 1947 and was replaced by Glynwood Primary School and <unk> Junior School , which were opened by Alderman Grant on 28 November 1953 after a dedication by the Rector of Gateshead . 
 Situated on Glynwood Gardens and Southend Road , the schools were later merged ; Glynwood School survives as the sole educational establishment in Sheriff Hill . As of 2010 , the school is larger than average and the proportion of children entitled to and claiming free school meals is well above the UK average . The pupils at Key Stage 1 and Key Stage 2 are taught subjects from the National Curriculum and achievement is broadly inline with the national average . After inspecting the school in 2010 , OFSTED found it to be a " good " school and praised it for the high quality of teaching and for generating a positive and caring learning environment for pupils . 
 = = Leisure and recreation = = 
 Hodkin Park , at Sheriff 's Highway , is one of many small parks in Gateshead . It is named in honour of Alderman Daniel Hodkin , Gateshead 's deputy mayor in 1920 and a member of the Housing Committee which built council housing at Sheriff Hill . Hodkin Park was locally listed by Gateshead Council in 2004 in recognition of its significance to the local community . At the northern end of Sheriff 's Highway there is a dene , shown as the " Quarry Plantation " on Ordnance Survey maps of 1858 . In 2005 , Gateshead Council carried out maintenance work on the dene , including the pruning of shrubbery and the installation of several sets of steps , to encourage residents to use the area . 
 Sheriff Hill contains several public houses because of its origin as a mining village with a population of tinkers , and because before Durham Road through Low Fell was opened in 1827 , Sodhouse Bank ( now Sheriff 's Highway ) was the route to the Great North Road . The Old Cannon , at the northern end of Sheriff 's Highway , has existed since medieval times and its present name has been used since 1782 , and possibly earlier . The Three Tuns , which is listed in trade directories in 1778 , was the social hub of Sheriff Hill in the 19th century and used by miners and quarrymen , who engaged in cock fighting and <unk> races – informal races between pit donkeys where bets were placed – on open ground in Kells Lane . In 1867 it was the scene of a reception to celebrate the passing of Lord Russell 's Reform Act , and reform meetings and benefit societies were subsequently held there . In recent times it has hosted a number of niche events , including an international pie festival in 2010 and an international sausage festival in 2011 . Both the Old Cannon and The Three Tuns were locally listed by Gateshead Council in 2004 . Other public houses in Sheriff Hill include the Queens Head , listed in trade directories since 1848 , ( which as of 2016 is being converted into a 14 bedroom property ) and the Travellers Rest , which was once called the " Golden <unk> " . 
 Sheriff Hill Methodist Church plays an important social role in the community ; it has hosted biannual jumble sales for many years and an annual Christmas Fayre is held at the church to mark the start of Christmas in Sheriff Hill . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Part of Sheriff Hill was designated a Conservation Area in 1999 . The suburb has three Grade II listed buildings . The Church of St John was conceived in 1809 when an Enclosure Act decreed that a church be built on Gateshead Fell . The church was completed on 30 August 1825 at a cost of £ 2742 . The church is a neat , plain , Gothic structure built from ashlar and slate , and was Grade II listed in 1950 . The principal features are the tower and spire , which rise to 148 feet ( 45 m ) . Coupled with the natural terrain of the land , the top of the spire reaches over 500 feet ( 150 m ) above sea level , making it the highest point in the metropolitan borough and one of the highest churches in England ; it is visible for several miles in all directions , making it a prominent landmark and sea mark . 
 Field House on Windy Nook Road was built in the 19th century in rubble stone and Welsh slate . It has been described as a remnant of Sheriff Hill 's rural past and was listed on 13 January 1983 . <unk> on Church Road is one of the oldest buildings in the suburb . It is built in stone ashlar with a low hipped slate roof and the <unk> has two intact Greek Ionic columns . Much of the original grounds have survived intact , as have the original walls of locally quarried stone . It was listed on 13 January 1988 . Additionally , Sheriff Hill has ten locally listed buildings . These are the Zion Methodist Chapel , six stone cottages at Sheriff 's Highway , The Three Tuns and Old Cannon public houses , and houses at 13 – 14 Egremont Drive . 
 The elevation of Sheriff Hill affords dramatic views of the surrounding landscape across the Team Valley to the west and the Cheviot Hills to the north . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Sheriff Hill is situated on the B1296 Old Durham Road , a wide and busy route that was formerly an alignment of the Great North Road , which was diverted through Low Fell . The section of Old Durham Road that traverses the suburb is called Sheriff 's Highway . The journey time to Gateshead town centre by car or bus is approximately ten minutes , and approximately fifteen minutes to the centre of Newcastle upon Tyne . − 
 The nearest mainline railway station is Newcastle Central Station , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) away . The nearest airport is Newcastle International Airport , 7 @.@ 9 miles ( 12 @.@ 7 km ) away . 
 Sheriff Hill is served by several bus services , including <unk> 28 , the Fab 56 which continues into Sunderland and the Fab 57 , which terminates at the Ellen Wilkinson Estate and is part of the 93 / 94 Loop network . All buses serving Sheriff Hill are operated by Go North East under the administration of Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive , known as " Nexus " . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Home Office policing in Sheriff Hill is provided by Northumbria Police ; the nearest police station is at High West Street , Gateshead . Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Tyne and Wear Fire and Rescue Service and Sheriff Hill is served by the Gateshead East station on Dryden Road in Low Fell . Health provision is provided by the Queen Elizabeth Hospital , which is a National Health Service ( NHS ) hospital administered by the Gateshead Health NHS Foundation Trust . The area is served by an ambulance station adjacent to the hospital on Old Durham Road and ambulance services are provided by the North East Ambulance Service . 
 Public transport services are co @-@ ordinated by the Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive . Waste management is co @-@ ordinated by the local authority , Gateshead Council , which provides refuse collections , which became fortnightly in March 2012 . Sheriff Hill 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is Northern Powergrid . Northumbrian Water supplies drinking water , which is sourced from Kielder Reservoir , and also has responsibility for waste water services . 
 = Carolina in My Mind = 
 " Carolina in My Mind " is a song written and performed by singer @-@ songwriter James Taylor , which first appeared on his 1968 self @-@ titled debut album . Taylor wrote it while overseas recording for the Beatles ' label Apple Records , and the song 's themes reflect his homesickness at the time . Released as a single , the song earned critical praise but not commercial success . It was re @-@ recorded for Taylor 's 1976 Greatest Hits album in the version that is most familiar to listeners . It has been a staple of Taylor 's concert performances over the decades of his career . 
 The song was a modest hit on the country charts in 1969 for North Carolinian singer George Hamilton IV . Strongly tied to a sense of geographic place , " Carolina in My Mind " has been called an unofficial state anthem for North Carolina . It is also an unofficial song of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , being played at athletic events and pep rallies and sung by the graduating class at every university commencement . The association of the song with the state is also made in written works of both fiction and non @-@ fiction . It has become one of Taylor 's most critically praised songs and one that has great popularity and significance for his audience . 
 = = Song and recordings = = 
 The song references Taylor 's years growing up in North Carolina . Taylor wrote it while overseas recording for the Beatles ' label Apple Records . He started writing the song at producer Peter Asher 's London flat on Marylebone High Street , resumed work on it while on holiday on the Mediterranean island of Formentera , and then completed it while stranded on the nearby island of Ibiza with Karin , a Swedish girl he had just met . The song reflects Taylor 's homesickness at the time , as he was missing his family , his dog and his state . 
 The original recording of the song was done at London 's Trident Studios during the July to October 1968 period , and was produced by Asher . The song 's lyric " holy host of others standing around me " makes reference to the Beatles , who were recording The Beatles in the same studio where Taylor was recording his album . Indeed , the recording of " Carolina in My Mind " featured a credited appearance by Paul McCartney on bass guitar and an uncredited one by George Harrison on backing vocals . The other players were Freddie Redd on organ , Joel " Bishop " O 'Brien on drums , and Mick Wayne providing a second guitar alongside Taylor 's . Taylor and Asher also did backing vocals and Asher added a tambourine . Richard Hewson arranged and conducted a string part ; an even more ambitious 30 @-@ piece orchestra part was recorded but not used . The song itself earned critical praise , with Jon Landau 's April 1969 review for Rolling Stone calling it " beautiful " and one of the " two most deeply affecting cuts " on the album and praising McCartney 's bass playing as " extraordinary " . Taylor biographer Timothy White calls the song " the album 's quiet masterpiece . " 
 The song was first released on Taylor 's eponymous debut album in December 1968 ( February 1969 in the United States ) , and was later released as a single in the UK in February 1969 and in the United States in March 1969 . However , owing to the same problems which plagued the release of the album ( namely , Taylor 's inability to promote it due to his hospitalization for drug addiction ) , the single 's original release reached only No. 118 on US pop charts and failed to chart in the UK . Indeed , Taylor had fallen back into addiction during the London recording sessions , and his line about being surrounded by Beatles had been immediately followed by " Still I 'm on the dark side of the moon . " Following the success of Taylor 's second album , Sweet Baby James , and its hit single " Fire and Rain " , " Carolina in My Mind " was reissued by Apple as a single in October 1970 and rose to No. 67 on the U.S. charts . ( A previously unreleased acoustic demo of " Carolina in My Mind " was issued as a bonus track on the 2010 Apple Records remastering of James Taylor . ) 
 Different versions of both this song and " Something in the Way She Moves " were remade by Taylor for use on his 1976 Greatest Hits album because of the difficulty of obtaining licensing rights from Apple during the 1970s and because of uncertainty about where the Apple masters were . The new recordings were done in October 1976 at The Sound Factory in Los Angeles and production was again done by Peter Asher . 
 This rendition of " Carolina in My Mind " had a slower tempo than the original , and accompanying Taylor on acoustic guitar were experienced LA session musicians Dan <unk> on pedal steel ( highlighted in the descending note sequences at the song 's conclusion ) , Lee Sklar on bass , Russ Kunkel on drums , Clarence McDonald on piano , Andrew Gold on harmonium , and Byron <unk> on fiddle . Backing vocals were handled by Gold and Taylor . Greatest Hits became a diamond record , selling more than 11 million copies in the United States by 2001 , and this is the version of " Carolina in My Mind " that became best known . The remake earned even more critical praise than the original . Bill Janovitz of Allmusic said of the 1976 recording that it " accent [ ed ] the languid , plaintive and wistful country melancholy of the song , " while in the 1979 Rolling Stone Record Guide , critic Stephen Holden said that the " stunning " remake showed how much Taylor 's singing had strengthened in the intervening years . Biographer White believed that the song benefited from the removal of the original 's orchestration . 
 The 1976 re @-@ recording was also included on Taylor 's 2003 compilation The Best of James Taylor . 
 = = Later appearances = = 
 " Carolina in My Mind " became a staple of Taylor 's concert repertoire , appearing in the set list of virtually every Taylor tour . A 1992 performance of it was included near the end of Taylor 's first live album , 1993 's Live . The audience reaction demonstrates that the song has great popularity despite never being a hit single : there is immediate cheering as the first notes are picked out on Taylor 's acoustic guitar , and further cheering as soon as he starts to sing . By this era Taylor 's always @-@ excellent touring band was using four backing singers . Arnold McCuller , David Lasley , Kate Markowitz , and Valerie Carter featured strongly in the arrangement , continuing the emphasis on the song 's harmonies that had begun with the 1976 remake . Their part was especially prominent in the concluding refrains as the final words , " in my mind " , were prolonged for emphasis at the end of the song : i @-@ i @-@ i @-@ i @-@ in my mind . 
 The song has been included in a number of Taylor 's concert video releases , including 1980 's James Taylor : In Concert at the Blossom Music Center , 1988 's James Taylor : In Concert at Boston 's Colonial Theatre , and 2002 's Pull Over . It was performed in collaboration with the Dixie Chicks in 2002 for the CMT Crossroads program . In 2004 , Taylor and the Chicks again performed the song together during the Vote for Change tour , with Taylor dedicating it to former North Carolina Senator and U.S. vice @-@ presidential candidate John Edwards . On the 2006 A <unk> Person of the Year Tribute Honoring James Taylor tribute show and video release , " Carolina in My Mind " was performed by Alison Krauss and Jerry Douglas . The song was then included in Taylor 's 2006 – 2007 One Man Band Tour ; accompanied only by Larry Goldings on piano and harmonium , Taylor introduced the song with visual material and by relating its composition on Formentera and other locations . He talked about the Karin of the lyrics , whom he had known only briefly and never seen since , and related various humorous notions about how to find her again . One such performance was documented on the 2007 album and video release One Man Band . Another live performance appeared on Taylor 's 2010 live CD / DVD combo release with Carole King , Live at The Troubadour . James Taylor appeared on The Colbert Report on January 19 , 2012 , and sang " Carolina in My Mind " along with Stephen Colbert , and then performed it on the final day of the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte , North Carolina , where he greeted " fellow Tar Heels and Democrats " . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 While " Carolina in My Mind " did not gain much attention from the public upon its original release , it did from other artists . It was a No. 29 hit on the American country charts and No. 3 hit in Canada in 1969 for North Carolinian singer George Hamilton IV . The Everly Brothers also released it as a single in 1969 , under the variant title " Carolina on My Mind " , but it failed to chart ; this was later collected on their 1994 box set Heartaches and Harmonies . Evie Sands also touched upon it in her 1969 album Any Way That You Want Me . 
 The song was recorded by Melanie on her hit April 1970 album Candles in the Rain ; the arrangement and vocal phrasing are different from Taylor 's , and Allmusic writes that her version " exist [ s ] on an entirely separate plane from the original " . It was also recorded in more conventional folk rock form by John Denver on his May 1970 album Take Me to Tomorrow . Philadelphia @-@ based pop group Crystal Mansion released a version in October 1970 that reached No. 73 on the U.S. pop singles chart . Dawn included a version of it on their 1970 debut album Candida . About the same time , Glen Campbell was performing the song as a sped @-@ up country duet with Linda Ronstadt on his popular television series The Glen Campbell Goodtime Hour ; this was later collected on his 2007 video release Good Times Again . 
 The song subsequently became so identified with Taylor that other artists recorded it less frequently , but still by the late 2000s there were some 60 albums ( including compilation reappearances and albums from Taylor himself ) that featured it . 
 = = Sense of place = = 
 " Carolina in My Mind " is strongly associated with its geographical place and has been called an unofficial state anthem of North Carolina . Taylor had grown up in Carrboro , outside Chapel Hill , where his father taught at the University of North Carolina School of Medicine . Taylor later reflected : " Chapel Hill , the piedmont , the outlying hills , were tranquil , rural , beautiful , but quiet . Thinking of the red soil , the seasons , the way things smelled down there , I feel as though my experience of coming of age there was more a matter of landscape and climate than people . " More broadly , the song has been associated with The South . Author James L. Peacock sees it akin to Stephen Foster 's " My Old Kentucky Home " and other songs and works of literature in establishing " the South 's sense of place " , even if that sense is sometimes an exercise in projected nostalgia . Author Ken Emerson also sees a connection to that quintessential American songwriter , with the Taylor song resembling Foster 's " Sitting By My Own Cabin Door " in its sense of longing for home amid personal and contextual dislocation . Recognizing the association with the state , the Chapel Hill Museum opened an ongoing exhibit " Carolina in My Mind : The James Taylor Story " in 2003 that includes memorabilia from Taylor 's years in the area and a video documentary . 
 " Carolina in My Mind " is also an unofficial song of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . It is played at athletic events and pep rallies , and is sung by the graduating class at every university graduation . In October 2006 , Taylor returned to the campus to receive the school 's Carolina Performing Arts Lifetime Achievement Award . University chancellor James <unk> said to Taylor , " We love you . We love what you do and how you represent this university . " Taylor said , " It 's strange but somehow compelling to come home and sing it . It draws a line through my own personal history and connects me again to a place that I go to in my dreams , a landscape that will forever be a part of me . " The song is also frequently covered by popular UNC campus a cappella groups , including the Clef Hangers . The Clef Hangers ' Fall Concert 2007 performances of the song featured future American Idol season 8 finalist Anoop Desai handling the lead vocal on the closing part of the song . The Clef Hangers , joined by university chancellor Holden Thorp , again performed it in March 2009 at the first anniversary memorial service for murdered student president Eve Carson . 
 The 82nd Airborne Division of the United States Army , stationed at Fort Bragg in North Carolina , sponsors a group of singing soldiers known as the 82nd Airborne Division All @-@ American Chorus . They recorded a version of the song on their 2009 album A Soldier 's Heart . 
 Some of the song 's lyrics are used as an epigraph in the 2001 Celebrate the States series volume on North Carolina and in the 1983 reference book America the Quotable . News providers have used " Carolina in My Mind " as a title for stories about the state 's politics , economy , and outdoor activities . The song 's geographical association also appears in fiction , including in Carly Alexander 's 2004 novel The Eggnog Chronicles and North Carolinian Sharyn <unk> 's 2006 novel St. Dale . 
 Although it was North Carolina that inspired the song , it is popular in South Carolina too , tying for first place on a South Carolina Information Highway 's construction of a soundtrack regarding the state . It has been used as the theme for the television coverage of the annual Family Circle Cup tennis event in South Carolina . 
 " Carolina in My Mind " is also popular among the Carolinian diaspora ; prize @-@ winning North Carolinian writer Jill McCorkle , living in Massachusetts , refers to it as " the chosen anthem of misplaced Carolinians . " In Kathy Reichs ' initial Temperance Brennan novel , Déjà Dead , the protagonist ( like the author ) is from North Carolina but working in Montreal as a forensic anthropologist , and alludes to the song as part of a Carolinian reverie in the midst of a horrid murder case . One person who had moved to California said , " Still to this day I get nostalgic whenever I hear it on the radio . It 's a song that makes anyone who grew up in North Carolina homesick . In a way , it 's become an anthem song for people who left the state . " 
 = Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... = 
 Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... ( English : Sometimes there 's Happiness , Sometimes there 's Sorrow ) , also known as K3G , is a 2001 Indian drama film written and directed by Karan Johar and produced by his father , Yash Johar . Written specifically to evoke nostalgia among the expatriate Indian audiences , the film stars Amitabh Bachchan , Jaya Bachchan , Shah Rukh Khan , Kajol , Hrithik Roshan and Kareena Kapoor in leading roles , with Rani Mukerji appearing in an extended cameo appearance . The music was composed by Jatin Lalit , Sandesh Shandilya and <unk> Shrivastava , with lyrics penned by Sameer and Anil Pandey . The background score was composed by <unk> Chakravarty . The film tells the story of an Indian family , which faces troubles and misunderstandings over their adopted son 's marriage to a girl belonging to a lower socio @-@ economic group than them . 
 Development of the film began in 1998 , soon after the release of Karan 's debut film Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) . Principal photography began on 16 October 2000 in Mumbai and continued in London and Egypt . Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... was promoted with the tag @-@ line " It 's All About Loving Your Parents " . Initially scheduled to release during the Diwali festivities of 2001 , the film eventually released in India , United Kingdom and North America on 14 December 2001 . In 2003 , it became the first Indian film to be given a theatrical release in Germany . Upon release , the film met with mixed reviews from film critics and received polarising reactions to Karan Johar 's " larger @-@ than @-@ life " directorial style , some seeing it as an " oddly hollow film " . 
 Made on a budget of ₹ 400 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 9 million ) , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... emerged as a major commercial success , both domestically and internationally , with a lifetime gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 35 billion ( US $ 20 million ) . Outside India , the film was the highest grossing Indian film ever , until its record was broken by Karan 's next directorial , Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna ( 2006 ) . Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... won several awards at popular award ceremonies the following year , including five Filmfare Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Yashvardhan " Yash " Raichand ( Amitabh Bachchan ) is a rich businessman living in India with his wife Nandini ( Jaya Bachchan ) and two sons Rahul and Rohan . Rahul is the elder son and was adopted by Yash and Nandini at birth . This is known to everyone in the Raichand household , except Rohan . When grown up , Rahul ( Shahrukh Khan ) comes across the vivacious Punjabi @-@ speaking Anjali Sharma ( Kajol ) , and they eventually fall in love , but their love is forbidden , because Anjali is from a working @-@ class background . Yash and Nandini soon send Rohan to a Boarding School , which all the males in their family have attended . Yash announces his desire for Rahul to marry Naina ( Rani Mukherji ) , but Naina learns that Rahul is in love with Anjali , and encourages him to pursue her . When Yash comes to know of this , he is enraged , and Rahul promises not to marry Anjali . En route to tell her of his promise , he discovers that her father ( Alok Nath ) has died , and decides to marry her despite his father 's hostility . Yash learns of the marriage and disowns Rahul , whereupon Nandini and Rahul share a tearful goodbye . Nandini sends Sayeeda ( Farida Jalal ) , Rahul and Rohan 's nanny , to watch over him . Rahul visits Rohan in the Boarding School and begs of Rohan never to ask where he went or why he left , and asks that he take care of Nandini . 
 Ten years later , Rohan ( Hrithik Roshan ) returns home from the Boarding School , and learns from his grandmothers ( <unk> Sachdev and Sushma Seth ) that Rahul was adopted , and the reason why Rahul left the house , whereupon Rohan vows to reunite the family . He learns that Rahul , Anjali , and her younger sister Pooja moved to London , and tells his parents that he wishes further studies in London , his parents agree to let him go . In London , Rahul is now a wealthy businessman . He and Anjali now have their own son , Krish . Pooja ( Kareena Kapoor ) , now a popular fashion @-@ obsessed diva , is a student at King 's College London . Rohan enrolls there too . He and Pooja meet again and he tells her that he has come to London to bring his brother and sister @-@ in @-@ law back home . Pooja tells Rahul that Rohan is her friend 's brother who currently has nowhere to stay . After some persuasion , Rahul agrees to let Rohan stay . At Krish 's school function , he leads his class in singing the Indian National Anthem , and later recites advice which Rohan had given him . Rahul having given Rohan this advice ten years back , he now realises that Rohan is his brother . 
 Rohan begs Rahul to come home , but he refuses . Pooja convinces Rohan to invite his parents to London ; Rahul and Nandini are overjoyed to see one another , but Rahul still refuses to talk to his father . Soon , Yash learns that his mother is on her death bed , and that her last wish is for Yash , Rahul , and Rohan to light her funeral pyre together . Therefore , the entire family attends the funeral , and Nandini tells Yash that she thought he was wrong for disowning Rahul . Rohan and Pooja convince Rahul to talk to Yash , who allows him and Anjali into the house . Rohan and Pooja are married and the family hold a belated celebration of Rahul and Anjali 's wedding . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Amitabh Bachchan as Yashvardhan " Yash " Raichand , a New Delhi @-@ based businessman . Fiercely dominating , he insists on controlling the life of his wife and sons . Amitabh Bachchan was Karan 's first choice for the portrayal of Yash Raichand . Karan added , " As I wrote the film , I realised that Yashvardhan Raichand is the backbone of the film and I could only see one actor playing the role — Amitabh Bachchan . " Bachchan , on his part , agreed to do the film without a script narration . Karan mentioned that he was initially scared to direct a star of the stature of Bachchan , but the latter " soon became an actor instead of a superstar " . 
 Jaya Bachchan as Nandini Raichand , Yash 's wife . She shares a close bond with her sons , but remains in the shadow of her husband . According to Karan Johar , Jaya Bachchan was the " obvious " choice for the character of Nandini , and added that her " acting prowess and stature " were the other reasons for him preferring to cast her . The film also marked the return of Amitabh and Jaya Bachchan together on screen after a gap of 18 years . Of her character , she said that Nandini was an extension of her own self . She elaborated , " My personal feelings towards Shah Rukh are similar to what I was supposed to portray in the film . There 's something about him that makes me want to mother him . " She added that she modelled her character on Karan 's mother , Hiroo Johar , who " is a very emotional and sentimental person . " 
 Shah Rukh Khan as Rahul Raichand , Yash and Nandini 's adopted son . He feels indebted to his parents and tries to fulfill all their wishes . However , he falls in love with Anjali and invites the wrath of Yash . When Karan offered the role to Shah Rukh , he immediately agreed to do it and accommodated his dates , despite having several other commitments . Khan described the character of Rahul by saying , " I love the vulnerability and the honesty in his eyes . He has the appeal of a boy next door . Besides , his intensity and ability to convey emotions without words is amazing . " 
 Kajol as Anjali Sharma Raichand , Rahul 's love @-@ interest and later , wife . She is a fun @-@ loving Punjabi woman living in the Chandni Chowk area of Delhi . Belonging to a lower socio @-@ economic group than the Raichand family , she is not accepted by Yash as his daughter @-@ in @-@ law . Karan was initially hesitant to cast Kajol in the film , as he felt that she would refuse the offer due to her recent marriage . Kajol , however , was moved to tears during the script narration and agreed to do the film . In an interview to Filmfare , Kajol said , " One tiny fact that Karan forgot to mention during his narration was just how much Punjabi my character spoke in the film . I nearly died when I saw the lines of dialogue on the first day of shooting . " However , she learnt the right pronunciation and diction with the help of Yash Johar and the crew members . 
 Hrithik Roshan as Rohan Raichand , Yash and Nandini 's biological son . He wants his elder brother , Rahul , to return home . Karan signed Roshan to play the character of Rohan after watching a rough cut of the latter 's debut film , Kaho Naa ... Pyaar Hai ( 2000 ) . Roshan described his character as a " buffer " in a film that primarily focused on Amitabh Bachchan and Shah Rukh Khan . 
 Kareena Kapoor as Pooja " Poo " Sharma , Anjali 's younger sister . She is a sophisticated girl , who helps Rohan in his plan to reunite Rahul with his parents . After spotting Kapoor at a party organised by Bombay Times , Karan decided to cast her immediately for the role of the glamorous diva , Poo . Kapoor stated that in her opinion , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... was primarily Kajol 's film , and that her own character was a supporting one . In order to prepare for her role , she worked hard on her dancing skills , as she didn 't want audiences to know that she couldn 't dance well . 
 Rani Mukerji as Naina Kapoor , a socialite girl who loves Rahul and wants to marry him , and Yashvardhan approves of her . Following the success of Karan 's previous film , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , which starred Khan , Kajol and Mukerji , he wanted her presence in this film too . He thus cast Mukerji in a guest appearance . Initially , Karan wanted her presence in the film to be a surprise , but an accidental slip by Sony Music during the promotional activities led to her discovery . 
 Farida Jalal as Sayeeda / <unk> ( DJ ) , Rahul and Rohan 's nanny . On the insistence of Nandini , she follows Rahul and Anjali to London . 
 Simone Singh as <unk> , Sayeeda 's daughter and Anjali 's best friend 
 Alok Nath as <unk> Sharma , Anjali and Pooja 's father 
 <unk> Majumdar as the younger Rohan Raichand 
 <unk> Raaj as the younger Pooja Sharma 
 Aryan Khan ( Shah Rukh Khan 's real @-@ life son ) as the younger Rahul ( special appearance ) 
 Jugal Hansraj as Rohan 's friend ( special appearance ) 
 <unk> Sachdev and Sushma Seth were cast as Yash and Nandini 's mothers , respectively . The film also featured Johnny Lever as <unk> ( a shopkeeper in Chandni Chowk ) , Himani Shivpuri as <unk> 's wife , <unk> Khan as Krish Raichand ( Rahul and Anjali 's son ) , Amar Talwar as Mr. Kapoor ( Yash 's friend and Naina 's father ) . Ramona <unk> , <unk> Writer and Vikas Sethi feature as Poo 's friends Sonya , Tanya and Robbie , respectively . Additionally , Ashutosh Singh features as Ashfaque , <unk> 's husband . Shilpa Mehta , <unk> and <unk> Dastur were cast as Ashfaque 's mother , grandmother and nephew , respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After the success of Karan 's debut film , Kuch Kuch Hota Hai ( 1998 ) , he began work on a story dealing with the concept of " generations " . The idea initially revolved around two daughters @-@ in @-@ law . However , on the advice of filmmaker Aditya Chopra , who thought that the male characters would be too weak , Karan decided to tweak the story @-@ line to make it the story of two brothers . 
 The inspiration behind Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... came from Yash Chopra 's Kabhi Kabhie ( 1976 ) . On being inspired by the classic , Karan quoted , " What appealed to me was the fact that the love story stretched out across generations . It began with youth and went on as the people grew older . You could say that Kabhi Kabhie is the starting point for my new film , that I am inspired by it . But the film , I am sure , will be very different . It will look different , feel different . " Similarly , Karan added an extra " e " to the second Kabhi in the title of his film , due to numerological reasons . In an interview with The Times of India , Karan dispelled comparisons with Kuch Kuch Hota Hai and said that while his debut film was " frothy and bubble @-@ <unk> " , this one was " more classy and sophisticated " . He added that there would be " plenty of drama " in this film too , but handled more maturely . 
 Before principal photography could begin , Karan and the contracted costume designers ( Manish Malhotra , Shabina Khan and Rocky S. ) shopped in several locations of USA , London , Milan , and New Delhi to get the right look for each of the cast members . Additionally , Karan had only one expectation from the contracted actors ; to " look good and do their job " . He did not organise any rehearsals for them , except for a scene involving a climatic encounter between Amitabh Bachchan and Roshan . Additional production people hired included choreographer Farah Khan , production designer Sharmishta Roy and cinematographer Kiran <unk> . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The first schedule of the film began in Mumbai on 16 October 2000 , with the picturisation of the song " Bole <unk> " involving Roshan , Kapoor , Khan and Kajol . Amitabh and Jaya Bachchan joined the schedule on 20 October . Due to the immense stress caused by the presence of these actors , Karan fainted on the sets . However , he continued directing the rest of the song while lying in bed . 
 For the first half of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... , the production design team led by Sharmishtha Roy , recreated Chandni Chowk in a studio at Film City of Mumbai . In order to lend authenticity , the team took several pictures of the original area and also shopped in the various alleys of Chandni Chowk . Roy later won Filmfare Award for Best Art Direction her work . The inside of a palatial mansion was developed from scratch in the same studio to double as the home of the Raichand family . In order to lend authenticity to the house of the multi @-@ <unk> , several expensive paintings were hung from the walls . A total of 18 – 19 elaborate sets were constructed by Roy , as Karan wanted the look of the film to be " larger @-@ than @-@ life " . 
 The second half of the film was shot in the city of London . Karan chose to set the film there due to his fondness for the city . He added , " I could have based my plot in New York City or anywhere else . But London is kind of close to my heart . I like to weave my films around London . " Shooting locations include the Wales Millennium Centre , Bluewater Complex , Kent , Blenheim Palace , St Paul 's Cathedral and the banks of River Thames . The outdoor scenes of the Raichand family mansion were shot at Waddesdon Manor . The crew faced enormous difficulties while filming an emotional scene between Jaya Bachchan and Khan at the Bluewater Complex , as a massive crowd had gathered there to watch them at work . The situation , eventually , got worse and the complex officials asked them to wrap up the shoot within two hours . 
 Another song sequence ( " Suraj Hua Maddham " ) involving Khan and Kajol was shot with the backdrop of the Pyramids of Giza in the city of Cairo in Egypt . Due to the lighting conditions , the crew could shoot only between 7 and 9 am in the morning . As a result , the song took several days to film . In addition , Kajol suffered from a minor injury while filming for the song , as she had experienced a bad fall . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The music of the film was composed by Jatin Lalit , Sandesh Shandilya and <unk> Shrivastava . The lyrics were provided by Sameer , except for " Suraj Hua Maddham " which was penned by Anil Pandey . A total of 11 tracks are present in the album , which was released by Sony Music on 16 October 2001 . Explaining the album , Karan Johar said , " I wanted music that had all kinds of tunes — pop , romantic , bhangra – but one sound . It had to be larger than life . " He added that Jatin @-@ Lalit came up with three " haunting melodies " , while Shandilya and Shrivastava came up with the pop and bhangra songs , respectively . A legal suit was filed against Johar for using the song " It 's Raining Men " in the film without obtaining prior permission . 
 Upon release , the soundtrack of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... emerged as a major success by selling 2 @.@ 5 million units within 30 days . Additionally , it became the largest selling album of the year in India . Writing for Rediff , Sukanya Varma praised most of the compositions , while being critical of the song " Say Shava Shava " due to the " overdose of Punjabi emotions " . She summed up by saying , " The music of K3G has a presence . Hate it or love it , you certainly won 't ignore it . " Planet Bollywood gave it 8 of 10 stars , calling " Suraj Hua Maddham " the best song , and the best reason to buy the album . In 2002 , Sony released another album titled Klub K3G , featuring remixes by Indian electronic music producers <unk> Sarin , <unk> Sidhu , <unk> Hans and others . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Initially scheduled for a theatrical release during the Diwali celebrations of 2001 , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... released a month later on 14 December . Due to the long duration of the film , theatres screened three shows daily , instead of four . Additionally , due to a massive rush in advance bookings , several theatres increased their ticket prices . 
 The use of " Jana Gana Mana " by Rabindranath Tagore during the film was met with criticism from a certain section of the audiences , and politicians of the Bharatiya Janata Party , for being " out @-@ of @-@ context " and " insulting the national pride " . Subsequently , a writ was issued against Dharma Productions in the Allahabad High Court by a petitioner based in Uttar Pradesh . However , the court did not entertain the complainant 's petition . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 In India , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... met with polarised reactions from film critics . While certain critics praised the visual richness and the performances of the cast , certain others were negative about the lengthy run time and criticised the script strength and inconsistencies . Khalid Mohamed of The Times of India applauded the film and reviewed , " K3G is the complete commercial banquet delivered with fabulous finesse by Karan Johar . So , go indulge yourself . Cry your heart out and surprisingly , you 'll feel life 's finally alive and kicking in Mumbai 's dream world . " Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . He praised the emotional sequences , as well as the choreography , production design , costumes , and cinematography . He added that Karan Johar was the real star , for creating many memorable sequences . Rakesh <unk> of Planet Bollywood gave the film 8 out of 10 stars , saying " Dharma Productions has kept its promise in giving us a lovable film to remember in coming times . " He pointed out several flaws in the script , but added that the positive aspects of the film managed to outweigh the negative ones . He quoted , " K3G is one heck of an entertainer and was worth the wait " . In the film review section of his book Bollywood : An Insider 's Guide , Fuad Omar showered overwhelming praise on the film and called it a " masterpiece from the first frame to the last " . In summary he said , " Overall Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... is without a doubt the most enthralling , entertaining , emotional and complete vision and definition of Hindi cinema I have ever seen . It is simply the perfect Hindi film . " 
 Contrary to the positive reviews , <unk> N. , writing for Rediff , said that despite an extraordinary cast and a big budget , " Karan Johar disappoints . " He praised Amitabh and Jaya Bachchan 's performance and noted Hrithik Roshan for holding his own against the veteran actors . However , in summary he called the film " a bad remix of Mohabbatein and Kuch Kuch Hota Hai " . Writing for The Hindu , Ziya Salam praised Kajol 's performance and Karan 's ability to " keep the viewer occupied " . She commented , " Watch Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... not because of the hype which preceded its release but because in these meagre times not many have come up with better fare . The film at least partially redeems the hope surrounding it . Again , just like its name . Some joy , some disappointment . " <unk> Joshi of Outlook gave a mixed review and said that while the film " makes you laugh and cry alternately " , the shenanigans were nevertheless " fake and affected " and " monochromatic despite the profusion of colours " . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 Overseas too , the reviews were mostly mixed , with several critics praising the technical production details of the film , while being somewhat less enthusiastic about the story line . <unk> Khan of BBC gave the film 9 out of 10 stars and praised the performances of Khan , Kajol and Kapoor . She summed up by saying , " ( K3G is ) a well made film , with some magical moments ( hilarious and weepy ) and possibly the world 's best looking family ! " Derek Elley of Variety said that it " is a highly enjoyable , often dazzlingly staged vehicle dragged down by a sluggish final half @-@ hour " . He also praised the cinematography , and the picturisation of the song , " Say Shava Shava " . Corey K. Creekmur , of the University of Iowa , said that there were many ignored or illogical plot points and inconsistencies between the moral messages meant to be portrayed and the manner in which they came off on screen . Overall , he called the film a letdown . 
 = = = Box Office = = = 
 Upon release , Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... broke all opening records . The film opened to around ₹ 70 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 0 million ) nett collections in its first weekend in India , with the first week total at around ₹ 140 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 1 million ) . The domestic opening week collections were 70 % higher than the previous record and never before had opening records been eclipsed by such large margins . It also set new records for the second and third weeks , by collecting ₹ 105 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 6 million ) and ₹ 80 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 2 million ) respectively . The film went on to become the second highest grosser of 2001 domestically , netting ₹ 550 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 2 million ) in India , and earning " Blockbuster " status . 
 The film was released in around 125 prints in the overseas markets , grossing a total of $ 8 @.@ 9 million at the end of its theatrical run . It performed very well in the United Kingdom , with a gross of $ 689 @,@ 000 in its opening weekend . It thus debuted at the third position at the British box @-@ office . The total earnings of the film reached over $ 3 @.@ 2 million in the UK . The film also had the biggest opening ever for a Bollywood film in North America , with a gross of $ 1 @.@ 1 million in 73 screens . However , according to a report by Rediff , the numbers were so high that the official reporting agency did not believe it , and asked for evidence that could not be furnished until after the reporting deadline had passed . If reported on time , the film would have opened at the number 10 spot in the North American box @-@ office . However , according to figures from Box Office Mojo , the film debuted at the 32nd place at the American box office during the week of 4 January 2002 . It eventually gathered a total of $ 2 @.@ 9 million there . Additionally , in 2003 , the film became the first from India to be given a theatrical release in Germany . 
 Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... earned a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 35 billion ( US $ 20 million ) . It was the highest grossing film of the year worldwide , surpassing Gadar : Ek Prem Katha which was the top grosser in the domestic market . Its record of being the highest grosser abroad was broken only by Johar 's next directorial , Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna ( 2006 ) . When adjusted for inflation , the film is still among the highest grossers worldwide . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... received fifteen nominations at the Filmfare Awards , ultimately winning five awards . In an interview with Filmfare , Karan Johar said that he wasn 't dejected to have not won too many awards at the ceremony , as he felt that Lagaan was " a classic " and deserved to win . 
 The film won several awards at the International Indian Film Academy Awards ( IIFA ) , and some at the Zee Cine Awards and Screen Awards ceremonies , among others . Among the cast members , Kajol and Jaya Bachchan won several awards in the Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress category , respectively . At the 13th annual Valenciennes International Film Festival , the film won five major awards , including three Best Film awards and Best Actress for Kajol . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Film critics and academics have analysed Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... in several ways . In the book , Encyclopedia of Religion and Film , Eric Mazur described several " mythological subtexts " in the film . While mentioning the opening scene of the film , which features the Raichand family worshiping " Hindu deities during the annual Diwali holiday " , he explained that the scene allowed the Hindu audiences to participate in the darshan along with the characters . 
 Author Rajani Mazumdar compared Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... to Hum Aapke Hain Koun .. ! ( 1994 ) and added that the film dealt with themes of family and moral values through a " spectacular stage that moves across global locations " . She further stated that the buildup to the story was juxtaposed with the backdrop of two contrasting places – the Raichand home and the interiors of Chandni Chowk . While the Raichand house is described as " expensive , almost like a museum " , Chandni Chowk is shown as a world of crowds , chaos and festivities . She also made a note of the use of frontal camera angles in order to ensure that the " spectators eye travels throughout the interior expanse " . 
 Writer Sangita Gopal analysed the " intensification of the aesthetic effects of Hindi cinema " in the narrative scheme of the film . During the confrontation scene between Yash and Rahul Raichand , a " thundering background score " coupled with " 360 ° panning shots " were used to build up melodrama . She added that while such scenes simply began by reprising previous face @-@ offs in several melodramatic Hindi films ( such as Mohabbatein of 2000 ) , they gradually shifted " to a more realist register as the framework moves from a sociology to a psychology of the family " . Mazur mentioned the use of " dream sequences " in the film as a means of escapism . He referred to the song " Suraj Hua Maddham " as an <unk> sequence that allowed Rahul and Anjali to be physically intimate " in ways that they could not in the real world of the film . " He added that the characters conveyed a plethora of emotions not through extensive dialogue but through the exchange of glances , which were demonstrated by extreme close @-@ ups on their eyes . 
 Writing for the book Movie Blockbusters , Andrew Willis commented that the film was specifically written to appeal to the Indian diaspora . He explained that the film was aimed at invoking nostalgia among the large section of NRI 's in Canada , United Kingdom and North America . In the second half of the film , Rahul and Anjali move to London , where they enjoy an affluent lifestyle , among several non @-@ Indian neighbours and friends . However , there is a perpetual dissatisfaction among them , especially Anjali , in living away from home . Additionally , she dresses up in a traditional sari and performs the duties of a loyal <unk> . She also frets about her son and younger sister being " too influenced " by Western culture . The film , thus tries to form an emotional connection with the expatriate Indian audiences . 
 According to Eckstein several sequences convey a " culturally conservative " and " idealistic image " of India , while maintaining that the diaspora living in Britain lead a life of " involuntary exile " . Western ideology is equated with economic success , with emphasis on Western consumerism such as Starbucks and Burger King . Creekmur believes that Rohan was the only character in the film who could navigate multiple cultural spaces with ease . He seems totally at ease both at his ancestral home in India and in London . Though the tagline for the film was " It 's all about loving your parents " , Creekmur was skeptical and suggested " the film seems to actually admonish stern fathers to trust and love their children — mothers , <unk> , and grandmothers , of course , love their children unconditionally even while respecting the idiotic wishes of vain patriarchs . " 
 = = Other media = = 
 During the production and filming process , a book entitled The Making of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham was written by Niranjan Iyengar . It features materials and interviews concerning the producer , director , photographer , art director , cast and crew that Iyengar gathered over an 18 @-@ month period during the production of the film . The book was released a few days prior to the theatrical release of the film . 
 Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham ... has been released on VHS and DVD ( one and two disc version ) formats , beginning in 2002 , and in the Blu @-@ ray format beginning in 2010 . The two disc DVD version of the film contains a 45 @-@ minute documentary entitled The Making of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham along with deleted scenes , a theatrical trailer , and several television promos . 
 = Xu Lai ( actress ) = 
 Xu Lai ( Chinese : <unk> ; Wade – Giles : <unk> Lai ; 1909 – 4 April 1973 ) was a Chinese film actress , socialite , and World War II secret agent . Known as the " Standard Beauty " , she was active in the film industry for only three years , and quit acting after the suicide of the great star Ruan Lingyu in 1935 . Her first husband was Li Jinhui , the " Father of Chinese pop music " . 
 During the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War , Xu and her second husband , Lieutenant General Tang Shengming , ostensibly served under the Japanese @-@ controlled Nanking puppet regime , but secretly worked as agents for the Republic of China resistance based in Chungking . 
 With the Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War , Xu and Tang defected to the People 's Republic of China , but were severely persecuted during the Cultural Revolution ( 1966 – 76 ) . Xu Lai died in prison in 1973 ; her husband survived and lived until 1987 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Xu Lai was born 1909 to a poor family in Shanghai . Her original name was Xu <unk> ( <unk> ) and she was also called Xu <unk> ( <unk> ) . Due to poverty , she began working at a British @-@ owned egg factory in <unk> at the age of 13 , but was later able to attend school after her family fortunes improved . 
 In 1927 , Xu attended the China Song and Dance School run by Li Jinhui , who is now considered the " Father of Chinese pop music " . She also joined Li 's Bright Moon Song and Dance Troupe and toured many cities in China and Southeast Asia . She married Li , who was 18 years her senior , in 1930 , and gave birth to a daughter named Xiaofeng . 
 = = Film career = = 
 In 1932 , Xu Lai was recruited by Zhou <unk> , a cofounder of the Mingxing Film Company , to join the studio . She became famous after starring in the 1933 silent film Remnants of Spring ( <unk> ) , in which she appeared in probably the earliest female bath scene in the history of Chinese cinema . Later that year she starred in A Feather on Mount Tai ( <unk> ) . In 1934 , she starred in Cheng <unk> 's popular patriotic films Romance of Mount Hua ( <unk> ) and Go Northwest ( <unk> ) . 
 Xu Lai , together with Wang Renmei and Li Lili , her former colleagues at the Bright Moon Troupe , were the earliest stars to portray the vibrant , wholesome , and sexy " country girl " prototype , which became one of the most popular figures in Chinese cinema , and later inherited by the cinema of Hong Kong . 
 Xu became widely known as the " Standard Beauty " , and a ceremony was held to crown her the " Beauty Queen of the Far East " . The Shanghai Chinese Women 's Association strongly disapproved of her " coronation " . Among the objections raised was that she " shocked the public by exhibiting herself in the nude " , referring to her bath scene . 
 The suicide of actress Ruan Lingyu in 1935 , which caused three other women to commit suicide during her 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) long funeral procession , had a major impact on Xu Lai . She quit acting after finishing her last film , The Boatman 's Daughter ( <unk> ) , directed by Shen <unk> . It was critically acclaimed and considered her best film . 
 The sudden death of her daughter Xiaofeng , also in 1935 , caused a breakdown of her marriage with Li Jinhui and the couple divorced in November of that year . It was an acrimonious divorce and Li requested compensation for the investment he had made in training her . 
 = = Secret agent = = 
 In 1936 , Xu Lai married Tang Shengming ( <unk> ) , a Kuomintang Lieutenant General from a prominent Hunanese family . Tang was a notorious playboy and a close friend of Dai Li , chief of the Bureau of Investigation and Statistics ( <unk> ) , the secret service of the Republic of China . Xu 's assistant Zhang <unk> ( <unk> ) , a <unk> secret agent , became Tang 's concubine , and Shanghai tabloids often reported salacious stories of the three sharing the same bed . Tang made sure that Xu Lai introduced Dai Li to the " movie queen " Hu Die , who later became the spy chief 's mistress . 
 A year after her wedding , the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War erupted . The Imperial Japanese Army attacked Shanghai in August 1937 , and the national capital Nanking in December . Tang 's older brother , General Tang Shengzhi , was the chief commander of the doomed defense of Nanking , which resulted in the Nanking Massacre . Tang Shengming , meanwhile , was the deputy commander of Changsha and chief commander of Changde , both in Hunan province . 
 In 1940 , Tang Shengming surrendered to the Japanese and was recruited to serve in the Reorganized National Government of China ( the Wang Jingwei regime ) , a puppet government established by Japan in occupied Nanking . Tang was appointed the commander of public security of Jiangsu province , while Xu was his socialite wife who became a close friend with the wives of Wang Jingwei , Chen <unk> , and Zhou <unk> , the top leaders of the puppet regime . They were widely condemned by the Chinese public as traitors , and Tang Shengzhi publicly renounced all relationship with his brother and sister @-@ in @-@ law . 
 After the surrender of Japan at the end of World War II , the Kuomintang government revealed that Tang Shengming and Xu Lai had been sent by Dai Li to serve as secret agents in the Wang Jingwei regime . The couple took great personal risks to obtain intelligence about Japanese spies and troop movements and pass it to the resistance . Xu Lai reportedly discovered the identity of a Japanese spy while playing mahjong with Zhou <unk> 's wife , and personally delivered messages to Chinese agents in Shanghai in urgent situations . 
 = = After 1949 = = 
 In 1949 , as it was becoming clear that Mao Zedong 's Communists were winning the Chinese Civil War , Xu Lai moved her family from Shanghai to British Hong Kong , while Tang Shengming went to Changsha to join the surrender of Hunan Governor Cheng Qian to the Communists . His brother Tang Shengzhi also surrendered . In 1950 , Tang Shengming was appointed deputy commander of 21st Group Army of the People 's Liberation Army and fought battles against the Kuomintang troops in Guangdong and Guangxi provinces . 
 In 1956 , Tang was appointed a counsellor of the State Council of the People 's Republic of China , and Xu Lai moved with her husband to Beijing . 
 When the Cultural Revolution started in 1966 , Mao 's wife Jiang Qing , who had been a minor actress in Shanghai during the 1930s , began persecuting many of her former colleagues who were familiar with her " bourgeois " past . Xu Lai and her husband were both imprisoned for unfounded criminal charges . On 4 April 1973 , Xu died in prison after years of torture and maltreatment , at the age of 64 . Tang survived the tumultuous period , and lived until 1987 . 
 = Marcus Morton = 
 Marcus Morton ( 1784 – February 6 , 1864 ) was an American lawyer , jurist , and politician from Taunton , Massachusetts . He served two terms as Governor of Massachusetts and several months as Acting Governor following the death in 1825 of William Eustis . He served for 15 years as an Associate Justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court , all the while running unsuccessfully as a Democrat for governor . He finally won the 1839 election , acquiring exactly the number of votes required for a majority win over Edward Everett . After losing the 1840 and 1841 elections , he and was reelected in another narrow victory in 1842 . 
 The Massachusetts Democratic Party was highly factionalized , which contributed to Morton 's long string of defeats . His brief periods of ascendancy , however , resulted in no substantive Democratic @-@ supported reforms , since the dominant Whigs reversed most of the changes enacted during his terms . An opponent of the extension of slavery , he split with longtime friend John C. Calhoun over that issue , and eventually left the party for the Free Soil movement . He was considered by Martin Van Buren as a potential vice presidential running mate in 1848 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Morton was born in East Freetown , Massachusetts in 1784 , the only son of Nathaniel and Mary ( Cary ) Morton . Sources report his day of birth to be either February or December 19 . His father was a farmer who was politically active , serving for a time on the Governor 's Council . Morton received his early education at home , and was placed at age fourteen in the academy of Reverend Calvin Chaddock at Rochester , Massachusetts . 
 In 1801 Morton was admitted to Brown University with the sophomore class , and graduated in 1804 . During his time at Brown came to adopt Jeffersonian ideas , making an outspoken anti @-@ Federalist speech at his commencement . He then read law at Taunton for a year in the office of Judge Seth Padelford , after which he entered Tapping Reeve 's law school in Litchfield , Connecticut . There he was a schoolmate of John C. Calhoun , who served as a mentor and friend for many years . Moving back to Taunton , he was admitted to the Norfolk County bar in 1807 and opened a practice . In December of that year he married Charlotte Hodges , with whom he had twelve children . He later received honorary law degrees from Brown ( 1826 ) , and Harvard ( 1840 ) . 
 = = Entry into politics = = 
 Morton honed his partisan skills in Taunton , frequently speaking out against Federalism , which dominated Massachusetts politics . In 1808 Governor James Sullivan offered him the post of district attorney for Bristol County , but he demurred because the office was still held by his teacher , Judge Padelford . He did , however , accept the post when it was offered to him in 1811 by Elbridge Gerry . 
 Morton was nominated by the Democratic @-@ Republicans to run for Congress in 1814 , but lost by a wide margin to Laban Wheaton in what was then seen as a strongly Federalist district . Two years later he was , to some surprise , victorious in a rematch with Wheaton despite Federalist strength in other races . Morton was reelected in 1818 , but narrowly lost to Francis <unk> in 1820 . In Congress he supported Andrew Jackson , whose actions in the Seminole Wars were being scrutinized , and opposed the Missouri Compromise . Morton was personally opposed to slavery , but did not often let it inform his political decisions until later in life ; he preferred instead to focus his efforts on other priorities . Despite this , his written statements on slavery were to become a matter of contentious debate when party factions within the Democratic Party sought to use them against him in the 1840s . In these early years he was also a proponent of free trade ; like many Massachusetts politicians , he later adopted a strong protectionist stance , calling the early period " the lamest ... of my life " . 
 = = Supreme Judicial Court and runs for governor = = 
 In 1823 Morton was elected to the Massachusetts Governor 's Council , and the following year was elected Lieutenant Governor , serving under Republican Governor William Eustis . When Eustis died in office in February 1825 , Morton served as acting governor until the election a few months later . Since the 1824 election had virtually eliminated the Federalist Party as a force in the state , Federalists and wealthy Republicans were coalescing into what became known as the National Republican Party ( predecessor to the Whigs ) . Morton disagreed with this trend ( calling the National Republicans " aristocratic " ) , preferring Jacksonian @-@ style Democracy instead , and refused to stand for election as governor in 1825 . He was , however , prevailed to run again for lieutenant governor , and he won the post , serving under Levi Lincoln Jr . , who had been nominated by both the Republicans and a rump Federalist coalition . Morton was unhappy with what he termed Whig elitism ( he accused Lincoln in 1830 of being a " tool of monied aristocracy " ) , and resigned the lieutenant governorship . Lincoln promptly appointed Morton as an associate justice of the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court ( SJC ) , a post he would hold until 1840 . 
 = = = Jurisprudence = = = 
 Morton was the only Democrat on the SJC , all the other justices having been appointed by Federalists . Despite this , Morton wrote a few notable decisions . He wrote the court 's decision in Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge , a case that eventually went to the United States Supreme Court . The plaintiffs were proprietors of the Charles River Bridge , a toll bridge constructed between Boston and Charlestown in 1786 , and the defendants were proprietors of a competing bridge to which the state had issued a charter in 1828 . The plaintiffs argued that the defendant 's charter infringed on their charter , in which they claimed the state granted them an exclusive right to control the crossing . The SJC split 2 – 2 , and dismissed the case so that it could be heard by the Supreme Court . Morton wrote the decision favoring the defendants , pointing out that if the state was going to grant an exclusive right , it had to do so explicitly , and it had not done so in this case . This reasoning was upheld in 1837 by the Taney Supreme Court . 
 In 1838 Morton was the lone dissenter in Commonwealth v. Kneeland , the last time in the nation that someone was convicted of blasphemy . Abner Kneeland , a vitriolic former Universalist minister turned pantheist , had made statements Christians found offensive . Convicted by the trial court , Kneeland had appealed , and two more highly politicized trials ended in hung juries before the conviction was upheld in appeals . The full SJC took up the case in March 1836 . Kneeland , representing himself , argued that the statements he made did not rise to level specified by the statute , and argued that the statute violated the First Amendment to the United States Constitution . Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw , writing for the court majority , found that Kneeland 's speech satisfied the legal definition of blasphemy , and by narrow construction found that the law did not violate the state constitution 's protections of free speech and religion . In his dissent Morton argued for a more liberal reading of the Article 2 of the state constitution ( which addressed religious freedoms ) , and argued that every person " has a constitutional right to discuss the subject of God , to affirm or deny his existence . I cannot agree that a man may be punished for wilfully doing what he has a legal right to do . " Governor Edward Everett refused to pardon Kneeland , who served sixty days in prison . The case is now one of the most frequently cited American cases on blasphemy . 
 = = = Perennial candidate for governor = = = 
 The political situation in the late 1820s and 1830s was quite fluid . The Democrats were highly factionalized , with three major groups vying with one another for control of the party apparatus . Morton 's support base consisted mainly of farmers , industrial and shipyard laborers , and recent immigrants . A second faction , dominated by Theodore Lyman , consisted of merchants and wealthy coastal interests opposed to Whig interests . The third faction , which successfully controlled the party apparatus in its early years , was headed by David Henshaw , who had split from the John Quincy Adams camp over political aspects of the bridge controversy . Henshaw was the principal party organizing force , while Morton became a perennial gubernatorial candidate , running for the office each year from 1828 to 1843 . The party was supported in its organizing efforts by Morton 's friend John Calhoun , who served as Vice President under Adams and Jackson . Morton generally did no overt campaigning , sensitive to maintaining the appearance of neutrality as a judge . 
 Morton was never able to make significant electoral inroads on Lincoln 's majorities in the years the latter held the governor 's seat ( 1825 – 34 ) . This was principally because opposition to the National Republicans was fragmented , exemplified by the Free Bridge Party and the Anti @-@ Masonic Party , the latter of which in particular siphoned off significant numbers of Democratic votes in the 1832 election . Despite attempts by both the National Republicans and the Democrats to woo the Anti @-@ Masons into their fold , neither was able to . Morton was mildly anti @-@ Mason , but Henshaw was a Freemason , and Morton apparently did not recognize the potential power of the Anti @-@ Masons despite their significant electoral showing . As a result , the Democrats lacked the voting strength to unseat the National Republicans . The Democrats were also splintered in 1832 and 1833 , when the Working Men 's Party drew support by attacking both of the larger parties for their lack of attention to labor issues . Morton was sufficiently disheartened by his repeated failures that he considered abandoning his quest for the governorship in 1832 ; Henshaw convinced him to soldier on . In 1831 Morton broke ranks with his friend John Calhoun over the latter 's support for nullification , which Morton believed was based on his support for slavery . This also caused fractures in the Massachusetts Democratic Party , with Henshaw siding with Calhoun and the southern Democrats . 
 The closest Morton came to victory before 1839 was in the 1833 election , when Lincoln stepped down . In a four @-@ way race involving Worcester Congressman John Davis ( running as a National Republican ) and John Quincy Adams ( running as an Anti @-@ Mason ) as his principal opponents ( along with a Working Men 's candidate ) , none of the candidates received the required majority . The state legislature chose Davis , the largest vote @-@ getter , after Adams withdrew in Davis ' favor . 
 By the late 1830s activists for the abolition of slavery had grown into a potent political force in the state . Both Whigs and Democrats ( including Morton ) had avoided the issue in pursuit of other political objectives , but abolitionists began regularly requesting formal statements from candidates for office on the subject . Morton was known to be personally opposed to slavery , and this gained him votes in the 1837 and 1838 elections despite the vacillating answers he gave to such requests . His opponent in those elections , Edward Everett , was also opposed to slavery , but had in 1826 made a speech sympathetic to the rights of slaveholders , which was used against him . Morton 's faction within the Democratic Party also gained strength due to the organizational skill of historian George Bancroft , and successful moves spearheaded by Morton to change the methods by which lower @-@ level party leaders were chosen . David Henshaw resigned from the politically important post as the collector of the Port of Boston in 1837 , starting a struggle within the party for this valuable patronage plum . Morton was one several potential recipients , but eventually dropped out , suggesting it go instead to George Bancroft . Bancroft , from the western part of the state , attracted support from the Working Men into the Democratic fold . 
 = = Governor = = 
 In the 1839 election , an unrelated issue came up that finally gave Morton a victory . The Whig legislature had passed a bill promoted by temperance activists that banned the sale of liquor in quantities less than 15 US gallons ( 57 l ) ; this effectively outlawed service over a bar . The bill was seen by many as an instance of class elitism by the Whigs . The vote was so close that a recount was performed , and ballots were carefully scrutinized . One ballot counted for Morton contained the scrawl " Maccus Mattoon " ; despite efforts by Whig partisans to deny that the writer intended to vote for Morton , no person with that name was found anywhere in the state . Everett graciously refused to persist in contesting the balloting , and Morton was certified the winner with 51 @,@ 034 votes ( exactly half those cast ) to 50 @,@ 725 for Everett ( with another 307 votes being scattered ) . 
 With a hostile Whig @-@ dominated legislature , Morton 's reform agenda went nowhere . Proposals such as reductions in the poll tax and the number of capital crimes were defeated , but the Democrats were able to introduce some fiscal discipline and produced the first budget surplus in some years . The Whigs attacked his proposals as poor economic policy , and regrouped to focus on defeating him in 1840 . They convinced John Davis to return from the U.S. Senate to run against him , and Morton went down to defeat by a wide margin . He made some gains in the 1841 rematch . In 1842 the candidate of the upstart Liberty Party , an abolitionist party , secured enough votes to send the election to the state legislature . Because of the third party there were also a large number of vacancies in the state senate which was to choose the winner . The Liberty Party hoped to use its position in the balance of power to control the outcome , but a single Whig defector in the vote to fill the senate led to a Democratic majority in the chamber . The senate then went on to choose Morton as governor . 
 Morton once again called for a series of reforms , repeating those from 1840 , and including a proposal to transfer the tax burden from real to personal property . He was criticized by the Whigs for omitting any mention of slavery in his inaugural address . During his term the leaders of the various Democratic factions squabbled over executive and party appointments , and the death of President William Henry Harrison shortly after taking office brought on further party divisions as potential presidential nominees canvassed the state for support . As a consequence , much of the reform agenda was either not implemented at all , or only minimally , despite a nominally working Democratic @-@ Liberty coalition majority in the legislature . George Bancroft bemoaned the lost opportunity : " Never had a party a better opening than we have in Massachusetts , if all would but profit by our position . But they will not . " 
 In the 1843 election Morton was set against George N. Briggs , a Whig lawyer from rural Berkshire County , who was chosen to counter Morton 's appeal to rural voters . The Liberty candidate again won enough votes to deny either Briggs ( who won a 3 @,@ 000 vote plurality ) or Morton a majority , and the election was sent to the legislature . The legislature had been returned to Whig control , and thus elected Briggs . The Whigs promptly undid most of the few reforms that were enacted during Morton 's term . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Following his 1843 defeat , Morton finally decided to stop running for governor , yielding the nomination in 1844 to George Bancroft . In September 1844 he traveled to neighboring Rhode Island , where he agitated for the release of Thomas Wilson Dorr , the leader of Dorr 's Rebellion who had been sentenced to hard labor . Democratic sympathies for Dorr were used as ammunition against them by the Whigs in subsequent elections . 
 In 1845 President James K. Polk appointed Morton collector of the port of Boston ; he served four years . Approval of his nomination in the U.S. Senate became somewhat controversial , with southern Senators objecting to him because of earlier statements he had made in opposition to slavery . Even before his appointment was approved , he began using the politically important post in an effort to bring the state party membership more in line with his vision , but only succeeded in widening the already existing fractures in the party organization . The divide resulted in a delay of his confirmation due to political intrigues by the Henshaw faction , and caused a permanent break in political relations between Morton and Bancroft . After an acrimonious state convention in 1847 ( in which the Henshaw faction refused to allow platform items opposing slavery ) , Morton quit the party for the burgeoning Free Soil movement . Morton would refuse to support the Democrat @-@ Free Soil coalition that in 1850 saw the election of Democrat George S. Boutwell as governor and Free <unk> Charles Sumner as U.S. Senator . 
 In 1848 Morton was invited by Martin Van Buren to run as the Vice Presidential nominee on the Free Soil ticket . Morton refused , arguing that Van Buren ( a New Yorker ) needed geographic diversity . Van Buren finally chose Wisconsin 's Henry Dodge , but the party convention chose Massachusetts 's Charles Francis Adams . Morton campaigned for Van Buren , who ended up polling third . 
 Morton was a delegate to the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention of 1853 , and was elected on the Free Soil ticket to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1858 , serving one term . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Morton died at his home in Taunton in 1864 and was buried in its Mount Pleasant Cemetery . His home in Taunton later became the original building of Morton Hospital and Medical Center . It was demolished in the 1960s during hospital expansion . 
 His son , also named Marcus , followed him onto the state 's supreme court , eventually serving as its Chief Justice . His daughter , Frances , was the mother of novelist Octave Thanet . 
 = Schutzstaffel = 
 The Schutzstaffel ( SS ; also stylized as with Armanen runes ; German pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ; literally " Protection Squadron " ) was a major paramilitary organization under Adolf Hitler and the National Socialist German Workers ' Party ( NSDAP ; Nazi Party ) in Nazi Germany . It began with a small guard unit known as the Saal @-@ Schutz ( Hall @-@ Protection ) made up of NSDAP volunteers to provide security for party meetings in Munich . In 1925 , Heinrich Himmler joined the unit , which had by then been reformed and given its final name . Under his direction ( 1929 – 45 ) , it grew from a small paramilitary formation to one of the most powerful organizations in Nazi Germany . From 1929 until the regime 's collapse in 1945 , the SS was the foremost agency of surveillance and terror within Germany and German @-@ occupied Europe . 
 The two main constituent groups were the Allgemeine SS ( General SS ) and Waffen @-@ SS ( Armed SS ) . The Allgemeine SS was responsible for enforcing the racial policy of Nazi Germany and general policing , whereas the Waffen @-@ SS consisted of combat units of troops within Nazi Germany 's military . A third component of the SS , the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände ( SS @-@ TV ) , ran the concentration camps and extermination camps . Additional subdivisions of the SS included the Gestapo and the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD ) organizations . They were tasked with the detection of actual or potential enemies of the Nazi state , the neutralization of any opposition , policing the German people for their commitment to Nazi ideology , and providing domestic and foreign intelligence . 
 The SS was the organization most responsible for the genocidal killing of an estimated 5 @.@ 5 to 6 million Jews in the Holocaust . Members of all of its branches committed war crimes and crimes against humanity during World War II ( 1939 – 45 ) . The SS was also involved in commercial enterprises and exploited concentration camp inmates as slave labor . After Nazi Germany 's defeat , the SS and the NSDAP were judged by the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg to be criminal organizations . Ernst Kaltenbrunner , the highest @-@ ranking surviving SS officer , was found guilty of crimes against humanity at the Nuremberg trials and hanged in 1946 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 = = = Forerunner of the SS = = = 
 By 1923 , the Nazi Party ( NSDAP ) had created a small volunteer guard unit known as the Saal @-@ Schutz ( Hall @-@ Protection ) to provide security at their meetings in Munich . That same year , party leader Adolf Hitler ordered the formation of a small bodyguard unit dedicated to his personal service . He wished it to be separate from the " suspect mass " of the party , including the paramilitary Sturmabteilung ( " Storm Battalion " ; SA ) , which he did not trust . The new formation was designated the Stabswache ( Staff Guard ) . Originally the unit was composed of eight men , commanded by Julius Schreck and Joseph Berchtold , and was modeled after the Erhardt Naval Brigade , a Freikorps of the time . The unit was renamed Stoßtrupp ( Shock Troops ) in May 1923 . 
 The Stoßtrupp was abolished after the failed 1923 Beer Hall Putsch , an attempt by the NSDAP to seize power in Munich . In 1925 , Hitler ordered Schreck to organize a new bodyguard unit , the Schutzkommando ( Protection Command ) . It was tasked with providing personal protection for Hitler at NSDAP functions and events . That same year , the Schutzkommando was expanded to a national organization and renamed successively the Sturmstaffel ( Storm Squadron ) , and finally the Schutzstaffel ( Protection Squad ; SS ) . Officially , the SS marked its foundation on 9 November 1925 ( the second anniversary of the Beer Hall Putsch ) . The new SS was to provide protection for NSDAP leaders throughout Germany . Hitler 's personal SS protection unit was later enlarged to include combat units . 
 = = = Early commanders = = = 
 Schreck , a founding member of the SA and a close confidant of Hitler , became the first SS chief in March 1925 . On 15 April 1926 , Joseph Berchtold succeeded him as chief of the SS . Berchtold changed the title of the office to Reichsführer @-@ SS ( Reich Leader @-@ SS ) . Berchtold was considered more dynamic than his predecessor , but became increasingly frustrated by the authority the SA had over the SS . This led to him transferring leadership of the SS to his deputy , Erhard Heiden , on 1 March 1927 . Under Heiden 's leadership , a stricter code of discipline was enforced than would have been tolerated in the SA . 
 Between 1925 and 1929 , the SS was considered to be a small Gruppe ( battalion ) of the SA . Except in the Munich area , the SS was unable to maintain any momentum in its membership numbers , which declined from 1 @,@ 000 to 280 as the SA continued its rapid growth . As Heiden attempted to keep the SS from dissolving , Heinrich Himmler became his deputy in September 1927 . Himmler displayed good organizational abilities compared to Heiden . The SS established a number of Gaus ( regions or provinces ) . The SS @-@ Gaus consisted of SS @-@ Gau Berlin , SS @-@ Gau Berlin Brandenburg , SS @-@ Gau Franken , SS @-@ Gau <unk> , SS @-@ Gau Rheinland @-@ Süd , and SS @-@ Gau Sachsen . 
 = = = Himmler appointed = = = 
 With Hitler 's approval , Himmler assumed the position of Reichsführer @-@ SS in January 1929 . There are differing accounts of the reason for Heiden 's dismissal from his position as head of the SS . The party announced that it was for " family reasons " . Under Himmler , the SS expanded and gained a larger foothold . He considered the SS an elite , ideologically driven National Socialist organization , a " conflation of Teutonic knights , the Jesuits , and Japanese Samurai " . His ultimate aim was to turn the SS into the most powerful organization in Germany and most influential branch of the party . He expanded the SS to 3 @,@ 000 members in his first year as its leader . 
 In 1929 , the SS @-@ Hauptamt ( main SS office ) was expanded and reorganized into five main offices dealing with general administration , personnel , finance , security , and race matters . At the same time , the SS @-@ Gaus were expanded into three SS @-@ <unk> areas , namely the SS @-@ Oberführerbereich Ost , SS @-@ Oberführerbereich West , and SS @-@ Oberführerbereich Süd . The lower levels of the SS remained largely unchanged . Although officially still considered a sub @-@ organization of the SA and answerable to the <unk> ( SA Chief of Staff ) , it was also during this time that Himmler began to establish the independence of the SS from the SA . The SS grew in size and power due to its exclusive loyalty to Hitler , as opposed to the SA , which was seen as semi @-@ independent and a threat to Hitler 's hegemony over the party , mainly because they demanded a " second revolution " beyond the one that brought the NSDAP to power . By the end of 1933 , the membership of the SS reached 209 @,@ 000 . Under Himmler 's leadership the SS continued to gather greater power as more and more state and party functions were assigned to its jurisdiction . Over time the SS became answerable only to Hitler , a development typical of the organizational structure of the entire Nazi regime , where legal norms were replaced by actions undertaken under the Führerprinzip ( leader principle ) , where Hitler 's will was considered to be above the law . 
 In the latter half of 1934 , Himmler oversaw the creation of SS @-@ <unk> ( Junker schools ) , institutions where SS officer candidates received leadership training , political and ideological indoctrination , and military instruction . The training stressed ruthlessness and toughness as part of the SS value system , which helped foster a sense of superiority among the men and taught them self @-@ confidence . The first schools were established at Bad <unk> and Braunschweig , with additional schools opening at Klagenfurt and Prague during the war . 
 = = = Ideology = = = 
 The SS was regarded as the NSDAP 's elite unit . In keeping with the racial policy of Nazi Germany , in the early days all SS officer candidates had to provide proof of Aryan ancestry back to 1750 and for other ranks to 1800 . Once the war started and it became more difficult to confirm ancestry , the regulation was amended to just proving the candidate 's grandparents were Aryan , as spelled out in the Nuremberg Laws . Other requirements were complete obedience to the Führer and a commitment to the German people and nation . Himmler also tried to institute physical criteria based on appearance and height , but these requirements were only loosely enforced , and over half the SS men did not meet the criteria . Inducements such as higher salaries and larger homes were provided to members of the SS , since they were expected to produce more children than the average German family as part of their commitment to NSDAP doctrine . 
 Commitment to SS ideology was emphasized throughout the recruitment , membership process , and training . Members of the SS were indoctrinated in the racial policy of Nazi Germany , and were taught that it was necessary to remove from Germany people deemed by that policy as inferior . Esoteric rituals and the awarding of regalia and insignia for milestones in the SS man 's career suffused SS members even further with Nazi ideology . Members were expected to renounce their Christian faith , and Christmas was replaced with a solstice celebration . Church weddings were replaced with SS <unk> , a pagan ceremony invented by Himmler . These pseudo @-@ religious rites and ceremonies often took place near SS @-@ dedicated monuments or in special SS @-@ designated places . In 1933 , Himmler bought Wewelsburg , a castle in Westphalia . He initially intended it to be used as an SS training centre , but its role came to include hosting SS dinners and neo @-@ pagan rituals . 
 The SS ideology included the application of brutality and terror as a solution to military and political problems . The SS stressed total loyalty and obedience to orders unto death . Hitler used this as a powerful tool to further his aims and those of the NSDAP . The SS was entrusted with the commission of atrocities , illegal activities , and war crimes . Himmler once wrote that an SS man " hesitates not for a single instant , but executes unquestioningly ... " any Führer @-@ <unk> ( Führer order ) . Their official motto was " Meine Ehre <unk> <unk> " ( My Honour is Loyalty ) . 
 As part of its race @-@ centric functions during World War II , the SS oversaw the isolation and displacement of Jews from the populations of the conquered territories , seizing their assets and deporting them to concentration camps and ghettos , where they were used as slave labor or immediately killed . Chosen to implement the Final Solution for Jews and other groups deemed inferior or enemies of the state , the SS led the killing , torture , and enslavement of approximately 12 million people . Most victims were Jews or of Polish or other Slavic extraction . A significant number of victims were members of other racial or ethnic groups such as the Romani people . The SS was involved in killing people viewed as threats to race hygiene or NSDAP ideology , including the mentally or physically handicapped , homosexuals , and political dissidents . Members of trade unions and those perceived to be affiliated with groups that opposed the regime ( religious , political , social , and otherwise ) , or those whose views were contradictory to the goals of the NSDAP government , were rounded up in large numbers ; these included clergy of all faiths , Jehovah 's Witnesses , Freemasons , Communists , and Rotary Club members . According to the judgments rendered at the Nuremberg trials as well as many war crimes investigations and trials conducted since then , the SS was responsible for the majority of Nazi war crimes . In particular , it was the primary organization which carried out the Holocaust . 
 = = Pre @-@ war Germany = = 
 After Hitler and the NSDAP came to power on 30 January 1933 , the SS were considered a state organization and a branch of the government . Law enforcement gradually became the purview of the SS , and many SS organizations became de facto government agencies . 
 The SS established a police state within Nazi Germany , using the secret state police and security forces under Himmler 's control to suppress resistance to Hitler . In his role as Minister President of Prussia , Hermann Göring had in 1933 created a Prussian secret police force , the Geheime Staatspolizei or Gestapo , and appointed Rudolf Diels as its head . Concerned that Diels was not ruthless enough to use the Gestapo effectively to counteract the power of the SA , Göring handed over its control to Himmler on 20 April 1934 . Also on that date , in a departure from long @-@ standing German practice that law enforcement was a state and local matter , Hitler appointed Himmler chief of all German police outside Prussia . Himmler named his deputy and protégé Reinhard Heydrich chief of the Gestapo on 22 April 1934 . Heydrich also continued as head of the Sicherheitsdienst ( SD ; security service ) . 
 The Gestapo 's transfer to Himmler was a prelude to the Night of the Long Knives , in which most of the SA leadership were arrested and subsequently executed . The SS and Gestapo carried out most of the killings . On 20 July 1934 , Hitler detached the SS from the SA , which was no longer an influential force after the purge . The SS became an independent elite corps of the NSDAP , answerable only to Hitler . Himmler 's title of Reichsführer @-@ SS now became his actual rank , equivalent to the rank of field marshal in the army ( his previous rank was Obergruppenführer ) . As Himmler 's position and authority grew , so did his de facto rank . 
 On 17 June 1936 , all police forces throughout Germany were united under the purview of Himmler and the SS . Himmler and Heydrich thus became two of the most powerful men in the country 's administration . Police and intelligence forces brought under their administrative control included the SD , Gestapo , Kriminalpolizei ( Kripo ; criminal investigative police ) , and Ordnungspolizei ( Orpo ; regular uniformed police ) . In September 1939 , the security and police agencies , including the Sicherheitspolizei ( SiPo ; security police ) and SD ( but not the Orpo ) , were consolidated into the Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) , headed by Heydrich . This further increased the collective authority of the SS . 
 In September 1939 , the authority of the SS expanded further when the senior SS officer in each military district also became its chief of police . Most of these SS and police leaders held the rank of SS @-@ Gruppenführer or above , and answered directly to Himmler in all SS matters within their district . Their role was to police the population and oversee the activities of the SS men within their district . By declaring an emergency , they could bypass the district administrative offices for the SS , SD , SiPo , SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände ( SS @-@ TV ; concentration camp guards ) , and Orpo , thereby gaining direct operational control of these groups . 
 During Kristallnacht ( 9 – 10 November 1938 ) , SS security services clandestinely coordinated violence against Jews as the SS , Gestapo , SD , Kripo , SiPo and regular police did what they could to ensure that while Jewish synagogues and community centers were destroyed , Jewish @-@ owned businesses and housing remained intact so that they could later be seized . In the end , thousands of Jewish businesses , homes , and graveyards were vandalized and looted , particularly by members of the SA . Some 500 to 1 @,@ 000 synagogues were destroyed , mostly by arson . On 11 November , Heydrich reported a death toll of 36 people , but later assessments put the number of deaths at up to two thousand . On Hitler 's orders , around 30 @,@ 000 Jewish men were arrested and sent to concentration camps by 16 November . It is likely that as many as 2 @,@ 500 of these people died in the following months . It was at this point that the SS state began in earnest its campaign of terror against political and religious opponents , who they imprisoned without trial or judicial oversight for the sake of " security , re @-@ education , or prevention " . 
 = = = Hitler 's personal bodyguards = = = 
 As the SS grew in size and importance , so too did Hitler 's personal protection units . Three main SS groups were assigned to protect Hitler . In 1933 , his larger personal bodyguard unit ( previously the 1st SS @-@ Standarte ) was called to Berlin to replace the Army Chancellery Guard , assigned to protect the Chancellor of Germany . Sepp Dietrich commanded the new unit , previously known as SS @-@ Stabswache Berlin ; the name was changed to SS @-@ Sonderkommando Berlin . In November 1933 , the name was changed to Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler . In April 1934 , Himmler modified the name to Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler ( LSSAH ) . The LSSAH guarded Hitler 's private residences and offices , providing an outer ring of protection for the Führer and his visitors . LSSAH men manned sentry posts at the entrances to the old Reich Chancellery and the new Reich Chancellery . The number of LSSAH guards was increased during special events . At the Berghof , Hitler 's residence in the Obersalzberg , a large contingent of the LSSAH patrolled an extensive cordoned security zone . 
 From 1941 , forward , the Leibstandarte became four distinct entities , the Waffen @-@ SS division ( unconnected to Hitler 's personal protection but a formation of the Waffen @-@ SS ) , the Berlin <unk> Guard , the SS security regiment assigned to the Obersalzberg , and a Munich @-@ based bodyguard unit which protected Hitler when he visited his personal apartment and the Brown House NSDAP headquarters in Munich . Although the unit was nominally under Himmler , Dietrich was the real commander and handled day @-@ to @-@ day administration . 
 Two other SS units composed the inner ring of Hitler 's personal protection . The SS @-@ Begleitkommando des <unk> ( Escort Command of the Führer ) , formed in February 1932 , served as Hitler 's protection escort while he was travelling . This unit consisted of eight men who served around the clock protecting Hitler in three eight @-@ hour shifts . Later the SS @-@ Begleitkommando was expanded and became known as the Führerbegleitkommando ( Führer Escort Command ; FBK ) . It continued under separate command and remained responsible for Hitler 's personal protection . The Führer Schutzkommando ( Führer Protection Command ; FSK ) was a protection unit founded by Himmler in March 1933 . Originally it was charged with protecting Hitler only while he was inside the borders of Bavaria . In early 1934 , they replaced the SS @-@ Begleitkommando for Hitler 's protection throughout Germany . The FSK was renamed the <unk> ( Reich Security Service ; RSD ) in August 1935 . Johann Rattenhuber , chief of the RSD , for the most part took his orders directly from Hitler . The current FBK chief acted as his deputy . Wherever Hitler was in residence , members of the RSD and FBK would be present . RSD men patrolled the grounds and FBK men provided close security protection inside . The RSD and FBK worked together for security and personal protection during Hitler 's trips and public events , but they operated as two groups and used separate vehicles . By March 1938 , both units wore the standard field grey uniform of the SS . The RSD uniform had the SD diamond on the lower left sleeve . 
 = = = Concentration camps founded = = = 
 The SS was closely associated with Nazi Germany 's concentration camp system . On 26 June 1933 , Himmler appointed SS @-@ Oberführer Theodor Eicke as commandant of Dachau concentration camp , one of the first Nazi concentration camps . It was created to consolidate the many small camps that had been set up by various police agencies and the NSDAP to house political prisoners . The organizational structure Eicke instituted at Dachau stood as the model for all later concentration camps . After 1934 , Eicke was named commander of the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände ( SS @-@ TV ) , the SS formation responsible for running the concentration camps under the authority of the SS and Himmler . Known as the " Death 's Head Units " , the SS @-@ TV was first organized as several battalions , each based at one of Germany 's major concentration camps . Leadership at the camps was divided into five departments : commander and adjutant , political affairs division , protective custody , administration , and medical personnel . By 1935 , Himmler secured Hitler 's approval and the finances necessary to establish and operate additional camps . Six concentration camps housing 21 @,@ 400 inmates ( mostly political prisoners ) existed at the start of the war in September 1939 . By the end of the war , hundreds of camps of varying size and function had been created , holding nearly 715 @,@ 000 people , most of whom were targeted by the regime because of their race . The concentration camp population rose in tandem with the defeats suffered by the Nazi regime ; the worse the catastrophe seemed , the greater the fear of subversion , prompting the SS to intensify their repression and terror . 
 = = SS in World War II = = 
 By the outbreak of World War II , the SS had consolidated into its final form , which comprised three main organizations : the Allgemeine SS , SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände , and the Waffen @-@ SS , which was founded in 1934 as the SS @-@ Verfügungstruppe ( SS @-@ VT ) and renamed in 1940 . The Waffen @-@ SS evolved into a second German army alongside the Wehrmacht and operated in tandem with them , especially with the Heer ( German Army ) . Although SS ranks generally had equivalents in the other services , the SS rank system did not copy the terms and ranks used by the Wehrmacht 's branches . Instead it used the ranks established by the post @-@ World War I Freikorps and the SA . This was primarily done to emphasize the SS as being independent from the Wehrmacht . 
 = = = Invasion of Poland = = = 
 In the September 1939 invasion of Poland , the LSSAH and SS @-@ VT fought as separate mobile infantry regiments . The LSSAH became notorious for torching villages without military justification . Members of the LSSAH committed atrocities in numerous towns , including the murder of 50 Polish Jews in <unk> and the massacre of 200 civilians , including children , who were machine gunned in <unk> . Shootings also took place in <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Mława , and Włocławek . Some senior members of the Wehrmacht were not convinced the units were fully prepared for combat . Its units took unnecessary risks and had a higher casualty rate than the army . Generaloberst Fedor von Bock was quite critical ; following an April 1940 visit of the SS @-@ Totenkopf division , he found their battle training was " insufficient " . Hitler thought the criticism was typical of the army 's " outmoded conception of chivalry . " In its defence , the SS insisted that its armed formations had been hampered by having to fight piecemeal and were improperly equipped by the army . 
 After the invasion , Hitler entrusted the SS with extermination actions codenamed Operation Tannenberg and AB @-@ Aktion to remove potential leaders who could form a resistance to German occupation . The killings were committed by Einsatzgruppen ( task forces ; deployment groups ) , assisted by local paramilitary groups . Men for the Einsatzgruppen units were drawn from the SS , the SD , and the police . Some 65 @,@ 000 Polish civilians , including activists , intelligentsia , scholars , teachers , actors , former officers , and others , were killed by the end of 1939 . When the army leadership registered complaints about the brutality being meted out by the Einsatzgruppen , Heydrich informed them that he was acting " in accordance with the special order of the Führer . " The first systematic mass shooting of Jews by the Einsatzgruppen took place on 6 September 1939 during the attack on Kraków . 
 Satisfied with their performance in Poland , Hitler allowed further expansion of the armed SS formations , but insisted new units remain under the operational control of the army . While the SS @-@ Leibstandarte remained an independent regiment functioning as Hitler 's personal bodyguards , the other regiments — SS @-@ Deutschland , SS @-@ Germania , and SS @-@ Der Führer — were combined to form the SS @-@ Verfügungs @-@ Division . A second SS division , the SS @-@ Totenkopf , was formed from SS @-@ TV concentration camp guards , and a third , the SS @-@ Polizei , was created from police volunteers . The SS gained control over its own recruitment , logistics , and supply systems for its armed formations at this time . The SS , Gestapo , and SD were in charge of the provisional military administration in Poland until the appointment of Hans Frank as Governor @-@ General on 26 October 1939 . 
 = = = Battle of France = = = 
 On 10 May 1940 , Hitler launched the Battle of France , a major offensive against France and the Low Countries . The SS supplied two of the 89 divisions employed . The LSSAH and elements of the SS @-@ VT participated in the ground invasion of the Battle of the Netherlands . Simultaneously , airborne troops were dropped to capture key Dutch airfields , bridges , and railways . In the five @-@ day campaign , the LSSAH linked up with army units and airborne troops after a number of clashes with Dutch defenders . 
 SS troops did not take part in the thrust through the Ardennes and the river Meuse . Instead , the SS @-@ Totenkopf was summoned from the army reserve to fight in support of Generalmajor Erwin Rommel 's 7th Panzer Division as they advanced toward to the English Channel . On 21 May , the British launched an armored counterattack against the flanks of 7th Panzer Division and SS @-@ Totenkopf . The Germans then trapped the British and French troops in a huge pocket at Dunkirk . On 27 May , 4 Company , SS @-@ Totenkopf perpetrated the Le Paradis massacre , where 97 men of the 2nd Battalion , Royal Norfolk Regiment were machine gunned after surrendering , with survivors finished off with bayonets . Two men survived . By 28 May the SS @-@ Leibstandarte had taken Wormhout , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from Dunkirk . There , soldiers of the 2nd Battalion were responsible for the <unk> massacre , where 80 British and French soldiers were murdered after they surrendered . According to historian Charles Sydnor , the " fanatical recklessness in the assault , suicidal defense against enemy attacks , and savage atrocities committed in the face of frustrated objectives " exhibited by the SS @-@ Totenkopf division during the invasion were typical of the SS troops as a whole . 
 At the close of the campaign , Hitler expressed his pleasure with the performance of the SS @-@ Leibstandarte , telling them : " Henceforth it will be an honour for you , who bear my name , to lead every German attack . " The SS @-@ VT was renamed the Waffen @-@ SS in a speech made by Hitler in July 1940 . Hitler then authorized the enlistment of " people perceived to be of related stock " , as Himmler put it , to expand the ranks . A number of Danes , Dutch , Norwegians , Swedes , and Finns volunteered to fight in the Waffen @-@ SS under the command of German officers . They were brought together to form the new division SS @-@ Wiking . In January 1941 , the SS @-@ Verfügungs Division was renamed SS @-@ Reich Division ( Motorized ) , and was renamed as the 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich when it was reorganized as a Panzergrenadier division in 1942 . 
 = = = Campaign in the Balkans = = = 
 In April 1941 , the Germany Army invaded Yugoslavia and Greece . The LSSAH and Das Reich were attached to separate army Panzer Corps . Fritz <unk> , a company commander in the Das Reich , led his men across Yugoslavia to the capital , Belgrade , where a small group in the vanguard accepted the surrender of the city on 13 April . A few days later Yugoslavia surrendered . SS police units immediately began taking hostages and carrying out reprisals , a practice that became common . In some cases , they were joined by the Wehrmacht . Similar to Poland , the war policies of the Nazis in the Balkans resulted in brutal occupation and racist mass murder . Serbia became the second country ( after Estonia ) declared Judenfrei ( free of Jews ) . 
 In Greece , the Wehrmacht and Waffen @-@ SS encountered resistance from the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) and Greek Army . The fighting was intensified by the mountainous terrain , with its heavily defended narrow passes . The LSSAH was at the forefront of the German push . The BEF evacuated by sea to Crete , but had to flee again in late May when the Germans arrived . Like Yugoslavia , the conquest of Greece brought its Jews into danger , as the Nazis immediately took a variety of measures against them . Initially confined in ghettos , most were transported to Auschwitz concentration camp in March 1943 , where they were killed in the gas chambers on arrival . Of Greece 's 80 @,@ 000 Jews , only 20 percent survived the war . 
 = = War in the east = = 
 On 22 June 1941 , Hitler launched Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union . The expanding war and the need to control occupied territories provided the conditions for Himmler to further consolidate the police and military organs of the SS . Rapid acquisition of vast territories in the East placed considerable strain on the SS police organizations as they struggled to adjust to the changing security challenges . 
 The 1st and 2nd SS Infantry Brigades , which had been formed from surplus concentration camp guards of the SS @-@ TV , and the SS Cavalry Brigade moved into the Soviet Union behind the advancing armies . At first they fought Soviet partisans , but by the autumn of 1941 , they left the anti @-@ partisan role to other units and actively took part in the Holocaust . While assisting the Einsatzgruppen , they formed firing parties that participated in the liquidation of the Jewish population of the Soviet Union . 
 On 31 July 1941 , Göring gave Heydrich written authorization to ensure the cooperation of administrative leaders of various government departments to undertake genocide of the Jews in territories under German control . Heydrich was instrumental in carrying out these exterminations , as the Gestapo was ready to organize deportations in the West and his Einsatzgruppen were already conducting extensive killing operations in the East . On 20 January 1942 , Heydrich chaired a meeting , called the Wannsee Conference , to discuss the implementation of the plan . 
 During battles in Soviet Union in 1941 and 1942 , the Waffen @-@ SS suffered enormous casualties . The LSSAH and Das Reich lost over half their troops to illness and combat casualties . In need of recruits , Himmler began to accept soldiers that did not fit the original SS racial profile . In early 1942 , SS @-@ Leibstandarte , SS @-@ Totenkopf , and SS @-@ Das Reich were withdrawn to the West to refit and were converted to Panzergrenadier divisions . The SS @-@ Panzer Corps returned to the Soviet Union in 1943 and participated in the Third Battle of Kharkov in February and March . 
 = = = The Holocaust = = = 
 The SS was built on a culture of violence , which was exhibited in its most extreme form by the mass murder of civilians and prisoners of war on the Eastern Front . Augmented by personnel from the Kripo , Orpo ( Order Police ) , and Waffen @-@ SS , the Einsatzgruppen reached a total strength of 3 @,@ 000 men . Einsatzgruppen A , B , and C were attached to Army Groups North , Centre , and South ; Einsatzgruppe D was assigned to the 11th Army . The Einsatzgruppe for Special Purposes operated in eastern Poland starting in July 1941 . The historian Richard Rhodes describes them as being " outside the bounds of morality " ; they were " judge , jury and executioner all in one " , with the authority to kill anyone at their discretion . Following Operation Barbarossa , these Einsatzgruppen units , together with the Waffen @-@ SS and Order Police , engaged in the mass killing of the Jewish population in occupied eastern Poland and the Soviet Union . The greatest extent of Einsatzgruppen action occurred in 1941 and 1942 in Ukraine and Russia . Before the invasion there were five million registered Jews throughout the Soviet Union , with three million of those residing in the territories occupied by the Germans ; by the time the war ended , over two million of these had been murdered . 
 The extermination activities of the Einsatzgruppen generally followed a standard procedure , with the Einsatzgruppen chief contacting the nearest Wehrmacht unit commander to inform him of the impending action ; this was done so they could coordinate and control access to the execution grounds . Initially the victims were shot , but this method proved impracticable for an operation of this scale . Also , after Himmler observed the shooting of 100 Jews at Minsk in August 1941 , he grew concerned about the impact such actions were having on the mental health of his SS men . He decided that alternate methods of killing should be found , which led to introduction of gas vans . However , these were not popular with the men , because removing the dead bodies from the van and burying them was a horrible ordeal . Prisoners or auxiliaries were often assigned to do this task so as to spare the SS men the trauma . 
 = = = Anti @-@ partisan operations = = = 
 In response to the army 's difficulties in dealing with Soviet partisans , Hitler decided in July 1942 to transfer anti @-@ partisan operations to the police . This placed the matter under Himmler 's purview . As Hitler had ordered on 8 July 1941 that all Jews were to be regarded as partisans , the term " anti @-@ partisan operations " was used as a euphemism for the extermination of Jews as well as actual combat against resistance elements . In July 1942 Himmler ordered that the term " partisan " should no longer be used ; instead resisters to Nazi rule would be described as " bandits " . 
 Himmler set the SS and SD to work on developing additional anti @-@ partisan tactics and launched a propaganda campaign . Sometime in June 1943 , Himmler issued the <unk> ( bandit fighting ) order , simultaneously announcing the existence of the Bandenkampfverbände ( bandit fighting formations ) , with SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Erich von dem Bach @-@ Zelewski as its chief . Employing troops primarily from the SS police and Waffen @-@ SS , the Bandenkampfverbände had four principal operational components : propaganda , centralized control and coordination of security operations , training of troops , and battle operations . Once the Wehrmacht had secured territorial objectives , the Bandenkampfverbände first secured communications facilities , roads , railways , and waterways . Thereafter , they secured rural communities and economic installations such as factories and administrative buildings . An additional priority was securing agricultural and forestry resources . The SS oversaw the collection of the harvest , which was deemed critical to strategic operations . Any Jews in the area were rounded up and killed . Communists and people of Asiatic descent were killed presumptively under the assumption that they were Soviet agents . 
