 John Patitucci – bass 
 Dave <unk> – drums 
 Additional personnel 
 Bernard Alexander – piano tuner 
 Brian Alexander – keyboard technician 
 Bob Cetti – assistant engineer 
 Bernie Grundman – mastering 
 Joe Hesse – equipment manager 
 Bernie <unk> – engineer 
 Rik <unk> – mixing 
 Emanuele <unk> – assistant producer 
 Pernell Saturnino – percussion , guest appearance 
 Steve Wilson – saxophone 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Mahavira = 
 Mahavira ( Mahāvīra ) , also known as Vardhamāna , was the twenty @-@ fourth and last Jain Tirthankara ( Teaching God ) . Mahavira was born into a royal family in what is now Bihar , India , in 599 BC . At the age of 30 , he left his home in pursuit of spiritual awakening , and abandoned worldly things , including his clothes , and became a monk . For the next twelve @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years , Mahavira practiced intense meditation and severe penance , after which he became <unk> ( omniscient ) . 
 For the next 30 years , he travelled throughout South Asia to teach Jain philosophy . Mahavira taught that the observance of the vows ahimsa ( non @-@ injury ) , satya ( truth ) , asteya ( non @-@ stealing ) , brahmacharya ( chastity ) and aparigraha ( non @-@ attachment ) is necessary to elevate the quality of life . He gave the principle of Anekantavada ( pluralism ) , <unk> and <unk> . The teachings of Mahavira were compiled by Gautama Swami ( his chief disciple ) and were called Jain Agamas . Most of these Agamas are not available today . Jains believe Mahavira attained moksha ( liberation from the cycle of birth and death ) at the age of 72 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 In Jainism , a Tirthankara ( Maker of the River @-@ Crossing or Teaching God ) signifies the founder of a tirtha which means a fordable passage across the sea of interminable births and deaths ( called saṃsāra ) . According to the Jain texts , twenty @-@ four Tirthankaras grace each half of the cosmic time cycle . Mahavira was the last Tirthankara of <unk> ( present descending phase ) . Samantabhadra , an illustrious Digambara monk , who lived in the 2nd century A.D. , called the <unk> of Mahavira by the name <unk> ( universal uplift ) . 
 Mahavira is often called the founder of Jainism , but this was not the case because the Jain tradition recognizes his predecessors and he is considered the 24th Tirthankara . In addition to that , Parshvanatha ( 23rd tirthankara ) was a historical figure . 
 = = = Names = = = 
 According to Jain texts , Mahavira 's childhood name was Vardhamāna ( " the one who grows " ) , because of the increased prosperity in the kingdom at the time of his birth . He was called Mahavira ( " the great hero " ) because of the acts of bravery he performed during his childhood . Mahavira was given the title <unk> ( " the victor or conqueror of inner enemies such as attachment , pride and greed " ) , which later became synonymous with Tirthankara . 
 Buddhist texts refer to Mahavira as Nigaṇṭha <unk> . Nigaṇṭha means " without knot , tie , or string " and <unk> ( son of Natas ) , refers to his clan of origin as <unk> or Naya ( Prakrit ) . He is also known as Sramana ( seeker ) . 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Belonging to Kashyapa gotra , Mahavira was born into the royal Kshatriya family of King Siddhartha and Queen <unk> ( sister of King <unk> of Vaishali ) of the Ikshvaku dynasty , on the thirteenth day of the rising moon of Chaitra in the Vira Nirvana Samvat calendar in 599 BC . In the Gregorian calendar , this date falls in March or April and is celebrated as Mahavir Jayanti . Traditionally , <unk> in the ancient city of <unk> Kund <unk> is regarded as his birthplace , in the present @-@ day Sikandra Division of <unk> district , Bihar . According to Jainism , after his birth , anointment and abhisheka ( consecration ) — carried out by Indra on Mount Meru . Most modern historians agree he was born at <unk> , now <unk> in <unk> district in the state of Bihar , India . Jain traditions date Mahavira as living from 599 B.C. to 527 B.C. Western historians date Mahavira as living from 480 BC to 408 BC . Some Western scholars suggest Mahavira died around 425 BC . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 As the son of a king , Mahavira had all luxuries of life at his disposal . According to the second chapter of the Śvētāmbara text Acharanga Sutra , both his parents were followers of Parshvanatha and lay devotees of Jain ascetics . Jain traditions do not agree about his marital state ; according to the Digambara tradition , Mahavira 's parents wanted him to marry Yashoda but Mahavira refused to marry . According to the Śvētāmbara tradition , he was married to Yashoda at a young age and had one daughter , <unk> . 
 = = = Renunciation = = = 
 At the age of thirty , Mahavira abandoned the comforts of royal life and left his home and family to live an ascetic life in the pursuit of spiritual awakening . He underwent severe penances , meditated under the Ashoka tree and discarded his clothes . There is a graphic description of his hardships and humiliation in the Acharanga Sutra . According to Kalpa Sūtra , Mahavira spent forty @-@ two monsoons of his ascetic life at <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Vaishali , <unk> , Nalanda , Mithila , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Shravasti and Pawapuri . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 After twelve years of rigorous penance , at the age of 43 , Mahavira achieved the state of Kevala Jnana ( omniscience or infinite knowledge ) under a <unk> tree according to traditional accounts . The details of this event are mentioned in Jain texts like Uttar @-@ <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> . The Acharanga Sutra describes Mahavira as all @-@ seeing . The Sutrakritanga elaborates the concept as all @-@ knowing and provides details of other qualities of Mahavira . Jains believe that Mahavira had the most auspicious body ( <unk> <unk> ) and was free from eighteen imperfections when he attained omniscience . 
 For thirty years after gaining omniscience , Mahavira travelled throughout in India to teach his philosophy . According to the Jain tradition , Mahavira had 14 @,@ 000 muni ( male ascetics ) , 36 @,@ 000 <unk> ( nuns ) , 159 @,@ 000 <unk> ( laymen ) and 318 @,@ 000 <unk> ( laywomen ) as his followers . Some of the royal followers included King <unk> ( popularly known as <unk> ) of Magadha , <unk> of Anga and <unk> of Videha . 
 = = = Moksha ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Jains believe Mahavira attained moksha ( liberation from the cycle of birth and death ) at the age of seventy @-@ two and his soul is now resting in <unk> ( abode of the liberated souls ) . According to Jain texts , Mahavira attained nirvana ( final release ) at the town of Pawapuri ( now in Bihar ) . On the same day , his chief disciple Gautama Swami attained omniscience . According to the Jinasena 's <unk> , after the nirvana of Tīrthankaras , heavenly beings perform the funeral rites . According to the <unk> , only the nails and hair of Tirthankaras are left behind ; the rest of the body is dissolved in the air like camphor . Today , a Jain temple called Jal Mandir stands at the place where Mahavira is believed to have attained moksha . 
 = = = Previous births = = = 
 Mahavira 's previous births are discussed in Jain texts such as the <unk> and Tri @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ purusha @-@ charitra . While a soul undergoes countless reincarnations in the <unk> cycle of saṃsāra ( world ) , the births of a Tirthankara are reckoned from the time he determined the causes of karma and developed the <unk> . Jain texts discuss twenty @-@ six births of Mahavira before his incarnation as a Tirthankara . As per the texts , Mahavira was born as Marichi , the son of Bharata Chakravartin , in one of his previous births . 
 = = Teachings = = 
 = = = Jain Agamas = = = 
 Mahavira 's teachings were compiled by his <unk> ( chief disciple ) , Gautama Swami . The sacred canonical scriptures had twelve parts . According to Vijay K. Jain , " These scriptures contained the most comprehensive and accurate description of every branch of learning that one needs to know . The knowledge contained in these scriptures was transmitted orally by the teachers to their disciple saints . " According to the Digambaras , Āchārya Bhutabali was the last ascetic who had partial knowledge of the original canon . Later , some learned Āchāryas started to restore , compile and write down the teachings of Lord Mahavira that were the subject matter of Agamas . Āchārya <unk> , in first century CE , guided two Āchāryas , Āchārya <unk> and Āchārya Bhutabali , to write down these teachings . The two Āchāryas wrote on palm leaves , Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama — among the oldest known Digambara Jaina texts . Jain Agamas prescribe five major vratas ( vows ) that both ascetics and householders have to follow . These ethical principles were preached by Mahavira : 
 Ahimsa ( Non @-@ violence or Non @-@ injury ) . Mahavira taught that every living being has sanctity and dignity of its own and it should be respected just as one expects one 's own sanctity and dignity to be respected . Ahimsa is formalised into Jain doctrine as the first and foremost vow . According to the Jain text , Tattvarthasutra : " The severance of vitalities out of passion is injury " . 
 Satya ( Truthfulness ) — not to lie or speak what is not commendable . According to the Jain text Sarvārthasiddhi : " that which causes pain and suffering to the living is not commendable , whether it refers to actual facts or not " . 
 Asteya ( Non @-@ stealing ) , which states one should not take anything if not properly given . 
 Brahmacharya ( Chastity ) , which stresses steady but determined restraint over yearning for sensual pleasures . 
 Aparigraha ( Non @-@ attachment ) — non @-@ attachment to both inner possessions ( liking , disliking ) and external possessions like property . 
 Mahavira 's philosophy has eight cardinal ( law of trust ) , three metaphysical ( dravya , Jīva and <unk> ) , and five ethical principles . The objective is to elevate the quality of life . Mahavira said an individual or society should exercise self @-@ restraint to achieve social peace , security and an enlightened society . 
 = = = Ahiṃsā = = = 
 Mahavira preached that ahimsa ( non @-@ injury ) is the supreme ethical and moral virtue . Mahavira taught that no one likes pain and therefore non @-@ injury must cover all living beings . According to Mahatma Gandhi : 
 No religion in the World has explained the principle of Ahimsa so deeply and systematically as is discussed with its applicability in every human life in Jainism . As and when the benevolent principle of Ahimsa or non @-@ violence will be ascribed for practice by the people of the world to achieve their end of life in this world and beyond . Jainism is sure to have the uppermost status and Lord Mahāvīra is sure to be respected as the greatest authority on Ahimsa . 
 = = = Anekantavada = = = 
 Another fundamental teaching of Mahavira was Anekantavada ( pluralism and multiplicity of viewpoints ) . 
 = = Jaina literature = = 
 = = = Biographies = = = 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> of <unk> discusses almost all of the events connected with the life of Mahavira in a form convenient to memorise . Acharya Jinasena 's <unk> include <unk> purāṇa and Uttara @-@ purāṇa . It was completed by his disciple Acharya Gunabhadra in the 8th century . In Uttara @-@ purāṇa the life of Mahavira is described in three <unk> ( 74 – 76 ) in 1818 verses . <unk> is a Sanskrit <unk> ( poem ) that describe the life of Mahavira written by <unk> in 853 . 
 = = = Adoration = = = 
 <unk> by Acharya Samantabhadra is the adoration of twenty @-@ four Tirthankaras . Its eight shlokas ( aphorisms ) adore the qualities of Mahavira . One such <unk> is : 
 O Lord Jina ! Your doctrine that expounds essential attributes required of a potential aspirant to cross over the ocean of worldly existence ( Saṃsāra ) reigns supreme even in this strife @-@ ridden spoke of time ( <unk> Kaal ) . Accomplished sages who have invalidated the so @-@ called deities that are famous in the world , and have made ineffective the whip of all blemishes , adore your doctrine . 
 <unk> by Acharya Samantabhadra is a poetic work consisting of sixty @-@ four verses in praise of Mahavira . 
 <unk> Stotra was composed by Jain poet <unk> . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Mahavira 's teachings influenced many personalities . Rabindranath Tagore wrote : 
 Mahavira proclaimed in India , the message of salvation , that religion is a reality and not a mere social convention , that salvation comes from taking refuge in the true religion and not from observing the external ceremonies of the community , that religion cannot regard any barriers between man and man as an eternal variety . <unk> to say , this teaching rapidly over topped the barriers of the race abiding instinct and conquered the whole county . 
 A major event is associated with the 2,500th anniversary of the Nirvana of Mahavira in 1974 . According to Padmanabh Jaini : 
 Probably few people in the West are aware that during this Anniversary year for the first time in their long history , the mendicants of the Śvētāmbara , Digambara and <unk> sects assembled on the same platform , agreed upon a common flag ( Jaina <unk> ) and emblem ( <unk> ) ; and resolved to bring about the unity of the community . For the duration of the year four dharma <unk> , a wheel mounted on a chariot as an ancient symbol of the <unk> ( Holy Assembly ) of <unk> Mahavira traversed to all the major cities of India , winning legal sanctions from various state governments against the slaughter of animals for sacrifice or other religious purposes , a campaign which has been a major preoccupation of the Jainas throughout their history . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 Mahavira : The Hero of Nonviolence is an illustrated children ’ s story based upon the life of Mahavira . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 Mahavira is usually depicted in a sitting or standing meditative posture with the symbol of a lion beneath him . Every Tīrthankara has a distinguishing emblem that allows worshippers to distinguish similar @-@ looking idols of the Tirthankaras . The lion emblem of Mahavira is usually carved below the legs of the Tirthankara . Like all Tirthankaras , Mahavira is depicted with <unk> and downcast eyes . 
 = = = Images = = = 
 = James Rainwater = 
 Leo James Rainwater ( December 9 , 1917 – May 31 , 1986 ) was an American physicist who shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1975 for his part in determining the asymmetrical shapes of certain atomic nuclei . 
 During World War II , he worked on the Manhattan Project that developed the first atomic bombs . In 1949 , he began developing his theory that , contrary to what was then believed , not all atomic nuclei are spherical . His ideas were later tested and confirmed by Aage Bohr 's and Ben Mottelson 's experiments . He also contributed to the scientific understanding of X @-@ rays and participated in the United States Atomic Energy Commission and naval research projects . 
 Rainwater joined the physics faculty at Columbia in 1946 , where he reached the rank of full professor in 1952 and was named Pupin Professor of Physics in 1982 . He received the Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award for Physics in 1963 and in 1975 was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics , " for the discovery of the connection between collective motion and particle motion in atomic nuclei and the development of the theory of the structure of the atomic nucleus based on this connection " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Leo James Rainwater was born on December 9 , 1917 , in Council , Idaho , the son of a former civil engineer who ran the local general store , Leo Jaspar Rainwater and his wife Edna Eliza née Teague . He never used his first name and was always referred to as James or Jim . His father died in the great influenza epidemic of 1918 and Rainwater and his mother moved to Hanford , California , where she married George Fowler , a widower with two sons , Freeman and John . In time he also acquired a half @-@ brother , George Fowler , Jr . , who became naval officer . At high school he excelled in mathematics , chemistry and physics and was admitted to the California Institute of Technology on the strength of a chemistry competition . He received his Bachelor of Science degree as a physics major in 1939 . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 Rainwater then chose to undertake postgraduate studies at Columbia University . At the time this was an unusual move for a scholar from California , as Columbia was not then renowned for its physics ; but this had recently changed . George B. Pegram had recently built up the physics department , and hired scientists like Enrico Fermi . At Columbia Rainwater studied under Isidor Isaac Rabi , Enrico Fermi , Edward Teller and John R. Dunning . Fermi was engaged in neutron moderator studies that would lead to the construction of the first nuclear reactor , while Dunning and Eugene T. Booth had built Columbia 's first cyclotron , in the basement of the Pupin Physics Laboratories . Rainwater received his Master of Arts in 1941 . For his Doctor of Philosophy thesis on " Neutron beam spectrometer studies of boron , cadmium , and the energy distribution from paraffin " , written under Dunning 's supervision , he built a neutron spectrometer and developed techniques for its use . Rainwater married Emma Louise Smith in March 1942 . They had three sons , James , Robert and William and a daughter , Elizabeth Ann , who died from leukaemia when she was nine . 
 Fermi 's reactor group moved to the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago in 1942 . Rainwater remained at Columbia , where he joined the Manhattan Project 's Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories . The Manhattan Project was the Allied effort during World War II to develop atomic bombs . The SAM Laboratories ' primary task was the development of gaseous diffusion technology for uranium enrichment , to produce fissile uranium @-@ 235 for use in atomic bombs . Rainwater worked with William W. Havens , Jr. and Chien @-@ Shiung Wu , mostly on studies of neutron cross sections , using the neutron spectrometer . After the war , a dozen papers by Dunning , Havens , Rainwater and Wu would be declassified and published . So too was his thesis , published in the Physical Review in two parts with Havens 's thesis , and he was awarded his doctorate in 1946 . In 1963 he was awarded the United States Atomic Energy Commission 's Ernest Orlando Lawrence Award , for his work on the Manhattan Project . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Rainwater remained at Columbia as an instructor . In 1948 , he began teaching courses on nuclear structure . Niels Bohr and John Wheeler had developed a theoretical treatment for nuclear fission in 1939 that they based on the liquid drop model of the nucleus . This was superseded in 1949 by Maria Goeppert Mayer 's nuclear shell model , which could explain more about the structure of heavy elements than the older theory but it still had limits . At a colloquium at Columbia in 1949 , Charles H. Townes reported experimental results that indicated quadrupole moments greater than those indicated by the shell model . It occurred to Rainwater that this could be explained and the differences between the liquid drop and nuclear shell models could be reconciled , if the atomic nucleus were not spherical , as had been assumed but could assume other shapes . Rainwater published his theoretical paper in 1950 . By chance , that year he was sharing an office with Aage Bohr , who took up the challenge of experimentally verifying Rainwater 's theory . Bohr and Ben Mottelson published their results in three papers in 1952 and 1953 that conclusively confirmed the theory . Rainwater felt that his model was overlooked . He later recalled that : 
 When I made my proposal for use of a spheroidal nuclear model , it seemed to be an obvious answer which would immediately be simultaneously suggested by all theorists in the field . I do not understand why it was not . I was also surprised and dismayed to hear one or more respected theorists announce in every Nuclear Physics Conference which I attended through 1955 some such comment as , " Although the Nuclear Shell Model seems empirically to work very well , there is at present no theoretical justification as to why it should apply . " 
 With funding from the Office of Naval Research , Rainwater built a synchrotron , which became operational in 1950 , at the Nevis Laboratories , on an estate on the Hudson River at Irvington , New York , willed to Columbia University by the DuPont family . He became a full professor in 1952 and was the director of Nevis Laboratories from 1951 to 1954 and again from 1957 to 1961 . He worked with his student Val Fitch on studies of muonic atoms , atoms where an electron is replaced by a muon . After 1965 , he worked on turning the Nevis synchrotron into a meson facility . When a reporter rang in 1975 to inform him that he had won the Nobel Prize in Physics , he initially thought that it was for his work on muonic atoms . Several hours passed before he discovered that it was for his was for his work on atomic structure , the Nobel Prize being shared with Bohr and Mottelson . 
 Rainwater succeeded Robert R. Wilson as Michael I. Pupin Professor of Physics in 1983 . He was a fellow of the American Physical Society , the New York Academy of Sciences and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers , and was a member of the National Academy of Science , the American Institute of Physics , the American Association of Physics Teachers and the Optical Society of America . Fitch noted that Rainwater seldom engaged and had little interest in sports except when his sons were involved . Rainwater collapsed after a lecture at the Pupin Laboratories in 1985 but was revived by a student who knew how to administer CPR . In declining health , he retired and became a professor emeritus in February 1986 . He died from cardiopulmonary arrest at St. John 's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers , New York on May 31 , 1986 . He was survived by his wife , three sons and half @-@ brother George . 
 = Romney Academy = 
 Romney Academy was an educational institution for higher learning in Romney , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . Romney Academy was first incorporated by the Virginia General Assembly on January 11 , 1814 , and was active until 1846 when it was reorganized as the Romney Classical Institute . In addition to the Romney Classical Institute , Romney Academy was also a forerunner institution to Potomac Seminary . Romney Academy was one of the earliest institutions for higher learning within the present boundaries of the state of West Virginia . 
 With the growth of settlement in Pearsall 's Flats , which was later the location of Romney , the need for educational facilities became apparent and the community began plans for the establishment of schools and churches . A log structure , which served as both a school and a church , was built at Pearsall 's Flats around 1752 near Fort Pearsall . To provide for a teacher 's payment , a form was circulated around Romney and each parent indicated on the paper how many of their children would attend the school and the type of payment the teacher would expect . By the time Romney was surveyed by Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron laid out the town of Romney in 1762 , the log school was still in existence . That year , a stone school building was erected on the site to the immediate north of the old Hampshire County Courthouse and became known as Romney Academy . 
 Local education , including Romney Academy , continued to depend exclusively upon subscriptions until 1810 when the Virginia General Assembly passed what was known as the " Literary Fund " . The assembly first incorporated Romney Academy on January 11 , 1814 . In 1817 , the assembly passed a bill for the incorporating the trustees of Romney Academy . The Virginia General Assembly reincorporated Romney Academy on February 11 , 1818 , and on March 25 , 1820 . In 1820 , as a result of a movement and debate for higher education by the Romney Literary Society , Romney Academy incorporated classical studies into its curriculum , thus making it the first institution of higher education in the region . 
 By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its facilities , and the Romney Literary Society was given authorization to raise monies from a lottery to build a new school building . The society successfully raised the funds , and in 1845 bids were called for the construction of a new school building . On December 12 , 1846 , the Virginia General Assembly empowered the Romney Literary Society to establish a seminary for learning at the academy . That same year , a new brick building was constructed for the academy and for the library of the society ; the building now serves as the central unit of the administration building of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . 
 Romney Academy was administered under the leadership of scholarly Englishman Dr. Henry Johnston , who was succeeded by Presbyterian Reverend and historian Dr. William Henry Foote . Foote introduced courses in theology into the school 's curriculum . As the school 's popularity grew and knowledge of its curriculum under Dr. Foote spread , Romney Academy began to attract students from beyond the South Branch Potomac River valley region . Other educators at Romney Academy during its early years were E. W. Newton , Silas C. Walker , Thomas Mulledy , and Samuel Mulledy . Thomas and Samuel Mulledy each later served as presidents of Georgetown University in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Background = = 
 The land upon which Romney Academy was established was originally part of the Northern Neck Proprietary , a land grant that Charles II of England awarded to seven of his supporters in 1649 and renewed by an official patent in 1688 . One of these seven supporters , Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper , acquired the entire area in 1681 , and his grandson , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , inherited it in 1719 . 
 The South Branch Survey of the Northern Neck Proprietary extended from the north end of The Trough to the confluence of the North and South Branches of the Potomac River . Lord Fairfax originally planned to maintain the South Branch Survey as his personal manor but later commissioned James Genn to survey the South Branch Potomac River lowlands for sale in 1748 , with land lots ranging in size from 300 acres ( 120 ha ) to 400 acres ( 160 ha ) . 
 Romney and its environs within the South Branch Survey were originally settled in the 1730s by Job Pearsall , and by 1748 approximately 200 people had settled at what was then known as Pearsall 's Flats . Prior to 1762 , Lord Fairfax sent surveyors into Hampshire County , who were charged with the selection of a site for the what would later become the town of Romney . Pearsall 's Flats was selected as the site due to its already having Fort Pearsall , a courthouse , and natural topographical advantages . Lord Fairfax commissioned a survey of Romney , and the town was laid out into 25 2 @-@ acre blocks with eight streets in a grid pattern in 1762 . On December 13 , 1762 , the Virginia General Assembly recognized the stability of the upper Potomac frontier when it passed a bill establishing the town of Romney , and the bill was signed by Governor Francis Fauquier on December 23 , 1762 . 
 In the early years in western Virginia , pioneer settlers were primarily concerned with providing defense from Native American attacks , so little emphasis was placed upon education . Education was viewed as a religious duty , to be provided for at home , where its quality was dependent upon the spare time and level of education of parents . With the growth of settlement in Pearsall 's Flats , and later Romney , the need for educational facilities became apparent and the community began plans for the establishment of schools and churches . 
 A log structure , which served as both a school and a church , was built at Pearsall 's Flats around 1752 near Fort Pearsall . During his travels in western Virginia in 1753 , George Washington made mention of this structure . The log building was constructed of roughly hewn logs with clay chinking and contained puncheon log floors , hewn side up , clapboard doors , and one small window covered by a paper greased with lard . Light in the log structure was provided by the small window and a fireplace measuring 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) in height , which contained a tall pile of logs during the winter to provide for warmth in addition to lighting . The school 's teachers were paid by subscriptions from the attending students . To provide for a teacher 's payment , a form was circulated around Romney and each parent indicated on the paper how many of their children would attend the school and the type of payment the teacher would expect , whether in the form of cash <unk> , produce , or boarding . These early teachers were usually " wandering pedagogues , settling wherever they could obtain enough signers to insure a living " . 
 By the time the surveyors on behalf of Lord Fairfax had laid out the town of Romney in 1762 , the log school was still in existence along with other public buildings . Later in 1762 following the establishment of Romney , the school was rebuilt in stone on the same site . The stone building was erected on the site to the immediate north of the old Hampshire County Courthouse and became known as Romney Academy . The stone building was a rugged square building that served as Romney 's cultural center before the school was formally incorporated by the Virginia General Assembly , but the exact date of its construction is unknown . Romney Academy was first incorporated by the Virginia General Assembly on January 11 , 1814 . 
 Following the American Revolutionary War , education in Virginia was provided predominantly by private " district schools " whose curriculum was decided by the people who funded them . On February 8 , 1817 , the first comprehensive bill for public education in the southern United States was introduced to the Virginia House of Delegates by Federalist delegate Charles F. Mercer . Mercer 's bill provided for a centralized system for public education that was to be administered by a board of education and financed by the state of Virginia . The bill stated that primary schools were to be established first for " all free white children ... free of any charge whatever " and provided for the establishment of a system of academies , 48 for males and three for females , and four colleges that were to be dispersed throughout Virginia , and a university to be founded in a centralized location . The bill faced substantial partisan opposition and eventually failed . Despite the bill 's failure , the Virginia General Assembly continued incorporated academies or " classical schools " throughout the state to provide primary and secondary education . Despite being incorporated by the assembly , the academies were not public and were instead funded through tuition fees , which were generally low but prevented a larger number of students from attending them . By 1860 , the Virginia General Assembly had incorporated 250 of these academies , including Romney Academy . 
 = = Establishment and development = = 
 Local education , including Romney Academy , continued to depend upon subscriptions exclusively until 1810 when the Virginia General Assembly passed what was known as the " Literary Fund " , which was to be apportioned among the Virginia counties for the education of the poor . In 1817 , a bill " incorporating the trustees of Romney Academy in the county of Hampshire " was presented to the Virginia House of Delegates by Mr. Scott , a delegate on the Committee of Schools and Colleges . The bill was read a second time in the Virginia House of Delegates following a motion by Hampshire County delegate William Naylor , after which it was ordered to be " re @-@ committed to the Committee of Schools and Colleges " . An amended version of the bill was again presented to the Virginia House of Delegates for a third time by Mr. Scott , and it was passed by the legislative body and renamed " an act incorporating the trustees of Romney Academy in the county of Hampshire " . 
 A further provision for local education in Virginia was included in an act passed by the Virginia General Assembly in 1818 stating that : " It shall be the duty of the courts of the several counties , cities , and corporate towns — in the month of October or as soon thereafter as may be — to appoint not less than five or more than fifteen discreet persons to be called school commissioners . " The commissioners who were appointed in Hampshire County were John McDowell , David Gibson , John Pierce , John Randalls , Elisha Thompson , Charles Keller , Frederick Sheets , James Abernathy , and Robert Sherard . Accounts rendered to the Hampshire County court for the expenditure of the Literary Fund illustrated that " the average price of tuition , exclusive of books , paper , etc. has been within a small fraction of four cents for every day of each attendance for each poor child . " Because nearly 700 impoverished children in Hampshire County were entitled to the fund , each child was only able to receive only a few months ' worth of schooling , and because of the limited facilities , only about half of the total number of eligible children were able to be taken care of at each of the two periods of enrollment . 
 Romney Academy was formally established on February 11 , 1818 , when the Virginia General Assembly finally passed an act entitled " an act incorporating the trustees of Romney academy , in the county of Hampshire " in which the assembly incorporated Romney Academy and constituted and appointed a board of trustees for the operation of the institution . With a system of formal education underway in Hampshire County , forces were underway for the higher education in the community . 
 On a winter evening in 1819 , nine men in Romney conducting a meeting in the office of Dr. John Temple for the purpose " of taking into consideration the proprietary of financing a Society , having for its object the advancement of Literature and Science ; the purchase of a Library by and for the use of its members ; and their further improvement by discussing before the Society such questions as shall be selected under its directors . " The nine men consisted of Thomas Blair , David Gibson , James P. Jack , Virginia author and historian Samuel Kercheval , Nathaniel Kuykendall , Charles T. Magill , James M. Stephens , John Temple , and W. C. Wodrow . Shortly after the formation of the Romney Literary Society , the society recognized that the quality of the education provided by Romney Academy and other local subscription schools was not meeting the needs of the Romney community , and therefore , it launched a movement to establish an institution for " the higher education of the youth of the community " . The society frequently debated upon theories of education advancement and popular education . In 1820 , as a result of this movement and debate , Romney Academy incorporated classical studies into its curriculum , thus making it the first institution of higher education in the region . The institution was again incorporated by the Virginia General Assembly on March 25 , 1820 . 
 By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its facilities , and the Romney Literary Society commenced its campaign to raise funds for a new academic building . On January 6 , 1832 , the Virginia General Assembly authorized the society to raise $ 20 @,@ 000 by lottery for educational purposes . Following a ten @-@ year lapse after this authorization , the society made arrangements with James Gregory of Jersey City , New Jersey , and Daniel McIntyre of Philadelphia to finance the lottery , " for raising a sum of money not exceeding Twenty Thousand dollars , for the purpose of erecting a suitable building for their accommodation , the purchase of a library and Philosophical apparatus " . The lottery was to be conducted for a period lasting 10 years , and the sums of $ 750 , $ 1 @,@ 000 , and $ 1 @,@ 500 were to be raised in semi @-@ annual installments . The society successfully raised the funds , and in 1845 bids were called for the construction of a new school building . On December 12 , 1846 , the Virginia General Assembly empowered the Romney Literary Society " to establish at or near the town of Romney a Seminary of Learning for the instruction of youth in various branches of science and literature ; and the Society may appropriate to the same such portion of the property which it now has or may acquire , as it may deem expedient " . That same year , a new brick building was constructed for the academy and for the library of the society , which now serves as the central unit of the administration building of the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind . Following the school 's move to the building , it was reorganized as the Romney Classical Institute with Foote as its principal . 
 = = Faculty and curriculum = = 
 The earliest faculty members of Romney Academy are unknown , but the institution 's first principal and one of the institution 's longest serving teachers from its era of infancy was scholarly Englishman Dr. Henry Johnston . Under Johnston 's leadership , Romney Academy became known regionally for its courses in the " higher classics " and made Romney the seat of one the Eastern Panhandle 's most successful academies . Johnston believed in the " rule of the birch rod " and discipline was no light matter under his leadership . Some of Romney 's prominent men in its early history were among Johnston 's students . Other educators at Romney Academy during its early years were E. W. Newton , Silas C. Walker , a Mr. Brown , Thomas Mulledy , and Samuel Mulledy . Thomas and Samuel Mulledy each later served as presidents of Georgetown University in Washington , D.C. 
 Presbyterian Reverend and historian Dr. William Henry Foote succeeded Johnston as principal of Romney Academy around 1826 . Foote served in that capacity until his departure from Romney around 1837 or 1839 . Foote also concurrently served as the pastor of the Romney Presbyterian Church . Foote introduced courses in theology into the school 's curriculum , which broadened the make @-@ up of the student body to include young men preparing for the ministry . As the school 's popularity grew and knowledge of its curriculum under Dr. Foote spread , Romney Academy began to attract students from beyond the South Branch Potomac River valley region . Following Foote 's departure , Reverend Theodore Gallaudet served as Romney Academy 's principal . 
 = = Board of trustees = = 
 The inaugural board of trustees were constituted and appointed by the Virginia General Assembly in 1818 . Because there were several vacancies among the board of trustees , on March 25 , 1839 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act , appointing a new board of trustees consisting of David Gibson , John Baker White , Angus William McDonald , Daniel Mytinger , and John Kern , Jr . In addition , the 1839 act authorized any of the five appointed trustees of Romney Academy to fill vacancies on the board " occasioned by death , resignation , removal , or legal disability " , thereby preventing future prolonged vacant trustee seats . 
 Romney Academy trustee John Baker White was a clerk of both the circuit and county courts of Hampshire County and was the father of Robert White , Attorney General of West Virginia from 1877 until 1881 . Robert White successfully lobbied the West Virginia Legislature to pass an act establishing the Institution for the Deaf , Dumb , and Blind of West Virginia ( later named the West Virginia Schools for the Deaf and Blind ) , which utilized the former campus of the Romney Classical Institute , a successor educational institution to Romney Academy . Another trustee , Angus William McDonald , was the father of Marshall McDonald , who served as commissioner of the United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries from 1888 until 1895 . 
 = = Building = = 
 Romney Academy utilized a native stone structure located behind the Hampshire County Courthouse at a site presently occupied by the Courthouse Annex building ( 1934 ) at 66 North High Street in Romney . According to West Virginia historians Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher in their History of Hampshire County , West Virginia ( 1897 ) , the Romney Academy building was one of the earliest educational facilities in the county and regarding its architecture , Maxwell and Swisher noted : " the rough <unk> stones of which the academy was built gave it a very uncouth exterior . " By 1831 , Romney Academy had outgrown its quarters in the old stone school building and relocated to a new Classical Revival structure completed in 1846 , after which the institution was reorganized as the Romney Classical Institute . 
 After the academy 's stone building ceased being used as an educational facility , it was subsequently utilized for various purposes including serving as the offices of the Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser newspaper and as a meeting place for local fraternal organizations . Romney Academy 's stone building remained dormant and unoccupied for a number of years and was demolished by the time Maxwell and Swisher researched and authored their History of Hampshire County , West Virginia in the late 1890s . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 During its brief years of operation between 1814 and 1846 , Romney Academy educated a number of notable alumni . According to Seldon Brannon 's Historic Hampshire ( 1976 ) , " among the pupils of this school were some of the most prominent men in the early history of the [ Romney ] community . " The academy 's students included William C. Clayton , a West Virginia state senator ; John Jeremiah Jacob , 4th Governor of West Virginia ; Angus William McDonald , Jr . , a West Virginia lawyer , politician , and military officer ; and Reverend Stuart Robinson , a Presbyterian minister , orator , writer , and editor . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 According to West Virginia historian Hu Maxwell in his article entitled " West Virginia a Century Ago " published in The <unk> Historical Magazine ( 1901 ) , Romney Academy was " one of the oldest and most renowned schools on the early soil of West Virginia " . Of the institution , Maxwell stated that " from its halls went forth some of the teachers who became the <unk> of learning in the famous South Branch [ valley ] — whose people might appropriately be called the Phoenicians of the Alleghenies , the carriers of liberty , equality , and education . " 
 = Ontario Highway 51 = 
 King 's Highway 51 , commonly referred to as Highway 51 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that connected Highway 3 in Eatonville with Rondeau Provincial Park . An earlier designation existed south of Orangeville , connecting Highway 24 with Highway 10 . This iteration was assumed in 1938 , but later renumbered as Highway 24 In 1961 . The more recent incarnation of the route number was assumed in 1970 , but then decommissioned in 1997 and transferred to what is now the city of Chatham – Kent . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 51 was a short connector road that served to link Highway 3 to Rondeau Provincial Park . At its southern terminus , the highway began at the entrance gates to the provincial park , proceeding northeast through a small community of recreational cottages . The highway exited the park and turned north onto what is now Chatham – Kent Road 15 . From here the highway progressed straight north to Highway 3 , passing through the community of New Scotland along the way . Trees continue to line both sides of this section of the highway , with farmland sprawling out beyond that . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1961 , the section of Highway 24 between Highway 51 and Orangeville was renumbered as Highway 136 ; Highway 51 was renumbered as Highway 24 and the latter signed concurrently with Highway 10 north to Orangeville . On April 9 , 1970 , the road from Eatonville to Rondeau Provincial Park was designated as Highway 51 . This iteration of the route remained unaltered until April 1 , 1997 , when it was transferred to Kent County , now the City of Chatham – Kent . It was subsequently designated as Chatham – Kent Road 15 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 51 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in Chatham – Kent . 
 = Gilbert and Sullivan = 
 Gilbert and Sullivan refers to the Victorian @-@ era theatrical partnership of the librettist W. S. Gilbert ( 1836 – 1911 ) and the composer Arthur Sullivan ( 1842 – 1900 ) and to the works they jointly created . The two men collaborated on fourteen comic operas between 1871 and 1896 , of which H.M.S. Pinafore , The Pirates of Penzance and The Mikado are among the best known . 
 Gilbert , who wrote the words , created fanciful " topsy @-@ turvy " worlds for these operas where each absurdity is taken to its logical conclusion — fairies rub elbows with British lords , flirting is a capital offence , gondoliers ascend to the monarchy , and pirates emerge as noblemen who have gone astray . Sullivan , six years Gilbert 's junior , composed the music , contributing memorable melodies that could convey both humour and pathos . 
 Their operas have enjoyed broad and enduring international success and are still performed frequently throughout the English @-@ speaking world . Gilbert and Sullivan introduced innovations in content and form that directly influenced the development of musical theatre through the 20th century . The operas have also influenced political discourse , literature , film and television and have been widely parodied and pastiched by <unk> . Producer Richard D 'Oyly Carte brought Gilbert and Sullivan together and nurtured their collaboration . He built the Savoy Theatre in 1881 to present their joint works ( which came to be known as the Savoy Operas ) and founded the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , which performed and promoted Gilbert and Sullivan 's works for over a century . 
 = = Beginnings = = 
 = = = Gilbert before Sullivan = = = 
 Gilbert was born in London on 18 November 1836 . His father , William , was a naval surgeon who later wrote novels and short stories , some of which included illustrations by his son . In 1861 , to supplement his income , the younger Gilbert began writing illustrated stories , poems and articles of his own , many of which would later be mined as inspiration for his plays and operas , particularly Gilbert 's series of illustrated poems , the Bab Ballads . 
 In the Bab Ballads and his early plays , Gilbert developed a unique " topsy @-@ turvy " style in which humour was derived by setting up a ridiculous premise and working out its logical consequences , however absurd . Director and playwright Mike Leigh described the " Gilbertian " style as follows : 
 With great fluidity and freedom , [ Gilbert ] continually challenges our natural expectations . First , within the framework of the story , he makes bizarre things happen , and turns the world on its head . Thus the Learned Judge marries the Plaintiff , the soldiers metamorphose into aesthetes , and so on , and nearly every opera is resolved by a deft moving of the goalposts ... His genius is to fuse opposites with an imperceptible sleight of hand , to blend the surreal with the real , and the caricature with the natural . In other words , to tell a perfectly outrageous story in a completely deadpan way . 
 Gilbert developed his innovative theories on the art of stage direction , following theatrical reformer Tom Robertson . At the time Gilbert began writing , theatre in Britain was in disrepute . Gilbert helped to reform and elevate the respectability of the theatre , especially beginning with his six short family @-@ friendly comic operas , or " entertainments " , for Thomas German Reed . 
 At a rehearsal for one of these entertainments , Ages Ago ( 1869 ) , the composer Frederic Clay introduced Gilbert to his friend , the young composer Arthur Sullivan . Two years later , Gilbert and Sullivan would write their first work together . Those two intervening years continued to shape Gilbert 's theatrical style . He continued to write humorous verse , stories and plays , including the comic operas Our Island Home ( 1870 ) and A Sensation Novel ( 1871 ) , and the blank verse comedies The Princess ( 1870 ) , The Palace of Truth ( 1870 ) , and Pygmalion and Galatea ( 1871 ) . 
 = = = Sullivan before Gilbert = = = 
 Sullivan was born in London on 13 May 1842 . His father was a military bandmaster , and by the time Arthur had reached the age of eight , he was proficient with all the instruments in the band . In school he began to compose anthems and songs . In 1856 , he received the first Mendelssohn Scholarship and studied at the Royal Academy of Music and then at Leipzig , where he also took up conducting . His graduation piece , completed in 1861 , was a suite of incidental music to Shakespeare 's The Tempest . Revised and expanded , it was performed at the Crystal Palace in 1862 and was an immediate sensation . He began building a reputation as England 's most promising young composer , composing a symphony , a concerto , and several overtures , among them the Overture di Ballo , in 1870 . 
 His early major works for the voice included The Masque at Kenilworth ( 1864 ) ; an oratorio , The Prodigal Son ( 1869 ) ; and a dramatic cantata , On Shore and Sea ( 1871 ) . He composed a ballet , L 'Île Enchantée ( 1864 ) and incidental music for a number of Shakespeare plays . Other early pieces that were praised were his Symphony in E , Concerto for Cello and Orchestra , and Overture in C ( In Memoriam ) ( all three of which premiered in 1866 ) . These commissions , however , were not sufficient to keep Sullivan afloat . He worked as a church organist and composed numerous hymns , popular songs , and parlour ballads . 
 Sullivan 's first foray into comic opera was Cox and Box ( 1866 ) , written with librettist F. C. Burnand for an informal gathering of friends . Public performance followed , with W. S. Gilbert ( then writing dramatic criticism for the magazine Fun ) saying that Sullivan 's score " is , in many places , of too high a class for the grotesquely absurd plot to which it is wedded . " Nonetheless , it proved highly successful , and is still regularly performed today . Sullivan and Burnand 's second opera , The Contrabandista ( 1867 ) was not as successful . 
 = = Operas = = 
 = = = First collaborations = = = 
 = = = = Thespis = = = = 
 In 1871 , producer John Hollingshead brought Gilbert and Sullivan together to produce a Christmas entertainment , Thespis , at his Gaiety Theatre , a large West End house . The piece was an extravaganza in which the classical Greek gods , grown elderly , are temporarily replaced by a troupe of 19th @-@ century actors and actresses , one of whom is the eponymous Thespis , the Greek father of the drama . Its mixture of political satire and grand opera parody mimicked Offenbach 's Orpheus in the Underworld and La belle Hélène , which ( in translation ) then dominated the English musical stage . 
 Thespis opened on Boxing Day and ran for 63 performances . It outran five of its nine competitors for the 1871 holiday season , and its run was extended beyond the length of a normal run at the Gaiety , but no one at the time anticipated that this was the beginning of a great collaboration . Unlike the later Gilbert and Sullivan works , it was hastily prepared , and its nature was more risqué , like Gilbert 's earlier burlesques , with a broader style of comedy that allowed for improvisation by the actors . Two of the male characters were played by women , whose shapely legs were put on display in a fashion that Gilbert later condemned . The musical score to Thespis was never published and is now lost , except for one song that was published separately , a chorus that was re @-@ used in The Pirates of Penzance , and the Act II ballet music . 
 Over the next three years , Gilbert and Sullivan did not have occasion to work together again , but each man became more eminent in his field . Gilbert worked with Frederic Clay on Happy Arcadia ( 1872 ) and with Alfred Cellier on Topsyturveydom ( 1874 ) , and wrote The Wicked World ( 1873 ) Sweethearts ( 1874 ) and several other libretti , farces , extravaganzas , fairy comedies , dramas and adaptations . Sullivan completed his Festival Te Deum ( 1872 ) ; another oratorio , The Light of the World ( 1873 ) ; his only song cycle , The Window ; or , The Song of the Wrens ( 1871 ) ; incidental music to The Merry Wives of Windsor ( 1874 ) ; and more songs , parlour ballads , and hymns , including " Onward , Christian Soldiers " ( 1872 ) . At the same time , the audience for theatre was growing because of the rapidly expanding British population ; improvement in education and the standard of living , especially of the middle class ; improving public transportation ; and installation of street lighting , which made travel home from the theatre safer . The number of pianos manufactured in England doubled between 1870 and 1890 as more people began to play parlour music at home and more theatres and concert halls opened . 
 = = = = Trial by Jury = = = = 
 In 1874 , Gilbert wrote a short libretto on commission from producer – conductor Carl Rosa , whose wife would have played the leading role , but her death in childbirth cancelled the project . Not long afterwards , Richard D 'Oyly Carte was managing the Royalty Theatre , and he needed a short opera to be played as an afterpiece to Offenbach 's La Périchole . Carte knew about Gilbert 's libretto for Rosa and suggested that Sullivan write a score for it . Gilbert read the piece to Sullivan in February 1875 , and the composer was delighted with it ; Trial by Jury was composed and staged in a matter of weeks . 
 The piece is one of Gilbert 's humorous spoofs of the law and the legal profession , based on his short experience as a barrister . It concerns a breach of promise of marriage suit . The defendant argues that damages should be slight , since " he is such a very bad lot , " while the plaintiff argues that she loves the defendant fervently and seeks " substantial damages . " After much argument , the judge resolves the case by marrying the lovely plaintiff himself . With Sullivan 's brother , Fred , as the Learned Judge , the opera was a runaway hit , outlasting the run of La Périchole . Provincial tours and productions at other theatres quickly followed . 
 Fred Sullivan was the prototype for the " patter " ( comic ) baritone roles in the later operas . F. C. Burnand wrote that he " was one of the most naturally comic little men I ever came across . He , too , was a first @-@ rate practical musician ... As he was the most absurd person , so was he the very <unk> ... " Fred 's creation would serve as a model for the rest of the collaborators ' works , and each of them has a crucial comic little man role , as Burnand had put it . The " patter " baritone ( or " principal comedian " , as these roles later were called ) would often assume the leading role in Gilbert and Sullivan 's comic operas , and was usually allotted the speedy patter songs . 
 After the success of Trial by Jury , Gilbert and Sullivan were suddenly in demand to write more operas together . Over the next two years , Richard D 'Oyly Carte and Carl Rosa were two of several theatrical managers who negotiated with the team but were unable to come to terms . Carte proposed a revival of Thespis for the 1875 Christmas season , which Gilbert and Sullivan would have revised , but he was unable to obtain financing for the project . In early 1876 , Carte requested that Gilbert and Sullivan create another one @-@ act opera on the theme of burglars , but this was never completed . 
 = = = Early successes = = = 
 = = = = The Sorcerer = = = = 
 Carte 's real ambition was to develop an English form of light opera that would displace the bawdy burlesques and badly translated French operettas then dominating the London stage . He assembled a syndicate and formed the Comedy Opera Company , with Gilbert and Sullivan commissioned to write a comic opera that would serve as the centrepiece for an evening 's entertainment . 
 Gilbert found a subject in one of his own short stories , " The Elixir of Love , " which concerned the complications arising when a love potion is distributed to all the residents of a small village . The leading character was a Cockney businessman who happened to be a sorcerer , a purveyor of blessings ( not much called for ) and curses ( very popular ) . Gilbert and Sullivan were tireless taskmasters , seeing to it that The Sorcerer opened as a fully polished production , in marked contrast to the under @-@ rehearsed Thespis . While The Sorcerer won critical acclaim , it did not duplicate the success of Trial by Jury . Nevertheless , Carte and his syndicate were sufficiently encouraged to commission another full @-@ length opera from the team . 
 = = = = H.M.S. Pinafore = = = = 
 Gilbert and Sullivan scored their first international hit with H.M.S. Pinafore ( 1878 ) , satirising the rise of unqualified people to positions of authority and poking good @-@ natured fun at the Royal Navy and the English obsession with social status ( building on a theme introduced in The Sorcerer , love between members of different social classes ) . As with many of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , a surprise twist changes everything dramatically near the end of the story . 
 Gilbert oversaw the designs of sets and costumes , and he directed the performers on stage . He sought realism in acting , shunned self @-@ conscious interaction with the audience , and insisted on a standard of characterisation where the characters were never aware of their own absurdity . Gilbert insisted that his actors know their words perfectly and obey his stage directions , which was something new to many actors of the day . Sullivan personally oversaw the musical preparation . The result was a new crispness and polish in the English musical theatre . As Jessie Bond wrote later : 
 Our stage discipline was strict and unbending . Gilbert 's word was law ; he thoroughly worked out in his own mind every bit of action , by @-@ play and grouping , and allowed no deviation from his plan . He ... made drawings and took measurements with the minutest care .... He had unlimited fertility of invention in comic business and would allow no gag , no clowning , no departure from his own definite conception . Sullivan 's musical conception was equally clear @-@ cut and decided . Every part must be made subservient to the whole , and his <unk> overwhelmed the transgressor with scorn . " And now , might I trouble you to try over my music , " he would say to a singer too anxious to display his or her top notes . But there was nothing to hurt or offend us in this unswerving discipline , we took their good @-@ humoured <unk> as our due when we failed in our rendering or overstepped the bounds ; and the patience and enthusiasm of that artistic pair so infected all of us that we worked willingly for hours and hours at rehearsals , trying with all our might to realize the conceptions of those two brilliant minds . 
 H.M.S. Pinafore ran in London for 571 performances , the second longest run of any musical theatre piece in history up to that time ( after the operetta Les cloches de Corneville ) . Hundreds of unauthorised , or " pirated " , productions of Pinafore appeared in America . During the run of Pinafore , Richard D 'Oyly Carte split up with his former investors . The disgruntled former partners , who had invested in the production with no return , staged a public fracas , sending a group of thugs to seize the scenery during a performance . Stagehands successfully managed to ward off their backstage attackers . This event cleared the way for Carte , Gilbert and Sullivan to form the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company , which then produced all of their succeeding operas . 
 The libretto of H.M.S. Pinafore relied on stock character types , many of which were familiar from European opera ( and some of which grew out of Gilbert 's earlier association with the German Reeds ) : the heroic protagonist ( tenor ) and his love @-@ interest ( soprano ) ; the older woman with a secret or a sharp tongue ( contralto ) ; the baffled lyric baritone — the girl 's father ; and a classic villain ( bass @-@ baritone ) . Gilbert and Sullivan added the element of the comic patter @-@ singing character . With the success of H.M.S. Pinafore , the D 'Oyly Carte repertory and production system was cemented , and each opera would make use of these stock character types . Before The Sorcerer , Gilbert had constructed his plays around the established stars of whatever theatre he happened to be writing for , as had been the case with Thespis and Trial by Jury . Building on the team he had assembled for The Sorcerer , Gilbert no longer hired stars ; he created them . He and Sullivan selected the performers , writing their operas for ensemble casts rather than individual stars . 
 The repertory system ensured that the comic patter character who performed the role of the sorcerer , John Wellington Wells , would become the ruler of the Queen 's navy as Sir Joseph Porter in H.M.S. Pinafore , then join the army as Major @-@ General Stanley in The Pirates of Penzance , and so on . Similarly , Mrs. <unk> in The Sorcerer transformed into Little Buttercup in Pinafore , then into Ruth , the piratical maid @-@ of @-@ all @-@ work in Pirates . Relatively unknown performers whom Gilbert and Sullivan engaged early in the collaboration would stay with the company for many years , becoming stars of the Victorian stage . These included George Grossmith , the principal comic ; Rutland Barrington , the lyric baritone ; Richard Temple , the bass @-@ baritone ; and Jessie Bond , the mezzo @-@ soprano soubrette . 
 = = = = The Pirates of Penzance = = = = 
 The Pirates of Penzance ( New Year 's Eve , 1879 ) also poked fun at grand opera conventions , sense of duty , family obligation , the " respectability " of civilisation and the peerage , and the relevance of a liberal education . The story also revisits Pinafore 's theme of unqualified people in positions of authority , in the person of the " modern Major @-@ General " who has up @-@ to @-@ date knowledge about everything except the military . The Major @-@ General and his many daughters escape from the tender @-@ hearted Pirates of Penzance , who are all orphans , on the false plea that he is an orphan himself . The pirates learn of the deception and re @-@ capture the Major @-@ General , but when it is revealed that the pirates are all peers , the Major @-@ General bids them : " resume your ranks and legislative duties , and take my daughters , all of whom are beauties ! " 
 The piece premiered first in New York rather than London , in an ( unsuccessful ) attempt to secure the American copyright , and was another big success with both critics and audiences . Gilbert , Sullivan and Carte tried for many years to control the American performance copyrights over their operas , without success . Nevertheless , Pirates was a hit both in New York , again spawning numerous imitators , and then in London , and it became one of the most frequently performed , translated and parodied Gilbert and Sullivan works , also enjoying successful 1981 Broadway and 1982 West End revivals by Joseph Papp that continue to influence productions of the opera . 
 In 1880 , Sullivan wrote the cantata The Martyr of Antioch , presented at the Leeds Triennial Music Festival , with a libretto modified by Gilbert from an 1822 epic poem by Henry Hart Milman concerning the martyrdom of St. Margaret of Antioch in the 3rd century . Sullivan became the conductor of the Leeds festival beginning in 1880 and conducted the performance . It could be said that Martyr was the 15th opera of the partnership , since the Carl Rosa Opera Company presented the work as an opera in 1898 . 
 = = = Savoy Theatre opens = = = 
 = = = = Patience = = = = 
 Patience ( 1881 ) satirised the aesthetic movement in general and its colourful poets , in particular , combining aspects of Algernon Charles Swinburne , Dante Gabriel Rossetti , Oscar Wilde , James McNeill Whistler and others in the rival poets Bunthorne and Grosvenor . Grossmith , who created the role of Bunthorne , based his makeup , wig and costume on Swinburne and especially Whistler , as seen in the adjacent photo . The work also lampoons male vanity and chauvinism in the military . The story concerns two rival " aesthetic " poets , who attract the attention of the young ladies of the village , who had been engaged to the members of a cavalry regiment . But both poets are in love with Patience , the village milkmaid , who detests one of them and feels that it is her duty to avoid the other despite her love for him . Richard D 'Oyly Carte was the booking manager for Oscar Wilde , a then lesser @-@ known proponent of aestheticism , and dispatched Wilde on an American lecture tour in conjunction with the opera 's U.S. run , so that American audiences might better understand what the satire was all about . 
 During the run of Patience , Carte built the large , modern Savoy Theatre , which became the partnership 's permanent home . It was the first theatre ( indeed the world 's first public building ) to be lit entirely by electric lighting . Patience moved into the Savoy after six months at the Opera Comique and ran for a total of 578 performances , surpassing the run of H.M.S. Pinafore and becoming the second longest @-@ running work of musical theatre up to that time in history . 
 = = = = Iolanthe = = = = 
 Iolanthe ( 1882 ) was the first of the operas to open at the Savoy . The fully electric Savoy made possible numerous special effects , such as sparkling magic wands for the female chorus of fairies . The opera poked fun at English law and the House of Lords and made much of the war between the sexes . The critics felt that Sullivan 's work in Iolanthe had taken a step forward . The Daily Telegraph wrote , " The composer has risen to his opportunity , and we are disposed to account Iolanthe his best effort in all the Gilbertian series . " Similarly , the Theatre asserted that " the music of Iolanthe is Dr Sullivan 's chef d 'oeuvre . The quality throughout is more even , and maintained at a higher standard , than in any of his earlier works ... " 
 Iolanthe is one of a number of Gilbert 's works , including The Wicked World ( 1873 ) , Broken Hearts ( 1875 ) , Princess Ida ( 1884 ) and Fallen Fairies ( 1909 ) , where the introduction of men and " mortal love " into a tranquil world of women wreaks havoc with the status quo . Gilbert had created several " fairy comedies " at the Haymarket Theatre in the early 1870s . These plays , influenced by the fairy work of James Planché , are founded upon the idea of self @-@ revelation by characters under the influence of some magic or some supernatural interference . 
 In 1882 , Gilbert had a telephone installed in his home and at the prompt desk at the Savoy Theatre so that he could monitor performances and rehearsals from his home study . Gilbert had referred to the new technology in Pinafore in 1878 , only two years after the device was invented and before London even had telephone service . Sullivan had one installed as well , and on 13 May 1883 , at a party to celebrate the composer 's 41st birthday , the guests , including the Prince of Wales ( later Edward VII ) , heard a direct relay of parts of Iolanthe from the Savoy . This was probably the first live " broadcast " of an opera . 
 During the run of Iolanthe , in 1883 , Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria . Although it was the operas with Gilbert that had earned him the broadest fame , the honour was conferred for his services to serious music . The musical establishment , and many critics , believed that this should put an end to his career as a composer of comic opera — that a musical knight should not stoop below oratorio or grand opera . Sullivan , despite the financial security of writing for the Savoy , increasingly viewed his work with Gilbert as unimportant , beneath his skills , and repetitious . Furthermore , he was unhappy that he had to simplify his music to ensure that Gilbert 's words could be heard . But paradoxically , in February 1883 , just after Iolanthe opened , Sullivan had signed a five @-@ year agreement with Gilbert and Carte requiring him to produce a new comic opera on six months ' notice . 
 = = = = Princess Ida = = = = 
 Princess Ida ( 1884 ) spoofed women 's education and male chauvinism and continued the theme from Iolanthe of the war between the sexes . The opera is based on Tennyson 's poem The Princess : A Medley . Gilbert had written a blank verse farce based on the same material in 1870 , called The Princess , and he reused a good deal of the dialogue from his earlier play in the libretto of Princess Ida . Ida is the only Gilbert and Sullivan work with dialogue entirely in blank verse and is also the only one of their works in three acts . Lillian Russell had been engaged to create the title role , but Gilbert did not believe that she was dedicated enough , and when she missed a rehearsal , he dismissed her . 
 Princess Ida was the first of the Gilbert and Sullivan operas that , by the partnership 's previous standards , was not a success . A particularly hot summer in London did not help ticket sales . The piece ran for a comparatively short 246 performances and was not revived in London until 1919 . Sullivan had been satisfied with the libretto , but two months after Ida opened , Sullivan told Carte that " it is impossible for me to do another piece of the character of those already written by Gilbert and myself . " As Princess Ida showed signs of flagging , Carte realised that , for the first time in the partnership 's history , no new opera would be ready when the old one closed . On 22 March 1884 , he gave Gilbert and Sullivan contractual notice that a new opera would be required in six months ' time . In the meantime , when Ida closed , Carte produced a revival of The Sorcerer . 
 = = = Dodging the magic lozenge = = = 
 = = = = The Mikado = = = = 
 The most successful of the Savoy Operas was The Mikado ( 1885 ) , which made fun of English bureaucracy , thinly disguised by a Japanese setting . Gilbert initially proposed a story for a new opera about a magic lozenge that would change the characters , which Sullivan found artificial and lacking in " human interest and probability " , as well as being too similar to their earlier opera , The Sorcerer . As dramatised in the film Topsy @-@ Turvy , the author and composer were at an impasse until 8 May 1884 , when Gilbert dropped the lozenge idea and agreed to provide a libretto without any supernatural elements . 
 The story focuses on a " cheap tailor , " Ko @-@ Ko , who is promoted to the position of Lord High Executioner of the town of Titipu . Ko @-@ Ko loves his ward , Yum @-@ Yum , but she loves a musician , who is really the son of the emperor of Japan ( the Mikado ) , and who is in disguise to escape the attentions of the elderly and amorous Katisha . The Mikado has decreed that executions must resume without delay in Titipu . When news arrives that the Mikado will be visiting the town , Ko @-@ Ko assumes that he is coming to ascertain whether Ko @-@ Ko has carried out the executions . Too timid to execute anyone , Ko @-@ Ko cooks up a conspiracy to misdirect the Mikado , which goes awry . Eventually , Ko @-@ Ko must persuade Katisha to marry him , in order to save his own life and the lives of the other conspirators . 
 With the opening of trade between England and Japan , Japanese imports , art and styles became fashionable in London , making the time ripe for an opera set in Japan . Gilbert said , " I cannot give you a good reason for our ... piece being laid in Japan . It ... afforded scope for picturesque treatment , scenery and costume , and I think that the idea of a chief magistrate , who is ... judge and actual executioner in one , and yet would not hurt a worm , may perhaps please the public . " 
 Setting the opera in Japan , an exotic locale far away from Britain , allowed Gilbert and Sullivan to satirise British politics and institutions more freely by clothing them in superficial Japanese trappings . Gilbert wrote , " The Mikado of the opera was an imaginary monarch of a remote period and cannot by any exercise of ingenuity be taken to be a slap on an existing institution . " G. K. Chesterton compared it to Jonathan Swift 's Gulliver 's Travels : " Gilbert pursued and persecuted the evils of modern England till they had literally not a leg to stand on , exactly as Swift did ... I doubt if there is a single joke in the whole play that fits the Japanese . But all the jokes in the play fit the English . ... About England Pooh @-@ bah is something more than a satire ; he is the truth . " Several of the later operas are similarly set in foreign or fictional locales , including The Gondoliers , Utopia Limited , and The Grand Duke . 
 The Mikado became the partnership 's longest @-@ running hit , enjoying 672 performances at the Savoy Theatre , which was the second longest run for any work of musical theatre ( surpassing the 571 performances of Pinafore and 576 of Patience ) and one of the longest runs of any theatre piece up to that time . The Mikado remains the most frequently performed Savoy Opera . It has been translated into numerous languages and is one of the most frequently played musical theatre pieces in history . 
 = = = = Ruddigore = = = = 
 Ruddigore ( 1887 ) , a topsy @-@ turvy take on Victorian melodrama , was less successful than most of the earlier collaborations with a run of 288 performances . The original title , Ruddygore , together with some of the plot devices , including the revivification of ghosts , drew negative comments from critics . Gilbert and Sullivan <unk> the title and made a number of changes and cuts . Nevertheless , the piece was profitable , and the reviews were not all bad . For instance , the Illustrated London News praised the work and both Gilbert and , especially , Sullivan : " Sir Arthur Sullivan has eminently succeeded alike in the expression of refined sentiment and comic humour . In the former respect , the charm of graceful melody prevails ; while , in the latter , the music of the most grotesque situations is redolent of fun . " Further changes were made , including a new overture , when Rupert D 'Oyly Carte revived Ruddigore after the First World War , and the piece was regularly performed by the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company thereafter . 
 Some of the plot elements of Ruddigore were introduced by Gilbert in his earlier one @-@ act opera , Ages Ago ( 1869 ) , including the tale of the wicked ancestor and the device of the ghostly ancestors stepping out of their portraits . When Ruddigore closed , no new opera was ready . Gilbert again proposed a version of the " lozenge " plot for their next opera , and Sullivan reiterated his desire to leave the partnership . While the two men worked out their artistic differences , Carte produced revivals of such old favourites as H.M.S. Pinafore , The Pirates of Penzance , and The Mikado . 
 = = = = The Yeomen of the Guard = = = = 
 The Yeomen of the Guard ( 1888 ) , their only joint work with a serious ending , concerns a pair of strolling players — a jester and a singing girl — who are caught up in a risky intrigue at the Tower of London during the 16th century . The dialogue , though in prose , is quasi @-@ early modern English in style , and there is no satire of British institutions . For some of the plot elements , Gilbert had reached back to his 1875 tragedy , Broken Hearts . The Times praised the libretto : " It should ... be acknowledged that Mr. Gilbert has earnestly endeavoured to leave familiar grooves and rise to higher things . " Although not a grand opera , the new libretto provided Sullivan with the opportunity to write his most ambitious score to date . The critics , who had recently lauded the composer for his successful oratorio , The Golden Legend , considered the score to Yeomen to be Sullivan 's finest , including its overture , which was written in sonata form , rather than as a sequential pot @-@ pourri of tunes from the opera , as in most of his other overtures . The Daily Telegraph wrote : 
 The accompaniments ... are delightful to hear , and especially does the treatment of the woodwind compel admiring attention . Schubert himself could hardly have handled those instruments more deftly , written for them more lovingly ... We place the songs and choruses in The Yeomen of the Guard before all his previous efforts of this particular kind . Thus the music follows the book to a higher plane , and we have a genuine English opera ... 
 Yeomen was a hit , running for over a year , with strong New York and touring productions . During the run , on 12 March 1889 , Sullivan wrote to Gilbert , 
 I have lost the liking for writing comic opera , and entertain very grave doubts as to my power of doing it ... You say that in a serious opera , you must more or less sacrifice yourself . I say that this is just what I have been doing in all our joint pieces , and , what is more , must continue to do in comic opera to make it successful . 
 Sullivan insisted that the next opera must be a grand opera . Gilbert did not feel that he could write a grand opera libretto , but he offered a compromise that Sullivan ultimately accepted . The two would write a light opera for the Savoy , and at the same time , Sullivan a grand opera ( Ivanhoe ) for a new theatre that Carte was constructing to present British grand opera . After a brief impasse over the choice of subject , Sullivan accepted an idea connected with Venice and Venetian life , as " this seemed to me to hold out great chances of bright colour and taking music . " 
 = = = = The Gondoliers = = = = 
 The Gondoliers ( 1889 ) takes place partly in Venice and partly in a kingdom ruled by a pair of gondoliers who attempt to remodel the monarchy in a spirit of " republican equality . " Gilbert recapitulates a number of his earlier themes , including the satire of class distinctions figuring in many of his earlier librettos . The libretto also reflects Gilbert 's fascination with the " Stock Company Act " , highlighting the absurd convergence of natural persons and legal entities , which plays an even larger part in the next opera , Utopia Limited . Press accounts were almost entirely favourable . The Illustrated London News reported : 
 ... Gilbert has returned to the Gilbert of the past , and everyone is delighted . He is himself again . The Gilbert of the Bab Ballads , the Gilbert of whimsical conceit , inoffensive cynicism , subtle satire , and playful paradox ; the Gilbert who invented a school of his own , who in it was schoolmaster and pupil , who has never taught anybody but himself , and is never likely to have any imitator — this is the Gilbert the public want to see , and this is the Gilbert who on Saturday night was cheered till the audience was weary of cheering any more . 
 Sullivan 's old collaborator on Cox and Box ( later the editor of Punch magazine ) , F. C. Burnand , wrote to the composer : " <unk> ! ... I envy you and <unk> being able to place a piece like this on the stage in so complete a fashion . " The opera enjoyed a run longer than any of their other joint works except for H.M.S. Pinafore , Patience and The Mikado . There was a command performance of The Gondoliers for Queen Victoria and the royal family at Windsor Castle in 1891 , the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera to be so honoured . The Gondoliers was Gilbert and Sullivan 's last great success . 
 = = = Carpet quarrel = = = 
 Gilbert and Sullivan sometimes had a strained working relationship , partly caused by the fact that each man saw himself as allowing his work to be subjugated to the other 's , and partly caused by the opposing personalities of the two — Gilbert was often confrontational and notoriously thin @-@ skinned ( though prone to acts of extraordinary kindness ) , while Sullivan eschewed conflict . In addition , Gilbert imbued his libretti with " topsy @-@ turvy " situations in which the social order was turned upside down . After a time , these subjects were often at odds with Sullivan 's desire for realism and emotional content . Also , Gilbert 's political satire often poked fun at the wealthy and powerful whom Sullivan sought out for friendship and patronage . 
 Gilbert and Sullivan disagreed several times over the choice of a subject . After both Princess Ida and Ruddigore , which were less successful than the seven other operas from H.M.S. Pinafore to The Gondoliers , Sullivan asked to leave the partnership , saying that he found Gilbert 's plots repetitive and that the operas were not artistically satisfying to him . While the two artists worked out their differences , Carte kept the Savoy open with revivals of their earlier works . On each occasion , after a few months ' pause , Gilbert responded with a libretto that met Sullivan 's objections , and the partnership was able to continue successfully . 
 In April 1890 , however , during the run of The Gondoliers , Gilbert challenged Carte over the expenses of the production . Among other items to which Gilbert objected , Carte had charged the cost of a new carpet for the Savoy Theatre lobby to the partnership . Gilbert believed that this was a maintenance expense that should be charged to Carte alone . Gilbert confronted Carte , who refused to reconsider the accounts . Gilbert stormed out and wrote to Sullivan that " I left him with the remark that it was a mistake to kick down the ladder by which he had risen " . Helen Carte wrote that Gilbert had addressed Carte " in a way that I should not have thought you would have used to an offending menial . " As scholar Andrew Crowther has explained : 
 After all , the carpet was only one of a number of disputed items , and the real issue lay not in the mere money value of these things , but in whether Carte could be trusted with the financial affairs of Gilbert and Sullivan . Gilbert contended that Carte had at best made a series of serious blunders in the accounts , and at worst deliberately attempted to swindle the others . It is not easy to settle the rights and wrongs of the issue at this distance , but it does seem fairly clear that there was something very wrong with the accounts at this time . Gilbert wrote to Sullivan on 28 May 1891 , a year after the end of the " Quarrel " , that Carte had admitted " an unintentional overcharge of nearly £ 1 @,@ 000 in the electric lighting accounts alone . 
 Things soon degraded , a legal hearing was held , and Sullivan supported Carte by making an affidavit erroneously stating that there were minor legal expenses outstanding from a battle Gilbert had with Lillian Russell . On 5 May 1890 , Gilbert had written to Sullivan : " The time for putting an end to our collaboration has at last arrived . " Gilbert later asked Sullivan to say he had been mistaken in his affidavit , but Sullivan refused . Gilbert felt it was a moral issue , and could not look past it . Sullivan felt that Gilbert was questioning his good faith , and in any event , Sullivan had other reasons to stay in Carte 's good graces : Carte was building a new theatre , the Royal English Opera House , to produce Sullivan 's only grand opera , Ivanhoe . Gilbert brought suit , and after The Gondoliers closed in 1891 , he withdrew the performance rights to his libretti , vowing to write no more operas for the Savoy . 
 Gilbert next wrote The Mountebanks with Alfred Cellier and the flop Haste to the Wedding with George Grossmith , and Sullivan wrote Haddon Hall with Sydney Grundy . Gilbert eventually won the law suit , but his actions and statements had been hurtful to his partners . Nevertheless , the partnership had been so profitable that , after the financial failure of the Royal English Opera House , Carte and his wife sought to reunite the author and composer . In late 1891 , after many failed attempts at reconciliation , Gilbert and Sullivan 's music publisher , Tom Chappell , stepped in to mediate between two of his most profitable artists , and within two weeks he had succeeded , eventually leading to two further collaborations between Gilbert and Sullivan . 
 = = = Last works = = = 
 Utopia , Limited ( 1893 ) , their penultimate opera , was a very modest success , and their last , The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) was an outright failure . Neither work entered the canon of regularly performed Gilbert and Sullivan works until the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company made the first complete professional recordings of the two operas in the 1970s . Gilbert had also offered Sullivan another libretto , His Excellency ( 1894 ) , but Gilbert 's insistence on casting Nancy McIntosh , his protege from Utopia , led to Sullivan 's refusal , and His Excellency was instead composed by F. Osmond Carr . Meanwhile , the Savoy Theatre continued to revive the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , in between new pieces , and D 'Oyly Carte touring companies also played them in repertory . 
 After The Grand Duke , the partners saw no reason to work together again . A last unpleasant misunderstanding occurred in 1898 . At the premiere of Sullivan ’ s opera The Beauty Stone on 28 May , Gilbert arrived at the Savoy Theatre with friends , assuming that Sullivan had reserved some seats for him . Instead , he was informed that Sullivan objected to his presence . The composer later denied that this was true . The last time they met was at the Savoy Theatre on 17 November 1898 at the celebration of the 21st anniversary of the first performance of The Sorcerer . They did not speak to each other . Sullivan , by this time in exceedingly poor health , died in 1900 , although to the end he continued to write new comic operas for the Savoy with other librettists , most successfully with Basil Hood in The Rose of Persia ( 1899 ) . Gilbert also wrote several works , some with other collaborators , in the 1890s . By the time of Sullivan 's death in 1900 , Gilbert wrote that any memory of their rift had been " completely bridged over , " and " the most cordial relations existed between us . " He stated that Sullivan was " A composer of the rarest genius – who , because he was a composer of the rarest genius , was as modest and as unassuming as a neophyte should be , but seldom is .... I remember all that he has done for me in allowing his genius to shed some of its lustre upon my humble name . " 
 Richard D 'Oyly Carte died in 1901 , and his widow , Helen , continued to direct the activities of the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company at the Savoy and on tour . Gilbert went into semi @-@ retirement , although he continued to direct revivals of the Savoy Operas and wrote new plays occasionally . Between 1906 and 1909 , he assisted Mrs. Carte in staging two repertory seasons at the Savoy Theatre . These were very popular and revived interest in the works . Gilbert was knighted during the first repertory season . After Sullivan 's death , Gilbert wrote only one more comic opera , Fallen Fairies ( 1909 ; music by Edward German ) , which was not a success . 
 = = Legacy and assessment = = 
 Gilbert died in 1911 , and Richard 's son , Rupert D 'Oyly Carte , took over the opera company upon his step @-@ mother 's death in 1913 . His daughter , Bridget , inherited the company upon his death in 1948 . The D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company toured nearly year @-@ round , except for its many London seasons and foreign tours , performing exclusively the Gilbert and Sullivan operas , until it closed in 1982 . During the 20th century , the company gave well over 35 @,@ 000 performances . The Savoy operas , from the beginning , were produced extensively in North America and Australasia , and soon afterwards in Germany , Russia , and elsewhere in Europe and around the world . 
 In 1922 , Sir Henry Wood explained the enduring success of the collaboration as follows : 
 Sullivan has never had an equal for brightness and drollery , for humour without coarseness and without vulgarity , and for charm and grace . His orchestration is delightful : he wrote with full understanding of every orchestral voice . Above all , his music is perfectly appropriate to the words of which it is the setting .... He found the right , the only cadences to fit Gilbert 's happy and original rhythms , and to match Gilbert 's fun or to throw Gilbert 's frequent irony , pointed although not savage , into relief . Sullivan 's music is much more than the accompaniment of Gilbert 's libretti , just as Gilbert 's libretti are far more than words to Sullivan 's music . We have two masters who are playing a concerto . Neither is subordinate to the other ; each gives what is original , but the two , while neither predominates , are in perfect correspondence . This rare harmony of words and music is what makes these operas entirely unique . They are the work not of a musician and his librettist nor of a poet and one who sets his words to music , but of two geniuses . 
 G. K. Chesterton similarly praised the combination of the two artists , anticipating the operas ' success into the " remote future " . He wrote that Gilbert 's satire was " too intelligent to be intelligible " by itself , and that perhaps only Sullivan could have given " wings to his words ... in exactly the right degree frivolous and exactly the right degree fastidious . [ The words ' ] precise degree of levity and distance from reality ... seemed to be expressed ... in the very notes of the music ; almost ... in the note of the laughter that followed it . " In 1957 , a review in The Times gave this rationale for " the continued vitality of the Savoy operas " : 
 " [ T ] hey were never really contemporary in their idiom .... Gilbert and Sullivan 's [ world ] , from the first moment was obviously not the audience 's world , [ it was ] an artificial world , with a neatly controlled and shapely precision which has not gone out of fashion – because it was never in fashion in the sense of using the fleeting conventions and ways of thought of contemporary human society .... For this , each partner has his share of credit . The neat articulation of incredibilities in Gilbert 's plots is perfectly matched by his language .... His dialogue , with its primly mocking formality , satisfies both the ear and the intelligence . His verses show an unequalled and very delicate gift for creating a comic effect by the contrast between poetic form and prosaic thought and wording .... How deliciously [ his lines ] prick the bubble of sentiment .... [ Of ] equal importance ... Gilbert 's lyrics almost invariably take on extra point and sparkle when set to Sullivan 's music .... Sullivan 's tunes , in these operas , also exist in a make @-@ believe world of their own .... [ He is ] a delicate wit , whose airs have a precision , a neatness , a grace , and a flowing melody .... The two men together remain endlessly and incomparably delightful .... Light , and even trifling , though [ the operas ] may seem upon grave consideration , they yet have the shapeliness and elegance that can make a trifle into a work of art " . 
 Because of the unusual success of the operas , the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company were able , from the start , to license the works to other professional companies , such as the J. C. Williamson Gilbert and Sullivan Opera Company , and to amateur troupes . For almost a century , until the British copyrights expired at the end of 1961 , and even afterwards , the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company influenced productions of the operas worldwide , creating a " performing tradition " for most of the operas that is still referred to today by many directors , both amateur and professional . Indeed , Gilbert , Sullivan and Carte had an important influence on amateur theatre . Cellier and Bridgeman wrote in 1914 that , prior to the creation of the Savoy operas , amateur actors were treated with contempt by professionals . After the formation of amateur Gilbert and Sullivan companies in the 1880s licensed to perform the operas , professionals recognised that the amateur performing groups " support the culture of music and the drama . They are now accepted as useful training schools for the legitimate stage , and from the volunteer ranks have sprung many present @-@ day favourites . " Cellier and Bridgeman attributed the rise in quality and reputation of the amateur groups largely to " the popularity of , and infectious craze for performing , the Gilbert and Sullivan operas " . The National Operatic and Dramatic Association ( NODA ) was founded in 1899 . It reported , in 1914 , that nearly 200 British troupes were performing Gilbert and Sullivan that year , constituting most of the amateur companies in the country ( this figure included only the societies that were members of NODA ) . The association further reported that almost 1 @,@ 000 performances of the Savoy operas had been given in Britain that year , many of them to benefit charities . Cellier and Bridgeman noted that strong amateur groups were performing the operas in places as far away as New Zealand . In the U.S. , and elsewhere where British copyrights on the operas were not enforced , both professional and amateur companies performed the works throughout the 20th century – the Internet Broadway Database counts about 150 productions on Broadway alone from 1900 to 1960 . The Savoy Company , an amateur group formed in 1901 in Philadelphia , continues to perform today . 
 Recordings of excerpts from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas began to be released in 1906 . In 1917 , the Gramophone Company ( also known as HMV ) produced the first album of a complete musical score of a Gilbert and Sullivan opera , The Mikado , followed by recordings of eight more of the operas . Electrical recordings of the complete musical scores of most of the operas were then issued by the Gramophone Company and Victor Talking Machine Company beginning in the late 1920s . These recordings were supervised by Rupert D 'Oyly Carte . The original D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company continued to produce well @-@ regarded recordings until 1979 , helping to keep the operas popular through the decades . Many of these recordings have been reissued on CD . After the copyrights on the operas expired , other professional companies were free to perform and record the operas . Many performing companies arose to produce the works , such as Gilbert and Sullivan for All in Britain and the Light Opera of Manhattan and Light Opera Works in the U.S. , and existing companies , such as English National Opera and Australian Opera added Gilbert and Sullivan to their repertories . These companies also released popular audio and video recordings of the operas . In 1980 , a Broadway and West End production of Pirates produced by Joseph Papp brought new audiences to Gilbert and Sullivan , and between 1988 and 2003 , the revived D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company revived the operas on tour and on the West End , also recording seven of the operas . A set of eleven of the operas ( omitting the last two ) was produced in 1982 for television , ten of which are available on VHS and DVD . 
 Today , numerous professional repertory companies , small opera companies , amateur societies , churches , schools and universities continue to produce the works . The most popular G & S works also continue to be performed from time to time by major opera companies , and professional recordings of the operas , and albums of songs from the operas , continue to be released . Since 1994 , a three @-@ week @-@ long International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival has been held every August in England , with some two dozen or more performances of the operas given on the main stage , and several dozen related " fringe " events given in smaller venues . The Festival sells both professional and amateur videos of its most popular productions . In connection with the 2009 festival , a contemporary critic wrote , " The appeal of G & S ’ s special blend of charm , silliness and gentle satire seems immune to fashion . " There continue to be hundreds of amateur companies performing the Gilbert and Sullivan works worldwide . 
 = = = Cultural influence = = = 
 In the past 125 years , Gilbert and Sullivan have pervasively influenced popular culture in the English @-@ speaking world , and lines and quotations from their operas have become part of the English language ( even if not originated by Gilbert ) , such as " short , sharp shock " , " What never ? Well , hardly ever ! " , " let the punishment fit the crime " , and " A policeman 's lot is not a happy one " . The operas have influenced political style and discourse , literature , film and television , have been widely parodied by humorists , and have been quoted in legal rulings . 
 The American and British musical owes a tremendous debt to G & S , who were admired and copied by early musical theatre authors and composers such as Ivan Caryll , Adrian Ross , Lionel Monckton , P. G. Wodehouse , Guy Bolton , and Victor Herbert , and later Jerome Kern , Ira Gershwin , Yip Harburg , Irving Berlin , Ivor Novello , Oscar Hammerstein II , and Andrew Lloyd Webber . Gilbert 's lyrics served as a model for such 20th @-@ century Broadway lyricists as Cole Porter , Ira Gershwin , and Lorenz Hart . Noël Coward wrote : " I was born into a generation that still took light music seriously . The lyrics and melodies of Gilbert and Sullivan were hummed and strummed into my consciousness at an early age . My father sang them , my mother played them , my nurse , Emma , breathed them through her teeth .... My aunts and uncles ... sang them singly and in unison at the slightest provocation .... " 
 Professor Carolyn Williams has noted , however : " The influence of Gilbert and Sullivan – their wit and sense of irony , the send ups of politics and contemporary culture – goes beyond musical theater to comedy in general . Allusions to their work have made their way into our own popular culture " . Gilbert and Sullivan expert and enthusiast Ian Bradley agrees : 
 The musical is not , of course , the only cultural form to show the influence of G & S. Even more direct heirs are those witty and satirical songwriters found on both sides of the Atlantic in the twentieth century like Michael Flanders and Donald Swann in the United Kingdom and Tom Lehrer in the United States . The influence of Gilbert is discernible in a vein of British comedy that runs through John Betjeman 's verse via Monty Python and Private Eye to ... television series like Yes , Minister ... where the emphasis is on wit , irony , and poking fun at the establishment from within it in a way which manages to be both disrespectful of authority and yet <unk> comfortable and urbane . 
 The works of Gilbert and Sullivan are themselves frequently pastiched and parodied . Well known examples of this include Tom Lehrer 's The Elements and Clementine ; Allan Sherman 's I 'm Called Little Butterball , When I Was a Lad , You Need an Analyst and The Bronx Bird @-@ Watcher ; and The Two Ronnies ' 1973 Christmas Special . Other comedians have used Gilbert and Sullivan songs as a key part of their routines , including Hinge and Bracket , Anna Russell , and the HMS Yakko episode of the animated TV series Animaniacs . Songs from Gilbert and Sullivan are often pastiched in advertising , and elaborate advertising parodies have been published , as have the likenesses of various Gilbert and Sullivan performers throughout the decades . Gilbert and Sullivan comic operas are commonly referenced in literature , film and television in various ways that include extensive use of Sullivan 's music or where action occurs during a performance of a Gilbert and Sullivan opera , such as in the film The Girl Said No . There are also a number of Gilbert and Sullivan biographical films , such as Mike Leigh 's Topsy @-@ Turvy ( 2000 ) and The Story of Gilbert and Sullivan ( 1953 ) , as well as shows about the partnership , including a 1938 Broadway show , Knights of Song and a 1975 West End show called Tarantara ! Tarantara ! 
 It is not surprising , given the focus of Gilbert on politics , that politicians and political observers have often found inspiration in these works . Chief Justice of the United States William Rehnquist added gold stripes to his judicial robes after seeing them used by the Lord Chancellor in a production of Iolanthe . Alternatively , Lord Chancellor Charles Falconer is recorded as objecting so strongly to Iolanthe 's comic portrayal of Lord Chancellors that he supported moves to disband the office . British politicians , beyond quoting some of the more famous lines , have delivered speeches in the form of Gilbert and Sullivan pastiches . These include Conservative Peter Lilley 's speech mimicking the form of " I 've got a little list " from The Mikado , listing those he was against , including " sponging socialists " and " young ladies who get pregnant just to jump the housing queue " . Political humour based on Gilbert and Sullivan 's style and characters continues to be written . 
 = = Collaborations = = 
 = = = Major works and original London runs = = = 
 Thespis ; or , The Gods Grown Old ( 1871 ) 63 performances 
 Trial by Jury ( 1875 ) 131 performances 
 The Sorcerer ( 1877 ) 178 performances 
 H.M.S. Pinafore ; or , The Lass That Loved a Sailor ( 1878 ) 571 performances 
 The Pirates of Penzance ; or , The Slave of Duty ( 1879 ) 363 performances 
 The Martyr of Antioch ( cantata ) ( 1880 ) ( Gilbert modified the poem by Henry Hart Milman ) 
 Patience ; or Bunthorne 's Bride ( 1881 ) 578 performances 
 Iolanthe ; or , The Peer and the Peri ( 1882 ) 398 performances 
 Princess Ida ; or , Castle Adamant ( 1884 ) 246 performances 
 The Mikado ; or , The Town of Titipu ( 1885 ) 672 performances 
 Ruddigore ; or , The Witch 's Curse ( 1887 ) 288 performances 
 The Yeomen of the Guard ; or , The Merryman and his Maid ( 1888 ) 423 performances 
 The Gondoliers ; or , The King of Barataria ( 1889 ) 554 performances 
 Utopia , Limited ; or , The Flowers of Progress ( 1893 ) 245 performances 
 The Grand Duke ; or , The Statutory Duel ( 1896 ) 123 performances 
 = = = Parlour ballads = = = 
 The Distant Shore ( 1874 ) 
 The Love that Loves Me Not ( 1875 ) 
 Sweethearts ( 1875 ) , based on Gilbert 's 1874 play , Sweethearts 
 = = = Overtures = = = 
 The overtures from the Gilbert and Sullivan operas remain popular , and there are many recordings of them . Most of them are structured as a potpourri of tunes from the operas . They are generally well @-@ orchestrated , but not all of them were composed by Sullivan . However , even those delegated to his assistants were based on an outline he provided , and in many cases incorporated his suggestions or corrections . Sullivan invariably conducted them ( as well as the entire operas ) on opening night , and they were included in the published scores approved by Sullivan . 
 Those Sullivan wrote himself include the overtures to Thespis , Iolanthe , Princess Ida , The Yeomen of the Guard , The Gondoliers and The Grand Duke . Sullivan 's authorship of the overture to Utopia , Limited cannot be verified with certainty , as his autograph score is now lost , but it is likely attributable to him , as it consists of only a few bars of introduction , followed by a straight copy of music heard elsewhere in the opera ( the Drawing Room scene ) . Thespis is now lost , but there is no doubt that Sullivan wrote its overture . Very early performances of The Sorcerer used a section of Sullivan 's incidental music to Shakespeare 's Henry the VIII , as he did not have time to write a new overture , but this was replaced in 1884 by one executed by Hamilton Clarke . Of those remaining , the overtures to H.M.S. Pinafore and The Pirates of Penzance are by Alfred Cellier , the overture to Patience is by Eugene d 'Albert , and those to The Mikado and Ruddigore are by Hamilton Clarke ( although the Ruddigore overture was later replaced by one written by Geoffrey Toye ) . 
 Most of the overtures are in three sections : a lively introduction , a slow middle section , and a concluding allegro in sonata form , with two subjects , a brief development , a recapitulation and a coda . However , Sullivan himself did not always follow this pattern . The overture to Princess Ida , for instance , has only an opening fast section and a concluding slow section . The overture to Utopia Limited is dominated by a slow section , with only a very brief original passage introducing it . 
 In the 1920s , the D 'Oyly Carte Opera Company commissioned its musical director at the time , Geoffrey Toye , to write new overtures for Ruddigore and The Pirates of Penzance . Toye 's Ruddigore overture entered the general repertory , and today is more often heard than the original overture by Clarke . Toye 's Pirates overture , however , did not last long and is now presumed lost . Sir Malcolm Sargent devised a new ending for the overture to The Gondoliers , adding the " cachucha " from the second act of the opera . This gave the Gondoliers overture the familiar fast @-@ slow @-@ fast pattern of most of the rest of the Savoy Opera overtures , and this version has competed for popularity with Sullivan 's original version . 
 = = Alternative versions = = 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 Gilbert and Sullivan operas have been translated into many languages , including Portuguese , Yiddish , Hebrew , Swedish , Dutch , Danish , Estonian , Hungarian , Russian , Japanese , French , Italian , Spanish ( reportedly including a version of Pinafore transformed into zarzuela style ) , Catalan and others . 
 There are many German versions of Gilbert and Sullivan operas , including the popular Der Mikado . There is even a German version of The Grand Duke . Some German translations were made by Friedrich Zell and Richard Genée , librettists of Die Fledermaus and other Viennese operettas , who even translated one of Sullivan 's lesser @-@ known operas , The Chieftain , as ( Der <unk> ) . 
 = = = Ballets = = = 
 Pirates of Penzance - The Ballet ! , created for the Queensland Ballet in 1991 
 Pineapple Poll , created by John Cranko in 1951 at Sadler 's Wells Theatre ; in repertoire at the Birmingham Royal Ballet . The ballet is based on Gilbert 's 1870 Bab Ballad " The Bumboat Woman 's Story " , as is H.M.S. Pinafore . Cranko expanded the plotline of Gilbert 's poem and added a happy ending . The music is arranged by Sir Charles Mackerras from themes by Sullivan . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 Gilbert adapted the stories of H.M.S. Pinafore and The Mikado into children 's books called The Pinafore Picture Book and The Story of The Mikado giving , in some cases , backstory that is not found in the librettos . Many other children 's books have since been written retelling the stories of the operas or adapting characters or events from them . In the 19th century , the most popular Gilbert and Sullivan songs and music were adapted as dance pieces . 
 Many musical theatre and film adaptations of the operas have been produced , including the following : 
 The Swing Mikado ( 1938 ; Chicago – all @-@ black cast ) 
 The Hot Mikado ( 1939 ) and Hot Mikado ( 1986 ) 
 The Jazz Mikado ( 1927 , Berlin ) 
 Hollywood Pinafore ( 1945 ) 
 The Cool Mikado ( 1962 film ) 
 The Black Mikado ( 1975 ) 
 Dick Deadeye , or Duty Done ( 1975 animated film ) 
 The Pirate Movie ( 1982 film ) 
 The Ratepayers ' Iolanthe ( 1984 ; Olivier Award @-@ winning musical ) adapted by Ned Sherrin and Alistair Beaton 
 Metropolitan Mikado ( political satire adapted by Sherrin and Beaton , first performed at Queen Elizabeth Hall ( 1985 ) starring Louise Gold , Simon Butteriss , Rosemary Ashe , Robert Meadmore and Martin Smith ) 
 Di Yam <unk> by Al Grand ( 1986 ; a Yiddish adaptation of Pirates ; a New York production was nominated for a 2007 Drama Desk Award ) 
 Pinafore ! ( A Saucy , Sexy , Ship @-@ Shape New Musical ) ( adapted by Mark Savage , first performed at the Celebration Theater in Los Angeles , California in 2001 ; only one character is female , and all but one of the male characters are gay . 
 Gondoliers : A Mafia @-@ themed adaptation of the opera , broadly rewritten by John Doyle and orchestrated and arranged Sarah Travis , was given at the Watermill Theatre and transferred to the Apollo Theatre in the West End in 2001 . The production utilised Doyle 's signature conceit of the actors playing their own orchestra instruments . 
 Parson 's Pirates by Opera della Luna ( 2002 ) 
 The Ghosts of Ruddigore by Opera della Luna ( 2003 ) 
 Pinafore Swing , Watermill Theatre ( 2004 @.@ another Doyle adaptation in which the actors double as the orchestra ) 
 = Cumberland ( rugby league team ) = 
 Cumberland , officially known as Central Cumberland , were a rugby league team in 1908 based in the region of Cumberland Plain in western Sydney . They were one of the nine original teams in the first New South Wales Rugby League ( NSWRL ) season , albeit admitted after the first round of matches had already been played . They are the shortest lived team in the history of first @-@ grade rugby league in Australia after disbanding late that year . Statistically , they are the club with the poorest all @-@ time record , only lasting eight games in their inaugural and only season . 
 = = History = = 
 The Cumberland area was dominated by rugby union , another form of the game , as the main winter sport . The local Kings School took part in a regular competition of rugby union with other clubs <unk> , Calder House , Civil , Lyndhurst , Military , Newington , North Shore and Waratah . These teams in the area by 1900 , were put under the banner of Western Suburbs Rugby Union . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The club was formed on the night of 21 April 1908 at Horse and Jockey Hotel , Homebush , the night after the first round of rugby league was being held in the NSWRL premiership . On that morning , Sydney newspaper The Daily Telegraph advertised a meeting for that night to discuss the formation of rugby league club in the Cumberland area . The meeting was attended by annoyed members of the Western Suburbs Rugby Union Club who were asked to form a rugby league club under the name Central Cumberland . 
 When the Western Suburbs formed their club , most of their players had come from Ashfield Rugby Union Club , which was a second division team to the Western Suburbs Rugby Union Club . All but two of the first grade team of Western Suburbs Rugby Union Club rejected offers from Western Suburbs . However , when Cumberland were looking for players , 23 of the 27 players present at the meeting signed with the club , most of which were rugby union players from the Western Suburbs Rugby Union Club . 
 The NSWRL were reluctant to admit a ninth team into the premiership and proposed they merge with nearby team Western Suburbs . However , the clubs involved declined so the NSWRL agreed to allowing the Cumberland team to a trial match against Eastern Suburbs . While Eastern Suburbs won the match 18 @-@ 4 , the NSWRL was convinced of that they could be competitive . As the NSWRL premiership had already begun , the NSWRL had to reformat the draw to include Cumberland , which meant increasing the number of teams from eight to nine . Cumberland did not have a home ground , like some of the other teams , and would play their games at the Agricultural Ground , Birchgrove Oval and Wentworth Park . 
 = = = 1908 season = = = 
 The first match they played was against Souths on 9 May 1908 and despite the loss , the league praised the club over the 20 @,@ 000 crowd that attended the game . Though the game , which Cumberland lost 23 @-@ 2 was played as a curtain @-@ raiser to an international match between Australia and New Zealand . 
 Both Cumberland and Western Suburbs had been winless to this point of the season and Cumberland had a score to settle with their rivals from Western Suburbs Rugby Union Club who were with Western Suburbs rugby league club . Cumberland led 4 @-@ 2 at half time , having two penalty goals kicked by Harry Bloomfield in the first half , however Western Suburbs goalkicker Jim Abercrombie kicked a penalty goal to equalize , after which George Cribb scored between the post and Bloomfield kicked the goal to make it 9 @-@ 4 . Abercrombie scored another penalty goal to make it 9 @-@ 6 , after which Bloomfield intercepted a pass , kicked the ball and regathered it to score which he also converted to win the match 14 @-@ 6 . Cumberland won its only game in the premiership season and ever . 
 In what turned out to be their final ever game , Cumberland were only able to field eleven out of the required thirteen players . The club ended up borrowing two players from the opposing team North Sydney to play for them , who were ' Paddy ' Boland and Bert <unk> . They lost this game 45 @-@ 0 and were awarded the wooden spoon for finishing on the bottom of the competition ladder . 
 = = = Demise = = = 
 Cumberland 's dismal winning percentage and the inability to field a team led to their disbanding at the end of the season . After only playing eight first @-@ grade matches and one trial match , Cumberland ceased to exist and passed into history . Seven of the Cumberland players moved to neighbours Western Suburbs , although only Harry Bloomfield , A. Halling and S. Jarvis played first @-@ grade rugby league again . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Cumberland 's neighbour club Western Suburbs had used black and white as their colours , which had been taken from Ashfield rugby club , a second grade rugby union team which supplied many of Western Suburbs players . Unlike other clubs , Western Suburbs did not take their colours from their district rugby union team , due to Ashfield 's influence at the club . Cumberland thought of using the bottle green of the Western Suburbs Rugby Union Club ' , as many of their team members were from there . However , the club believed that some would be unable to distinguish Western Suburbs and Cumberland if this approach was taken . 
 The club eventually chose the colours of the local Parramatta council , which were royal blue and gold , which were represented on their jersey in horizontal stripes , or hoops . The crest used these colours and was like many of the other crests of the 1908 season , a badge with a letter ' C ' , to represent the first letter of Cumberland . The badge was royal blue , while the letter gold . These colours were later used by the Parramatta Eels at their introduction in the NSWRL premiership in 1947 , although there was no official affiliation between Cumberland and the later Parramatta team . The club 's jersey was , like most other clubs , the colours in hoops around the jersey . These hoops of blue and gold were mixed with a white collar and black or grey shorts . 
 = = Players = = 
 Cumberland used twenty @-@ four players in their eight matches : 
 Key 
 Position - the rugby league position that player played at . 
 Career - the years the player spent at the team . 
 Appearances - the number of times this player played for the team . 
 T - the number of tries the player scored for the team . 
 G - the number of goals the player scored for the team . 
 FG - the number of field goals the player scored for the team . 
 P - The total number of points scored by the player . 
 = = = Representative players = = = 
 Cumberland has no representative players 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 = = = Individual records = = = 
 Harry Bloomfield , statistically , is Cumberland 's best player . Bloomfield , along with A. Halling , S. Jarvis , Thomas Lalor and F. O 'Grady played all eight matches for Cumberland . Bloomfield played fullback and scored nineteen points for Cumberland which encompassed one try and eight goals throughout the season which was enough to warrant representation for New South Wales in an interstate match against Queensland . This included eleven points in one match , against Wests in their only win for the Season . E. Bellamy claims hold to most tries in a season , scoring two , one in the match against Glebe , the other against Eastern Suburbs . 
 = = = Team honours = = = 
 Statistically , Cumberland are the worst team in the history of first @-@ grade rugby league in Australia . They only have won 12 @.@ 5 % of their games , lowest to Annandale ( 18 @.@ 3 % ) , who are also a defunct team . They won the wooden spoon for being last on the table in the 1908 season . They had only one win which was 14 @-@ 6 over Western Suburbs , and had their worst loss in their final game against <unk> , 45 @-@ 0 . They lost six consecutive games from 9 May 1908 until 27 June 1908 , a win , then a final loss . They scored an average 4 @.@ 75 points each game whereas they had an average of 23 @.@ 88 points scored against them . 
 = Pattie Boyd = 
 Patricia Anne " Pattie " Weston ( née Boyd ) ( born 17 March 1944 ) is an English model , photographer and author . She was the first wife of both George Harrison and Eric Clapton . In August 2007 , she published her autobiography Wonderful Tonight . Her photographs of Harrison and Clapton , titled Through the Eye of a Muse , have been exhibited in Dublin , Sydney , Toronto , Moscow , London and throughout the United States . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Boyd was born on 17 March 1944 , in Taunton , Somerset , and was the first child to Colin Ian Langdon Boyd , and Diana Frances Boyd ( née Drysdale ) , who were married on 14 September 1942 . The Boyds moved to West Lothian , Scotland , where her brother Colin was born in 1946 . The Boyd family moved to Guildford , Surrey , where her sister , Helen Mary " Jenny " Boyd was born in 1947 . Boyd 's youngest sister , Paula , was born at Nakuru hospital , Kenya , in 1951 . The Boyds lived in Nairobi , Kenya , from 1948 to 1953 , after her father 's discharge from the Royal Air Force . Boyd 's parents divorced in 1952 , and her mother married Robert Gaymer @-@ Jones in February 1953 , in Tanganyika ( now Tanzania ) . The family returned to England where Boyd gained two half brothers , David J.B. ( b . 1954 ) and Robert , Jr . ( b . 1955 ) . Jenny would later marry Fleetwood Mac 's drummer Mick Fleetwood and have two daughters with him - Amy and Lucy . 
 Boyd attended <unk> School in Putney , the St Agnes and St Michael Convent Boarding School in East Grinstead , and St Martha 's Convent in Hadley Wood , Hertfordshire ( where she received three GCE O level passes in 1961 ) . Boyd moved to London in 1962 and worked as a shampoo girl at Elizabeth Arden 's salon , until a client who worked for a fashion magazine inspired her to begin work as a model . 
 = = Career = = 
 Boyd began her fashion career in 1962 , modelling in London , New York and Paris . She was photographed by David Bailey and Terence Donovan , and appeared on the cover of Vogue . Boyd appeared on the cover of the UK and Italian editions of Vogue magazine in 1969 , with other popular models of the day , such as Twiggy , who based her early modelling appearance on Boyd . Boyd was asked by Gloria <unk> to write a column for 16 Magazine , and appeared in a TV commercial promoting Smith 's crisps . She was cast for A Hard Day 's Night , where she met George Harrison . 
 Boyd exhibited her photos of Harrison and Clapton at the San Francisco Art Exchange on Valentine 's Day 2005 , in a show entitled Through the Eye of a Muse . The exhibition appeared in San Francisco and London during 2006 , and in La Jolla , California in 2008 . Boyd 's photography was shown in Dublin and in Toronto in 2008 and at the Blender Gallery in Sydney , Australia and in Almaty , Kazakhstan in 2009 and 2010 . Her exhibit " Yesterday and Today : The Beatles and Eric Clapton " was shown in Santa Catalina Island in California , and at the National Geographic Headquarters in Washington , DC in 2011 . 
 In 2007 Boyd published her autobiography , which includes some of her photographs , titled Wonderful Today in the UK ; in the US it was published with the title Wonderful Tonight : George Harrison , Eric Clapton , and Me . In the United States , Boyd 's book debuted at the top of the New York Times Best Seller list . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Marriage to George Harrison = = = 
 In 1964 , Boyd met Harrison during the filming of A Hard Day 's Night , in which she was cast as a schoolgirl . Her only line in the film was asking " Prisoners ? " , but she later appeared in the " I Should Have Known Better " segment . Boyd was " semi @-@ engaged " to photographer Eric Swayne at the time , and so declined a date proposal from Harrison . Several days later , after ending her relationship with Swayne , she went back to work on the film and Harrison asked her out on a date for a second time . The couple went to a private gentlemen 's club called the Garrick Club , chaperoned by the Beatles ' manager , Brian Epstein . According to Boyd , one of the first things Harrison said to her on the film set was : " Will you marry me ? Well , if you won 't marry me , will you have dinner with me tonight ? " 
 Boyd had her first encounter with LSD in early 1965 when the couple 's dentist , John Riley , secretly laced her coffee with the drug during a dinner party at his home . As she was getting ready to leave with Harrison and John and Cynthia Lennon , Riley told them that he had spiked their drinks and tried to convince them to stay . Outside , Boyd was in an agitated state from the drug and threatened to break a store window , but Harrison pulled her away . Later , when Boyd and her group were in a lift on their way up to the Ad Lib club , they mistakenly believed it was on fire . 
 Later that year , Boyd moved into Kinfauns with Harrison . The couple were engaged on 25 December 1965 , and married on 21 January 1966 , in a ceremony at a register office in Ashley Road , Epsom , with Paul McCartney as best man . Later , the couple went on a honeymoon in Barbados . In September , Boyd flew with Harrison to Bombay to visit sitar virtuoso Ravi Shankar , before returning to London on 23 October 1966 . The following year , Boyd attended the Our World broadcast of " All You Need Is Love " . Through her interest in Eastern mysticism and her membership in the Spiritual Regeneration Movement , she inspired all four Beatles to meet the Indian mystic Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in London on 24 August 1967 , which resulted in a visit to the Maharishi 's seminar in Bangor , the following day . Boyd accompanied Harrison on the Beatles ' visit to the Maharishi 's ashram in Rishikesh , India , in February 1968 . In March 1970 , Boyd moved with Harrison from Kinfauns to Friar Park , a Victorian neo @-@ Gothic mansion , in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames . 
 In 1973 , Boyd 's marriage to Harrison began to fail and she had an affair with Faces guitarist Ronnie Wood . She separated from Harrison in 1974 and their divorce was finalised on 9 June 1977 . Boyd said her decision to end their marriage and leave Harrison was based largely on his repeated infidelities , culminating in an affair with Ringo Starr 's wife Maureen , which Boyd called " the final straw " . Boyd characterised the last year of her marriage as " fuelled by alcohol and cocaine " , and claimed " George used coke excessively , and I think it changed him ... it froze his emotions and hardened his heart . " 
 = = = Marriage to Eric Clapton = = = 
 In the late 1960s , Clapton and Harrison became close friends , and began writing and recording music together . At this time Clapton fell in love with Boyd . His 1970 album with Derek and the Dominos , Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs , was written to proclaim his love for her , particularly the hit song " Layla " . When Boyd rebuffed his advances late that year , Clapton descended into heroin addiction and self @-@ imposed exile for three years . Boyd moved in with Clapton and married him in 1979 . Her struggles within the marriage were masked by her public image with Clapton . Boyd drank , and admits to past drug use , but she never became a drug addict like Clapton did . Boyd left Clapton in September 1984 , and divorced him in 1988 . Her stated reasons were Clapton 's years of alcoholism , as well as his numerous affairs including one with Italian model Lory Del Santo . In 1989 , her divorce was granted on the grounds of " infidelity and unreasonable behaviour " . Boyd was also the inspiration for the songs : " Bell Bottom Blues " and " Wonderful Tonight " . 
 = = = Marriage to Rod Weston = = = 
 On 30 April 2015 , Boyd was married for the third time at the Chelsea Register Office at Chelsea Old Town Hall in London . Her husband , property developer Rod Weston , was quoted as saying , " It 's almost our silver anniversary so we thought we had better get on with it " . 
 = 49th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 49th Battalion was an infantry unit of the Australian Army . Raised as part of the Australian Imperial Force during the First World War , the battalion fought along the Western Front between mid @-@ 1916 and late 1918 , before being disbanded in early 1919 . In 1921 , it was re @-@ formed as a part @-@ time unit based in the state of Queensland . Throughout the 1930s , the battalion was merged a couple of times as a result of manpower shortages , but in early 1940 , as Australia mobilised for the Second World War , the 49th was expanded and the following year deployed to New Guinea to undertake garrison duty . Following Japan 's entry into the war , the 49th was committed to the fighting in the early stages of the New Guinea campaign , taking part in the Battle of Sanananda in December 1942 , where it took many casualties and suffered heavily from disease . The battalion was withdrawn back to Australia in early 1943 and subsequently disbanded in July , with the majority of its personnel being redistributed to other units . During the post @-@ war period , the 49th Battalion was subsumed into the Royal Queensland Regiment , existing between 1966 and 1997 , before being merged with the 25th Battalion to form the 25th / 49th Battalion , Royal Queensland Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 The 49th Battalion was originally formed on 27 February 1916 as part of an expansion of the all @-@ volunteer Australian Imperial Force , which took place after the failed Gallipoli Campaign , during the First World War . The expansion was undertaken by raising a new division in Australia – the 3rd Division – and by splitting the battalions of the veteran 1st Division in Egypt , using its experienced personnel to provide cadre staff for new battalions that would form the 4th and 5th Divisions . The 2nd Division , which had been sent to Gallipoli late in the campaign , remained intact . Upon formation , the 49th Battalion was assigned to the 13th Brigade , which was part of the 4th Division . The battalion drew its cadre staff – a total of 14 officers and 500 other ranks – from the 9th , which had been raised primarily from volunteers from the state of Queensland and had been in the thick of the fighting at Gallipoli , having come ashore during the landing at Anzac Cove in the first wave as part of the covering force provided by the 3rd Brigade . A further three officers and 470 other ranks from Australia brought the battalion up to full strength . The battalion 's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Francis Lorenzo , who had previously served with the 10th Battalion , and it had an authorised strength of 1 @,@ 023 officers and other ranks . 
 After forming at Tel @-@ el @-@ Kebir , the battalion moved 40 miles ( 64 km ) to the Suez Canal where they undertook a period of training in the desert until early June . At that time , the four AIF infantry divisions that were based in Egypt were transferred to Europe , where they would later be joined by the 3rd Division , which undertook its initial training in Australia before finalising its preparations in the United Kingdom at the end of the year . Sailing on the transport Arcadian , the 49th Battalion landed in Marseilles , France , on 12 June 1916 , and moved up to the front line around <unk> , arriving on 21 June . For the next two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years the battalion would fight in numerous battles in the trenches along the Western Front in France and Belgium . The battalion 's first significant action came during the Battle of Mouquet Farm , taking part in two efforts in August and early September . Conceived as a follow on action to the Battle of Pozières to advance the line towards Thiepval to exploit a salient that had developed in the line , the battle proved a costly , and ultimately unsuccessful , introduction to the Western Front for the 4th Division . The first time they were committed in early August they suffered heavily from German artillery , and the second time , although succeeding in capturing the farm , they were eventually pushed back under the weight of strong German counter @-@ attacks . 
 The 49th Battalion suffered heavy casualties in making their debut – 14 officers and 417 other ranks killed or wounded – and did not take part in any more significant attacks for the rest of the year ; nevertheless , they rotated through the front a number of times – firstly around Ypres and then later back in the Somme – where they conducted patrols and raids , in between periods of rest , training and manual labour in the rear . After enduring the harsh winter of 1916 – 17 , early in the new year the Germans withdrew between 15 – 50 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 – 31 @.@ 1 mi ) across a broad front between Arras and the Aisne , as part of a plan to shorten their lines and free up reserves . A brief advance followed , as the Australians followed their opponents up , before they were checked by the strongly prepared defences of the Hindenburg Line . In early April , as a preliminary to the First Battle of Bullecourt , the 13th Brigade was thrown into an attack around <unk> , during which the 49th was initially placed in brigade reserve , before putting in an attack that captured a railway cutting on the Cambrai – Arras line . Its next significant action came in June , after the AIF was transferred to the Ypres sector in Belgium , where a large salient had formed in the line . On 7 June the 49th joined the Battle of Messines where it advanced on the 13th Brigade 's right , past <unk> Farm , into the <unk> Valley where they encountered German pillboxes for the first time . The German machine @-@ gun fire was so intense that heavy casualties were suffered in the initial attack , particularly amongst the officers with every company commander killed . By the end of the battle , the 49th had suffered 379 casualties , with many being inflicted by their own artillery which had fallen on them during a German counterattack on 8 June . Further fighting was experienced in late September at Polygon Wood during the Third Battle of Ypres , as part of follow on actions after the success at Menin Road . 
 The Australians wintered in Belgium during which time they undertook mainly defensive actions as they held various positions along the line , but in early 1918 they were moved south to the Somme Valley . Following the collapse of Tsarist Russia in late 1917 , the Germans were able to transfer large amounts of equipment and manpower from the Eastern Front to the Western Front and subsequently launched their Spring Offensive in March . Falling on the southern flanks of the sector held by the British Third and Fifth Armies , the offensive initially succeeded in driving the Allies back and in late March , as the Germans closed in on the vital railhead around Amiens , the five Australian divisions , which had been grouped together as part of the Australian Corps , were transferred to the Somme to help blunt the attack . The 4th Division took up positions around Dernancourt , along the River Ancre , and on 5 April played a significant part in repelling a German attack there during the Second Battle of Dernancourt , where in the words of author Chris Coulthard @-@ Clark , the 4th Division " faced the strongest attack mounted against Australians during the war " . For their part , the 49th Battalion , supported by part of the 45th , put in a vital counter @-@ attack late in the afternoon amidst heavy rain , which saved the situation for the Australians , whose line had been penetrated by a German counterattack across a railway bridge west of the town ; in doing so they suffered heavily , though , losing 14 officers and 207 other ranks . Later in the month , they took part in the Second Battle of Villers @-@ Bretonneux , launching an Anzac Day attack that successfully recaptured the town , which had been lost the previous day following an attack by four German divisions . 
 After the German offensive was halted , a brief period of lull during which " Peaceful Penetration " operations were carried out as the Allies sought to regain the initiative . On 8 August , the Allies launched their own offensive , known as the Hundred Days Offensive , which ultimately brought about an end to the war . The 49th Battalion took part in the initial fighting , attacking around Bray , but by the end of the month was rotated to the rear . The following month , commencing on 18 September 1918 , the 49th undertook its final offensive action of the war , forming part of the divisional reserve during an attack against the Hindenburg Line 's outpost line , as part of efforts to penetrate the forward part of the German main line in Picardy . Shortly after the attack , the Australian Corps , which had been heavily depleted by the fighting throughout 1918 , was withdrawn from the line for rest and reorganisation . It did not return to the front before the armistice was signed on 11 November , and was subsequently disbanded on 9 May 1919 as part of the demobilisation and repatriation process . 
 According to the Australian War Memorial , throughout the course of the war , the 49th Battalion lost 769 men killed , and 1 @,@ 419 men wounded . Members of the unit received the following awards : one Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , two Orders of the British Empire ( OBEs ) , 19 Military Crosses ( MCs ) with one bar , seven Distinguished Conduct Medals ( DCMs ) , 85 Military Medals ( MMs ) with eight bars , six Meritorious Service Medals , 21 Mentions in Despatches , and 10 foreign awards . The unit also received a total of 17 battle honours , which were bestowed in 1927 . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 During the inter @-@ war years , the focus of Australia 's defence planning was primarily upon the maintenance of a part @-@ time military force , known as the Citizen Force . During the war years , this force had existed alongside the AIF , albeit largely only on paper . After the demobilisation of the AIF , a process which was only completed in early 1921 , the Citizens Force was reorganised to mirror the divisional structure of the AIF , forming five infantry divisions and two cavalry divisions , and the previously existing structures were redesignated to adopt the numerical designations of the AIF units . Where possible , these units were allocated to the same geographical areas as those from which the AIF unit had been raised . Consequently , the 49th Battalion was reformed in south @-@ east Queensland within the 1st Military District , headquartered at Kelvin Grove , with company @-@ sized detachments at Toowong , Ipswich and Lowood ; it was assigned to the 7th Brigade . Upon formation , the newly raised battalion drew personnel from the 9th and 52nd Infantry Regiments . In 1927 , when territorial titles were adopted , the battalion assumed the title of the " Stanley Regiment " and adopted the motto of Semper Fidelis . 
 Initially , the manpower of the Citizen Forces was maintained through a mixture of voluntary and compulsory service , but in 1929 – 30 , the compulsory training scheme was abolished by the newly elected Scullin Labor government and the Citizen Forces replaced by the all @-@ volunteer Militia . The economic hardships of the period resulted in few volunteers , and by December 1929 the 49th Battalion 's strength had fallen to just 108 men of all ranks . As a result , in early 1930 the 49th Battalion merged with the Toowoomba @-@ based 25th to form the 25th / 49th Battalion . In October 1934 , amidst a wide @-@ scale reorganisation of the Militia , the two battalions were delinked and the 49th was amalgamated with the 9th Battalion . They remained linked until July 1940 , when the 49th Battalion was reformed in its own right as Australia mobilised for the Second World War . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 Throughout the initial stages of the war , the Militia battalions were used primarily to provide training for conscripts who were called up for short periods of continuous service once the scheme was re @-@ established in January 1940 . The provisions of the Defence Act prevented them from being sent overseas , though , and the main focus of Australia 's combat effort was the all volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force . The 9th / 49th , before it was split , undertook several concentrations in the early months , beginning in February 1940 , firstly at Redbank and then later at Chermside . As tensions in the Pacific grew and the possibility of war with Japan became more likely , measures were taken to improve the defences of the islands to Australia 's north . A detachment of around 200 soldiers from the 15th Battalion were sent to Port Moresby in the middle of 1940 and in October that year this detachment was transferred to the 49th . In March 1941 , the rest of the 49th Battalion was dispatched to join the detachment in New Guinea , with a strength of 26 officers and 527 other ranks . At Moresby , the 49th was occupied mainly digging defences and labouring ; some training was achieved , although it was largely rudimentary , and a small detachment was also sent to Thursday Island . Later , after the 39th and 53rd Battalions joined them , the 49th was transferred to the 30th Brigade . Boredom amongst the troops was high , though , and discipline described as " the worst ... in Moresby " according to the Australian War Memorial . 
 The Japanese entered the war in December 1941 and as they advanced south towards Papua , the 49th found itself under air attack . Throughout the Kokoda Track campaign , troops from the 49th Battalion joined Honner Force , an ad hoc unit tasked with conducting long @-@ range patrols along the Goldie River to prevent the Japanese from cutting the track , while the rest of the battalion established standing patrols between the Goldie and <unk> Rivers . Although no contact was made with the Japanese , the combat role helped improve the outlook of the soldiers and morale improved . Throughout the preceding months the battalion 's strength had been increased and by September 1942 it had a strength of 37 officers and 818 other ranks , including a draft of 12 officers who had been posted from experienced Second Australian Imperial Force units in August . The battalion continued to expand throughout October and November , by which time more than half its personnel had volunteered to transfer to the AIF . Training opportunities remained limited , though , even as preparations were made to send the unit into battle . As the tide of the fighting in Papua turned towards the Allies , the 49th Battalion joined the fighting on the northern coast around Buna – Gona . On the Sanananda front , the US 126th Infantry Regiment had become encircled around a position known as the Huggins Road Block on the road to Sanananda . Several attacks were launched in early December to break through to the beleaguered unit , but these all ended in failure . As ammunition began to run low , the 49th Battalion , supported by the 55th / 53rd Battalion , was thrown in to the battle , launching a frontal assault early on the morning of 7 December 1942 . Attacking with all four companies , the 49th suffered heavily as it came up against heavy machine @-@ gun fire from well @-@ sited and concealed Japanese positions . Over the course of five hours , the 49th lost over 60 per cent of its assault force and the attack failed . A second attempt , supported by armour , on 19 December also failed to break through and resulted in further casualties . 
 For the remainder of the month the 49th remained at the front , but their actions were confined mainly to patrolling , providing fire support to neighbouring units and defensive operations . It had been deployed for nearly two years and many of its personnel were suffering from illnesses such as malaria , dysentery and scrub typhus . The almost constant rain and fetid jungle conditions resulted in increasing numbers of non @-@ battle casualties and as the battalion 's numbers dwindled , in early January 1943 it was relieved by the 2 / 9th Battalion and moved back to Port Moresby by air , concentrating around <unk> with a strength of just 17 officers and 302 other ranks . A period of training and rebuilding was undertaken to prepare the battalion to return to the front , but in early March , they were ordered to Australia . Sailing upon the transport Duntroon , they disembarked in Cairns and after a period of leave concentrated on the Atherton Tablelands with the rest of the 30th Brigade , which now consisted of the 39th and 3rd / 22nd Infantry Battalions . At this time , the government decided that the 30th Brigade would be converted to an all @-@ AIF unit , and to conduct a period of intense training before sending it back to New Guinea . As a result , many of the 49th Battalion 's Militia personnel were transferred to the 36th Battalion in late May , reducing the 49th to a cadre staff of just over 160 AIF personnel . Throughout June , the 49th Battalion took part in brigade exercises , but early the following month the decision was made that the 30th Brigade would be disbanded and used to reinforce the 6th Division , with reinforcements being sent specifically to the 16th and 19th Brigades . Consequently , the 49th Battalion was disbanded on 3 July 1943 and its remaining personnel were transferred to the 2 / 1st Infantry Battalion , with whom they went on to see further action , fighting in the Aitape – Wewak campaign with the 6th Division late in the war . 
 Casualties amongst the 49th Battalion are listed on the Australian War Memorial as 97 killed and 111 wounded , the majority of which were suffered during the fighting around Sanananda . Author Fred Cranston , who served with the 49th Battalion during the New Guinea campaign , disagrees with these figures , listing the 49th Battalion 's casualties during the fighting around Sanananda as 14 officers and 282 other ranks killed or wounded , and 313 all ranks evacuated sick . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : one DSO , three MCs , one DCM , three MMs and 10 MIDs . For their involvement in the fighting in New Guinea , in 1961 the 49th Battalion was awarded three battle honours . Throughout the majority of their involvement in the New Guinea campaign , the battalion was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Owen <unk> . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 After the war , Australia 's military was rapidly demobilised and then re @-@ formed with the part @-@ time element , the Citizens Military Force ( CMF ) , being established in 1948 . The force was recreated on a reduced scale , though , and there was no room on the order of battle initially for the 49th Battalion . In 1965 , conscription was reintroduced in the form of the national service scheme , and this saw an influx of manpower into the CMF . The following year , the 49th Battalion was re @-@ raised as a " special conditions " battalion within the Royal Queensland Regiment , catering for the training needs of men who were eligible for call up who elected to serve in the CMF rather than the Regular Army , but who could not parade regularly due to where they lived or what civilian occupation they held . The national service scheme ended in December 1972 , after which many who had joined the CMF to defer national service took discharges . The immediate effect on the battalion was significant , with its personnel dropping from around 1 @,@ 000 to approximately 200 , but later it was able to rebuild its numbers to the extent that by 1982 it had a strength of 22 officers and 548 other ranks . In 1984 – 85 , the 49th Battalion was moved from the 7th Brigade , to the 6th , becoming that brigade 's third infantry battalion . In 1991 , the 49th Battalion became a Ready Reserve battalion , offering Reservists an increased training opportunity over and above normal Reserve service ; when the scheme ended in 1997 it was once again amalgamated with the 25th Battalion to become the 25th / 49th Battalion , Royal Queensland Regiment , and returned to the 7th Brigade . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 49th Battalion received the following battle honours : 
 First World War : Somme , 1916 – 18 ; Pozières ; Bullecourt ; Messines , 1917 ; Ypres , 1917 ; Menin Road ; Polygon Wood ; Passchendaele ; Ancre , 1918 ; Villers Bretonneux ; Hamel ; Amiens ; Albert , 1918 ; Hindenburg Line ; <unk> ; France and Flanders , 1916 – 18 ; and Egypt , 1915 – 16 . 
 Second World War : South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 43 ; Buna – Gona ; and Sanananda Road . 
 = Rated @-@ RKO = 
 Rated @-@ RKO was a professional wrestling tag team on World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) based on the Raw brand . The team consisted of Edge , Randy Orton , and Lita , their valet . The name " Rated @-@ RKO " contains part of Edge 's nickname , " The Rated R Superstar " , and Orton 's initials / finishing maneuver , RKO . 
 Edge and Orton formed an alliance in October 2006 to challenge the team of Triple H and Shawn Michaels , collectively known as D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) , who Rated @-@ RKO felt were preventing them from becoming world champions . Rated @-@ RKO would succeed in defeating DX , giving the latter their first loss since their reunion in June 2006 . The following month , Edge and Orton became World Tag Team Champions , and Lita left the group after her legitimate retirement . 
 In January 2007 , Rated @-@ RKO lost the World Tag Team Championship , which caused tension between the two . The group officially disbanded in May 2007 , after Edge moved to the SmackDown brand . Edge and Orton had occasional reunions until Edge 's retirement in 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Feud with D @-@ Generation X ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 On the October 2 , 2006 , episode of one of the WWE 's television programs , Raw , interference from the newly reformed D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) tag team cost Edge his promoted " final chance " at the WWE Championship held by John Cena in a Steel Cage match . This led to Edge approaching Randy Orton and asking him to join forces with him to " get rid of DX " . In his stand , Edge explained to Orton why he should join him as a tag team partner , as he cited Orton 's lack of success after being kicked out of Evolution ( Orton 's former group ) , as well as the antics of DX taking up TV time that he felt should rightfully go to the younger stars . 
 Edge and Orton , calling themselves " Rated @-@ RKO " , immediately became very outspoken against DX and began mocking them at every opportunity , including a sketch reminiscent of the ones DX did about their opponents on a usual basis . Eventually Orton traded wins with Triple H in singles matches on episodes of Raw , leading to a tag team match on November 5 , 2006 , at Cyber Sunday with the fans choosing the special guest referee . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , the duo gave DX their first team loss since they reunited when Eric Bischoff ( the fan selected referee ) allowed the use of a steel chair without calling for a disqualification . Later in the night , Lita won the Women 's Championship in the finals of a seven @-@ woman tournament . The following night on Raw , Edge and Orton faced Ric Flair and Roddy Piper for the World Tag Team Championship with Eric Bischoff as the guest referee . Rated @-@ RKO lost the match , following help from DX . 
 The following week however , the team managed to capture the title in a rematch when they attacked Piper upon making his entrance , with Edge delivering a one man con @-@ chair @-@ to to Piper . As he was taken to the locker room by paramedics , Flair was forced to defend the title by himself , and Rated @-@ RKO won the match after Edge performed a spear on Flair . The real reason for the sudden switch was later revealed to be Piper 's diagnosis of lymphoma forcing him out of action . 
 At Survivor Series , Lita legitimately retired from WWE after losing her Women 's Championship to Mickie James and left the group in the process . At the same event , Team Rated @-@ RKO — consisting of Rated @-@ RKO along with Johnny Nitro , Mike Knox , and Gregory Helms — were swept by Team DX — DX , Jeff Hardy , Matt Hardy , and CM Punk — with Orton being the last member eliminated in a ten @-@ man elimination match . The night after Survivor Series , Edge and Orton beat Ric Flair until he was bloody and continued to beat him after dragging him to the ring , knowing that DX had already left the building . In doing so , DX claimed they had made their rivalry " personal " . At New Year 's Revolution in January 2007 , Rated @-@ RKO retained the World Tag Team Championship after fighting with DX to a no @-@ contest in a match that saw Triple H suffer a legitimate torn right quadriceps muscle . 
 With Triple H out of action , Rated @-@ RKO continued their on @-@ screen rivalry with remaining DX member Shawn Michaels . They were able to schedule a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match against Michaels , during which he was able to beat the odds and defeat both men , leaving Orton lying in the ring after a one @-@ man con @-@ chair @-@ to as Edge stood and watched at ringside . On January 29 , 2007 , the duo lost the World Tag Team Championship to the impromptu team of John Cena and Michaels . Internal dissension continued as both men laid claim to being the number one contender to the WWE Championship , and Edge walked out on Orton during a February 26 , 2007 , rematch for the World Tag Team Championship due to miscommunication . 
 = = = WWE Championship chase ( 2007 ) = = = 
 The relationship strained further after both men qualified for the WrestleMania 23 Money in the Bank ladder match , which would grant the winner a championship match . For weeks Edge influenced various authority figures into putting Orton in matches that would cause Orton not to succeed . 
 On the April 16 , 2007 , episode of Raw , they reunited to take on John Cena in a handicap match but lost the match due to interference from Michaels . At Backlash , the two were involved in a Fatal Four @-@ Way match for the WWE Championship along with Michaels and Cena . Cena ended up retaining the title after pinning Orton . 
 = = = Breakup and on @-@ off reunions ( 2007 – 2011 ) = = = 
 On the April 30 , 2007 , episode of Raw , Edge and Orton met in a one @-@ on @-@ one match . Edge won the match by pinning Orton following a spear . Edge then moved to the SmackDown brand on the May 11 episode after cashing in the Money in the Bank briefcase ( which he had won from Mr. Kennedy on the same episode of Raw ) to win the World Heavyweight Championship from then @-@ champion The Undertaker . With this move , Rated @-@ RKO was officially disbanded . 
 During Raw 's 15th Anniversary episode on December 10 , 2007 , Rated @-@ RKO reunited for ' one night only ' and were involved in a six man tag team match , with their partner Umaga facing Evolution ( Triple H , Batista , and Ric Flair ) , Orton 's former teammates . They lost the match after being disqualified . The team had a reunion of sorts on the April 21 , 2008 , episode of Raw , when Orton and Edge teamed with John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) and Chavo Guerrero to take on John Cena , Triple H , The Undertaker , and Kane in a winning effort . 
 On the April 26 , 2010 , episode of Raw , Edge ( who became a heel again ) cost Orton ( who turned face again after defeating Legacy at WrestleMania 26 ) a title shot against John Cena by spearing him during a triple threat match against Batista and Sheamus . Orton and Edge faced off at May 's Over the Limit pay @-@ per @-@ view , though , Orton dislocated his right shoulder and concluded the match with a double countout . On the January 28 , 2011 , episode of SmackDown , Edge and Orton — now both fan favorites — reunited to take on Dolph Ziggler and The Miz which ended with Edge and Orton taking the win . On the February 18 , 2011 , episode of SmackDown , Edge and Orton reunited once again with John Morrison , R @-@ Truth , Rey Mysterio , and John Cena to take on CM Punk , Kane , Drew McIntyre , Wade Barrett , Dolph Ziggler , and Sheamus in a 12 @-@ man tag team match which was won by Edge , Orton , Morrison , Truth , Mysterio , and Cena . 
 On the April 11 episode of Raw , Edge announced his retirement from professional wrestling due to his neck injury permanently preventing him from being cleared , thus ending any possibility of he and Orton teaming up again . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing maneuvers 
 Con @-@ chair @-@ to 
 Double RKO ( Double jumping cutter ) 
 Double dropkick 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – Randy Orton and Edge 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) – Lita 
 = No Man 's Land ( Kumi Koda song ) = 
 " No Man 's Land " is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Kumi Koda , taken from her tenth studio album , Japonesque ( 2012 ) . It was written by Koda , Mr. Blistah , Pete Kirtley , Jorge Mhondera , <unk> Berrabah , with production being done by long @-@ time collaborator Max Matsuura . The song premiered on January 18 , 2012 as the album 's fifth promotional digital single , which was served through online retailers <unk> , Mora , Mu @-@ Mo , <unk> and Recochoku . It was re @-@ released as an promotional radio airplay single on January 25 , the same release date as Japonesque . The single artwork uses the CD and double DVD cover of Japonesque , which was used exclusively through Recochoku stores . 
 Musically , " No Man 's Land " has been described as a rock song that borrows numerous musical elements such as heavy metal . It lyrically portrays an angry and violent woman trying to escape her lover 's life . Self @-@ described as " barren " , the song includes several instruments including electric guitars , acoustic guitars , and drums . The song received mixed to positive reviews from most music critics . While critics singled it out as an album highlight and one of the better tracks from Japonesque , it was criticized for Koda 's rap and overuse of instrumentation . 
 Due to " No Man 's Land " being released digitally , it was ineligible to chart on the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart due to their policy of restricting digital sales and releases . To promote the single , it has featured on one concert tour conducted by Koda , this being her 2013 Japonesque Tour . An accompanying music video for " No Man 's Land " ( and every other track from the parent album ) was directed by long @-@ time collaborator Ryuji Seki ; it featured Koda wondering a wasteland , with distant views of decayed cityscapes and merry go rounds . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 While working on her then @-@ upcoming album Japonesque ( 2012 ) , Koda and her main record labels Avex Trax and Rhythm Zone enlisted Japanese rapper Mr. Blistah to work with her again ; Mr. Blistah worked and performed with Koda in some of her albums , including the single " Candy , and Japonesque promotional single " So Nice " , among others . " No Man 's Land " was written by Koda , Mr. Blistah , Pete Kirtley , Jorge Mhondera , <unk> Berrabah , and produced by long @-@ time collaborator Max Matsuura . Mr. Blistah , Kirtley , Mhondera , and Berrabah served as the song 's composers , with Japanese arrangers Kenichi Asami , Toshiyuki Takao , Satoshi Yamada , and Daisuke Sakurai hired to arrange the instrumentation . Both Kirtley and Mhondera were credited as the song 's co @-@ arrangers . The song 's instrumentation includes guitars , drums , bass guitars , keyboards , and subtle synthesizers . The song was recorded in early @-@ 2011 by Takeshi Takizawa , Makoto <unk> , and Masahiro Kawata at Prime Sound Studios and Avex Studios , in Tokyo , Japan . 
 In December 2011 , Rhythm Zone confirmed that " No Man 's Land " would be included on Japonesque , and it appeared as the thirteenth track on all formats from Japonesque . " No Man 's Land " , alongside Japonesque tracks : " So Nice " , " Slow " featuring American recording artist Omarion , " Brave " , and " <unk> " , served as the album 's lead promotional digital singles on January 18 , 2012 , which was served through online retailers including Mora , Mu @-@ Mo , <unk> and Recochoku . That same year , " No Man 's Land " , " So Nice " , " Slow " , " Brave " , and " <unk> " were then re @-@ released on January 25 through Japanese airplay stations . This was the same release date as the album Japonesque A special application code was uploaded onto Koda 's official website , which allowed users to access the song from Recochoku and download a full ringtone for free . At the end of January 2012 , British production team StarRock promoted the single on Star Rock television ; the song was circulated throughout UK radio airplay shows . The single artwork uses the CD and double DVD cover of Japonesque , which was used exclusively through Recochoku stores . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " No Man 's Land " is a " hard " mid @-@ tempo rock song . Koda stated on her website that the song was a " violently " , " painful " , and " destructive " mix of rock and heavy metal music . Koda recognized the musical composition as a " turning point " for her future musical elements and influences . The original arrangement of " No Man 's Land " was different to the current version ; according to Koda , the original arrangement omitted the rapping verses and didn 't include heavy rock instrumentation or synthesizers . Zero from <unk> commented that " No Man 's Land " was the only song on the album that didn 't suffer from a " sparse " arrangement . 
 Lyrically , " No Man 's Land " portrays an angry and violent woman trying to escape her lovers life . In an exclusive interview with Recochoku about the song , Koda stated that " No Man 's Land " is a " nuance " of a " girl screaming that she wants to go to a world with no other men . " Koda identified that the themes cheating and betrayal are present throughout the song 's lyrics . However , Koda stated that " No Man 's Land " had a similarity to her single " Futari de ... " , where she believed had also grown strength after moving on . Koda performs the song in both the English and Japanese languages , one of nine tracks from Japonesque that is performed bilingually . According to the lyric sheet provided by Avex Trax , English is used in the song 's hook ; " No man 's , no man 's , no man 's land " . The onomatopoeia lyric " Ding Dong Ding Dong " is spoken during the first verse , whilst the rest is rapped in Japanese . The chorus opens with the English lyrics ; " I 've been running in circles , round and around " , carries on with Japanese , and ends with " Welcome to no man 's land " . The second verse includes the phrases " Zero zero " and " so look at deep " , whilst performed in Japanese . The bridge section has Koda singing in English ; " No matter where I go , this is still my home " and " my home " , whilst performing in Japanese . The song 's final English phrase is the interlude break ; " Everybody put hands right this " , and finishes with the chorus and hook . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 After its release , " No Man 's Land " received mixed to positive reviews from most music critics . Zero , <unk> , and Loki from <unk> highlighted " No Man 's Land " as the best track on the album ; they agreed that the single had a better arrangement than most tracks on Japonesque , and enjoyed the song 's composition . A member from StarRock highlighted " No Man 's Land " as the best track on the album , praising its commercial appeal . A staff member from CD Journal enjoyed the song 's composition , labelling the verses and second half of the song " impressive " . However , Asian Junkie member Random J reviewed " No Man 's Land " on his blogsite and criticized Koda 's rapping and overuse of instrumentation ; he commented " " No Man 's Land " would have sufficed as a mid @-@ tempo jam , is <unk> on by being raped with electric guitars . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " No Man 's Land " was directed by long @-@ time collaborator Ryuji Seki . The music video was shot with Koda in front of a green screen to immolate the chroma key functions . Koda , who was present at post @-@ production for the music video , suggested the use of black and white colouring , which Seki then added . This is Koda 's first music video to be in full black and white . The video opens with a distance shot of a wasteland , with decaying trees , floating black leaves , and hills . Koda is seen dragging herself through the valley , and an inter cut scene features a body shot of Koda in front of an abandoned city and abandoned merry @-@ go @-@ round ; the merry @-@ go @-@ round references the lyric in the song . As the first hook stars in the song , it features two scenes ; Koda singing the track in a distance , and close @-@ ups of Koda wearing a shackle . The verse has Koda wondering through a valley and singing the song . 
 The first chorus has Koda walking through the land , and scenes of her singing . She grabs a compass , but it does not function properly . She grabs a drinking bottle , but only filled with little droplets ; she tries to drink it , but falls all on her face instead . As she sings the song ; by the end of the second chorus , black projectile smoke is scene falling from the sky in the distance and hits parts of the abandoned city . As more smoke falls and black leaves con @-@ stellate , Koda collapses and sings the bridge on the ground . When the bridge section ends , rocks start levitating and the smoke rises , forming a black Dust devil in the distance . As more dust devil 's form , they become large and closely devour Koda . 
 By the last chorus , a close @-@ up of Koda 's eyes closes and zooms out , showing Koda in lighter clothes and long hair . A long field of dark green grass with the sun and blue sky beaming above it , still showing the abandoned city and merry @-@ go @-@ round in the distance . The field is then shown to be the distance of a cliff , with Koda standing on the edge and observing a forest at the bottom ; these scenes are shot in colour instead of black and white . The final vocal interlude break of the song has inter cut scenes of Koda on the cliff , and Koda walking through the valley from earlier scenes . The final scene has a repeating scene of the first scene ; Koda walking through the valley in the distance of a wasteland . After completing the video and watching it , Koda commented that the overall appearance had given her a " personal connection " to the video and song . She stated that the visual effects were " very cool " , and declared it as one of her " best " videos . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 The music video premiered on Japanese music television channels on January 18 , 2012 . Alongside with its radio airplay release , StarRock Productions had premiered the music video on UK music television channels on January 25 . The music video for " No Man 's Land " appeared on the CD and DVD format , and the CD and double DVD formats for Japonesque . Koda uploaded the video on her website , in order to promote the music videos from the album . On January 26 , Koda hosted a special television show for Nico Nico Live and premiered the music video to " No Man 's Land " , alongside the music videos from Japonesque . Tetsuo Hiraga from Hot Express complimented the music video 's erotic nature , Koda 's sexy image , and the video 's graphics . 
 = = Live performances and other inclusions = = 
 " No Man 's Land " has appeared on one of Koda 's concert tours , this being her 2013 Japonesque tour . The performance was included on part two of the concert tour , where Koda is wearing a solder uniform and singing the song in front of her backing band . Koda plays the drums to the ending interlude of the track . The performance was recorded live and included on the subsequent live DVD release , Koda Kumi Live Tour 2013 : Japonesque ( 2013 ) . Released as a triple @-@ DVD and double @-@ Blu @-@ ray set , " No Man 's Land " appeared on the second disc and first disc respectively . The 4 <unk> D 'n'B remix for " No Man 's Land " was included on her Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 5 remix compilation ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Japonesque . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Gender Bender ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Gender Bender " is the fourteenth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Premiering on the Fox network on January 21 , 1994 , it was written by Larry and Paul Barber , directed by Rob Bowman , and featured guest appearances by Brent Hinkley and Nicholas Lea , who would later appear in the recurring role of Alex Krycek . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' overarching mythology . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully begin investigating a series of murders following sexual encounters . The two soon discover that a member of a religious sect living in Massachusetts may be responsible — and may not be human . 
 The episode was inspired by producer Glen Morgan 's desire for " an episode with more of a sexy edge " ; the writers found it difficult to write a story that showed sex as scary and introduced an Amish @-@ like community as well . " Gender Bender " was seen by approximately 6 @.@ 8 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode has subsequently been met with mixed critical responses , facing criticism for its abrupt deus ex machina ending . Academic analysis of the episode has placed it within a science @-@ fiction tradition that attributes a powerful , supernatural element to physical contact with aliens . It has also been seen as reflecting anxieties about emerging gender roles in the 1990s . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a dance club , a young man is taken by a young woman , Marty ( Kate Twa ) , for casual sex . The man dies afterwards , and Marty leaves the room as a man ( Peter Stebbings ) . FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are called to the scene ; Mulder believes that the man 's death was caused by a fatal dose of pheromones . There is also ambiguity in similar murders as to the sex of the killer . Evidence from the crime scene leads the duo to an Amish @-@ like community in Steveston , Massachusetts , which Mulder calls the Kindred . 
 Mulder approaches some of the Kindred , only to be shunned . Meanwhile , Scully befriends a member , Brother Andrew ( Brent Hinkley ) , who is reluctant to talk . While shaking hands with him , Scully appears entranced , not coming to until Mulder catches her attention . The agents visit the Kindred 's remote community , where they are asked to surrender their guns before entering . Mulder and Scully are invited to dinner . When the Kindred refuse to allow Scully to treat Brother Aaron , a sick participant at the table , Brother Andrew states that the Kindred take care of their own . Meanwhile , in another nightclub , a man convinces a girl to dance with him by touching her hand . 
 When the Kindred escort the agents out of the village , Mulder comments on the lack of children in the community and states that he recognizes some of the faces from photographs taken in the 1930s . Curious , he returns to the village that night , and hears chanting as a procession of the Kindred moves to a barn . Scully is led off by Brother Andrew , who claims to be able to give her information about the murderer , whom he calls Brother Martin . Downstairs in the barn , the group can be seen bathing Brother Aaron 's body in watery clay . Mulder hides in a crevice , where he discovers that the sick man has been buried alive and has begun to take on feminine features . Meanwhile , Brother Andrew uses his power to seduce Scully . She is unable to resist , and is on the verge of succumbing before Mulder comes to her aid . The agents are again escorted out of the village . 
 Another man , Michel ( Nicholas Lea ) , is having sex with the female form of Brother Martin in a parked car before a patrol officer interrupts them . As Michel suddenly starts retching , the officer is attacked by Brother Martin , who changes into a man and escapes . In the hospital Michel reluctantly reveals to Mulder and Scully that when he looked out of the car , the girl he was with " looked like a man " . The agents are alerted about activity on a previous victim 's credit card , which was stolen by Brother Martin . The agents chase Brother Martin into an alley , only to have the Kindred appear and take him away . The following morning the agents return to the Kindred 's dwelling , which now appears deserted . The tunnels are blocked entirely with the white clay . Mulder and Scully walk into the nearby field where they find a large crop circle , suggesting that the Kindred are aliens . 
 = = Production = = 
 While discussing the installment 's origins , producer Glen Morgan said that he " wanted an episode with more of a sexy edge " . It proved difficult to portray sex as convincingly scary , which caused the producers to introduce the concept of " people like the Amish who are from another planet " . " Gender Bender " was penned by freelance writers Larry and Paul Barber , whose initial draft focused heavily on the contrast between the farming community of the Kindred and a version of city life " with very sexual connotations " , influenced by the works of Swiss artist H. R. Giger . This script went through various rewrites during the development process , including the removal of a scene where someone 's crotch rots away , to address concerns about the content of the episode . The chants uttered by the Kindred were not in the script handed in by the Barbers ; they were added later by producer Paul Rabwin . 
 The character of Marty was portrayed by two actors — Kate Twa plays its female form and Peter Stebbings the male . Twa was the first of the two to be cast , leading producer R. W. Goodwin to base the casting of Stebbings mostly on his " very strong resemblance " to the actress . This resemblance was exploited in a scene showing Twa morphing into Stebbings ; Goodwin felt that the two actors were too similar for the effect to be readily apparent , " <unk> [ ing ] the energy out of the moment " . Nicholas Lea , who played a would @-@ be victim in the episode , returned to the series in a recurring role as Alex Krycek , beginning with the second season 's " Sleepless " . Twa also returned that season , playing a former colleague of Scully in " Soft Light " . 
 " Gender Bender " marked Rob Bowman 's directorial debut on the series ; he became one of the series ' most prolific directors , even directing the 1998 film adaptation , The X @-@ Files : Fight the Future . Bowman found " Gender Bender " a difficult episode to work on — the script had initially called for lantern light to illuminate several scenes , but this was found to be unworkable . In addition , an interior set constructed to represent the catacombs under the Kindred 's barn was so encumbering to film in that a second unit crew were required to reshoot a large degree of camera coverage . This need for extra footage necessitated an additional day of filming for scenes featuring Duchovny . 
 The exterior shots of the village inhabited by the Kindred were filmed at a farm preserved from the 1890s in Langley , British Columbia , while interior sets were built on a sound stage . The small town visited by the agents was filmed on location in Steveston , British Columbia — a location which was revisited to film the first @-@ season episode " Miracle Man " . The music used in the episode 's nightclub scenes was recycled from composer Mark Snow 's earlier work on the television film In the Line of Duty : Street War . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Gender Bender " has been interpreted as representing contemporary sexual anxieties in a figurative manner , conflating seduction with alien abduction . M. Keith Booker has described the Kindred 's shapeshifting as representative of contemporary sexual anxieties caused by the changing gender roles of the decade , coupled with " a basic fear of sexual contact " . Antonio Ballesteros González has stated that the episode is representative of the series ' exploration of both seduction and abduction , noting that " both are seen as part of sexual aggression " , further describing the episode 's villain as representing " the fear of sex and reproduction " . The lethal nature of the Kindred 's touch has been cited as representing the potency of their sexual repression ; and has been placed within a science @-@ fiction tradition that depicts aliens or outsiders with a potent touch , alongside similar depictions in the films Communion and E.T. , and the novel The Puppet Masters . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Gender Bender " originally aired on Fox on January 21 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on December 22 , 1994 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 2 , with a 12 share . It was viewed by 6 @.@ 8 million households and 11 @.@ 1 million viewers , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 12 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . 
 " Gender Bender " received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , reviewed " Gender Bender " positively , feeling that it was " a nicely refreshing and original idea " , with " strikingly atmospheric " sets and " impressively spooky " villains . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , praised the episode , awarding it an " A " . He felt that the plot was " a perfect mixture of scientific theory , unsubstantiated rumor , and memorable visuals " . Handlen felt that the episode represented the ideal plot for The X @-@ Files , featuring someone briefly interacting with supernatural phenomena without ever learning the truth of their experience . Anna Johns , writing for TV Squad , was positive toward the episode . Johns stated she " totally loved it " . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " Gender Bender " was rated " B − " , being described as a " clever idea " that was " undermined by a bushel of burning questions " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Gender Bender " one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding that it " finishes up ... entirely clichéd " . Shearman felt that Bowman 's direction , and the contrast between " decadent " night @-@ life and the " restraint and denial " of the Kindred , were highlights of the episode . He also felt that it approached its themes too conservatively and tamely , leaving a " boring " end result . In his book The Nitpicker 's Guide for X @-@ Philes , author Phil Farrand has highlighted several inconsistencies in the episode , focusing on the implausible nature of the ending . Farrand cites the mention of the Kindred 's pheromones containing human DNA and their use of the English language when in private as elements which seem incongruous for an alien race . 
 The episode faced criticism from the crew over its ending using a deus ex machina to indicate that the Kindred may have been aliens . Producer James Wong felt that the episode 's ending seemed overly abrupt and unexpected , describing it as appearing " like we tried to play a trick on the audience to make them say ' Ooh , what the heck was that ? ' " . He added that the lack of a real connection to the episode 's plot meant that the revelation lost any sense of catharsis for the viewer . Morgan said that the episode " went too far . At what point do we become unbelievable ? " When asked about the similarity between the Kindred and the Amish , series creator Chris Carter noted that " they [ the Amish ] don 't watch TV , so I wasn 't worried about it " . 
 = Of Human Action = 
 " Of Human Action " is the seventh episode of the second season of the science fiction / crime series Fringe , and the 27th episode overall . The episode followed a case involving the apparent kidnapping of the son of a scientist working for biotechnology corporation Massive Dynamic , leading the Fringe team to deal with the repercussions of mind control . 
 The episode was written by the staff @-@ writing team of Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta , and was directed by executive producer Joe Chappelle . It first aired in the United States on November 12 , 2009 to an estimated 5 @.@ 89 million viewers . It received generally positive reviews , as multiple critics praised the story despite its characterization as a " standalone " episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Queens , New York , police chase a sedan driven through a parking garage by two men keeping a teenage boy named Tyler Carson ( Cameron Monaghan ) in the backseat . Police officers surround the car and draw their weapons , demanding that the men exit the car . They do , and Tyler stays in his seat . Without explanation , one of the officers goes to the parking ramp and jumps to his death . Another officer shoots her two remaining co @-@ workers , then herself . The kidnappers ' crime spree continues on the road . One of them , Hickey ( John Tench ) , demands that a convenience store clerk hand over all his cash . Another customer tries to intervene , but then takes a pot of hot coffee , pours the coffee over his own head , and beats himself with the pot . The cashier then electrocutes himself . 
 Examining the policewoman who shot herself , Walter ( John Noble ) concludes that she was the victim of mind control rather than hypnosis . Theorizing that the mind control works on an auditory basis , he develops a method of combating the effects through the use of white noise . The tactical team led by Olivia ( Anna Torv ) traces the kidnappers — both of them car salesmen with no serious criminal record — to a warehouse . One of them drives the car through a large door , but is burnt in the explosion when the car flips . Olivia gets the drop on the surviving kidnapper , who points a gun at his own chin and begs for her help . Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , wearing headphones that broadcast Walter 's white noise , follows the ransom payment . It leads him to Tyler , who says , " You can take off those stupid headphones . They won 't work . " 
 Peter is now forced into helping Tyler , who has mind control powers due to his father James ( Andrew Airlie ) working on thought @-@ controlled weapons systems for Massive Dynamic . Peter tries to get into Tyler 's head by sharing his own stories of his father not believing in him , but Tyler rejects the attempts to bond , as he only needs a driver . Their destination is the home of Tyler 's mother , whom Tyler had been told was dead . When the two of them meet , Tyler wants her to run off so that they can be together again . She refuses , and Tyler becomes enraged at her husband when he returns home . 
 Tyler tries to force Peter to shoot the husband , but changes the target to Agent Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) when he arrives at the house with Olivia . Peter is forced to shoot Broyles , but manages to pull the gun off @-@ center so that the agent is only hit in the shoulder . After Peter crashes the car that both he and Tyler are in , Tyler is brought unconscious into custody . Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) writes a message to the absent William Bell updating him on the status of the " Carson @-@ Penrose " experiments ( Claus Penrose is a scientist seen caring for a genetically engineered killer in the much earlier episode " The Same Old Story " ) . Tyler is one of many identical boys placed with foster families , and James was his assigned guardian , not his father . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Of Human Action " was written by frequent writing partners Glen Whitman and Robert Chiappetta , and was directed by executive producer Joe Chappelle . It was shot in Vancouver in September 2009 ; the crew wrapped up production during the middle of the month , and then immediately moved on to the following episode , " August " . 
 To simulate the police officer falling in the opening scene , the special effects department had the stunt double fall 52 feet onto an <unk> feet airbag , which they referred to as " old @-@ fashioned " because they used the airbag rather than wires . Trevor Jones , the stuntman doing the scene , commented during shooting that his fall had a small margin of error , because of the small airbag and cement walls surrounding the area , " if you land off center maybe three or four feet , then you 're going to get pitched in that direction " . To aid Jones , a large X was placed on the airbag . A scene later in the episode involves a car fleeing through a garage door , only to hit a concrete wall , flip over , and burst into flames . To create the scene , the crew used two externally identical cars ; one was drivable , and the other was a shell of car , and was hooked to a cable rig . After taking a week to get everything set up , the crew used a nitrogen cannon to launch the second , <unk> car through the garage door via wires . 
 The episode featured a guest performance by Cameron Monaghan as the mind controller Tyler Carson . The actor tweeted after the episode 's broadcast , " Fringe was cool . What person in the world doesn 't wish they had mind @-@ <unk> [ sic ] powers ! " " Of Human Action " also had guest appearances by Andrew Airlie , Peter Graham @-@ <unk> , John Tench , Vincent Gale , Jacqueline Ann Steuart , and Doron Bell Jr .. 
 = = Music and cultural references = = 
 " Of Human Action " featured two songs , " Subtle Duck " by Charles Bissell and " Angel Love " by Samantha James . In honor of The Simpsons 's 20th anniversary , several shows in Fox 's lineup contained references to the show . In " Of Human Action " , Tyler uses a Homer Simpson Pez dispenser to store his mind @-@ control drugs , and the town he and Peter journey to is Springfield , the same name of the town in The Simpsons ; when Springfield appears in the sky , no state is shown , just like the ambiguity concerning the home state of The Simpsons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 On its initial November 12 , 2009 broadcast in the United States , " Of Human Action " was watched by an estimated 5 @.@ 89 million viewers , and earned a 2 @.@ 2 ratings share among adults 18 – 49 , tying the season average . This was a 29 percent increase from the previous episode 's 1 @.@ 7 rating , though that episode 's low ratings have been attributed to the unexpected end to the 2009 World Series . Despite the ratings improvement , " Of Human Action " led Fringe to finish in fourth place for its timeslot . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Of Human Action " received a very positive reaction from MTV 's Josh Wigler , writing " As a stand @-@ alone episode with some interesting character insight , this week 's Fringe was a success . It might also be a mythological success , too , should the big reveal at the end — the fact that Massive Dynamic has inundated multiple children with telepathic abilities — pan out in future episodes . " Andrew Hanson of the Los Angeles Times enjoyed being able to see more of Massive Dynamic , and praised Astrid 's increased presence in the plot . Airlock Alpha writer Tiffany Vogt called it a " gripping story with much emotional resonance , " especially with the father @-@ son parallels between Peter and Tyler . 
 The A. V. Club 's Noel Murray had a more mixed reaction , giving the episode a rating of C + and criticizing lead guest actor Cameron Monaghan , " In this role , he was a drag , playing ' rebellious teen ' in a stock , wooden way , with no extra layers . Also , nobody — not even Joshua Jackson , whom I 've come to appreciate more as an actor over the run of this show — could make the ' My mind is being controlled ! ' scenes look anything other than goofy . " Murray also said , " Yet for all my griping , I was quite taken with the theme of this episode , and the motifs that writers Robert Chiappetta and Glen Whitman and director Joe Chappelle used to support it . From the tinfoil Peter Pan hats that Walter and Astrid wear to Tyler popping the medication that grants him his powers out of a Pez dispenser , there 's a lot in ' Of Human Action ' about childish things . " Ramsey Isler from IGN graded the episode 8 @.@ 0 / 10 , explaining that despite it being a " standalone " episode , it was " a high @-@ intensity , action @-@ filled tale that kept the adrenaline flowing . Fringe is usually more of a cerebral show , but there 's nothing wrong with appealing to our love of action every now and then " . Also positive was Chanel Reeder of Newsarama , who believed Fringe " totally deliver [ ed ] in its most recent episode . The twists are back , along with the dramatic high intensity moments that the show is known for . " Reeder praised the plot twist of Tyler being the mind controller , and was pleased with the increased presence of Massive Dynamic . 
 = Minimum Foundation Program = 
 In Louisiana , the Minimum Foundation Program is the formula that determines the cost to educate students at public elementary and secondary schools and defines state and local funding contributions to each district . Education officials often use the term " MFP " to refer specifically to the portion the state pays per student to each school district . 
 The Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education ( <unk> ) is required by the Louisiana Constitution to adopt a formula to determine the total cost of a minimum foundation program of education in public schools and to equitably allocate funding to school systems . The Louisiana legislature must approve the formula each year . Local and state contributions to the MFP vary based on student needs and local tax bases . 
 MFP funding has been frozen at the same rate for two years . In 2010 , the Louisiana Legislature moved to restructure the MFP formula . Critics say the formula does not encourage districts to implement taxes to pay higher amounts than the state for the cost of education . 
 = = Local and state contributions = = 
 Local and state shares of the MFP vary from district to district . On average , the state pays 65 percent of the total cost of the minimum foundation , and the district pays 35 percent . In the 2010 @-@ 2011 fiscal year , state and local government contributed $ 3 @.@ 3 billion to the MFP formula . Required local funding is paid by property and sales taxes levied by local school districts . Districts with higher tax revenues must pay a higher portion of the MFP than districts with lower tax revenues . The formula divides districts into levels based on the dollar amount of taxes they levy . 
 = = = Per student spending = = = 
 In 2010 @-@ 2011 , the base MFP formula was $ 3 @,@ 855 per pupil , without accounting for special student needs . The MFP formula also takes into account the additional expenses school systems incur in educating special classes of students ( e.g. at risk , special education and gifted and talented students . ) In the end , school districts get an average of about $ 10 @,@ 000 of state and local funding per student per year . 
 Local and state sources spent between $ 6 @,@ 500 and $ 10 @,@ 700 per student during the 2008 @-@ 2009 fiscal year . In that year , Allen , Assumption , Claiborne , Madison , Plaquemines , Red River and West Feliciana parishes received the highest per pupil funding while Acadia , Avoyelles , Grant and Vermillion parishes received the lowest per pupil funding . Among the 10 districts with the highest MFP per pupil that year , the average local contribution was $ 3 @,@ 900 , and the average state contribution was $ 6 @,@ 050 . Among the 10 districts with the lowest MFP per pupil that year , the average local contribution was $ 1 @,@ 850 and the average state contribution was $ 5 @,@ 600 . Total funding levels per student vary based on student population needs . 
 = = Weighted formula = = 
 MFP funding in the 2010 @-@ 2011 fiscal year totaled $ 3 @,@ 308 @,@ 741 @,@ 821 . That amount divided evenly among 696 @,@ 444 public school students in Louisiana would work out to $ 4 @,@ 750 per pupil . But some students cost more to educate than others . Rather than increasing the dollar amount , the MFP formula artificially increases the number of students it funds . This " weighted membership " accounts for special education , gifted and talented and at @-@ risk students . For example , a school receives 2 @.@ 5 times the amount of funding it would receive for a general population student to educate a special education student . 
 = = State executive and legislative action = = 
 = = = MFP freeze = = = 
 In the past , the Louisiana Department of Education factored in a 2 @.@ 75 percent increase per year in MFP funding , but that increase has been frozen for two years . In February , 2011 , The Advocate reported that Gov. Bobby Jindal plans to freeze the increase in MFP funding for the 2012 budget . John <unk> , president of the Louisiana Association of School Superintendents , said districts need the MFP growth factor because they have suffered downturns in local sales tax revenue and increases in retirement and health insurance costs . 
 = = = Move to restructure = = = 
 In 2010 , the Louisiana House of Representatives passed a resolution urging the Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education to make the school funding formula more efficient and effective . HCR 20 , introduced by Rep. Steve Carter , requested that <unk> make certain changes to the formula , including : 
 Increasing the percentage of MFP funds spent at the school level 
 Having funds " follow the child " when students are transferred to juvenile justice facilities 
 Adjusting funding ( up or down ) based on accurate student enrollment data 
 Targeting more MFP funds to dropout prevention 
 = = District taxing controversy = = 
 Critics say the MFP formula discourages high levels of local , rather than state , funding . Louisiana House Speaker Jim Tucker said in an interview with Louisiana Public Broadcasting that the MFP formula keeps districts from levying higher taxes because districts with high local taxes receive lower state funding payments . Tulane University 's Cowen Institute was founded in 2007 to examine the effects of local tax initiatives on the MFP . Tara O 'Neill , Cowen Institute Policy Manager , said districts receive extra incentive funding from the state when they raise high amounts of funding at the local level . O 'Neill said districts get this extra money whether they tax a low tax base at a high rate or tax a healthy tax base at a low rate . 
 = = MFP Accountability Reports for low @-@ performing schools = = 
 State laws require the Louisiana Department of Education to include each local school district that has a school with a School Performance Score ( SPS ) below 60 and growth of less than 2 points in an MFP Accountability Report that is submitted to the Louisiana House and Senate Committees on Education by June 1 each year . 
 The most recent report in 2009 contained data for 34 schools in 15 districts during the 2007 @-@ 2008 school year . The average school performance score for schools in that report was 52 @.@ 9 , compared to 86 @.@ 3 statewide . The average classroom instructional expenditure per student was $ 6 @,@ 416 among these schools , compared to $ 5 @,@ 924 statewide . About 91 percent of students in this report were in poverty , compared to 63 @.@ 2 percent statewide . The schools in this report had higher teacher turnover than the statewide average and a slightly higher percentage of uncertified teachers than the state average . 
 = Jon Hess ( lacrosse ) = 
 Jonathan A. " Jon " Hess is a retired lacrosse attackman who played professional box lacrosse in the National Lacrosse League ( NLL ) and professional field lacrosse in Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1995 through 1998 , where he earned National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) lacrosse attackman of the year award , three United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American recognitions , four Ivy League championships , three national championships , an Ivy League Player of the Year award and an NCAA tournament most outstanding player award . Jon Hess holds Princeton lacrosse scoring records for both points and assists and won an NCAA individual national statistical championship for assists . As a professional , he is a former sportsman of the year and MLL assists leader . Jon is married to Sara Whalen Hess . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jon Hess , who is from Nyack , New York , established the Rockland County scoring record ( 314 points ) . He attended Nyack High School , where he earned All @-@ county recognition three times , but was unable to lead them past perennial league champion Yorktown High School . Hess was an Empire State Games gold medalist in 1992 and bronze medalist in 1993 . 
 = = College career = = 
 Hess was part of a trio of noted attackmen who were Princeton classmates along with Jesse Hubbard and Chris Massey . As starters , the trio of All @-@ Americans , who retired second ( Hess ) , third ( Hubbard ) and fourth ( Massey ) in career points at Princeton , had a 43 – 2 record and combined for 618 points . Jon Hess was awarded the 1997 Jack Turnbull Award as the best NCAA lacrosse attackman . He was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 1997 and 1998 and second team selection in 1996 . He was also first team All @-@ Ivy League in 1996 and 1997 and a second team selection in 1998 . The 1995 team , which earned the school 's sixth consecutive NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship invitation , was Ivy League co @-@ champion , while the 1996 – 1998 teams were 6 – 0 undefeated outright conference champions . These undefeated league champions won the 1996 , 1997 and 1998 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championships , becoming the first team to win three consecutive championships since Syracuse from 1988 – 90 and the first to be recognized to have done so without an NCAA scandal since Johns Hopkins from 1978 – 80 . 
 Hess earned the 1997 Men 's Ivy League Player of the Year and the 1997 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament Most Outstanding Player . His most outstanding player performance included five goals and eleven assists in the tournament and three goals and five assists in the championship game against Maryland . The 1997 team is regarded as the best in school history with a record number of wins during its 15 – 0 season . He served as co @-@ captain of the 1998 team , and he scored two second half goals and had an assist as Princeton pushed its lead to 7 – 3 during the 1998 Championship game . For the day , he ended up with four goals as part of the 15 – 5 victory over Maryland . 
 Hess holds the Princeton University single @-@ season points ( 74 , 1997 ) and single @-@ season assists records ( 48 , 1997 ) . He was the 1998 NCAA statistical champion in assists per game ( 2 @.@ 60 ) , even though he was slowed down that season by a hamstring injury . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Jon Hess played for the New York Saints during the 1999 and 2000 NLL seasons . Hess also played three seasons in MLL with the New Jersey Pride from 2001 to 2003 before retiring to work for Merrill Lynch in New York City . Hess works as a NASDAQ stock trader . With the Pride , he won the Major League Lacrosse Iron Lizard of the Year Award during the 2003 MLL season . That year , he was reunited with Princeton teammate Hubbard . In each of his three seasons in the MLL , he finished first ( 2001 ) or second ( 2002 & 2003 ) in the league in assists . 
 = = Personal = = 
 In 2001 , he was dating New York Power player Sara Whalen . By 2004 , he was married to three @-@ time soccer All @-@ American and 2000 Olympic Games silver medalist Sara Whalen Hess . 
 = Anshei Israel Synagogue = 
 Anshei Israel Synagogue is a historic synagogue located in Lisbon , Connecticut , United States . The Orthodox congregation was founded with 15 families and constructed the synagogue in 1936 . It was built by George Allen & Sons . The interior is a single room that is lined with five benches before an altar which held the sacred ark . The congregation 's membership dwindled throughout the 1940s and 1950s , limiting the services to holidays before finally closing in the early 1980s . Rules in the congregation were not as strictly enforced as in the Old World , as there was no curtain to separate the sexes and distant members were allowed to drive part of the way to its services . The Town of Lisbon took ownership of the property in the 1980s . The synagogue is currently maintained by the Lisbon Historical Society . The synagogue was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1995 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In the early 1800s of Connecticut , people of the Jewish faith were few , with just twelve persons in the whole of Connecticut . In 1843 , Jewish public worship was first permitted after a petition to the Connecticut General Assembly . Early Jewish services were held in private homes or in rented halls and later in the first synagogues , which were usually adapted from churches . Rural synagogues like the Anshei Israel Synagogue were modest structures and " reflect the need of Jewish farming and summer congregations for buildings suitable for worship that were within their limited financial and geographic boundaries . " 
 The land upon which the synagogue was built was donated by Harry Rothenberg around 1936 . The congregation , pooled their money to construct the synagogue . Constructed by George Allen & Sons in 1836 , the Anshei Israel Synagogue is a 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) by 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) gable @-@ roofed clapboarded building with a 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) by 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) central projecting tower with a Magen David at its top . Flanking the tower on each side is a pair of 2 @-@ over @-@ 2 windows . Paint remnants show that the sash was previously painted a bright blue . 
 After passing through the tower , the single room has a platform with an ark at the front . The original altar and sacred ark remains , with the interior concealed by a gold curtain ; and a menorah rests on the podium . Chairs and five wooden , backless benches were provided for seating , which was described as " an unusual arrangement in historic Connecticut synagogues " . Though the building had electricity , it had no heat or plumbing ; though a wood stove was used to provide heat and an outhouse was previously behind the synagogue . 
 = = Use = = 
 The founding congregation of 15 families came from Poland and Russia and lived in the surrounding towns of Plainfield , Lisbon , Griswold , and Jewett City . Rothenberg became the first cantor of the Anshei Israel Synagogue and the service would continue to serve the Orthodox congregation for decades . The congregation 's membership dwindled throughout the 1940s and 1950s , which limited services to holidays . The synagogue finally closed when it could no longer steadily gather a <unk> , ten men , in 1987 . The town of Lisbon acquired the synagogue in the 1980s from the synagogue 's last six members . In 2004 , the synagogue was open during " Walking Weekend " events . 
 Caroline Read @-@ Burns , president of the Lisbon Historical Society and Jerome <unk> , a member of the synagogue , discussed the Orthodox congregation 's rules and noted that some rules were not as strictly enforced as in the Old World . As an Orthodox congregation , members were to walk to the synagogue , but some distant members would drive and " walk the last mile or so . " The synagogue did not use curtains to separate men and women , as was the norm for Orthodox services in Poland and Russia . The women 's seating was at a table on the right side of the sanctuary , near the door . The structure is well @-@ preserved , but not currently in use . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Anshei Israel Synagogue was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1995 . It is recognized as an architecturally significant example of " a small country Jewish house of worship " . Its architecture is the " epitome of simplicity " and it remains an important pre @-@ 1945 Jewish house of worship that is in a rural setting and possessing integrity in its design . The Day reflected Read @-@ Burn 's comments that the synagogue may " only one of its kind in the country " . In 2001 , the building was featuring on Connecticut Journal , a program of Connecticut Public Television . 
 In 2005 , the building was in need of some repairs due to neglect and damage from squirrels . The Lisbon Historical Society received a $ 5 @,@ 000 grant from the <unk> <unk> National Heritage Corridor to make repairs on the synagogue . Repairs would be done to repair the structure and the electrical wiring would be replaced for free by the students at the Norwich Regional Vocational Technical School . 
 = Lincoln Theatre ( Washington , D.C. ) = 
 Lincoln Theatre is a theater in Washington , D.C. , located at 1215 U Street , next to Ben 's Chili Bowl . The theater , located on " Washington 's Black Broadway " , served the city 's African American community when segregation kept them out of other venues . The Lincoln Theatre included a movie house and ballroom , and hosted jazz and big band performers such as Duke Ellington . The theater closed after the 1968 race @-@ related riots . It was restored and reopened in 1994 , and hosts a variety of performances and events . The U Street Metro station , which opened in 1991 , is located across the street from Lincoln Theater . 
 American recording artist Adam Lambert performed at this venue on 5 March 2016 as part of his The Original High Tour . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction of the Lincoln Theatre began in the summer of 1921 , and it opened in 1922 . The Lincoln Theatre , which showed silent film and vaudeville , served the city 's black community . The theatre was designed by Reginald <unk> , in collaboration with Harry Crandall , a local theater operator . 
 In 1927 , the Lincoln Theatre was sold to A.E. Lichtman , who decided to turn it into a luxurious movie house , and added a ballroom . The theatre was wired for sound in 1928 . The ballroom , known as Lincoln Colonnade , and the theater were known as the center of " Washington 's Black Broadway " . Performers at Lincoln Theatre have included Duke Ellington , Pearl Bailey , Louis Armstrong , Lionel Hampton , Ella Fitzgerald , Cab Calloway , Billie Holiday , and Sarah Vaughan . A television projection system was installed at Lincoln Theatre in 1952 . The movie house televised boxing fights on many occasions , such as the Sugar Ray Robinson @-@ Joey Maxim bout on June 25 , 1952 . 
 The Lincoln Theatre struggled financially after desegregation opened other movie theaters to blacks beginning in 1953 . In the late 1950s , the Colonnade was demolished . The theater fell into disrepair after the 1968 Washington , D.C. riots . In 1978 , the Lincoln Theatre was divided into two theaters , and was known as the Lincoln " Twins " . In the late 1970s and early 1980s , the Lincoln Theater featured " All @-@ Night Movie " shows on the weekend , attracting hundreds each weekend . The Lincoln Theatre was sold to developer Jeffrey Cohen in 1983 , who closed it for renovations . The theater remained boarded up for many years . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The Lincoln Theatre was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1993 . In 1993 , the theatre was restored by the U Street Theatre Foundation , with $ 9 million of aid from the District of Columbia government . The restoration started in 1989 by developer Jeffrey N. Cohen , who was working on a controversial $ 250 million redevelopment plan , " Jackson Plaza " , for the Shaw / U @-@ Street area . In 1990 , Cohen ran into financial difficulties and filed for bankruptcy in 1991 . Restoration of the theater was taken over by the District government and the foundation . The restoration work was done by the design firm , Leo A. Daly . The building has a brick exterior , and the interior features Victorian trim . 
 A " sneak preview " of the renovated theater was held on September 16 , 1993 for D.C. Councilmember Frank Smith , Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly , and 1 @,@ 000 attendees . The theatre officially reopened on February 4 , 1994 with a performance of Barry Scott 's Ain 't Got Long to Stay Here , which was about the life of Martin Luther King , Jr . In March 1995 , Lincoln Theatre hosted a play , Where Eagles Fly , written by local playwright Carole Mumin . The play told the story of a local elderly woman who fought the Shaw Urban Redevelopment Project that targeted the Shaw neighborhood for demolition , and sought to preserve the neighborhood and its history . 
 The 1 @,@ 250 @-@ seat theater has hosted theatrical and musical shows , leased space to community groups and for events , and hosted political events such as the mayor 's State of the District address . Jazz performances in recent years have included Cassandra Wilson , Quincy Jones , Chuck Brown , and Wynton Marsalis . In 2005 , the annual Duke Ellington Jazz Festival was inaugurated and hosted performances . Others that have performed at the Lincoln Theatre include Damien Rice , singer Brian Stokes Mitchell , and comedian Dick Gregory . Lincoln Theatre has also been a venue for Filmfest DC . The theater was the primary venue for the annual LGBT film festival Reel Affirmations from 1998 to 2008 . 
 The theater has struggled financially , and has received $ 500 @,@ 000 of aid annually for the past five years from the District government . The theater director , Janice Hill , has expressed concerns that the theater may have to shut down due to lack of funds . On January 11 , 2007 , the District government provided $ 200 @,@ 000 to the theatre . Councilmember Jim Graham also suggested adding an annual line item to the city 's budget to provide the theatre with $ 500 @,@ 000 each year . 
 In 2011 , the theatre was threatened with closure after the city cut funding . The D.C. Commission on the Arts and Humanities took over management and began searching for new management . 
 = = Current Operation by I.M.P. = = 
 In January 2012 , the D.C. Commission on the Arts and Humanities began searching for a new entertainment booking group to operate Lincoln Theatre . The process included evaluating business plans from various groups . In April 2013 , I.M.P. , the company that owns the 9 : 30 Club and operates Merriweather Post Pavilion , was selected over other competitors to operate the theatre . In June 2013 , DC Mayor Vincent Gray , the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development , the DC Commission on the Arts and Humanities , and the Deputy of General Services made the official announcement of the selection . 
 Prior to obtaining sole operation of the theatre , I.M.P. had booked a few shows at Lincoln Theatre , including sold @-@ out performances by Jeff Tweedy in 2010 and Jeff Mangum in 2012 . I.M.P. began sole operation of the theatre in the fall of 2013 . 
 Since gaining sole operation , I.M.P. has booked nearly 100 shows at Lincoln Theatre , including : 
 Laura Marling on September 4 , 2013 
 Janelle Monáe on October 14 , 2013 
 Colin Meloy on November 5 , 2013 
 Corey Holcomb on January 25 , 2014 
 Lauryn Hill on February 9 , 2014 
 Sharon Jones and the Dap @-@ Kings on February 10 and 11 , 2014 
 Bob Weir & <unk> on February 17 , 2014 
 Emmylou Harris on April 11 , 2014 
 Stephen Marley on April 17 , 2014 
 Johnny Hallyday on May 8 , 2014 
 Morcheeba on May 14 , 2014 
 Ingrid Michaelson on May 23 , 2014 
 Natalie Merchant on July 12 , 2014 
 Spoon on September 2 , 3 , and 4 , 2014 
 Nas on October 4 , 2014 
 Flying Lotus on October 13 , 2014 
 Hannibal Buress on October 17 , 2014 
 Dwight Yoakam on October 19 , 2014 
 = Sind sparrow = 
 The Sind sparrow ( Passer pyrrhonotus ) is a passerine bird of the sparrow family Passeridae , found around the Indus valley region in South Asia . It is also known as the jungle , Sind jungle , or rufous @-@ backed sparrow . Very similar to the related house sparrow , it is smaller and has distinguishing plumage features . As in the house sparrow , the male has brighter plumage than female and young birds , including black markings and a grey crown . <unk> , the male has a chestnut stripe running down its head behind the eye , and the female has a darker head than other sparrow species do . Its main vocalisations are soft chirping calls that are extended into longer songs with other sounds interspersed by breeding males . Historically , this species was thought to be very closely related to the house sparrow , but its closest evolutionary affinities may lie elsewhere . Discovered around 1840 , this species went undetected for several decades after its discovery . 
 Within its Indus valley breeding range in Pakistan and western India , the Sind sparrow is patchily distributed in riverine and wetland habitats with thorny scrub and tall grass . During the non @-@ breeding season , some birds enter drier habitats as they disperse short distances from their breeding habitat , or migrate into western Pakistan and the extreme east of Iran . Since this species is fairly common and expanding its range , it is assessed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . The Sind sparrow is social within small groups while feeding and breeding , and during its winter dispersal . It feeds mostly on seeds and less often on insects , foraging close to the ground . Nests are made in the branches of thorny trees , and are untidy globular masses constructed from grass or other plant matter and lined with softer material . Both sexes are involved in building the nest and caring for the young , and usually raise two clutches of three to five young each breeding season . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Sind sparrow is very similar to the house sparrow , and both sexes resemble their counterparts of that species , but it is slightly smaller and males and females each have features that distinguish them as Sind sparrows . The Sind sparrow is 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) long , while the common South Asian subspecies of the house sparrow , Passer domesticus indicus , is about 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long . Wingspans range from 6 @.@ 2 to 7 @.@ 0 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 8 in ) , tails from 4 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 9 to 2 @.@ 2 in ) , and tarsi measure 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 9 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 63 – 0 @.@ 75 in ) . 
 The breeding male has a short and narrow black bib and a broad chestnut eye stripe that does not meet the mantle . The male has a grey crown and nape and a rufous lower back and rump . The female has a darker and greyer crown and cheek than the female house sparrow and the shoulder is darker chestnut . The female Dead Sea sparrow of the subspecies Passer moabiticus <unk> is also similar to the female Sind sparrow , but has yellow tinges on the underparts and sometimes on parts of the head . The bill is black on the breeding male and pale brown on the non @-@ breeding male and female . With a culmen length of 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 43 – 0 @.@ 51 in ) , the Sind sparrow is slightly smaller @-@ billed than the house sparrow . 
 The Sind sparrow 's chirping <unk> call is softer , less strident , and higher pitched than that of the house sparrow , and is easily distinguished . The song of breeding males includes <unk> interspersed with grating t @-@ r @-@ r @-@ rt notes and short warbles or whistles . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Sind sparrow was first formally described by Edward Blyth , from a specimen collected by Alexander Burnes at Bahawalpur in around 1840 . Blyth 's description was published in an issue of the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal which , although dated 1844 , was published only in 1845 . It was not recorded until 36 years later , despite the efforts of noted ornithologists Allan Octavian Hume in Sindh and William Thomas Blanford in eastern Iran . This was probably because of its general similarity to the house sparrow , though additionally , Blyth 's description of the species incorrectly described its rump feathers as maroon , and a description by Thomas C. Jerdon contained similar errors . Commenting on his unsuccessful search , Hume wrote that the hundreds of house sparrows he killed in pursuit of the Sind sparrow " ought to form a heavy load " on Blyth 's conscience , and that if the Sind sparrow existed " it would be only decent for it ... to put on an appearance with as little delay as possible " . Hume doubted its distinction , as did other ornithologists . The Sind sparrow was rediscovered by Scrope <unk> Doig in 1880 , in the Eastern Nara district . Ernst Hartert considered it a subspecies of the house sparrow , Passer domesticus pyrrhonotus , in his Die <unk> der <unk> Fauna , but Doig and Claud Ticehurst both found that the two species bred in the same areas without interbreeding . 
 The specific epithet of the Sind sparrow , pyrrhonotus , comes from the Greek purrhos ( " flame @-@ coloured " ) , and <unk> ( " <unk> " ) . E. C. Stuart Baker suggested the English name rufous @-@ backed sparrow , but as this name might cause confusion with other species , Ticehurst suggested the name Sind jungle @-@ sparrow , which became the accepted name for the species . This name refers to Sindh , a province now in Pakistan which makes up a large part of the Sind sparrow 's range , and the jungle habitat of the bird ( in the word 's original sense of tangled dry thicket ) . This name is shortened to jungle sparrow or Sind sparrow , of which the first was used in the IOC World Bird List , until Sind sparrow was adopted in 2009 . 
 The Sind sparrow is a member of the genus Passer , which contains the house sparrow and around twenty other species . In a 1936 review of the house sparrow 's relatives , German ornithologist Wilhelm Meise suggested that the Sind sparrow evolved from an isolated population of house sparrows , noting that the Indus valley is a centre of small bird types . British ornithologist J. Denis Summers @-@ Smith considered the Sind sparrow to be part of the " Palaearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrow " group including the house sparrow , though not one with a particularly close relationship with the house sparrow . Summer @-@ Smith suggested that these species separated 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago , during the last glacial period , when sparrows would have been isolated in ice @-@ free refugia , such as the Indus River Delta , where he thought the Sind sparrow evolved . However , studies of mitochondrial DNA indicate an earlier origin of Passer species , with speciation occurring as early as the late Miocene and early Pliocene , about 5 million years ago . Hume and Ticehurst observed a resemblance , and a possible relation , between the Sind sparrow and the Dead Sea sparrow of the Middle East and Balochistan . William Robert Ogilvie @-@ Grant and Henry Ogg Forbes saw a resemblance to the Abd al @-@ Kuri sparrow , endemic to the island of Abd al @-@ Kuri , in their 1899 description of that species , noted upon by Guy M. Kirwan in a 2008 study . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Sind sparrow has a restricted distribution , primarily occurring within the Indus valley of Pakistan , and the lower parts of the tributaries of the Indus in the Punjab region . Its distribution extends from the Indus Delta north to the Kabul River near Nowshera and the Jhelum near <unk> Noon , extending east into India as far as the Delhi area . It also breeds locally in parts of Pakistan 's western province of Balochistan , and has been recorded several times in south @-@ eastern Iran . The Sind sparrow is somewhat common in its restricted breeding range , and no threats are known to the survival of the species , so it is assessed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 During winter , it often makes short distance movements , and some birds move into parts of western Pakistan and an adjoining corner of Iran , and less commonly north @-@ western Gujarat , India . Longer movements may occur , as suggested by a possible sighting in the United Arab Emirates in November 2000 . 
 It mostly breeds in acacia and tamarisk scrub and tall grass , invariably near rivers or other wetlands . The construction and expansion of irrigation canals has increased its habitat in Sindh , and helped it extend its range into the Yamuna floodplain and parts of Rajasthan , India . It may breed around rice paddies and other fields , or human habitations , provided that there is enough cover and suitable nesting sites . In winter , it moves away from its main riverine habitat , and into drier thickets characterised by Salvadora and Capparis bushes , but never moves too far from water . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The Sind sparrow is gregarious , generally forming small groups of four to six birds while feeding . It tends to breed in loose colonies of a few pairs , and non @-@ breeding birds may gather to roost in acacias or tamarisks near water . During winter , the non @-@ breeding season , it forms larger flocks of as many as 30 birds , and joins flocks with other seed @-@ eating birds , such as house sparrows and red <unk> . The Sind sparrow feeds mainly on the seeds of grasses and other plants such as Polygonum <unk> . It may also forage for insects such as caterpillars , especially to feed nestlings . Flocks forage on flats alongside rivers , flying into nearby bushes and continuing to forage when disturbed . 
 Nesting occurs during a period of several months between April to September , the timing depending on rainfall , during which two clutches are raised by most pairs . Sind sparrows build nests in the upper branches of thorny trees or the ends of thin branches hanging over water . The nest is an untidy dome of grass and other plant matter , such as tamarisk twigs , roots , and reeds , with a diameter of about 9 to 18 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 1 in ) . The nest has an entrance located higher up on the sides , is somewhat flat on top , and is lined with softer plant material and feathers . The birds may sometimes build below the nests of egrets or extend the nest of a <unk> weaver or pied myna . Both the male and female take part in nest building and incubation . Clutches typically contain three to five eggs . Scrope Doig described the eggs as being markedly smaller than the house sparrow 's , measuring 0 @.@ 7 × 0 @.@ 5 in ( 1 @.@ 3 × 1 @.@ 8 cm ) and similarly greenish or greyish with highly variable blotches , striations , and other markings . 
 = History of paleontology = 
 The history of paleontology traces the history of the effort to understand the history of life on Earth by studying the fossil record left behind by living organisms . Since it is concerned with understanding living organisms of the past paleontology can be considered to be a field of biology , but its historical development has been closely tied to geology and the effort to understand the history of the Earth itself . 
 In ancient times Xenophanes ( 570 @-@ 480 BC ) , Herodotus ( 484 @-@ 425 BC ) , Eratosthenes ( 276 @-@ 194 BC ) , and Strabo ( 64 BC @-@ 24 AD ) , wrote about fossils of marine organisms indicating that land was once under water . During the Middle Ages , fossils were discussed by the Persian naturalist , Ibn Sina ( known as Avicenna in Europe ) , in The Book of Healing ( 1027 ) , which proposed a theory of petrifying fluids that Albert of Saxony would elaborate on in the 14th century . The Chinese naturalist Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) would propose a theory of climate change based on evidence from petrified bamboo . 
 In early modern Europe , the systematic study of fossils emerged as an integral part of the changes in natural philosophy that occurred during the Age of Reason . The nature of fossils and their relationship to life in the past became better understood during the 17th and 18th centuries , and at the end of the 18th century the work of Georges Cuvier ended a long running debate about the reality of extinction and led to the emergence of paleontology , in association with comparative anatomy , as a scientific discipline . The expanding knowledge of the fossil record also played an increasing role in the development of geology , particularly stratigraphy . 
 In 1822 the word " paleontology " was invented by the editor of a French scientific journal to refer to the study of ancient living organisms through fossils , and the first half of the 19th century saw geological and paleontological activity become increasingly well organized with the growth of geologic societies and museums and an increasing number of professional geologists and fossil specialists . This contributed to a rapid increase in knowledge about the history of life on Earth , and progress towards definition of the geologic time scale largely based on fossil evidence . As knowledge of life 's history continued to improve , it became increasingly obvious that there had been some kind of successive order to the development of life . This would encourage early evolutionary theories on the transmutation of species . After Charles Darwin published Origin of Species in 1859 , much of the focus of paleontology shifted to understanding evolutionary paths , including human evolution , and evolutionary theory . 
 The last half of the 19th century saw a tremendous expansion in paleontological activity , especially in North America . The trend continued in the 20th century with additional regions of the Earth being opened to systematic fossil collection , as demonstrated by a series of important discoveries in China near the end of the 20th century . Many transitional fossils have been discovered , and there is now considered to be abundant evidence of how all classes of vertebrates are related , much of it in the form of transitional fossils . The last few decades of the 20th century saw a renewed interest in mass extinctions and their role in the evolution of life on Earth . There was also a renewed interest in the Cambrian explosion that saw the development of the body plans of most animal phyla . The discovery of fossils of the Ediacaran biota and developments in paleobiology extended knowledge about the history of life back far before the Cambrian . 
 = = Prior to the 17th century = = 
 As early as the 6th century BC , the Greek philosopher Xenophanes of Colophon ( 570 @-@ 480 BC ) recognized that some fossil shells were remains of shellfish , which he used to argue that what was at the time dry land was once under the sea . Leonardo da Vinci ( 1452 – 1519 ) , in an unpublished notebook , also concluded that some fossil sea shells were the remains of shellfish . However , in both cases , the fossils were complete remains of shellfish species that closely resembled living species , and were therefore easy to classify . 
 In 1027 , the Persian naturalist , Ibn Sina ( known as Avicenna in Europe ) , proposed an explanation of how the stoniness of fossils was caused in The Book of Healing . He modified an idea of Aristotle 's , which explained it in terms of vaporous exhalations . Ibn Sina modified this into the theory of petrifying fluids ( <unk> <unk> ) , which was elaborated on by Albert of Saxony in the 14th century and was accepted in some form by most naturalists by the 16th century . 
 Shen Kuo ( Chinese : <unk> ) ( 1031 – 1095 ) of the Song Dynasty used marine fossils found in the Taihang Mountains to infer the existence of geological processes such as geomorphology and the shifting of seashores over time . Using his observation of preserved petrified bamboos found underground in Yan 'an , <unk> region , Shaanxi province , he argued for a theory of gradual climate change , since Shaanxi was part of a dry climate zone that did not support a habitat for the growth of bamboos . 
 As a result of a new emphasis on observing , classifying , and cataloging nature , 16th century natural philosophers in Europe began to establish extensive collections of fossil objects ( as well as collections of plant and animal specimens ) , which were often stored in specially built cabinets to help organize them . Conrad Gesner published a 1565 work on fossils that contained one of the first detailed descriptions of such a cabinet and collection . The collection belonged to a member of the extensive network of correspondents that Gesner drew on for his works . Such informal correspondence networks among natural philosophers and collectors became increasingly important during the course of the 16th century and were direct forerunners of the scientific societies that would begin to form in the 17th century . These cabinet collections and correspondence networks played an important role in the development of natural philosophy . 
 However , most 16th @-@ century Europeans did not recognize that fossils were the remains of living organisms . The etymology of the word fossil comes from the Latin for things having been dug up . As this indicates , the term was applied to wide variety of stone and stone @-@ like objects without regard to whether they might have an organic origin . 16th @-@ century writers such as Gesner and Georg Agricola were more interested in classifying such objects by their physical and mystical properties than they were in determining the objects ' origins . In addition , the natural philosophy of the period encouraged alternative explanations for the origin of fossils . Both the Aristotelian and Neoplatonic schools of philosophy provided support for the idea that stony objects might grow within the earth to resemble living things . Neoplatonic philosophy maintained that there could be affinities between living and non @-@ living objects that could cause one to resemble the other . The Aristotelian school maintained that the seeds of living organisms could enter the ground and generate objects resembling those organisms . 
 = = 17th century = = 
 During the Age of Reason , fundamental changes in natural philosophy were reflected in the analysis of fossils . In 1665 Athanasius Kircher attributed giant bones to extinct races of giant humans in his Mundus subterraneus . In the same year Robert Hooke published Micrographia , an illustrated collection of his observations with a microscope . One of these observations was entitled " Of <unk> 'd wood , and other <unk> 'd bodies " , which included a comparison between petrified and ordinary wood . He concluded that petrified wood was ordinary wood that had been soaked with " water impregnated with stony and earthy particles " . He then suggested that several kinds of fossil sea shells were formed from ordinary shells by a similar process . He argued against the prevalent view that such objects were " Stones form 'd by some extraordinary Plastick virtue latent in the Earth itself " . Hooke believed that fossils provided evidence about the history of life on Earth writing in 1668 : 
 ... if the finding of <unk> , Medals , Urnes , and other Monuments of famous persons , or Towns , or Utensils , be admitted for unquestionable Proofs , that such Persons or things have , in former times had a being , certainly those <unk> may be allowed to be of equal Validity and Evidence , that there have formerly been such Vegetables or Animals ... and are true universal Characters legible to all rational Men . 
 Hooke was prepared to accept the possibility that some such fossils represented species that had become extinct , possibly in past geological catastrophes . 
 In 1667 Nicholas Steno wrote a paper about a shark head he had dissected . He compared the teeth of the shark with the common fossil objects known as tongue stones . He concluded that the fossils must have been shark teeth . Steno then took an interest in the question of fossils , and to address some of the objections to their organic origin he began studying rock strata . The result of this work was published in 1669 as Forerunner to a Dissertation on a solid naturally enclosed in a solid . In this book , Steno drew a clear distinction between objects such as rock crystals that really were formed within rocks and those such as fossil shells and shark teeth that were formed outside of those rocks . Steno realized that certain kinds of rock had been formed by the successive deposition of horizontal layers of sediment and that fossils were the remains of living organisms that had become buried in that sediment . Steno who , like almost all 17th century natural philosophers , believed that the earth was only a few thousand years old , resorted to the Biblical flood as a possible explanation for fossils of marine organisms that were far from the sea . 
 Despite the considerable influence of Forerunner , naturalists such as Martin Lister ( 1638 – 1712 ) and John Ray ( 1627 – 1705 ) continued to question the organic origin of some fossils . They were particularly concerned about objects such as fossil Ammonites , which Hooke claimed were organic in origin , that did not resemble any known living species . This raised the possibility of extinction , which they found difficult to accept for philosophical and theological reasons . In 1695 Ray wrote to the Welsh naturalist Edward <unk> complaining of such views : " ... there follows such a train of consequences , as seem to shock the Scripture @-@ History of the <unk> of the World ; at least they overthrow the opinion received , & not without good reason , among Divines and Philosophers , that since the first Creation there have been no species of Animals or Vegetables lost , no new ones produced . " 
 = = 18th century = = 
 In his 1778 work <unk> of Nature Georges Buffon referred to fossils , in particular the discovery of fossils of tropical species such as elephants and rhinoceros in northern Europe , as evidence for the theory that the earth had started out much warmer than it currently was and had been gradually cooling . 
 In 1796 Georges Cuvier presented a paper on living and fossil elephants comparing skeletal remains of Indian and African elephants to fossils of mammoths and of an animal he would later name mastodon utilizing comparative anatomy . He established for the first time that Indian and African elephants were different species , and that mammoths differed from both and must be extinct . He further concluded that the mastodon was another extinct species that also differed from Indian or African elephants , more so than mammoths . Cuvier made another powerful demonstration of the power of comparative anatomy in paleontology when he presented a second paper in 1796 on a large fossil skeleton from Paraguay , which he named Megatherium and identified as a giant sloth by comparing its skull to those of two living species of tree sloth . Cuvier ’ s ground @-@ breaking work in paleontology and comparative anatomy led to the widespread acceptance of extinction . It also led Cuvier to advocate the geological theory of catastrophism to explain the succession of organisms revealed by the fossil record . He also pointed out that since mammoths and wooly rhinoceros were not the same species as the elephants and rhinoceros currently living in the tropics , their fossils could not be used as evidence for a cooling earth . 
 In a pioneering application of stratigraphy , William Smith , a surveyor and mining engineer , made extensive use of fossils to help correlate rock strata in different locations . He created the first geological map of England during the late 1790s and early 19th century . He established the principle of faunal succession , the idea that each strata of sedimentary rock would contain particular types of fossils , and that these would succeed one another in a predictable way even in widely separated geologic formations . At the same time , Cuvier and Alexandre Brongniart , an instructor at the Paris school of mine engineering , used similar methods in an influential study of the geology of the region around Paris . 
 = = Early to mid @-@ 19th century = = 
 = = = The age of reptiles = = = 
 In 1808 , Cuvier identified a fossil found in Maastricht as a giant marine reptile that would later be named Mosasaurus . He also identified , from a drawing , another fossil found in Bavaria as a flying reptile and named it Pterodactylus . He speculated , based on the strata in which these fossils were found , that large reptiles had lived prior to what he was calling " the age of mammals " . Cuvier 's speculation would be supported by a series of finds that would be made in Great Britain over the course of the next two decades . Mary Anning , a professional fossil collector since age eleven , collected the fossils of a number of marine reptiles from the Jurassic marine strata at Lyme Regis . These included the first ichthyosaur skeleton to be recognized as such , which was collected in 1811 , and the first two plesiosaur skeletons ever found in 1821 and 1823 . Many of her discoveries would be described scientifically by the geologists William Conybeare , Henry De la Beche , and William Buckland . It was Anning who observed that stony objects known as " bezoar stones " were often found in the abdominal region of ichthyosaur skeletons , and she noted that if such stones were broken open they often contained fossilized fish bones and scales as well as sometimes bones from small ichthyosaurs . This led her to suggest to Buckland that they were fossilized feces , which he named coprolites , and which he used to better understand ancient food chains . 
 In 1824 , Buckland found and described a lower jaw from Jurassic deposits from Stonesfield . He determined that the bone belonged to a carnivorous land @-@ dwelling reptile he called Megalosaurus . That same year Gideon Mantell realized that some large teeth he had found in 1822 , in Cretaceous rocks from Tilgate , belonged to a giant herbivorous land @-@ dwelling reptile . He called it Iguanodon , because the teeth resembled those of an iguana . All of this led Mantell to publish an influential paper in 1831 entitled " The Age of Reptiles " in which he summarized the evidence for there having been an extended time during which the earth had teemed with large reptiles , and he divided that era , based in what rock strata different types of reptiles first appeared , into three intervals that anticipated the modern periods of the Triassic , Jurassic , and Cretaceous . In 1832 Mantell would find , in Tilgate , a partial skeleton of an armored reptile he would call Hylaeosaurus . In 1841 the English anatomist Richard Owen would create a new order of reptiles , which he called Dinosauria , for Megalosaurus , Iguanodon , and Hylaeosaurus . 
 This evidence that giant reptiles had lived on Earth in the past caused great excitement in scientific circles , and even among some segments of the general public . Buckland did describe the jaw of a small primitive mammal , <unk> , that was found in the same strata as Megalosaurus . This discovery , known as the Stonesfield mammal , was a much discussed anomaly . Cuvier at first thought it was a marsupial , but Buckland later realized it was a primitive placental mammal . Due to its small size and primitive nature , Buckland did not believe it invalidated the overall pattern of an age of reptiles , when the largest and most conspicuous animals had been reptiles rather than mammals . 
 = = = <unk> and the origin of the word paleontology = = = 
 In 1828 Alexandre Brongniart 's son , the botanist Adolphe Brongniart , published the introduction to a longer work on the history of fossil plants . Adolphe Brongniart concluded that the history of plants could roughly be divided into four parts . The first period was characterized by <unk> . The second period was characterized by the appearance of the conifers . The third period brought emergence of the cycads , and the fourth by the development of the flowering plants ( such as the dicotyledons ) . The transitions between each of these periods was marked by sharp discontinuities in the fossil record , with more gradual changes within the periods . Brongniart 's work is the foundation of paleobotany and reinforced the theory that life on earth had a long and complex history , and different groups of plants and animals made their appearances in successive order . It also supported the idea that the Earth 's climate had changed over time as <unk> concluded that plant fossils showed that during the Carboniferous the climate of Northern Europe must have been tropical . 
 The increasing attention being paid to fossil plants in the first decades of the 19th century would trigger a significant change in the terminology for the study of past life . The editor of the influential French scientific journal , Journal de Physique , a student of Cuvier 's named Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville , coined the term " <unk> " in 1817 to refer to the work Cuvier and others were doing to reconstruct extinct animals from fossil bones . However , Blainville began looking for a term that could refer to the study of both fossil animal and plant remains . After trying some unsuccessful alternatives , he hit on " <unk> " in 1822 . Blainville 's term for the study of the fossilized organisms quickly became popular and was anglicized into " paleontology " . 
 = = = <unk> , uniformitarianism and the fossil record = = = 
 In Cuvier 's landmark 1796 paper on living and fossil elephants , he referred to a single catastrophe that destroyed life to be replaced by the current forms . As a result of his studies of extinct mammals , he realized that animals such as <unk> had lived before the time of the mammoths , which led him to write in terms of multiple geological catastrophes that had wiped out a series of successive faunas . By 1830 , a scientific consensus had formed around his ideas as a result of paleobotany and the dinosaur and marine reptile discoveries in Britain . In Great Britain , where natural theology was very influential in the early 19th century , a group of geologists that included Buckland , and Robert Jameson insisted on explicitly linking the most recent of Cuvier 's catastrophes to the biblical flood . <unk> had a religious overtone in Britain that was absent elsewhere . 
 Partly in response to what he saw as unsound and unscientific speculations by William Buckland and other practitioners of flood geology , Charles Lyell advocated the geological theory of uniformitarianism in his influential work Principles of Geology . Lyell amassed evidence , both from his own field research and the work of others , that most geological features could be explained by the slow action of present @-@ day forces , such as vulcanism , earthquakes , erosion , and sedimentation rather than past catastrophic events . Lyell also claimed that the apparent evidence for catastrophic changes in the fossil record , and even the appearance of directional succession in the history of life , were illusions caused by imperfections in that record . For instance he argued that the absence of birds and mammals from the earliest fossil strata was merely an imperfection in the fossil record attributable to the fact that marine organisms were more easily fossilized . Also Lyell pointed to the Stonesfield mammal as evidence that mammals had not necessarily been preceded by reptiles , and to the fact that certain Pleistocene strata showed a mixture of extinct and still surviving species , which he said showed that extinction occurred piecemeal rather than as a result of catastrophic events . Lyell was successful in convincing geologists of the idea that the geological features of the earth were largely due to the action of the same geologic forces that could be observed in the present day , acting over an extended period of time . He was not successful in gaining support for his view of the fossil record , which he believed did not support a theory of directional succession . 
 = = = Transmutation of species and the fossil record = = = 
 Jean Baptiste Lamarck used fossils in his arguments for his theory of the transmutation of species in the early 19th century . Fossil finds , and the emerging evidence that life had changed over time , fueled speculation on this topic during the next few decades . Robert Chambers used fossil evidence in his 1844 popular science book Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , which advocated an evolutionary origin for the cosmos as well as for life on earth . Like Lamarck 's theory it maintained that life had progressed from the simple to the complex . These early evolutionary ideas were widely discussed in scientific circles but were not accepted into the scientific mainstream . Many of the critics of transmutational ideas used fossil evidence in their arguments . In the same paper that coined the term dinosaur Richard Owen pointed out that dinosaurs were at least as sophisticated and complex as modern reptiles , which he claimed contradicted transmutational theories . Hugh Miller would make a similar argument , pointing out that the fossil fish found in the Old Red Sandstone formation were fully as complex as any later fish , and not the primitive forms alleged by Vestiges . While these early evolutionary theories failed to become accepted as mainstream science , the debates over them would help pave the way for the acceptance of Darwin 's theory of evolution by natural selection a few years later . 
 = = = Geological time scale and the history of life = = = 
 Geologists such as Adam Sedgwick , and Roderick Murchison continued , in the course of disputes such as The Great Devonian Controversy , to make advances in stratigraphy . They described new geological epochs such as the Cambrian , the Silurian , the Devonian , and the Permian . Increasingly , such progress in stratigraphy depended on the opinions of experts with specialized knowledge of particular types of fossils such as William Lonsdale ( fossil corals ) , and John Lindley ( fossil plants ) who both played a role in the Devonian controversy and its resolution . By the early 1840s much of the geologic time scale had been developed . In 1841 , John Phillips formally divided the geologic column into three major eras , the Paleozoic , Mesozoic , and Cenozoic , based on sharp breaks in the fossil record . He identified the three periods of the Mesozoic era and all the periods of the Paleozoic era except the Ordovician . His definition of the geological time scale is still used today . It remained a relative time scale with no method of assigning any of the periods ' absolute dates . It was understood that not only had there been an " age of reptiles " preceding the current " age of mammals " , but there had been a time ( during the Cambrian and the Silurian ) when life had been restricted to the sea , and a time ( prior to the Devonian ) when invertebrates had been the largest and most complex forms of animal life . 
 = = = Expansion and professionalization of geology and paleontology = = = 
 This rapid progress in geology and paleontology during the 1830s and 1840s was aided by a growing international network of geologists and fossil specialists whose work was organized and reviewed by an increasing number of geological societies . Many of these geologists and paleontologists were now paid professionals working for universities , museums and government geological surveys . The relatively high level of public support for the earth sciences was due to their cultural impact , and their proven economic value in helping to exploit mineral resources such as coal . 
 Another important factor was the development in the late 18th and early 19th centuries of museums with large natural history collections . These museums received specimens from collectors around the world and served as centers for the study of comparative anatomy and morphology . These disciplines played key roles in the development of a more technically sophisticated form of natural history . One of the first and most important examples was the Museum of Natural History in Paris , which was at the center of many of the developments in natural history during the first decades of the 19th century . It was founded in 1793 by an act of the French National Assembly , and was based on an extensive royal collection plus the private collections of aristocrats confiscated during the French revolution , and expanded by material seized in French military conquests during the Napoleonic Wars . The Paris museum was the professional base for Cuvier , and his professional rival Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire . The English anatomists Robert Grant and Richard Owen both spent time studying there . Owen would go on to become the leading British morphologist while working at the museum of the Royal College of Surgeons . 
 = = Late 19th century = = 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Charles Darwin 's publication of the On the Origin of Species in 1859 was a watershed event in all the life sciences , especially paleontology . Fossils had played a role in the development of Darwin 's theory . In particular he had been impressed by fossils he had collected in South America during the voyage of the Beagle of giant armadillos , giant sloths , and what at the time he thought were giant llamas that seemed to be related to species still living on the continent in modern times . The scientific debate that started immediately after the publication of Origin led to a concerted effort to look for transitional fossils and other evidence of evolution in the fossil record . There were two areas where early success attracted considerable public attention , the transition between reptiles and birds , and the evolution of the modern single @-@ toed horse . In 1861 the first specimen of Archaeopteryx , an animal with both teeth and feathers and a mix of other reptilian and avian features , was discovered in a limestone quarry in Bavaria and described by Richard Owen . Another would be found in the late 1870s and put on display at a Museum in Berlin in 1881 . Other primitive toothed birds were found by Othniel Marsh in Kansas in 1872 . Marsh also discovered fossils of several primitive horses in the Western United States that helped trace the evolution of the horse from the small 5 @-@ toed <unk> of the Eocene to the much larger single @-@ toed modern horses of the genus Equus . Thomas Huxley would make extensive use of both the horse and bird fossils in his advocacy of evolution . Acceptance of evolution occurred rapidly in scientific circles , but acceptance of Darwin 's proposed mechanism of natural selection as the driving force behind it was much less universal . In particular some paleontologists such as Edward Drinker Cope and Henry Fairfield Osborn preferred alternatives such as neo @-@ Lamarckism , the inheritance of characteristics acquired during life , and orthogenesis , an innate drive to change in a particular direction , to explain what they perceived as linear trends in evolution . 
 There was also great interest in human evolution . Neanderthal fossils were discovered in 1856 , but at the time it was not clear that they represented a different species from modern humans . Eugene Dubois created a sensation with his discovery of Java Man , the first fossil evidence of a species that seemed clearly intermediate between humans and apes , in 1891 . 
 = = = Developments in North America = = = 
 A major development in the second half of the 19th century was a rapid expansion of paleontology in North America . In 1858 Joseph Leidy described a Hadrosaurus skeleton , which was the first North American dinosaur to be described from good remains . However , it was the massive westward expansion of railroads , military bases , and settlements into Kansas and other parts of the Western United States following the American Civil War that really fueled the expansion of fossil collection . The result was an increased understanding of the natural history of North America , including the discovery of the Western Interior Sea that had covered Kansas and much of the rest of the Midwestern United States during parts of the Cretaceous , the discovery of several important fossils of primitive birds and horses , and the discovery of a number of new dinosaur genera including Allosaurus , Stegosaurus , and Triceratops . Much of this activity was part of a fierce personal and professional rivalry between two men , Othniel Marsh , and Edward Cope , which has become known as the Bone Wars . 
 = = Overview of developments in the 20th century = = 
 = = = Developments in geology = = = 
 Two 20th century developments in geology had a big effect on paleontology . The first was the development of radiometric dating , which allowed absolute dates to be assigned to the geologic timescale . The second was the theory of plate tectonics , which helped make sense of the geographical distribution of ancient life . 
 = = = Geographical expansion of paleontology = = = 
 During the 20th century , paleontological exploration intensified everywhere and ceased to be a largely European and North American activity . In the 135 years between Buckland 's first discovery and 1969 a total of 170 dinosaur genera were described . In the 25 years after 1969 that number increased to 315 . Much of this increase was due to the examination of new rock exposures , particularly in previously little @-@ explored areas in South America and Africa . Near the end of the 20th century the opening of China to systematic exploration for fossils has yielded a wealth of material on dinosaurs and the origin of birds and mammals . Also study of the Chengjiang fauna , a Cambrian fossil site in China , during the 1990s has provided important clues to the origin of vertebrates . 
 = = = Mass extinctions = = = 
 The 20th century saw a major renewal of interest in mass extinction events and their effect on the course of the history of life . This was particularly true after 1980 when Luis and Walter Alvarez put forward the Alvarez hypothesis claiming that an impact event caused the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event , which killed off the non @-@ avian dinosaurs along with many other living things . Also in the early 1980s Jack Sepkoski and David M. Raup published papers with statistical analysis of the fossil record of marine invertebrates that revealed a pattern ( possibly cyclical ) of repeated mass extinctions with significant implications for the evolutionary history of life . 
 = = = Evolutionary paths and theory = = = 
 Throughout the 20th century new fossil finds continued to contribute to understanding the paths taken by evolution . Examples include major taxonomic transitions such as finds in Greenland , starting in the 1930s ( with more major finds in the 1980s ) , of fossils illustrating the evolution of tetrapods from fish , and fossils in China during the 1990s that shed light on the dinosaur @-@ bird relationship . Other events that have attracted considerable attention have included the discovery of a series of fossils in Pakistan that have shed light on whale evolution , and most famously of all a series of finds throughout the 20th century in Africa ( starting with Taung child in 1924 ) and elsewhere have helped illuminate the course of human evolution . Increasingly , at the end of the 20th century , the results of paleontology and molecular biology were being brought together to reveal detailed phylogenetic trees . 
 The results of paleontology have also contributed to the development of evolutionary theory . In 1944 George Gaylord Simpson published Tempo and Mode in Evolution , which used quantitative analysis to show that the fossil record was consistent with the branching , non @-@ directional , patterns predicted by the advocates of evolution driven by natural selection and genetic drift rather than the linear trends predicted by earlier advocates of neo @-@ Lamarckism and orthogenesis . This integrated paleontology into the modern evolutionary synthesis . In 1972 Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould used fossil evidence to advocate the theory of punctuated equilibrium , which maintains that evolution is characterized by long periods of relative stasis and much shorter periods of relatively rapid change . 
 = = = Cambrian explosion = = = 
 One area of paleontology that has seen a lot of activity during the 1980s , 1990s , and beyond is the study of the Cambrian explosion during which many of the various phyla of animals with their distinctive body plans first appear . The well @-@ known Burgess Shale Cambrian fossil site was found in 1909 by Charles Doolittle Walcott , and another important site in Chengjiang China was found in 1912 . However , new analysis in the 1980s by Harry B. Whittington , Derek Briggs , Simon Conway Morris and others sparked a renewed interest and a burst of activity including discovery of an important new fossil site , Sirius Passet , in Greenland , and the publication of a popular and controversial book , Wonderful Life by Stephen Jay Gould in 1989 . 
 = = = Pre @-@ Cambrian fossils = = = 
 Prior to 1950 there was no widely accepted fossil evidence of life before the Cambrian period . When Charles Darwin wrote The Origin of Species he acknowledged that the lack of any fossil evidence of life prior to the relatively complex animals of the Cambrian was a potential argument against the theory of evolution , but expressed the hope that such fossils would be found in the future . In the 1860s there were claims of the discovery of pre @-@ Cambrian fossils , but these would later be shown not to have an organic origin . In the late 19th century Charles Doolittle Walcott would discover stromatolites and other fossil evidence of pre @-@ Cambrian life , but at the time the organic origin of those fossils was also disputed . This would start to change in the 1950s with the discovery of more stromatolites along with microfossils of the bacteria that built them , and the publication of a series of papers by the Soviet scientist Boris Vasil <unk> <unk> announcing the discovery of microscopic fossil spores in pre @-@ Cambrian sediments . A key breakthrough would come when Martin Glaessner would show that fossils of soft bodied animals discovered by Reginald Sprigg during the late 1940s in the Ediacaran hills of Australia were in fact pre @-@ Cambrian not early Cambrian as Sprigg had originally believed , making the Ediacaran biota the oldest animals known . By the end of the 20th century , paleobiology had established that the history of life extended back at least 3 @.@ 5 billion years . 
 = Doomsday ( 2008 film ) = 
 Doomsday is a 2008 English @-@ language science fiction action film written and directed by Neil Marshall . The film takes place in the future in Scotland , which has been quarantined because of a deadly virus . When the virus is found in London , political leaders send a team led by Major Eden Sinclair ( Rhona Mitra ) to Scotland to find a possible cure . Sinclair 's team runs into two types of survivors : marauders and medieval knights . Doomsday was conceived by Marshall based on the idea of futuristic soldiers facing medieval knights . In producing the film , he drew inspiration from various movies , including Mad Max , Escape from New York and 28 Days Later . 
 Marshall had a budget three times the size of his previous two films , The Descent and Dog Soldiers , and the director filmed the larger @-@ scale Doomsday in Scotland and South Africa . The film was released on 14 March 2008 in the United States and Canada and in the United Kingdom on 9 May 2008 . Doomsday did not perform well at the box office , and critics gave the film mixed reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2008 , an unknown killer virus , dubbed " The Reaper Virus " infected Scotland . Unable to contain the outbreak or cure the infected , The UK government built a massive 60 @-@ foot wall that isolated Scotland from the rest of Britain . The quarantine was deemed a success ; however , the extreme method employed by the government destroyed diplomatic and economic relations between the UK and the rest of the world . This led to massive unemployment , civil unrest and extreme economic turmoil , causing the UK to collapse into a dystopia . 
 In 2035 , 27 years after the quarantine , during a raid , police discover several people infected with Reaper Virus . The Prime Minister John Hatcher shares with domestic security chief Captain Nelson satellite footage of survivors in Scotland . Believing a cure may exist , Hatcher orders Nelson to send a team into Scotland to find medical researcher Dr. Kane , who was working on a cure when Scotland was quarantined . Nelson chooses Major Eden Sinclair to lead the team . 
 Sinclair 's team crosses the wall and goes to Glasgow , Dr. Kane 's last known location . In Glasgow , while searching the local hospital for survivors , Sinclair and her team are ambushed by a group of marauders . Sgt. Norton and Dr. Stirling manage to escape , while the team suffers heavy casualties . Sinclair and Dr. Talbot are captured by what turns out to be a huge gang of brutal cannibals . Sinclair is interrogated by the gang 's leader , Sol , who plans to use her as leverage to cross the wall and leave Scotland . He leaves and joins the rest of the gang , who grill Dr. Talbot and eat him . With the help of Cally , another prisoner , Sinclair escapes and kills Viper , Sol 's lover . After meeting with Norton and Stirling , they escape on a train . Cally reveals that she and Sol are Kane 's children . Unsatisfied with Kane 's rule , Sol left to create his own army . 
 Meanwhile , Hatcher plans secretly to isolate the central London area because of the infection . However , an infected man breaks into his office and tries to kill him . Nelson shoots and kills the man , but his blood splatters on Hatcher . Michael Canaris , Hatcher 's right hand man , quarantines him and takes his place as de facto Prime Minister . Hatcher later commits suicide . 
 After leaving the train , Sinclair 's group are arrested by soldiers armed with archaic weapons and armor . They are taken to a medieval castle and imprisoned . Their leader , Marcus Kane , tells Sinclair the truth : there is no cure , only people with a natural immunity . Originally a medical researcher , he was devastated when his family was left behind during the quarantine . After losing his wife , Kane became a twisted , sadistic leader . He sentences Sinclair and her group to death , pitting Sinclair against Telamon , his executioner , in a small fighting ground to entertain his followers . Sinclair subdues and kills Telamon . During the duel , the rest of the group escapes , retrieves their equipment and rescue Sinclair . 
 Sinclair , Norton , Stirling and Cally escape to a fallout shelter entrance on horseback . They locate an underground facility in the forest and find an intact 2007 Bentley Continental GT , which they fuel up . Kane 's medieval knights arrive and kill Norton . Sinclair and the others drive the Bentley back to the quarantine wall . On the way , they are intercepted by Sol 's gang , who seeks to avenge Viper 's death . After a high @-@ speed chase , Sol and many of his men are killed and Sinclair 's group escape . 
 The car is tracked down by a government gunship . Canaris arrives and reveals he will let the virus continue as a form of population control and profit . Cally 's blood is to be used as a vaccine for the virus . Calley and Stirling board the gunship , while Sinclair chooses to stay behind . Nelson flies into the quarantine zone to speak with Sinclair and she gives him a recording of the conversation , the evidence to bring down Canaris . The recording is later broadcast to the rest of the country . Sinclair retrieves Sol 's head and returns to his gang . Looking at the head , they cheer , accepting Sinclair as their new leader . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Rhona Mitra as Major Eden Sinclair of the Department of Domestic Security , selected to lead a team to find a cure . The heroine was inspired by the character Snake Plissken . Mitra worked out and fight trained for eleven weeks for the film . Marshall described Mitra 's character as a soldier who has been rendered cold from her military indoctrination and her journey to find the cure for the virus is one of redemption . The character was originally written to have " funny " lines , but the director scaled back on the humor to depict Sinclair as more " hardcore " . 
 Bob Hoskins as Bill Nelson , Eden Sinclair 's boss . Marshall sought to have Hoskins emulate his " bulldog " role from the 1980 film The Long Good Friday . 
 Malcolm McDowell as Marcus Kane , a former scientist who now lives as a feudal lord in an abandoned castle , having medieval army under his command and controlling parts of the country . McDowell described his character as a King Lear . According to Marshall , Kane is based on Kurtz from Joseph Conrad 's Heart of Darkness . The director originally sought to bring Sean Connery out of retirement to play Kane but was unsuccessful . 
 Alexander Siddig as Prime Minister John Hatcher . Marshall originally wrote Hatcher as a sympathetic character misguided by Canaris , but revised the character to be more like Canaris in embracing political manipulation . 
 David O 'Hara as Michael Canaris , a senior official within the British government whose position is never stated , who acts as Hatcher 's puppeteer . Canaris was depicted to have a fascist background , speaking lines that paralleled Adolf Hitler 's mindset of cleansing . 
 Craig Conway as Sol , Kane 's son and the leader of the marauders . He has a biohazard sign tattooed on his back and a large scar across his chest . Even though he is Kane 's son , he distanced himself from him and formed his own army . He was a young child in the original 2008 quarantine . 
 Lee @-@ Anne Liebenberg as Viper , the wild woman who is Sol 's lover and his second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 Also cast as part of Eden Sinclair 's team were Adrian Lester as Sergeant Norton , Chris Robson as Miller , and Leslie Simpson as Carpenter . The names Miller and Carpenter were nods to directors George Miller and John Carpenter , whose films influenced Marshall 's Doomsday . Sean Pertwee and Darren Morfitt portrayed the team 's medical scientists , Dr Talbot and Dr Stirling , respectively . <unk> <unk> portrayed Kane 's daughter Cally . Emma <unk> played Eden 's mother at the start of the film . 
