 Jodie Foster as Dr. Eleanor " Ellie " Ann Arroway , the SETI scientist who first discovers the alien contact message 
 Matthew McConaughey as Palmer Joss , a renowned Christian philosopher who becomes romantically involved with Arroway 
 James Woods as Michael Kitz , the skeptical National Security Advisor who also heads the Congressional investigation of Arroway 's mission 
 John Hurt as S.R. Hadden , an eccentric and reclusive billionaire industrialist who is fundamental in financing Dr. Arroway 's research and deciphering the alien 's message 
 Tom Skerritt as David Drumlin , a scientific aide to the President of the United States and director of the National Science Foundation . 
 Angela Bassett as Rachel Constantine , the White House Chief of Staff to President Clinton 
 William Fichtner as Kent Clark , a blind SETI scientist who assists Arroway in her studies 
 David Morse as Theodore Arroway , Ellie 's father , who encourages his daughter to study science . He also later plays the alien : the first extraterrestrial to make contact with humanity . 
 Jena Malone as young Ellie 
 Jake Busey as Joseph , a religious fanatic 
 Rob Lowe as Richard Rank , the leader of the Conservative Coalition ( a parody of Ralph Reed and the Christian Coalition ) 
 Geoffrey Blake as Fisher , a SETI scientist 
 Max Martini as Willie , a SETI scientist 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Carl Sagan conceived the idea for Contact in 1979 . The same year , Lynda Obst , one of Sagan 's closest friends , was hired by film producer Peter Guber to be a studio executive for his production company , Casablanca FilmWorks . She pitched Guber the idea for Contact , who commissioned a development deal . Sagan and Ann Druyan ( who later became his wife ) wrote a 100 + page film treatment , finishing in November 1980 . Druyan explained , " Carl 's and my dream was to write something that would be a fictional representation of what contact would actually be like , that would convey something of the true grandeur of the universe . " They added the science and religion analogies as a metaphor of philosophical and intellectual interest in searching for the truth of both humanity and alien contact . 
 Sagan incorporated Kip Thorne 's study of wormhole space travel into the screenplay . The characterization of Dr. Ellie Arroway was inspired by Dr. Jill Tarter , head of Project Phoenix of the SETI Institute ; Jodie Foster researched the lead role by meeting her . Tarter served as a consultant on the story , realistically portraying struggling careers of women scientists from the 1950s to 1970s . The writers debated whether Arroway should have a baby at the film 's end . Although Guber was impressed with Sagan and Druyan 's treatment , he hired various screenwriters to rewrite the script . New characters were added , one of them a Native American park ranger @-@ turned @-@ astronaut . Guber suggested that Arroway have an estranged teenage son , whom he believed would add more depth to the storyline . " Here was a woman consumed with the idea that there was something out there worth listening to , " Guber said , " but the one thing she could never make contact with was her own child . To me , that 's what the film had to be about . " Sagan and Druyan disagreed with Guber 's idea and it was not incorporated into the storyline . In 1982 , Guber took Contact to Warner Bros. Pictures and with the film 's development stalled , Sagan started to turn his original idea into a novel , which was published by Simon and Schuster in September 1985 . The film adaptation remained in development and Guber eventually vacated his position at Warner Bros. in 1989 . 
 Guber became the new president of Sony Pictures Entertainment and tried to purchase the film rights of Contact from Warner , but the studio refused . Coincidentally , in 1989 , Obst was hired as a new executive at Warner and began to fast track the film , by hiring more writers . Roland Joffé was eventually hired to direct , using a screenplay by James V. Hart . Joffé almost commenced pre @-@ production before he dropped out and Obst then hired Michael Goldenberg to rewrite the script , who finished his second draft in late 1993 . Goldenberg 's second draft rekindled Warner Bros. ' interest in Contact and Robert Zemeckis was offered the chance to direct , but he turned down the opportunity in favor of making a film based on the life of Harry Houdini . " The first script [ for Contact ] I saw was great until the last page and a half , " Zemeckis recalled . " And then it had the sky open up and these angelic aliens putting on a light show and I said , ' That 's just not going to work . ' " 
 In December 1993 , Warner Bros. hired George Miller to direct and Contact commenced pre @-@ production . Miller cast Jodie Foster in the lead role , approached Ralph Fiennes to play Palmer Joss and also considered casting Linda Hunt as the President of the United States . In addition to having aliens put on a laser lighting display around Earth , another version of the Goldenberg scripts had an alien wormhole swallow up the planet , transporting Earth to the center of the galaxy . Miller also asked Goldenberg to rewrite Contact in an attempt to portray the Pope as a key supporting character . Warner Bros. was hoping to have the film ready for release by Christmas 1996 , but under Miller 's direction pre @-@ production lasted longer than expected . The studio fired the director , blaming pushed @-@ back start dates , budget concerns , and Miller 's insistence that the script needed five more weeks of rewriting . Robert Zemeckis , who previously turned down the director 's position , decided to accept the offer . Warner Bros. granted Zemeckis total artistic control and the right of final cut privilege . The director cast Matthew McConaughey as Palmer Joss , who dropped out of the lead role in The Jackal to take the role in Contact . Despite being diagnosed with <unk> in 1994 , Sagan continued to be involved in the production of the film . For the cast and main crew members , he conducted an academic conference that depicted a detailed history of astronomy . 
 During the development of Contact , the production crew watched Stanley Kubrick 's 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) for inspiration . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on September 24 , 1996 , and ended on February 28 , 1997 . The first shooting took place at the Very Large Array ( VLA ) near Socorro , New Mexico . " Shooting at the VLA was , of course , spectacular but also one of the most difficult aspects of our filming , " producer Steve Starkey said . " It is a working facility , so in order for us to accomplish shots for the movie , we had to negotiate with the National Science Foundation for ' dish control ' in order to move the dishes in the direction we needed to effect the most dramatic shot for the story . " After arduous first weeks of location shooting in New Mexico and Arizona , production for Contact returned to Los Angeles for five months ' worth of location and sound stage shooting that used a total of nine soundstages at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , and Culver Studios . All together , the art department created more than 25 sets . 
 In an attempt to create a sense of realism for the storyline , principal CNN news outlet commentators were scripted into Contact . More than 25 news reporters from CNN had roles in the film and the CNN programs Larry King Live and Crossfire were also included . Ann Druyan makes a cameo appearance as herself , debating with Rob Lowe 's character , Richard Rank , on Crossfire . In January 1997 , a second unit was sent to Puerto Rico for one week at the Arecibo Observatory . 
 Other second unit work took place in Fiji and Newfoundland , Canada . Also essential to the production were a host of technical consultants from the SETI Institute , the California Institute of Technology , the VLA and a former White House staff member to consult on Washington D.C. and government protocol issues . Sagan visited the set a number of times , where he also helped with last @-@ minute rewrites . Filming was briefly delayed with the news of his death on December 20 , 1996 . Contact was dedicated to Sagan : ' For Carl ' comes on the screen at the fade . 
 Cinematographer Don Burgess shot the film in anamorphic format using Panavision cameras as well as using large format 65mm and VistaVision for special effects shots . The sound designers used Pro Tools software for the audio mixing , which was done at Skywalker Sound . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Designing Contact 's visual effects sequences was a joint effort among eight separate VFX companies . This team included Sony Pictures Imageworks , Peter Jackson 's Weta Digital , George Lucas ' Industrial Light & Magic , and Effects Associates , with Pixar 's RenderMan used for CGI rendering . Weta Digital , in particular , was responsible for designing the wormhole sequence . Jodie Foster admitted she had difficulty with blue screen technology because it was a first for the actress . " It was a blue room . Blue walls , blue roof . It was just blue , blue , blue , " Foster explained . " And I was rotated on a Lazy Susan with the camera moving on a computerized arm . It was really tough . " 
 News footage of then @-@ President Bill Clinton was digitally altered to make it appear as if he is speaking about alien contact . This was not the original plan for the film ; Zemeckis had initially approached Sidney Poitier to play the president , but the actor turned the role down in favor of The Jackal . Shortly after Poitier 's refusal , Zemeckis saw a NASA announcement in August 1996 . " Clinton gave his Mars rock speech , " the director explained , " and I swear to God it was like it was scripted for this movie . When he said the line ' We will continue to listen closely to what it has to say , ' I almost died . I stood there with my mouth hanging open . " 
 One notable feature of Contact is its use of digital color correction . This approach helped solve continuity errors during the location shooting at the Very Large Array in New Mexico . " The weather killed us , so we were going back in and changing it enough so that the skies and colors and times of day all seem roughly the same , " visual effects supervisor Ken Ralston commented . 
 The opening scene is a three @-@ minute computer @-@ generated sequence , beginning with a view of Earth from high in the exosphere and listening in on numerous radio waves of modern programming emitting from the planet . The camera then starts zooming backward , passing the Moon , Mars , and other features of the solar system , then to the Oort cloud , interstellar space , the Local Bubble , the Milky Way , other galaxies of the Local Group , and eventually into deep space . As this occurs , the radio signals start to drop out and reflect older programming , representing the distance these signals would have traveled at the speed of light , eventually becoming silent as the distance becomes much greater . The sequence eventually resolves into the iris of young Ellie 's eye as she is listening on her amateur radio set . This scale view shot of the entire universe was inspired by the short documentary film Powers of Ten ( 1977 ) . At the time , it was the longest continuous computer @-@ generated effect for a live @-@ action film , eventually surpassed by the opening sequence from The Day After Tomorrow ( 2004 ) . 
 The decoding of the extraterrestrial message , with its architectural drawings of the machine , was created by Ken Ralston and Sony Pictures Imageworks . This is the sixth film collaboration between director Zemeckis and VFX supervisor Ralston . Imageworks created more than 350 visual effects shots , using a combination of model and miniature shots and digital computer work . On designing the Machine , Zemeckis explained that " The Machine in Sagan 's novel was somewhat vague , which is fine for a book . In a movie , though , if you 're going to build a giant physical structure of alien design , you have to make it believable . " He continued that " it had to be huge , so that the audience would feel like it was bigger than man should be tinkering with . It had to look absolutely real . " The machine was then designed by concept artist Steve Burg , reusing a conceptual design he had originally created to appear as the " Time Displacement Device " in Terminator 2 in a scene that did not make the final cut . 
 Early conceptual designs of the Pod itself were based , as it existed in the novel , on one of the primary shapes in geometry , a dodecahedron , or a twelve @-@ sided figure . Eventually the Pod was modified to a spherical capsule that encases the traveler . Zemeckis and the production crew also made several visits to the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral , where officials allowed them access to sites off @-@ limits to most visitors . Filmmakers were also brought onto Launch Complex 39 before the launch of the space shuttle . There , they concentrated on the mechanics of the elevator and the gantry area and loading arm . The resulting photographs and research were incorporated into the design of the machine 's surrounding supports and gantry . Once the concept met with the filmmakers ' approval , physical construction began on the sets for the Pod itself , the interior of the elevator , and the gantry , which took almost four months to build . The rest of the effects were compiled digitally by Imageworks . 
 The climactic scene depicting the mysterious beach near the galactic core where Arroway makes contact , in particular , called for major visual innovations . The goal was an idyllic seashore with a sky blazing with stars that might exist near the core of the galaxy . Ralston said that " the thought was that this beach would have a heightened reality . One that might make the everyday world seem like a vague daydream . " To keep the question alive whether any of it was real in Arroway 's mind , elements such as ocean waves running in reverse and palm tree shadows swaying with sped @-@ up motion were applied . 
 The Hitler newsreel also required digital manipulation . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The original score was composed by Alan Silvestri , most of which was released on August 19 , 1997 , by Warner Bros. Records . The full score is approximately an hour long , 44 minutes of which is on the CD , including every major cue . The CD track entitled " Good to Go " features a slightly different opening — a brief brass motif that is not in the film — but all other cues are identical in orchestration to the mix in the film . 
 The Region 2 Special Edition DVD release contains a 5 @.@ 1 isolated score track , which presents the complete score ( this feature , as with many isolated scores , is not mentioned in most product descriptions of the DVD ) . 
 = = = Science and religion = = = 
 Contact often suggests that cultural conflicts between religion and science would be brought to the fore by the apparent contact with aliens that occurs in the film . A point of discussion is the existence of God , with several different positions being portrayed . A description of an emotionally intense experience by Palmer Joss , which he describes as seeing God , is met by Arroway 's suggestion that " some part of [ him ] needed to have it " — that it was a significant personal experience but indicative of nothing greater . Joss compares his certainty that God exists to Arroway 's certainty that she loved her deceased father , despite her being unable to prove it . 
 Contact depicts intense debate occurring as a result of the apparent contact with aliens . Many clips of well @-@ known debate shows such as Crossfire and Larry King Live are shown , with participants discussing the implications of the message , asking whether it is proof of the existence of alien life or of God , and whether science is encroaching upon religious ground by , as one believer puts it , " talking to your god for you . " The head of a religious organization casts doubt on the morality of building the machine , noting : " We don 't even know whether [ the aliens ] believe in God . " The first machine is ultimately destroyed by a religious extremist , in the belief that building it was detrimental to humankind . 
 Although the revelation at the end of the film that Arroway 's recording device recorded approximately 18 hours of static is arguably conclusive proof of the fact of — if not the experience of — her " journey " , several coincidences and indications throughout the film cast doubt on its authenticity . Director Robert Zemeckis indicated : " The point of the movie is for there always to be a certain amount of doubt [ as to whether the aliens were real ] . " These indications consist mostly of visual cues during the " journey " that echo Ellie 's experiences earlier in the film ( which Ellie believed to be the result of the aliens " downloading [ her ] thoughts and memories " ) , but the timing of the message 's arrival and its eventual decoding are also highly coincidental : the message was first received shortly before Arroway and her team were to be ejected from the VLA facility and was successfully decoded only by S.R. Hadden ( Arroway 's only sponsor , who was close to death from cancer ) after weeks of failed attempts by the team at the VLA . 
 At the end of the film , Arroway is put into a position that she had traditionally viewed with skepticism and contempt : that of believing something with complete certainty , despite being unable to prove it in the face of not only widespread incredulity and skepticism ( which she admits that as a scientist she would normally share ) but also evidence apparently to the contrary . 
 Zemeckis stated that he intended the message of the film to be that science and religion can coexist rather than being opposing camps , as shown by the coupling of scientist Arroway with the religious Joss , as well as his acceptance that the " journey " indeed took place . This , and scattered references throughout the film , posit that science and religion are not nominally incompatible : one interviewer , after asking Arroway whether the construction of the machine — despite not knowing what will happen when it is activated — is too dangerous , suggests that it is being built on the " faith " that the alien designers , as Arroway puts it , " know what they 're doing . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Contact 's release in July 1997 rekindled public interest in Sagan 's 1985 novel . The book remained on the The New York Times Best Seller list from July 27 to September 21 , 1997 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Contact premiered on July 1 , 1997 , at the Westwood Theater in Los Angeles , California . The film was released in the United States on July 11 , 1997 , in 1 @,@ 923 theaters , earning $ 20 @,@ 584 @,@ 908 in its opening weekend . Contact eventually grossed $ 100 @,@ 920 @,@ 329 in the US and $ 70 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 in foreign countries , reaching a worldwide total of $ 171 @,@ 120 @,@ 329 . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Contact was released on VHS and the ( then new ) DVD format in December 1997 . Among the special features , the DVD contains three separate audio commentaries by director Zemeckis and producer Starkey , another by visual effects supervisors Ken Ralston and Stephen Rosenbaum , along with one by star Jodie Foster . Contact was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on October 6 , 2009 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Contact received mostly positive reviews from critics . On the basis of 62 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 63 % of critics enjoyed the film , with an average score of 6 @.@ 8 out of 10 . Metacritic calculated an average score of 62 out of 100 , based on 22 reviews , denoting " generally favorable reviews " . Roger Ebert gave a largely positive review , believing that Contact was on par with Steven Spielberg 's Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) as Hollywood 's most cinematic study of extraterrestrial life . " Movies like Contact help explain why movies like Independence Day leave me feeling empty and unsatisfied , " Ebert commented . On December 21 , 2011 , Ebert added Contact to his Great Movies collection . 
 Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the film carried a more philosophical portrait of the science fiction genre than did other films , but he believed that Contact still managed " to satisfy the cravings of the general public who simply want to be entertained , " he said . Internet reviewer James Berardinelli called Contact " one of 1997 's finest motion pictures , and is a forceful reminder that Hollywood is still capable of making magic . " Berardinelli also felt that the film was on par with Stanley Kubrick 's 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) to be one of the greatest science fiction films ever made . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle largely enjoyed the first 90 minutes of Contact but felt that director Robert Zemeckis was too obsessed with visual effects rather than cohesive storytelling for the pivotal climax . Rita Kempley , writing in The Washington Post , gave a largely negative review : she did not like the film 's main premise , which Kempley described as " a preachy debate between sanctity and science . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Sound designers Randy Thom , Tom Johnson , Dennis S. Sands and William B. Kaplan were nominated for the Academy Award for Sound but lost to Titanic . Jodie Foster was nominated the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture Drama , but Judi Dench was awarded the category for her work in Mrs. Brown . Contact won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation over The Fifth Element , Gattaca , Men in Black and Starship Troopers . The Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films awarded individual awards to Jodie Foster ( Best Actress ) and Jena Malone ( Best Performance by a Younger Actor ) at the 24th Saturn Awards . Director Robert Zemeckis , writers James V. Hart and Michael Goldenberg , film score composer Alan Silvestri and the visual effects supervisors also received Saturn Award nominations . Contact was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film , but lost to Men in Black . 
 American Film Institute lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Science Fiction Film 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Bill Clinton = = = 
 A meteorite was found in Antarctica in 1984 , thought to be from Mars . Twelve years later , a paper by a NASA scientist was published in the journal , Science , proposing that the meteorite might contain evidence for microscopic fossils of Martian bacteria ( later , a disputed interpretation ) . The announcement made headlines around the world and the following day , on August 7 , 1996 , the President of the United States , Bill Clinton , made remarks about the news at a press conference that were , in places , sufficiently generic in nature to allow fragments of his videotaped statement to be included in Contact , implying that Clinton was speaking about contact with extraterrestrial life , congruent with the film 's story : 
 Later in the film , a separate fragment of generic remarks by President Clinton , speaking about Saddam Hussein and Iraq at a different press conference in October 1994 , was lifted out of context and inserted into Contact : 
 On July 14 , 1997 , three days after the film opened in the United States , Warner Bros. received a letter from White House Counsel Charles Ruff protesting against the use of Clinton 's digitally @-@ composited appearance . The letter made no demands to director Robert Zemeckis or Warner Bros. about pulling release prints , film trailers , or other marketing , but called the duration and manner of Clinton 's appearance " inappropriate " . No legal action was planned ; the White House Counsel simply wanted to send a message to Hollywood to avoid unauthorized uses of the President 's image . Zemeckis was reminded that official White House policy " prohibits the use of the President in any way ... ( that ) implies a direct ... connection between the President and a commercial product or service . " 
 A Warner Bros. spokeswoman explained that " we feel we have been completely frank and upfront with the White House on this issue . They saw scripts , they were notified when the film was completed , they were sent a print well in advance of the film 's July 11 opening , and we have confirmation that a print was received there July 2 . " However , Warner Bros. did concede that they never pursued or received formal release from the White House for the use of Clinton 's image . While the Counsel commented that parody and satire are protected under the First Amendment , press secretary Mike McCurry believed that " there is a difference when the President 's image , which is his alone to control , is used in a way that would lead the viewer to believe he has said something he really didn 't say . " 
 = = = CNN = = = 
 Shortly after the White House 's complaint , CNN chairman , president , and CEO Tom Johnson announced he believed that in hindsight it was a mistake to allow 13 members of CNN 's on @-@ air staff ( including Larry King and Bernard Shaw ) to appear in the film , even though both CNN and Warner Bros. are owned by Time Warner . Johnson added that , for Contact , the CNN presence " creates the impression that we 're manipulated by Time Warner , and it blurs the line . " CNN then changed their policies for future films , which now requires potential appearances to be cleared through their ethics group . 
 = = = Lawsuits = = = 
 Director George Miller , who had developed Contact with Warner Bros. before Zemeckis ' hiring , unsuccessfully sued the studio over breach of contract policies . 
 During filming on December 28 , 1996 , filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola filed a lawsuit against Warner Bros. and Sagan , who had died the previous week . Coppola claimed that Sagan 's novel was based on a story the pair had developed for a television special back in 1975 , titled First Contact . Under their development agreement , Coppola and Sagan were to split proceeds from the project , as well as from any novel Sagan would write , with American Zoetrope and Children 's Television Workshop Productions . The TV program was never produced , but in 1985 , Simon and Schuster published Contact and Warner moved forward with development of a film adaptation . Coppola sought at least $ 250 @,@ 000 in compensatory damages and an injunction against production or distribution of the film . 
 In February 1998 , Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Ricardo Torres dismissed Coppola 's claim . Although Torres agreed that Sagan violated some terms of the contract , he explained that Coppola waited too long to file his lawsuit , and that the contract might not be enforceable as it was written . Coppola then appealed his suit , taking it to the California Courts of Appeal ( CCA ) . In April 2000 , the CCA dismissed his suit , finding that Coppola ’ s claims were barred because they were brought too late . The court noted that it was not until 1994 that the filmmaker thought about suing over Contact . 
 = = = NASA = = = 
 The scene where the NASA scientists give Arroway the " cyanide pill " caused some controversy during production and when the film came out . Gerald D. Griffin , the film 's NASA advisor , insisted that NASA has never given any astronaut a cyanide pill " just in case , " and that if an astronaut truly wished to commit suicide in space , all he or she would have to do is cut off their oxygen supply . However , Carl Sagan insisted that NASA did indeed give out cyanide pills and they did it for every mission an astronaut has ever flown . Zemeckis said that because of the two radically different assertions , the truth is unknown , but he left the suicide pill scene in the movie as it seemed more suspenseful that way and it was also in line with Sagan 's beliefs and vision of the film . Along with being NASA Technical Consultant for the project , Griffin had a cameo in the role of " Dynamics " in Mission Control . He had previously been technical advisor for Ron Howard 's 1995 film Apollo 13 . While working for NASA during the Apollo Program , he had been the actual flight director for that mission , among others , and during the 1980s was the director of the Johnson Space Center . 
 = Fossa ( animal ) = 
 The fossa ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ; Malagasy [ <unk> ̥ ] ; Cryptoprocta ferox ) is a cat @-@ like , carnivorous mammal endemic to Madagascar . It is a member of the Eupleridae , a family of carnivorans closely related to the mongoose family ( Herpestidae ) . Its classification has been controversial because its physical traits resemble those of cats , yet other traits suggest a close relationship with viverrids ( most civets and their relatives ) . Its classification , along with that of the other Malagasy carnivores , influenced hypotheses about how many times mammalian carnivores have colonized Madagascar . With genetic studies demonstrating that the fossa and all other Malagasy carnivores are most closely related to each other ( forming a clade , recognized as the family Eupleridae ) , carnivorans are now thought to have colonized the island once around 18 to 20 million years ago . 
 The fossa is the largest mammalian carnivore on the island of Madagascar and has been compared to a small cougar . Adults have a head @-@ body length of 70 – 80 cm ( 28 – 31 in ) and weigh between 5 @.@ 5 and 8 @.@ 6 kg ( 12 and 19 lb ) , with the males larger than the females . It has <unk> claws and flexible ankles that allow it to climb up and down trees head @-@ first , and also support jumping from tree to tree . The fossa is unique within its family for the shape of its genitalia , which share traits with those of cats and hyenas . 
 The species is widespread , although population densities are usually low . It is found solely in forested habitat , and actively hunts both by day and night . Over 50 % of its diet consists of lemurs , the endemic primates found on the island ; tenrecs , rodents , lizards , birds , and other animals are also documented as prey . Mating usually occurs in trees on horizontal limbs and can last for several hours . Litters range from one to six pups , which are born blind and toothless ( altricial ) . Infants wean after 4 @.@ 5 months and are independent after a year . Sexual maturity occurs around three to four years of age , and life expectancy in captivity is 20 years . The fossa is listed as " Vulnerable " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . It is generally feared by the Malagasy people and is often protected by their fady ( taboo ) . The greatest threat to the species is habitat destruction . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The generic name Cryptoprocta refers to how the animal 's anus is hidden by its anal pouch , from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " hidden " , and <unk> " anus " . The species name ferox is the Latin adjective " fierce " or " wild " . Its common name is spelled fossa in English or fosa in Malagasy , the Austronesian language from which it was taken , but some authors have adopted the Malagasy spelling in English . The word is similar to posa ( meaning " cat " ) in the Iban language ( another Austronesian language ) from Borneo , and both terms may derive from trade languages from the 1600s . However , an alternative etymology suggests a link to another word that comes from Malay : <unk> refers to the Malayan weasel ( Mustela <unk> ) . The Malay word <unk> could have become posa for cats in Borneo , while in Madagascar the word could have become fosa to refer to the fossa . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The fossa was formally described by Edward Turner Bennett on the basis of a specimen from Madagascar sent by Charles Telfair in 1833 . The common name is the same as the generic name of the Malagasy civet ( Fossa <unk> ) , but they are different species . Because of shared physical traits with civets , mongooses , and cats ( Felidae ) , its classification has been controversial . Bennett originally placed the fossa as a type of civet in the family Viverridae , a classification that long remained popular among taxonomists . Its compact braincase , large eye sockets , retractable claws , and specialized carnivorous dentition have also led some taxonomists to associate it with the felids . In 1939 , William King Gregory and Milo Hellman placed the fossa in its own subfamily within Felidae , the <unk> . George Gaylord Simpson placed it back in Viverridae in 1945 , still within its own subfamily , yet conceded it had many cat @-@ like characteristics . 
 In 1993 , <unk> Veron and François <unk> published a DNA hybridization study suggesting that the fossa was more closely related to mongooses ( family Herpestidae ) than to cats or civets . However , in 1995 , Veron 's morphological study once again grouped it with Felidae . In 2003 , molecular phylogenetic studies using nuclear and mitochondrial genes by Anne Yoder and colleagues showed that all native Malagasy carnivorans share a common ancestry that excludes other carnivores ( meaning they form a clade , making them monophyletic ) and are most closely related to Asian and African Herpestidae . To reflect these relationships , all Malagasy carnivorans are now placed in a single family , Eupleridae . Within Eupleridae , the fossa is placed in the subfamily <unk> along with the falanouc ( <unk> <unk> ) and Malagasy civet , but its exact relationships are poorly resolved . 
 An extinct relative of the fossa was described in 1902 from subfossil remains and recognized as a separate species , Cryptoprocta spelea , in 1935 . This species was larger than the living fossa ( with a body mass estimate roughly twice as great ) , but otherwise similar . Across Madagascar , people distinguish two kinds of fossa — a large fosa mainty ( " black fossa " ) and the smaller fosa <unk> ( " reddish fossa " ) — and a white form has been reported in the southwest . It is unclear whether this is purely folklore or individual variation — related to sex , age or instances of melanism and leucism — or whether there is indeed more than one species of living fossa . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fossa appears as a diminutive form of a large felid , such as a cougar , but with a slender body and muscular limbs , and a tail nearly as long as the rest of the body . It has a mongoose @-@ like head , relatively longer than that of a cat , although with a muzzle that is broad and short , and with large but rounded ears . It has medium brown eyes set relatively wide apart with pupils that contract to slits . Like many carnivorans that hunt at night , its eyes reflect light ; the reflected light is orange in hue . Its head @-@ body length is 70 – 80 cm ( 28 – 31 in ) and its tail is 65 – 70 cm ( 26 – 28 in ) long . There is some sexual dimorphism , with adult males ( weighing 6 @.@ 2 – 8 @.@ 6 kg or 14 – 19 lb ) being larger than females ( 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 8 kg or 12 – 15 lb ) . Smaller individuals are typically found north and east on Madagascar , while larger ones to the south and west . Unusually large individuals weighing up to 20 kg ( 44 lb ) have been reported , but there is some doubt as to the reliability of the measurements . The fossa can smell , hear , and see well . It is a robust animal and illnesses are rare in captive fossas . 
 Both males and females have short , straight fur that is relatively dense and without spots or patterns . Both sexes are generally a reddish @-@ brown dorsally and colored a dirty cream ventrally . When in rut , they may have an orange coloration to their abdomen from a reddish substance secreted by a chest gland secretions , but this has not been consistently observed by all researchers . The tail tends to be lighter in coloration than the sides . Juveniles are either gray or nearly white . 
 Several of the animal 's physical features are adaptions to climbing through trees . It uses its tail to assist balance and has semi @-@ retractable claws that it uses to climb trees in its search for prey . It has semiplantigrade feet , switching between a plantigrade @-@ like gait ( when arboreal ) and a digitigrade @-@ like one ( when terrestrial ) . The soles of its paws are nearly bare and covered with strong pads . The fossa has very flexible ankles that allow it to readily grasp tree trunks so as to climb up or down trees head first or to leap to another tree . Captive juveniles have been known to swing upside down by their hindfeet from knotted ropes . 
 The fossa has several scent glands , although the glands are less developed in females . Like <unk> it has a perianal skin gland inside an anal sac which surrounds the anus like a pocket . The pocket opens to the exterior with a horizontal slit below the tail . Other glands are located near the penis or vagina , with the penile glands emitting a strong odor . Like the <unk> , it has no <unk> glands . 
 = = = External genitalia = = = 
 One of the more peculiar physical features of this species is its external genitalia . The male fossa has an unusually long penis and baculum ( penis bone ) , reaching to between his forelegs when erect , with an average thickness of 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) . The glans extends about halfway down the shaft and is spiny except at the tip . In comparison , the glans of felids is short and spiny , while that of viverrids is smooth and long . The female fossa exhibits transient masculization , starting at about 1 – 2 years of age , developing an enlarged , spiny clitoris that resembles a male 's penis . The enlarged clitoris is supported by an os clitoridis , which decreases in size as the animal grows . The females do not have a pseudo @-@ scrotum , but they do secrete an orange substance that colors their underparts , much like the secretions of males . Hormone levels ( testosterone , androstenedione , dihydrotestosterone ) do not seem to play a part in this transient masculization , as those levels are the same in masculinized juveniles and <unk> adults . It is speculated that the transient masculization either reduces sexual harassment of juvenile females by adult males , or reduces aggression from territorial females . While females of other mammal species ( such as the spotted hyena ) have a pseudo @-@ penis , no other is known to diminish in size as the animal grows . 
 = = = Comparison with related carnivorans = = = 
 Overall , the fossa has features in common with three different carnivoran families , leading researchers to place it and other members of Eupleridae alternatively in Herpestidae , Viverridae , and Felidae . <unk> features are primarily those associated with eating and digestion , including tooth shape and facial portions of the skull , the tongue , and the digestive tract , typical of its exclusively carnivorous diet . The remainder of the skull most closely resembles skulls of genus Viverra , while the general body structure is most similar to that of various members of Herpestidae . The permanent dentition is 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @-@ 4 @.@ 13 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @-@ 4 @.@ 1 ( three incisors , one canine , three or four premolars , and one molar on each side of both the upper and lower jaws ) , with the deciduous formula being similar but lacking the fourth premolar and the molar . The fossa has a large , prominent rhinarium similar to that of viverrids , but has comparatively larger , round ears , almost as large as those of a similarly sized felid . Its facial vibrissae ( whiskers ) are long , with the longest being longer than its head . Like some mongoose genera , particularly <unk> ( which is now in the fossa 's own family , Eupleridae ) and Herpestes ( of Herpestidae ) , it has carpal vibrissae as well . Its claws are retractile , but unlike those of Felidae species , they are not hidden in skin sheaths . It has three pairs of nipples ( one inguinal , one ventral , and one pectoral ) . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fossa has the most widespread geographical range of the Malagasy carnivores , and is generally found in low numbers throughout the island in remaining tracts of forest , preferring pristine undisturbed forest habitat . It is also encountered in some degraded forests , but in lower numbers . Although the fossa is found in all known forest habitats throughout Madagascar , including the western , dry deciduous forests , the eastern rainforests , and the southern spiny forests , it is seen more frequently in humid than in dry forests . This may be because the reduced canopy in dry forests provides less shade , and also because the fossa seems to travel more easily in humid forests . It is absent from areas with the heaviest habitat disturbance and , like most of Madagascar 's fauna , from the central high plateau of the country . 
 The fossa has been found across several different elevational gradients in undisturbed portions of protected areas throughout Madagascar . In the Réserve Naturelle <unk> d <unk> , evidence of the fossa has been reported at four different sites ranging from 810 to 1 @,@ 625 m ( 2 @,@ 657 to 5 @,@ 331 ft ) . Its highest known occurrence was reported at 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) ; its presence high on the Andringitra Massif was subsequently confirmed in 1996 . Similarly , evidence has been reported of the fossa at the elevational extremes of 440 m ( 1 @,@ 440 ft ) and 1 @,@ 875 m ( 6 @,@ 152 ft ) in the Andohahela National Park . The presence of the fossa at these locations indicates its ability to adapt to various elevations , consistent with its reported distribution in all Madagascar forest types . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 The fossa is active during both the day and the night and is considered cathemeral ; activity peaks may occur early in the morning , late in the afternoon , and late in the night . The animal generally does not reuse sleeping sites , but females with young do return to the same den . The home ranges of male fossas in Kirindy Forest are up to 26 km2 ( 10 sq mi ) large , compared to 13 km2 ( 5 @.@ 0 sq mi ) for females . These ranges overlap — by about 30 percent according to data from the eastern forests — but females usually have separated ranges . Home ranges grow during the dry season , perhaps because less food and water is available . In general , radio @-@ collared fossas travel between 2 and 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 and 3 @.@ 1 mi ) per day , although in one reported case a fossa was observed moving a straight @-@ line distance of 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) in 16 hours . The animal 's population density appears to be low : in Kirindy Forest , where it is thought to be common , its density has been estimated at one animal per 4 km2 ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) in 1998 . Another study in the same forest between 1994 and 1996 using the mark and recapture method indicated a population density of one animal per 3 @.@ 8 km2 ( 1 @.@ 5 sq mi ) and one adult per 5 @.@ 6 km2 ( 2 @.@ 2 sq mi ) . 
 Except for mothers with young and occasional observations of pairs of males , animals are usually found alone , so that the species is considered solitary . A 2009 publication , however , reported a detailed observation of cooperative hunting , wherein three male fossas hunted a 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) sifaka ( Propithecus verreauxi ) for 45 minutes , and subsequently shared the prey . This behavior may be a vestige of cooperative hunting that would have been required to take down larger recently extinct lemurs . 
 Fossas communicate using sounds , scents , and visual signals . Vocalizations include purring , a threatening call , and a call of fear , consisting of " repeated loud , coarse inhalations and gasps of breath " . A long , high yelp may function to attract other fossas . Females mew during mating and males produce a sigh when they have found a female . Throughout the year , animals produce long @-@ lasting scent marks on rocks , trees , and the ground using glands in the anal region and on the chest . They also communicate using face and body expression , but the significance of these signals is uncertain . The animal is aggressive only during mating , and males in particular fight boldly . After a short fight , the loser flees and is followed by the winner for a short distance . In captivity , fossas are usually not aggressive and sometimes even allow themselves to be stroked by a zookeeper , but adult males in particular may try to bite . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The fossa is a carnivore that hunts small to medium @-@ sized animals . One of eight carnivorous species endemic to Madagascar , the fossa is the island 's largest surviving endemic terrestrial mammal and the only predator capable of preying upon adults of all extant lemur species , the largest of which can weigh as much as 90 percent of the weight of the average fossa . Although it is the predominant predator of lemurs , reports of its dietary habits demonstrate a wide variety of prey selectivity and specialization depending on habitat and season ; diet does not vary by sex . While the fossa is thought to be a lemur specialist in Ranomafana National Park , its diet is more variable in other rain forest habitats . 
 The diet of the fossa in the wild has been studied by analyzing their distinctive scats , which resemble gray cylinders with twisted ends and measure 10 – 14 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Scat collected and analyzed from both Andohahela and Andringitra contained lemur matter and rodents . Eastern populations in Andringitra incorporate the widest recorded variety of prey , including both vertebrates and invertebrates . Vertebrates consumed ranged from reptiles to a wide variety of birds , including both understory and ground birds , and mammals , including insectivores , rodents , and lemurs . Invertebrates eaten by the fossa in the high mountain zone of Andringitra include insects and crabs . One study found that vertebrates comprised 94 % of the diet of fossas , with lemurs comprising over 50 % , followed by tenrecs ( 9 % ) , lizards ( 9 % ) , and birds ( 2 % ) . Seeds , which comprised 5 % of the diet , may have been in the stomachs of the lemurs eaten , or may have been consumed with fruit taken for water , as seeds were more common in the stomach in the dry season . The average prey size varies geographically ; it is only 40 grams ( 1 @.@ 4 oz ) in the high mountains of Andringitra , in contrast to 480 grams ( 17 oz ) in humid forests and over 1 @,@ 000 grams ( 35 oz ) in dry deciduous forests . In a study of fossa diet in the dry deciduous forest of western Madagascar , more than 90 % of prey items were vertebrates , and more than 50 % were lemurs . The primary diet consisted of approximately six lemur species and two or three spiny tenrec species , along with snakes and small mammals . Generally , the fossa preys upon larger lemurs and rodents in preference to smaller ones . 
 Prey is obtained by hunting either on the ground or in the trees . During the non @-@ breeding season the fossa hunts individually , but during the breeding season hunting parties may be seen , and these may be pairs or later on mothers and young . One member of the group scales a tree and chases the lemurs from tree to tree , forcing them down to the ground where the other is easily able to capture them . The fossa is known to <unk> its larger lemur prey , a trait that , along with its distinct scat , helps identify its kills . Long @-@ term observations of the fossa 's predation patterns on rainforest sifakas suggest that the fossa hunts in a subsection of their range until prey density is decreased , then moves on . The fossa has been reported to prey on domestic animals , such as goats and small calves , and especially chickens . Food taken in captivity includes amphibians , birds , insects , reptiles , and small- to medium @-@ sized mammals . 
 This wide variety of prey items taken in various rainforest habitats is similar to the varied dietary composition noted occurring in the dry forests of western Madagascar , as well . As the largest endemic predator on Madagascar , this dietary flexibility combined with a flexible activity pattern has allowed it to exploit a wide variety of niches available throughout the island , making it a potential keystone species for the Madagascar ecosystems . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Most of the details of reproduction in wild populations are from the western dry deciduous forests ; determining whether or not certain of these details are applicable to eastern populations will require further field research . Mating typically occurs during September and October , although there are reports of its occurring as late as December , and can be highly conspicuous . In captivity in the Northern Hemisphere , fossas instead mate in the northern spring , from March to July . <unk> usually occurs in trees on horizontal limbs about 20 m ( 66 ft ) off the ground . Frequently the same tree is used year after year , with remarkable precision as to the date the season commences . Trees are often near a water source , and have limbs strong enough and wide enough to support the mating pair , about 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) wide . Some mating has been reported on the ground as well . 
 As many as eight males will be at a mating site , staying in close vicinity to the receptive female . The female seems to choose the male she mates with , and the males compete for the attention of the female with a significant amount of vocalization and antagonistic interactions . The female may choose to mate with several of the males , and her choice of mate does not seem to have any correlation to the physical appearance of the males . To stimulate the male to mount her , she gives a series of mewling vocalizations . The male mounts from behind , resting his body on her slightly off @-@ center , a position requiring delicate balance ; if the female were to stand , the male would have significant difficulty continuing . He places his paws on her shoulders or grasps her around the waist and often licks her neck . Mating may last for nearly three hours . This unusually lengthy mating is due to the physical nature of the male 's erect penis , which has backwards @-@ pointing spines along most of its length . Fossa mating includes a copulatory tie , which may be enforced by the male 's spiny penis . The tie is difficult to break if the mating session is interrupted . Copulation with a single male may be repeated several times , with a total mating time of up to fourteen hours , while the male may remain with the female for up to an hour after the mating . A single female may occupy the tree for up to a week , mating with multiple males over that time . Also , other females may take her place , mating with some of the same males as well as others . This mating strategy , whereby the females monopolize a site and maximize the available number of mates , seems to be unique among carnivores . Recent research suggests that this system helps the fossa overcome factors which would normally impede mate @-@ finding , such as low population density and lack of den use . 
 The birthing of the litter of one to six ( typically two to four ) takes place in a concealed location , such as an underground den , a termite mound , a rock crevice , or in the hollow of a large tree ( particularly those of the Commiphora genus ) . Contrary to older research , litters are of mixed sexes . Young are born in December or January , making the gestation period 90 days , with the late mating reports indicating a gestational period of about six to seven weeks . The newborns are blind and toothless and weigh no more than 100 g ( 3 @.@ 5 oz ) . The fur is thin and has been described as gray @-@ brown or nearly white . After about two weeks the cubs ' eyes open , they become more active , and their fur darkens to a pearl gray . The cubs do not take solid food until three months old , and do not leave the den until they are 4 @.@ 5 months old ; they are weaned shortly after that . After the first year , the juveniles are independent of their mother . Permanent teeth appear at 18 to 20 months . Physical maturity is reached by about two years of age , but sexual maturity is not attained for another year or two , and the young may stay with their mother until they are fully mature . Lifespan in captivity is up to or past 20 years of age , possibly due to the slow juvenile development . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The fossa has been assessed as " Vulnerable " by the IUCN Red List since 2008 , as its population size has probably declined by at least 30 percent between 1987 and 2008 ; previous assessments have included " Endangered " ( 2000 ) and " <unk> Known " ( 1988 , 1990 , 1994 ) . The species is dependent on forest and thus threatened by the widespread destruction of Madagascar 's native forest but is also able to persist in disturbed areas . A suite of microsatellite markers ( short segments of DNA that have a repeated sequence ) have been developed to help aid in studies of genetic health and population dynamics of both captive and wild fossas . Several pathogens have been isolated from the fossa , some of which , such as anthrax and canine distemper , are thought to have been transmitted by feral dogs or cats . Toxoplasma gondii was reported in a captive fossa in 2013 . 
 Although the species is widely distributed , it is locally rare in all regions , making fossas particularly vulnerable to extinction . The effects of habitat fragmentation increase the risk . For its size , the fossa has a lower than predicted population density , which is further threatened by Madagascar 's rapidly disappearing forests and dwindling lemur populations , which make up a high proportion of its diet . The loss of the fossa , either locally or completely , could significantly impact ecosystem dynamics , possibly leading to over @-@ grazing by some of its prey species . The total population of the fossa living within protected areas is estimated at less than 2 @,@ 500 adults , but this may be an overestimate . Only two protected areas are thought to contain 500 or more adult fossas : Masoala National Park and Midongy @-@ Sud National Park , although these are also thought to be overestimated . Too little population information has been collected for a formal population viability analysis , but estimates suggest that none of the protected areas support a viable population . If this is correct , the extinction of the fossa may take as much as 100 years to occur as the species gradually declines . In order for the species to survive , it is estimated that at least 555 km2 ( 214 sq mi ) is needed to maintain smaller , short @-@ term viable populations , and at least 2 @,@ 000 km2 ( 770 sq mi ) for populations of 500 adults . 
 Taboo , known in Madagascar as fady , offers protection for the fossa and other carnivores . In the Marolambo District ( part of the Atsinanana region in Toamasina Province ) , the fossa has traditionally been hated and feared as a dangerous animal . It has been described as " greedy and aggressive " , known for taking fowl and piglets , and believed to " take little children who walk alone into the forest " . Some do not eat it for fear that it will transfer its undesirable qualities to anyone who consumes it . However , the animal is also taken for bushmeat ; a study published in 2009 reported that 57 percent of villages ( 8 of 14 sampled ) in the Makira forest consume fossa meat . The animals were typically hunted using slingshots , with dogs , or most commonly , by placing snare traps on animal paths . Near Ranomafana National Park , the fossa , along with several of its smaller cousins and the introduced small Indian civet ( Viverricula indica ) , are known to " scavenge on the bodies of ancestors " , which are buried in shallow graves in the forest . For this reason , eating these animals is strictly prohibited by fady . However , if they wander into villages in search of domestic fowl , they may be killed or trapped . Small carnivore traps have been observed near chicken runs in the village of <unk> . 
 Fossas are occasionally held in captivity in zoos . They first bred in captivity in 1974 in the zoo of Montpellier , France . The next year , at a time when there were only eight fossas in the world 's zoos , the Duisburg Zoo in Germany acquired one ; this zoo later started a successful breeding program , and most zoo fossas now descend from the Duisburg population . Research on the Duisburg fossas has provided much data about their biology . 
 The fossa was depicted as an antagonist in the DreamWorks 2005 animated film Madagascar , accurately shown as the lemurs ' most feared predator . 
 = SY Aurora 's drift = 
 The drift of the Antarctic exploration vessel SY Aurora was an ordeal which lasted 312 days , during the Ross Sea chapter of Sir Ernest Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , 1914 – 17 . It began when the ship broke loose from its anchorage in McMurdo Sound in May 1915 , during a gale . Caught in heavy pack ice and unable to manoeuvre , Aurora was carried into the open waters of the Ross Sea and Southern Ocean , leaving ten men stranded ashore with meagre provisions . 
 Aurora , a 40 @-@ year @-@ old former Arctic whaler registered as a steam yacht , had brought the Ross Sea party to Cape Evans in McMurdo Sound in January 1915 , to establish its base there in support of Shackleton 's proposed transcontinental crossing . When Aurora 's captain Aeneas Mackintosh took charge of activities ashore , first officer Joseph Stenhouse assumed command of the ship . Stenhouse 's inexperience may have contributed to the choice of an inappropriate winter 's berth , although his options were restricted by the instructions of his superiors . After the ship was blown away it suffered severe damage in the ice , including the destruction of its rudder and the loss of its anchors ; on several occasions its situation was such that Stenhouse considered abandonment . Efforts to make wireless contact with Cape Evans and , later , with stations in New Zealand and Australia , were unavailing ; the drift extended through the southern winter and spring to reach a position north of the Antarctic Circle . In February 1916 the ice finally broke up , and a month later the ship was free . It was subsequently able to reach New Zealand for repairs and resupply , before returning to Antarctica to rescue the surviving members of the shore party . 
 Despite his role in saving the ship , after Aurora 's arrival in Port Chalmers Stenhouse was removed from command by the organisers of the Ross Sea party relief expedition , so the ship returned to McMurdo Sound under a new commander and with a substantially different crew . Stenhouse was later appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) for his service aboard Aurora . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition comprised two parties . The first , under Sir Ernest Shackleton , sailed to the Weddell Sea in the Endurance , intending to establish a base there from which a group would march across the continent via the South Pole to McMurdo Sound on the Ross Sea side . A second party under Aeneas Mackintosh in Aurora would be landed at a Ross Sea base , with the task of laying supply depots along the expected route of the latter stages of Shackleton 's march , a mission which Shackleton thought straightforward . Shackleton devoted little time to the details of the Ross Sea operation ; thus , on arriving in Australia to take up his appointment , Mackintosh found himself faced with an unseaworthy ship and no funds to rectify the situation . Aurora , though strongly built , was 40 years old and had recently returned from Douglas Mawson 's Australasian Antarctic Expedition in need of an extensive refit . After the intervention of the eminent Australian polar scientist Edgeworth David the Australian government provided money and dockyard facilities to make Aurora fit for further Antarctic service . 
 Of the Ross Sea party that eventually sailed from Australia in December 1914 , only Mackintosh , Ernest Joyce who was in charge of the dogs , and the ship 's boatswain James " Scotty " Paton had significant experience of Antarctic conditions . Some of the party were last @-@ minute additions : Adrian Donnelly , a railway engineer who had never been to sea , became Aurora 's second engineering officer , while Lionel Hooke , the wireless operator , was an 18 @-@ year @-@ old apprentice . Aurora 's chief officer was Joseph Stenhouse , from the British India Steam Navigation Company . Stenhouse , who was 26 years old when he joined the expedition , was in Australia recovering from a bout of depression when he heard of Shackleton 's plans , and had travelled to London to secure the Aurora post . Although as a boy he had been inspired by the polar exploits of Fridtjof Nansen , Scott and William Speirs Bruce , Stenhouse had no direct experience of Antarctic waters or ice conditions . 
 = = In McMurdo Sound = = 
 = = = Winter anchorage = = = 
 Aurora arrived in McMurdo Sound in January 1915 , late in the season due to her delayed departure from Australia . Because the party was three weeks behind schedule Mackintosh decided that the depot @-@ laying work should begin at once , and took charge of this himself . By 25 January he was leading one of the early sledging parties , leaving Stenhouse in command of the ship . In the few weeks before the Sound froze over for the winter , Stenhouse had to supervise the landing of most of the equipment and stores , stores , and find a safe winter berth for the ship ; Mackintosh 's departing instruction had been explicit that this was Stenhouse 's paramount duty . 
 The only known safe winter anchorage in McMurdo Sound was Scott 's original Discovery Expedition headquarters from 1901 – 03 , at Hut Point , south of the projection known as Glacier Tongue which divided the Sound into two sectors . However , Scott 's ship had been frozen in the ice for two years , and had needed two rescue ships and several explosive charges to release her . Shackleton was determined to avoid this , and had given Mackintosh instructions , relayed to Stenhouse , to winter Aurora north of the Tongue . No ship had previously wintered in the exposed northern section of the Sound , and the wisdom of doing this was questioned by the experienced seamen Ernest Joyce and James Paton in their private journals . After the expedition was over , John King Davis , who was to lead the Ross Sea party relief mission , wrote that Shackleton 's instruction should have been ignored and that Stenhouse should have taken Aurora to the safety of Hut Point , even at the risk of becoming frozen in . 
 Stenhouse first attempted to anchor the ship on the north side of Glacier Tongue itself . Disaster was only narrowly avoided when a change in the wind direction threatened to imprison Aurora between the Tongue and the advancing pack ice . With other options considered and rejected , Stenhouse finally decided to anchor at Cape Evans , site of Captain Scott 's 1911 Terra Nova headquarters , some six nautical miles ( 11 km ) north of Glacier Tongue . On 14 March , after numerous failed attempts , Stenhouse manoeuvred Aurora into position , stern @-@ first towards the shore at Cape Evans , where two large anchors had been sunk and cemented into the ground . Cables and hawsers , together with a heavy chain , attached these to the ship 's stern . Two bower anchors were also dropped . By 14 March the ship was settling into the shore ice with , according to second officer Leslie Thompson , " enough hawsers and anchors to hold a battleship " . 
 = = = Blown away = = = 
 The unsheltered Cape Evans anchorage exposed Aurora to the full harshness of the winter weather . By mid @-@ April the ship resembled a " wrecked hulk " , listing sharply to starboard and subject to violent shocks and tremors as the ice moved around it . When the weather permitted , attempts were made to rig the wireless aerials that would enable communication with the shore parties and later , it was hoped , with Australia and New Zealand . The remaining sledging rations for the depots were put ashore , but much of the shore parties ' personal supplies , fuel and equipment remained on board , as it was assumed that the ship would stay where it was throughout the winter . 
 At about 9 p.m. on 6 May , during a fierce storm , the men aboard heard two " explosive reports " as the main hawsers parted from the anchors . The combined forces of the wind and the rapidly moving ice had torn Aurora from its berth and , encased in a large ice floe , the ship was adrift in the Sound . Stenhouse ordered that steam be raised in the hopes that , under engine power , Aurora might be able to work back to the shore when the gale abated , but the engines had been partly dismantled for winter repairs , and could not be started immediately . In any event the 98 horsepower ( 73 kW ) engine and single @-@ screw propeller lacked the required power . Slowly , the ship drifted further from the shore ; the noise of the storm meant that the scientific party ashore at Cape Evans hut heard nothing ; it would be morning before they found the ship had gone . 
 Eighteen men were aboard when Aurora broke away , leaving ten marooned ashore . Four scientists were living in the Cape Evans hut ; six members of the first depot @-@ laying parties , including Mackintosh and Joyce , were stranded at Hut Point waiting an opportunity to cross the sea ice and return to Cape Evans . 
 = = Drift = = 
 = = = First phase = = = 
 By 8 May a continuous southerly gale had driven the ship northwards , still locked in the ice , out of McMurdo Sound and into the open Ross Sea . In his diary for 9 May Stenhouse summarised Aurora 's position : " ... fast in the pack and drifting God knows where [ ... ] We are all in good health [ ... ] we have good spirits and we will get through . " He recognised that this was the end of any hope of wintering the ship in McMurdo Sound , and expressed concern for the men at Cape Evans : " It is a dismal prospect for them [ ... ] we have the remaining <unk> , clothing etc for next year 's sledging still on board . " During the next two days the winds reached a force that made it impossible for the men to work on deck , but on 12 May the weather had moderated sufficiently for a temporary wireless aerial to be rigged , and Hooke began trying to contact the men ashore . His Morse messages failed to reach Cape Evans . Although the transmitter 's range was normally no more than 300 miles ( 480 km ) , Hooke attempted to raise the radio station at Macquarie Island , more than 1 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) away , again without success . 
 On 14 May the broken remains of the two bower anchors , which were threatening to capsize the ship , were hauled in . During the following days the pack ice thickened , and in increasingly turbulent weather the boilers were closed down , since attempting to manoeuvre under power in these conditions would merely waste coal . <unk> the ship 's supply of fresh water was a further difficulty . A large iceberg was in view , but too far away in the prevailing weather conditions to be accessible , so to obtain drinking water the crew had to gather snow . Food was less of a problem ; they were able to augment Aurora 's food supplies from the penguins and seals that gathered around the ship . To boost morale the crew were given a ration of rum to celebrate Empire Day on 24 May . 
 On 25 May , as Aurora drifted towards the Victoria Land coast , Stenhouse described a scene " like a graveyard " , with heavy blocks of ice twisted and standing up on end . Aurora was under constant danger as this ice shifted around her . Stenhouse ordered the crew to prepare sledging gear and supplies for a possible march for the shore should Aurora be caught and crushed , but that immediate danger passed . Weeks of relative inactivity followed , while Stenhouse considered his options . If the ship remained icebound but stationary he would , if the sea ice allowed , send a sledge party back to Cape Evans with equipment and supplies . If , however , the drift continued northward , as soon as the ship was free of the ice Stenhouse would head for New Zealand and , after repairs and resupply , would return to Cape Evans in September or October . 
 By 9 July the speed of the drift had increased , and there were signs of increasing pressure in the pack . On 21 July the ship was caught in a position that allowed the ice to squeeze her at both ends , a grip that smashed her rudder beyond repair . According to Hooke 's diary : " All hands were ready to jump overboard onto the ice . It seemed certain that the ship must go . " The next day Stenhouse prepared to abandon ship , but new movements in the ice eased the situation and eventually brought Aurora to a safer position . Plans to abandon the vessel were cancelled ; Hooke repaired his wireless aerials and resumed his attempts to contact Macquarie Island . On 6 August the sun made its first appearance since the start of the drift . Aurora , still firmly held , was now 360 nautical miles ( 670 km ) north of Cape Evans , close to Cape Adare at the northern tip of Victoria Land , where the Ross Sea merges into the Southern Ocean . 
 = = = Southern Ocean phase = = = 
 When the ship passed Cape Adare , the direction of drift changed to north @-@ westerly . On 10 August Stenhouse estimated that they were 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ) north @-@ east of the Cape , and that their daily drift was averaging just over 20 nautical miles ( 37 km ) . A few days later Stenhouse recorded that the ship was " backing and filling " , meaning that it was drifting back and forth without making progress . " However , we cannot grumble and must be patient " , he wrote , adding that from the crow 's nest a distinct impression of open water could be seen . With the possibility that the edge of the pack was nearby , work on the construction of a jury rudder began . This first involved the removal of the wreckage of the smashed rudder , a task largely carried out by Engineer Donnelly . The jury rudder was constructed from makeshift materials , and by 26 August was ready for use as soon as Aurora cleared the ice . It would then be lowered over the stern and operated manually , " like a huge oar " . 
 On 25 August Hooke began picking up occasional radio signals being exchanged between Macquarie Island and New Zealand . By the end of August open leads were beginning to appear , and sometimes it was possible to discern a sea @-@ swell under the ship . However , severe weather returned in September , when a hurricane @-@ force wind destroyed the wireless aerial and temporarily halted Hooke 's efforts . On 22 September , when Aurora was in sight of the uninhabited Balleny Islands , Stenhouse estimated that they had travelled over 700 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) from Cape Evans , in what he called a " wonderful drift " . He added that regular observations and records of the nature and direction of the ice had been maintained throughout : " It [ the drift ] has not been in vain , and [ ... ] knowledge of the set and drift of the pack will be a valuable addition to the sum of human knowledge " . 
 Aurora 's circumstances changed little during the following months . Stenhouse worked hard to maintain morale , keeping the crew working whenever possible and organising leisure activities , including games of football and cricket on the ice . On 21 November Aurora crossed the Antarctic Circle , and it was at last evident that the ice around the ship was beginning to melt : " ... one good hefty blizzard would cause a general break up " , wrote Stenhouse . Christmas approached with the ice still holding firm ; Stenhouse allowed the crew to prepare a feast , but noted in his journal : " I wish to God the blasted festivities were over [ ... ] we are hogging in to the best while the poor beggars at Cape Evans have little or nothing ! " A few days later the New Year was celebrated with an improvised band leading choruses of " Rule , Britannia " and " God Save the King . " 
 = = = Release = = = 
 In the early days of January 1916 the floe which held the ship began to crack in the sun . Stenhouse surmised that , after repairs in New Zealand : " if we could leave Lyttleton ( sic ) at the end of February , with luck and a quick passage south we might make Hut Point before the general freezing of the Sound . " Fast @-@ moving ice could be seen a short distance from the ship , but Aurora remained held fast throughout January . 
 With the Antarctic summer waning , Stenhouse had to consider the possibility that Aurora might be trapped for another year , and after reviewing fuel and stores he ordered the capture of more seals and penguins . This proved difficult , as the soft state of the ice made travel away from the ship hazardous . As the ice encasing the ship melted , the timber seams opened and were admitting around three to four feet ( about a metre ) of water daily , requiring regular work with the pumps . On 12 February , while the crew were busy with this activity , the ice around the ship finally began to break away . Within minutes the whole floe had splintered into fragments , a pool of water opened up , and Aurora was floating free . Next morning Stenhouse ordered the setting of sails , but on 15 February the ship was stopped by accumulated ice and remained , unable to move , for a further two weeks . Stenhouse was reluctant to use the engines because coal supplies were low , but on 1 March he decided he had no choice ; he ordered steam to be raised , and next day the ship edged forward under engine power . After a series of stops and starts , on 6 March the edge of the ice was sighted from the crow 's nest . On 14 March Aurora finally cleared the pack , after a drift of 312 days covering 1 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 000 km ) . Stenhouse recorded the ship 's position on reaching the open sea as latitude 64 ° 27'S , longitude 157 ° <unk> . 
 = = Return to civilization = = 
 The delays in breaking free from the pack had ended Stenhouse 's hopes of bringing rapid relief to Cape Evans . His priority now was to reach New Zealand and return to the Antarctic the following spring . During the final frustrating weeks in the pack , Hooke had been working on the wireless apparatus and had started transmitting again . He and the rest of the crew were unaware that the wireless station at Macquarie Island , the closest to their drift , had recently been closed by the Australian government as an economy measure . On 23 March , using a specially @-@ rigged 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) quadruple aerial , Hookes transmitted a message which , in freak atmospheric conditions , reached Bluff Station , New Zealand . The next day his signals were received in Hobart , Tasmania , and during the following days he reported the details of Aurora 's position , its general situation , and the plight of the stranded party . These messages , and the freak conditions which made transmission possible over a much greater distance than the equipment 's normal range , were reported throughout the world . 
 Aurora 's passage from the ice towards safety proved slow and perilous . Coal supplies had to be conserved , allowing only limited use of the engines , and the improvised emergency rudder made steering difficult ; the ship wallowed helplessly at times , in danger of foundering . Even after making contact with the outside world , Stenhouse was initially reluctant to seek direct assistance , fearful that a salvage claim might create further embarrassment for the expedition . However , he was obliged to request help when , as Aurora neared New Zealand in stormy weather on 31 March , it was in danger of being driven on the rocks . Two days later the tug Dunedin reached the ship and a towline was secured . On the following morning , 3 April 1916 , Aurora was brought into the harbour at Port Chalmers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On his arrival in New Zealand Stenhouse learned that nothing had been heard from Shackleton and the Weddell Sea party since their departure from South Georgia in December 1914 ; it seemed probable that both arms of the Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition were requiring relief . Stenhouse was informed by the expedition offices in London that funds had long since been exhausted and that money for the necessary work on Aurora would have to be found elsewhere . It was also evident that in the minds of the authorities the relief of Shackleton 's party should have priority over the men marooned at Cape Evans . 
 Inaction continued until Shackleton 's sudden reappearance in the Falkland Islands , at the beginning of June . The governments of Britain , Australia and New Zealand then agreed jointly to finance the Ross Sea relief expedition , and on 28 June work on Aurora began . Stenhouse still assumed that as de facto captain of the vessel he would lead the relief party , but the committee charged with supervision of the refit were critical of Shackleton 's initial organisation of the Ross Sea expedition . They wished to appoint their own commander for the relief expedition , and Stenhouse , as a Shackleton loyalist , was unacceptable to them . They also questioned whether Stenhouse had sufficient experience for command , citing his unfortunate choice of a winter berth . After months of uncertainty Stenhouse learned , through a newspaper account on 4 October , that John King Davis had been appointed as Aurora 's new captain . Davis had considerable Antarctic experience , having been chief officer and later Captain of Nimrod during the 1907 – 09 expedition , and captain of Aurora during the Australasian Antarctic Expedition . <unk> , John . " Davis , John King ( 1884 – 1967 ) " . Australian Dictionary of Biography . Retrieved 5 April 2009 . Urged by Shackleton not to cooperate with this arrangement , Stenhouse turned down the post of chief officer and was discharged , along with Thomson , Donnelly and Hooke . Shackleton arrived in New Zealand too late to influence matters , beyond arranging his own appointment as a supernumerary officer on Aurora before her departure for Cape Evans on 20 December 1916 . 
 On 10 January 1917 , manned by an almost entirely new crew , Aurora arrived at Cape Evans and picked up the seven survivors of the Ross Sea shore party ; Mackintosh , Victor Hayward and Arnold Spencer @-@ Smith had all died . This was the vessel 's final visit to Antarctic waters ; on return to New Zealand it was sold by Shackleton to a coal carrier . Aurora left Newcastle , New South Wales , on 20 June 1917 bound for Chile , and was never seen again , officially posted as missing by Lloyd 's of London on 2 January 1918 . Among those lost was James Paton , who had acted as the ship 's boatswain throughout the Ross Sea Party expedition and the drift , and on the subsequent relief mission . In 1920 King George V appointed Joseph Stenhouse an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) , in acknowledgement of his service aboard Aurora . 
 = Burchard du Puiset = 
 Burchard du Puiset ( sometimes <unk> du Puiset , or <unk> of Le Puiset ; died 1196 ) was a medieval Anglo @-@ Norman clergyman and treasurer of the diocese of York . Either the nephew or son of Hugh du Puiset , the Bishop of Durham , Burchard held a number of offices in the dioceses of York and Durham before being appointed treasurer by King Richard I of England in 1189 . His appointment was opposed by the newly appointed Archbishop Geoffrey , which led to a long dispute between Geoffrey and Burchard that was not resolved until the mid 1190s . After the death of Hugh du Puiset , Burchard was a candidate for the Hugh 's old bishopric , but lost out in the end to another candidate . Burchard died in 1196 . 
 = = Background and early career = = 
 Burchard was a relative of Hugh du Puiset , the Bishop of Durham . Some sources name him as Hugh 's nephew , but other sources call him Hugh 's son , including the modern biographer of Hugh . G. W. S. Barrow , the author of the entry for Hugh in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , merely states that Burchard could possibly be the son of Hugh . Burchard was among the most common witnesses to Hugh 's charters , and Hugh 's biographer calls Burchard the " intimate counsellor " of the bishop . 
 Burchard held a prebend in the cathedral chapter of York , although the exact prebend that he held is unknown . He then held the office of archdeacon for the East Riding , which he held along with the archdeaconry of Durham ; all known mentions of his archdeaconry of the East Riding also call him archdeacon of Durham . He acquired the Durham archdeaconry before 24 May 1172 , when he first appears holding the office , and held it until his death . Burchard also held a number of churches , including those at Heighington <unk> , and Aycliffe . Hugh is thought to have wanted the archbishopric of York for Burchard , most notably in 1189 . 
 In 1172 Burchard witnessed a charter of Henry the Liberal , Count of Champagne , written at Troyes . A further charter of Henry 's in 1175 mentions a " Burchard archdeacon " who is named as a relative of Henry 's . This may also be Burchard du Puiset . 
 = = Treasurer of York = = 
 Burchard was appointed as treasurer of York by King Richard I of England on 15 September 1189 , but his appointment was at first opposed by the newly chosen Archbishop of York , Geoffrey . Along with Burchard , Richard also appointed Henry Marshal the dean ; and Roger of London the abbot of Selby Abbey . Because of Geoffrey 's objections , his estates were confiscated by the king until he submitted . Burchard and Marshal retaliated by accusing the archbishop @-@ elect of being a murderer as well as the son of a prostitute . When Geoffrey visited York in October 1189 , both Burchard and Marshal requested their installation in their offices , but Geoffrey refused to do so until he himself was confirmed in his archbishopric by the papacy . Geoffrey 's refusal to install the royal nominees meant the archbishop @-@ elect was out of favour with Richard , and the king refused to allow Geoffrey 's officials to travel to Rome to request confirmation of the archbishopric . 
 Geoffrey accepted Burchard 's appointment in December 1189 , but then excommunicated Burchard in January 1190 . The excommunication , which was shared with Henry Marshal , was retaliation for a dispute with the archbishop @-@ elect that happened during a church service . The actual dispute occurred on 5 January 1190 when Burchard and Marshal were conducting vespers , either early or on time , depending on whose side was telling the story . Geoffrey appeared in the middle of their service and attempted to perform the same service , either late or on time , again depending on who was relating the story . When Burchard and Marshal finished their service , they put out all the lights in the church , leaving the archbishop in the dark . Despite that , he finished the service but then complained to the cathedral chapter of York about the incident . Attempts to mediate a dispute led nowhere , and the citizens of York soon became involved . Geoffrey attempted to keep the townspeople from abusing his two opponents , but Burchard was eventually forced to take refuge in the tomb of William of York , an earlier Archbishop of York . Hugh du Puiset then intervened with the king , and Geoffrey once more lost the royal favour . The king sent Burchard to Rome , along with Reginald fitzJocelin the Bishop of Bath , to attempt to secure the deposition of Geoffrey from York . Although Burchard 's efforts in Rome in mid @-@ 1190 contributed to a papal prohibition on Geoffrey 's consecration by Pope Clement III , Geoffrey was not deposed . Burchard did secure his own absolution of the excommunication placed by Geoffrey in January . 
 Burchard , along with Marshal and other members of the chapter , were often opposed to the actions of their archbishop . They objected to the archbishop having given a large part of York 's treasury towards Richard 's ransom , and to some of the archiepiscopal appointments in the church of York . Burchard and the others charged Geoffrey with simony , extortion , and neglect of his duties and the archbishop in return excommunicated the ringleaders more than once , and locked the canons out of church . The disputes flared up in 1192 , with Burchard facing an effort by Geoffrey to replace him in the treasurership with Hamo , but the dispute was resolved by the gift of a church to Hamo by Burchard and Hamo 's relinquishing of any claim to the treasurership . At another dispute , Geoffrey had confiscated the revenues of Burchard 's offices , along with the revenues of Marshal , Peter de Ros the Archdeacon of Carlisle , and the canons Hugh Murdac and Adam of <unk> . Geoffrey refused to restore the incomes unless the offenders came barefoot into York Minster and begged for the archbishop 's forgiveness . This all but Marshal did and they had their official revenues restored . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Burchard continued to hold the treasurership until at least October 1194 , when he last is mentioned in the office . In 1195 , after the death of Hugh du Puiset , Burchard was a candidate for the see of Durham , perhaps as part of a plan by his relative to pass the office on to his family . In June 1195 both Burchard and his rival , Philip of Poitou , were at the royal court in Le Mans , presumably both attempting to secure the bishopric . Philip was appointed to the see in November 1195 . 
 Burchard died 6 January 1196 . 
 = Pilgrim at Tinker Creek = 
 Pilgrim at Tinker Creek is a 1974 nonfiction narrative book by American author Annie Dillard . Told from a first @-@ person point of view , the book details an unnamed narrator 's explorations near her home , and various contemplations on nature and life . The title refers to Tinker Creek , which is outside Roanoke in Virginia 's Blue Ridge Mountains . Dillard began writing Pilgrim in the spring of 1973 , using her personal journals as inspiration . Separated into four sections that signify each of the seasons , the narrative takes place over the period of one year . 
 The book records the narrator 's thoughts on solitude , writing , and religion , as well as scientific observations on the flora and fauna she encounters . Touching upon themes of faith , nature , and awareness , Pilgrim is also noted for its study of theodicy and the inherent cruelty of the natural world . The author has described it as a " book of theology " , and she rejects the label of nature writer . Dillard considers the story a " single sustained nonfiction narrative " , although several chapters have been anthologized separately in magazines and other publications . The book is analogous in design and genre to Henry David Thoreau 's Walden ( 1854 ) , the subject of Dillard 's master 's thesis at Hollins College . Critics often compare Dillard to authors from the Transcendentalist movement ; Edward Abbey in particular deemed her Thoreau 's " true heir " . 
 Pilgrim at Tinker Creek was published by Harper 's Magazine Press shortly after Dillard 's first book , a volume of poetry titled Tickets for a Prayer Wheel . Since its initial publication , Pilgrim has been lauded by critics . It won the 1975 Pulitzer Prize for General Non @-@ fiction , and in 1998 it was included in Modern Library 's list of 100 Best Nonfiction Books . 
 = = Background and publication = = 
 Dillard , the daughter of an oil company executive , grew up in an upper middle @-@ class home in Pittsburgh . She read voraciously ; one of her favorite books was Ann Haven Morgan 's The Field Book of Ponds and Streams , which she compared to the Book of Common Prayer ; in painstaking detail , it instructed on the study and collection of plants and insects . She attended Hollins College in Roanoke County , Virginia , receiving both a bachelor 's ( 1967 ) and a master 's degree ( 1968 ) . At Hollins she came under the tutelage of poet and creative writing professor Richard Henry Wilde Dillard , whom she married in 1965 . She would later state that Richard taught her everything she knew about writing . Her master 's thesis , " Walden Pond and Thoreau " , studied the eponymous pond as a structuring device for Henry David Thoreau 's Walden . Dillard 's knowledge of Thoreau 's works was an obvious inspiration , although critics have pointed to many differences between their two works . However , in a nod to his influence , Dillard mentions within the text that she named her goldfish Ellery Channing , after one of Thoreau 's closest friends . 
 After graduating in 1968 , she continued to live in Virginia , near the Blue Ridge Mountains , where she wrote full @-@ time . At first she concentrated solely on poetry , which she had written and published when she was an undergraduate . She began keeping a journal in 1970 , in which she recorded her daily walks around Tinker Creek . Her journals would eventually consist of 20 volumes . In 1971 , after suffering from a serious bout of pneumonia , she decided to write a full @-@ length book dedicated to her nature writings . Dillard wrote the first half of Pilgrim at her home in spring 1973 , and the remaining half the following summer in a study carrel " that overlooked a tar @-@ and @-@ gravel roof " at the Hollins College library . She would later explain her choice of writing location as stemming from her wanting to avoid " appealing workplaces .... One wants a room with no view , so imagination can meet memory in the dark . " When she first began writing the book , Dillard would only dedicate one or two hours a day to the task ; by the last two months , however , she was writing nearly 15 – 16 hours a day . 
 Dillard 's primary reader for Pilgrim was a Hollins professor called John Rees Moore . After finishing a chapter , she would bring it to Moore to critique . Moore specifically recommended that she expand the book 's first chapter " to make clear , and to state boldly , what it was [ she ] was up to , " a suggestion that Dillard at first dismissed , but would later admit was good advice . Previous to publication , chapters of the book appeared in publications including Harper 's Magazine , The Atlantic , and The Living Wilderness . Pilgrim at Tinker Creek was published by Harper 's Magazine Press in 1974 , and was dedicated to Dillard 's husband . Editor in chief Larry Freundlich remarked upon first reading the book : " I never expected to see a manuscript this good in my life .... The chance to publish a book like this is what publishers are here for . " 
 = = Summary = = 
 Written in a series of internal monologues and reflections , the book is told from the perspective of an unnamed narrator who lives next to Tinker Creek , in the Blue Ridge Mountains near Roanoke , Virginia . Over the course of a year , the narrator observes and reflects upon the changing of the seasons as well as the flora and fauna near her home . Pilgrim is thematically divided into four sections — one for each season — consisting of separate , named chapters : " Heaven and Earth in Jest " , " Seeing " , " Winter " , " The Fixed " , " The Knot " , " The Present " , " Spring " , " <unk> " , " Flood " , " Fecundity " , " Stalking " , " <unk> " , " The Horns of the Altar " , " <unk> " , and " The Waters of Separation " . 
 The first chapter , " Heaven and Earth in Jest " , serves as an introduction to the book . The narrator describes the location as well as her connection to it : 
 I live by a creek , Tinker Creek , in a valley in Virginia 's Blue Ridge . An anchorite 's hermitage is called an anchor @-@ hold ; some anchor @-@ holds were simple sheds clamped to the side of a church like a barnacle or a rock . I think of this house clamped to the side of Tinker Creek as an anchor @-@ hold . It holds me at anchor to the rock bottom of the creek itself and keeps me steadied in the current , as a sea anchor does , facing the stream of light pouring down . It 's a good place to live ; there 's a lot to think about . 
 In the afterword of the 1999 Harper Perennial Modern Classics edition , Dillard states that the book 's other , two @-@ part structure mirrors the two routes to God according to Neoplatonic Christianity : the via <unk> and the via negativa . The first half of the book , the via <unk> , beginning with the second chapter , " accumulates the world 's goodness and God 's . " The second half , the via negativa , ends with the chapter " <unk> " which Dillard notes is the counterpart of the second chapter , " Seeing " . The first and last chapters of the book serve as the introduction and conclusion , respectively . The narrative is composed of vignettes detailing the narrator 's wanderings around the creek . In " The Present " the narrator encounters a puppy at a gas station off the highway , and pats its belly while contemplating the view of the nearby mountain range ; the reflective act of " petting the puppy " is referred to in several other chapters . In " Stalking " , the narrator pursues a group of muskrats in the creek during summer . One of the most famous passages comes from the beginning of the book , when the narrator witnesses a frog being drained and devoured by a water beetle . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 Pilgrim at Tinker Creek is a work of creative nonfiction that uses poetic devices such as metaphor , repetition , and inversion to convey the importance of recurrent themes . Although it is often described as a series of essays , Dillard has insisted it is a continuous work , as evidenced by references to events from previous chapters . Although the chapters are separately named — several have also been published separately in magazines and anthologies — she referred to the book in a 1989 interview as a " single sustained nonfiction narrative " . Dillard has also resisted the label of " nature writer " , especially in regard to Pilgrim . She stated , " There 's usually a bit of nature in what I write , but I don 't consider myself a nature writer . " 
 The book often quotes and alludes to Walden , although Dillard does not explicitly state her interest in Thoreau 's work . Critic Donna Mendelson notes that Thoreau 's " presence is so potent in her book that Dillard can borrow from [ him ] both straightforwardly and also humorously . " Although the two works are often compared , Pilgrim does not comment upon the social world as Walden does ; rather , it is completely rooted in observations of the natural world . Unlike Thoreau , Dillard does not make connections between the history of social and natural aspects , nor does she believe in an ordered universe . Whereas Thoreau refers to the machine @-@ like universe , in which the creator is akin to a master watchmaker , Dillard recognizes the imperfection of creation , in which " something is everywhere and always amiss " . 
 In her review for The New York Times , Eudora Welty noted Pilgrim 's narrator being " the only person in [ Dillard 's ] book , substantially the only one in her world .... Speaking of the universe very often , she is yet self @-@ surrounded " . Dillard seemingly refers to the idea of an " invisible narrator " in the sixth chapter of Pilgrim at Tinker Creek ; while referring to the " infinite power " of God , the narrator notes that " invisibility is the all @-@ time great ' cover ' " . Nancy C. Parrish , author of the 1998 book Lee Smith , Annie Dillard , and the Hollins Group : A Genesis of Writers , notes that despite its having been written in the first person , Pilgrim is not necessarily autobiographical . The narrator , " Annie Dillard " , therefore becomes a persona through which the author can experience and describe " thoughts and events that the real Annie Dillard had only heard about or studied or imagined . " Critic Suzanne Clark also points to the " peculiar evasiveness " of Dillard @-@ the @-@ author , noting that " when we read Annie Dillard , we don 't know who is writing . There is a silence in the place where there might be an image of the social self — of personality , character , or ego " . While most critics assume that the narrator is female , mostly due to the autobiographical elements of the book and the assumption that the narrator is Dillard herself , Clark questions whether the narrator is male . Stating that Dillard uses " a variety of male voices , male styles " throughout the book , Clark asks , " When Dillard quit writing Pilgrim at Tinker Creek in the persona of a fifty year old man , did she then begin to write as a woman ? " 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Religion and nature = = = 
 Pilgrim is often noted for its study of theodicy , or its defense of God 's goodness in the face of evil . The narrator attempts to reconcile the harsh natural world , with its " seemingly horrid mortality , " with the belief in a benevolent God . Death is repeatedly mentioned as a natural , although cruel progression : " Evolution " , the narrator states , " loves death more than it loves you or me . " A passage in the second chapter of the book describes a frog being " sucked dry " by a " giant water bug " as the narrator watches ; this necessary cruelty shows order in life and death , no matter how difficult it may be to watch . The narrator especially sees inherent cruelty in the insect world : " Fish gotta swim and birds gotta fly ... insects , it seems , gotta do one horrible thing after another . I never ask why of a vulture or a shark , but I ask why of almost every insect I see . More than one insect ... is an assault on all human virtue , all hope of a reasonable god . " While she remains drawn to the ultimately repugnant and amoral natural world , she also questions her place in it . The narrator states , " I had thought to live by the side of the creek in order to shape my life to its free flow . But I seem to have reached a point where I must draw the line . It looks as though the creek is not <unk> me up but dragging me down . " 
 The title of the book suggests a pilgrimage , and yet the narrator does not stray far from her home near the creek : the journey is metaphysical . Margaret Loewen Reimer , in one of the first critical studies based on the book , noted that Dillard 's treatment of the metaphysical is similar to that of Herman Melville . While " Melville 's eyes saw mainly the darkness and the horror " of the natural world , possibly stemming from his New England Puritan roots , Dillard 's " sinister " vision of the world comes " more from a horror at the seeming mindlessness of nature 's design than from a deeply pervasive sense of evil . " Unlike Melville , however , Dillard does not <unk> the natural world or seek to find parallels in human cultural acts ; focusing largely on observation as well as scientific analysis , Dillard follows the example of Charles Darwin and other naturalists . 
 The " pilgrim " narrator seeks to behold the sacred , which she dedicates herself to finding either by " stalking " or " seeing " . At one point , she sees a cedar tree near her house " charged and transfigured , each cell buzzing with flame " as the light hits it ; this burning vision , reminiscent of creation 's holy " fire " , " comes and goes , mostly goes , but I live for it . " Critic Jenny Emery Davidson believes that Dillard 's act of " stalking " allows her to rewrite the hunting myth , a popular theme in nature writing which mediates the space between nature and humans . Although a long tradition of male nature writers — including James Fenimore Cooper , Jack London and Richard Nelson — have used this theme as " a symbolic ritual of violence " , Dillard " ventures into the terrain of the hunt , employing its rhetoric while also challenging its conventions . " 
 = = = Seeing and awareness = = = 
 While some critics describe Pilgrim at Tinker Creek as being more devoted to speculation of the divine and natural world than to self @-@ exploration , others approach the work in terms of Dillard 's attention to self @-@ aware analysis . For example , critic Mary Davidson <unk> points to Dillard 's <unk> " commitment to awareness " . 
 In the book , the narrator is not only self @-@ aware , but also alert to every detail around her . Pilgrim 's second chapter defines two types of seeing : as " verbalization " ( active ) and as " a letting go " ( passive ) . The narrator refers to the difference between the two methods as " the difference between walking with and without a camera . " Whereas the former requires the need to " analyze and pry " , the latter only requires rapt attention . The act of seeing is exhaustive and exhausting , as one of the chapters relates : " I look at the water : minnows and shiners . If I am thinking minnows , a carp will fill my brain till I scream . I look at the water 's surface : skaters , bubbles , and leaves sliding down . Suddenly my own face , reflected , startles me witless . Those snails have been tracking my face ! Finally , with a shuddering wrench of the will , I see clouds , cirrus clouds . I 'm dizzy . I fall in . This looking business is risky . " Sandra Johnson refers to the structure of the book itself leading to an epiphany of self @-@ awareness , or a " mystical experience " ; as the narrator watches a falling maple key , she feels " lost , sunk ... gazing toward Tinker Mountain and feeling the earth reel down " . 
 = = Reception and awards = = 
 The book was a critical and financial success , selling more than 37 @,@ 000 copies within two months of publication . It went through eight separate printings in the first two years , and the paperback rights were quickly purchased . Dillard was unnerved by the crush of attention ; shortly after the book was published , she wrote , " I 'm starting to have dreams about Tinker Creek . Lying face down in it , all muddy and dried up and I 'm drowning in it . " She feared she had " shot my lifetime wad . Pilgrim is not only the wisdom of my 28 years but I think it 's the wisdom of my whole life . " 
 The initial consensus among reviewers was that it was " an unusual treatise on nature " . The book was published soon after her poetry collection Tickets for a Prayer Wheel ( 1974 , University of Missouri Press ) . Reviewing both volumes for America , John Breslin noted the similarities between the two : " Even if her first book of poems had not been published simultaneously , the language she uses in Pilgrim would have given her away . " The Saturday Evening Post also praised Dillard 's poetic ability in Pilgrim at Tinker Creek , noting that " the poet in her is everywhere evident in this prose @-@ poem of hers : the reader 's attention is caught not only by the freshness of her insights , but by the beauty of her descriptions as well . " Melvin Maddocks , a reviewer for Time , noted Dillard 's intention of subtle influence : " Reader , beware of this deceptive girl , mouthing her piety about ' the secret of seeing ' being ' the pearl of great price , ' modestly insisting , ' I am no scientist . I explore the neighborhood . ' Here is no gentle romantic twirling a buttercup , no graceful <unk> of 365 inspirational prose poems . As she guides the attention to a muskrat , to a monarch butterfly , a heron or a coot , Miss Dillard is stalking the reader as surely as any predator stalks its game . " 
 Despite being a bestseller , Pilgrim received little academic attention until more than five years after its publication . Early reviewers Charles Nicol and J. C. Peirce linked Dillard with the Transcendentalism movement , comparing her to Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson . Author and environmentalist Edward Abbey , known as the " Thoreau of the American West " , stated that Dillard was the " true heir of the Master " . He wrote , " she alone has been able to compose , successfully , in Thoreau 's extravagant and transcendental manner . " In his 1992 book critic Scott <unk> wrote that Pilgrim at Tinker Creek eventually " catapulted [ Dillard ] to prominence among contemporary American nonfiction writers — particularly among nature writers — and stimulated a wealth of reviews and a steadily accumulating body of criticism . " Gary McIlroy believed that Dillard 's work is distinctive for its " vibrant rediscovery of the woods . [ She ] studies the wildest remnants of the Virginia woodlands , stirring all the dark and promising mysteries of the American frontier . 
 Pilgrim at Tinker Creek won the Pulitzer Prize for General Non @-@ fiction in 1975 , when Dillard was 29 years old . The jury noted in its nomination that " Miss Dillard is an expert observer in whom science has not <unk> a sense of awe ... Her book is a blend of observation and introspection , mystery and knowledge . We unanimously recommend it for the prize . " Since its initial publication , portions of the book have been anthologized in over thirty collections . Subsequent editions included those published by Bantam Books ( 1975 ) and Harper Colophon ( 1985 ; 1988 ) . The Harper Perennial 25th @-@ Anniversary edition , which included an afterword by the author , was released in 1999 . The first UK edition was released in 1976 . The book has been translated into many languages throughout the years , including Swedish , Japanese , French , and German . In 1998 it was listed in Modern Library 100 Best Nonfiction Books , both on the board 's and the reader 's lists . 
 = Končar @-@ class missile boat = 
 The Končar @-@ class is a class of six missile boats built for the Yugoslav Navy during the late 1970s at Tito 's Shipyard Kraljevica , SR Croatia . The boats featured a mixture of Western and Eastern equipment , including Soviet anti @-@ ship missiles and Swedish guns . 
 During the Croatian War of Independence one ship , Vlado Ćetković , was captured by Croatian forces while being overhauled . It was eventually commissioned with the Croatian Navy as Šibenik and is still in use . The remaining five ships were relocated to Montenegro , entering service with the new FR Yugoslav Navy , with three of them being decommissioned in the early 2000s . The last two ships of the class are planned to be modified as patrol boats for service with the Montenegrin Navy . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Končar class was developed by the Brodarski institut ( BI ) from Zagreb . The six @-@ strong class was built at the Tito 's Kraljevica Shipyard from 1977 to 1979 with all six ships being named after People 's Heroes of Yugoslavia . The ships measure 44 @.@ 9 m ( 147 ft 4 in ) in length , with a 8 @.@ 4 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) beam and 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 ft 6 in ) draught . The hull , similar to the Swedish Spica class , is made of steel with an aluminium superstructure . Fully loaded they displace 271 t ( 267 long tons ) and are manned by a crew of 30 . 
 The class utilizes a <unk> engine configuration for propulsion . Mounted on four shafts , two MTU 16V 538 <unk> diesel engines are used for economical cruising while two RR Marine Proteus 52 M gas turbines are used for achieving high speeds . Cruising speed is 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) while the maximum achievable speed is 38 – 40 knots ( 70 – 74 km / h ; 44 – 46 mph ) . Travelling at a near maximum speed of 38 knots , the ships have a maximum range of 380 – 490 nautical miles ( 700 – 910 km ; 440 – 560 mi ) . Powered by diesel engines only and travelling at a speed of 22 – 23 knots ( 41 – 43 km / h ; 25 – 26 mph ) they have a range of 780 – 870 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 440 – 1 @,@ 610 km ; 900 – 1 @,@ 000 mi ) , with exact numbers varying from source to source . Endurance is between five and seven days . 
 Gun armament of the class consists of two Bofors 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) / 70 Mk1 gun mounted on the bow and towards the stern . During the development phase , the designers planned on using French Exocet anti @-@ ship missiles as the class 's main weapon system . However , due to the high price the French asked for the missile , possibly because of political reasons , the project was changed and two Soviet P @-@ 20 ( SS @-@ N @-@ 2B ) were used instead . Self @-@ defense measures include two Wallop Barricade chaff launchers . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Yugoslav Navy service = = = 
 During the late 1980s and early 1990s Rade Končar and Vlado Ćetković underwent a modernization program which included removing the stern 57 mm Bofors and installing a Soviet AK @-@ 630 CIWS . At the start of the Croatian War of Independence , Vlado Ćetković was captured by Croatian forces in Šibenik while being overhauled . It was commissioned with the Croatian Navy on 28 September 1991 as Šibenik ( RTOP @-@ 21 ) . Sometime between 1991 and 1994 Šibenik underwent a refit that included removing the P @-@ 20 launchers and installing two mounts for up to four Swedish built RBS @-@ 15 anti @-@ ship missiles . As of 2014 Šibenik is in active service with the Croatian Navy . 
 The rest of the class remained in hands of the Yugoslav Navy . On 6 October , Hasan Zahirović @-@ Laca along with the Koni @-@ class frigate Koper ( VPBR @-@ 32 ) took part in the Battle of Zadar . Croatian coastal batteries in the area operated two captured Bofors 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns with only one of them being in position to open fire on the ships . The initial five to six rounds fired at Hasan Zahirović @-@ Laca missed their target , after which the gun malfunctioned . After a quick repair , the missile boat was targeted again , with three rounds hitting the stern section and causing no damage because the gun crew didn 't have armor @-@ piercing ammunition at their disposal . Two Končar @-@ class missile boats also took part in the Battle of the Dalmatian Channels . Jordan <unk> @-@ <unk> , operating under the codename " <unk> " , and Ante <unk> , under the codename " <unk> " , were members of the tactical group " Vis " which was tasked with enforcing a naval <unk> of the city of Split and the surrounding islands . With the Yugoslav Peoples Army endings its campaign in Croatia , all ships of the class , excluding Vlado Ćetković , were relocated to Montenegro where they were commissioned with the new FR Yugoslav Navy of Serbia and Montenegro . 
 Three boats of the class took part in the Lido II incident . 
 = = = Post @-@ war service = = = 
 During the mid 1990s , Ramiz <unk> was docked for a major overhaul and reconstruction . However , due to the lack of funds the work was never completed and the boat was decommissioned and eventually sold for scrap . The boat 's superstructure , propulsion , sensors and weapon systems were dismantled , after which the new owner moved the boat to an underground naval dock on the <unk> peninsula . The boat remained there for several years , before its deteriorating condition caused it to sink inside the dock . The wreck was raised in 2014 and towed to <unk> where it was broken up to smaller segments which were then transported to the Nikšić steel factory . 
 In June 2006 , Hasan Zahirović @-@ Laca sailed from Boka Kotorska to Italy to participate in the international naval exercise " <unk> <unk> 06 " . The boat left port under the flag of the Navy of Serbia and Montenegro , but because Montenegro declared its independence on 6 June while the boat was still out on exercise , Hasan Zahirović @-@ Laca became the first ship outside of Montenegrin waters to display the flag of the new country . The boat was decommissioned later that year , along with the first boat of the class , Rade Končar . The latter was sold to Kenya in 2014 for an undisclosed price . The Kenyan Navy plans on stripping the boat of its guns and fire @-@ control systems which would then be overhauled and installed on the offshore patrol vessel KNS <unk> . Rade Končar itself is then expected to be rebuilt and used by the Navy as a patrol boat . The fate of Hasan Zahirović @-@ Laca remains unknown . 
 In 2013 , the Ministry of Defense of Montenegro issued the Strategic Overview of the Defense of Montenegro ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> Gore ) in which it was stated that until sufficient funds to acquire new patrol boats were made available , the Montenegrin Navy would modify two Končar @-@ class missile boats , RTOP @-@ 405 and RTOP @-@ 406 , for use as patrol boats . In February 2014 it was revealed that the Montenegrin Ministry of Defense chose the Brodarski institut from Zagreb to create the project documentation for the modification of the missile boats . As planned , the boats would be stripped of their missile launchers and the aft Bofors gun to allow a rigid @-@ hulled inflatable boat to be carried . 
 = Franklin 's lost expedition = 
 Franklin 's lost expedition was a British voyage of Arctic exploration led by Captain Sir John Franklin that departed England in 1845 . A Royal Navy officer and experienced explorer , Franklin had served on three previous Arctic expeditions , the latter two as commanding officer . His fourth and last , undertaken when he was 59 , was meant to traverse the last <unk> section of the Northwest Passage . After a few early fatalities , the two ships became icebound in Victoria Strait near King William Island in the Canadian Arctic . The entire expedition , 129 men including Franklin , was lost . 
 Pressed by Franklin 's wife , Jane , Lady Franklin , and others , the Admiralty launched a search for the missing expedition in 1848 . Prompted in part by Franklin 's fame and the Admiralty 's offer of a finder 's reward , many subsequent expeditions joined the hunt , which at one point in 1850 involved eleven British and two American ships . Several of these ships converged off the east coast of Beechey Island , where the first relics of the expedition were found , including the graves of three crewmen . In 1854 , explorer John Rae , while surveying near the Canadian Arctic coast southeast of King William Island , acquired relics of and stories about the Franklin party from the Inuit . A search led by Francis Leopold McClintock in 1859 discovered a note left on King William Island with details about the expedition 's fate . Searches continued through much of the 19th century . Finally , in 2014 , a Canadian search team located HMS Erebus west of O 'Reilly Island , in the eastern portion of Queen Maud Gulf , in the waters of the Arctic archipelago . 
 In 1981 , a team of scientists led by Owen Beattie , a professor of anthropology at the University of Alberta , began a series of scientific studies of the graves , bodies , and other physical evidence left by Franklin 's men on Beechey Island and King William Island . They concluded that the men whose graves had been found on Beechey Island most likely died of pneumonia and perhaps tuberculosis and that lead poisoning may have worsened their health , owing to badly soldered cans held in the ships ' food stores . However , it was later suggested that the source of this lead may not have been tinned food , but the distilled water systems fitted to the expedition ’ s ships . Cut marks on human bones found on King William Island were seen as signs of cannibalism . The combined evidence of all studies suggested that hypothermia , starvation , lead poisoning and disease including scurvy , along with general exposure to a hostile environment whilst lacking adequate clothing and nutrition , killed everyone on the expedition in the years following its last sighting by Europeans in 1845 . 
 The Victorian media portrayed Franklin as a hero despite the expedition 's failure and the reports of cannibalism . Songs were written about him , and statues of him in his home town , in London , and in Tasmania credit him with discovery of the Northwest Passage which was actually found by John Rae . Franklin 's lost expedition has been the subject of many artistic works , including songs , verse , short stories , and novels , as well as television documentaries . 
 = = Background = = 
 The search by Europeans for a northern shortcut by sea from Europe to Asia began with the voyages of Christopher Columbus in 1492 and continued through the mid @-@ 19th century with a long series of exploratory expeditions originating mainly in England . These voyages , when to any degree successful , added to the sum of European geographic knowledge about the Western Hemisphere , particularly North America , and as that knowledge grew larger , attention gradually turned toward the Arctic . Voyagers of the 16th and 17th centuries who made geographic discoveries about North America included Martin Frobisher , John Davis , Henry Hudson , and William Baffin . In 1670 , the incorporation of the Hudson 's Bay Company led to further exploration of the Canadian coasts and interior and of the Arctic seas . In the 18th century , explorers included James Knight , Christopher Middleton , Samuel Hearne , James Cook , Alexander MacKenzie , and George Vancouver . By 1800 , their discoveries showed conclusively that no Northwest Passage navigable by ships lay in the temperate latitudes between the Pacific and the Atlantic Oceans . 
 In 1804 , Sir John Barrow became Second Secretary of the Admiralty , a post he held until 1845 , and began a push by the Royal Navy to complete the Northwest Passage over the top of Canada and to navigate toward the North Pole . Over the next four decades , explorers including John Ross , David Buchan , William Edward Parry , Frederick William Beechey , James Clark Ross , George Back , Peter Warren Dease , and Thomas Simpson made productive trips to the Canadian Arctic . Among these explorers was John Franklin , second @-@ in @-@ command of an expedition towards the North Pole in the ships Dorothea and Trent in 1818 and the leader of overland expeditions to and along the Arctic coast of Canada in 1819 – 22 and 1825 – 27 . By 1845 , the combined discoveries of all of these expeditions had reduced the relevant unknown parts of the Canadian Arctic to a quadrilateral area of about 181 @,@ 300 km2 ( 70 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . It was into this unknown area that Franklin was to sail , heading west through Lancaster Sound and then west and south as ice , land , and other obstacles might allow , to complete the Northwest Passage . The distance to be navigated was roughly 1 @,@ 670 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 040 mi ) . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Command = = = 
 Barrow , who was 82 and nearing the end of his career , deliberated about who should command the expedition to complete the Northwest Passage and perhaps also find what Barrow believed to be an ice @-@ free Open Polar Sea around the North Pole . Parry , his first choice , was tired of the Arctic and politely declined . His second choice , James Clark Ross , also declined because he had promised his new wife he was done with the Arctic . Barrow 's third choice , James Fitzjames , was rejected by the Admiralty on account of his youth . Barrow considered George Back but thought he was too argumentative . Francis Crozier , another possibility , was of humble birth and Irish , which counted against him . Reluctantly , Barrow settled on the 59 @-@ year @-@ old Franklin . The expedition was to consist of two ships , HMS Erebus and HMS Terror , each of which had seen Antarctic service with James Clark Ross . Fitzjames was given command of Erebus , and Crozier , who had commanded Terror during the Antarctica expedition with Ross in 1841 – 44 , was appointed the executive officer and commander of Terror . Franklin received his expedition command on 7 February 1845 , and his official instructions on 5 May 1845 . 
 = = = Ships , provisions and crew = = = 
 Erebus at 378 tons ( bm ) and Terror at 331 tons ( bm ) were sturdily built and were outfitted with recent inventions . Steam engines were fitted in Erebus and Terror to drive a single screw in each vessel ; these engines were former locomotives from the London & Croydon Railway . They enabled the ships to make 7 @.@ 4 km / h ( 4 kn ) on their own power . Other advanced technology included bows reinforced with heavy beams and plates of iron , an internal steam heating device for the comfort of the crew , screw propellers and iron rudders that could be withdrawn into iron wells to protect them from damage , ships ' libraries of more than 1 @,@ 000 books , and three years ' worth of conventionally preserved or tinned preserved food supplies . The latter was supplied from a <unk> , Stephen Goldner , who was awarded the contract on 1 April 1845 , a mere seven weeks before Franklin set sail . Goldner worked frantically on the large and hasty order of 8 @,@ 000 tins . The speed required affected quality control of a proportion of the tins manufactured , which were later found to have lead soldering that was " thick and sloppily done , and dripped like melted candle wax down the inside surface " . 
 Most of the crew were Englishmen , many of them from the North Country , with a small number of Irishmen and Scotsmen . Aside from Franklin , Crozier , and Lieutenant Graham Gore , the only other officers who were Arctic veterans were an assistant surgeon and the two ice @-@ masters . 
 = = = Australian connections = = = 
 Apart from Sir John Franklin himself , who was a former Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Van Diemen 's Land , the crew included two people with close family connections to explorers of Australia who also died tragically . Cmdr Henry Le <unk> was the first cousin of William John Wills , the co @-@ leader of the 1861 Burke and Wills expedition , the first to cross the Australian mainland from south to north ; both Burke and Wills perished on the return journey . William Gibson , a steward on HMS Terror , was the elder brother of Alfred Gibson , who disappeared on an 1874 expedition led by Ernest Giles to cross the deserts of Western Australia from east to west , and was honoured in the naming of the Gibson Desert . From Giles ' journal entry of 21 April 1873 : 
 I remarked to Gibson as we rode along that this was the anniversary of Burke 's and Wills 's return to their depot at Coopers ' Creek and then recited to him , as he did not appear to know anything whatever about it , the hardships they endured , their <unk> struggles for existence and death there ; and casually remarked that Mr Wills had a brother [ sic ] who also lost his life in the field of discovery , as he went out with Sir John Franklin in 1845 . Gibson then remarked , " Oh , I had a brother who died with Franklin at the North Pole and my father had a great deal of trouble getting his pay from Government " . 
 = = Loss = = 
 The expedition set sail from Greenhithe , England , on the morning of 19 May 1845 , with a crew of 24 officers and 110 men . The ships stopped briefly in Stromness Harbour in the Orkney Islands in northern Scotland , and from there they sailed to Greenland with HMS Rattler and a transport ship , Barretto Junior . 
 At the <unk> Islands in Disko Bay , on the west coast of Greenland , 10 oxen carried by the transport ship were slaughtered for fresh meat ; supplies were transferred to Erebus and Terror , and crew members wrote their last letters home . Letters written on board told how Franklin banned swearing and drunkenness . Before the expedition 's final departure , five men were discharged and sent home on Rattler and Barretto Junior , reducing the ships ' final crew size to 129 . The expedition was last seen by Europeans in late July 1845 , when Captain <unk> of the whaler Prince of Wales and Captain Robert Martin of the whaler Enterprise encountered Terror and Erebus in Baffin Bay , waiting for good conditions to cross to Lancaster Sound . 
 Over the next 150 years , other expeditions , explorers , and scientists would piece together what happened next . Franklin 's men wintered in 1845 – 46 on Beechey Island , where three crew members died and were buried . Terror and Erebus became trapped in ice off King William Island in September 1846 and never sailed again . According to a note dated 25 April 1848 , and left on the island by Fitzjames and Crozier , Franklin had died on 11 June 1847 ; the crew had wintered on King William Island in 1846 – 47 and 1847 – 48 , and the remaining crew had planned to begin walking on 26 April 1848 toward the Back River on the Canadian mainland . Nine officers and fifteen men had already died ; the rest would die along the way , most on the island and another 30 or 40 on the northern coast of the mainland , hundreds of miles from the nearest outpost of Western civilization . 
 = = Early searches = = 
 After two years had passed with no word from Franklin , public concern grew and Lady Franklin — as well as members of Parliament and British newspapers — urged the Admiralty to send a search party . In response , the Admiralty developed a three @-@ pronged plan put into effect in the spring of 1848 that sent an overland rescue party , led by Sir John Richardson and John Rae , down the MacKenzie River to the Canadian Arctic coast . Two expeditions by sea were also launched , one entering the Canadian Arctic archipelago through Lancaster Sound , and the other entering from the Pacific side . In addition , the Admiralty offered a reward of £ 20 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @,@ 811 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) " to any Party or Parties , of any country , who shall render assistance to the crews of the Discovery Ships under the command of Sir John Franklin " . After the three @-@ pronged effort failed , British national concern and interest in the Arctic increased until " finding Franklin became nothing less than a crusade . " Ballads such as " Lady Franklin 's Lament " , commemorating Lady Franklin 's search for her lost husband , became popular . 
 Many joined the search . In 1850 , 11 British and two American ships cruised the Canadian Arctic , including Breadalbane , and her sister ship HMS Phoenix . Several converged off the east coast of Beechey Island , where the first relics of the expedition were found , including remnants of a winter camp from 1845 – 46 and the graves of John Torrington , John Hartnell , and William Braine . No messages from the Franklin expedition were found at this site . In the spring of 1851 , passengers and crew aboard several ships observed a huge iceberg off Newfoundland which bore two vessels , one upright and one on its beam ends . The ships were not examined closely . It was suggested that the ships could have been Erebus and Terror , though it is more likely that they were abandoned whaling ships . 
 In 1852 , Edward Belcher was given command of the government Arctic expedition in search of Sir John Franklin . This was unsuccessful ; Belcher 's inability to render himself popular with his subordinates was peculiarly unfortunate in an Arctic voyage , and he was not wholly suited to command vessels among ice . Four of the five ships ( HMS Resolute , Pioneer , Assistance and Intrepid ) were abandoned in pack ice , for which Belcher was court @-@ martialed but acquitted . One of the ships , HMS Resolute , was later recovered intact by an American whaler . Timbers from the ship were later used to manufacture three desks , one of which , the Resolute desk , was presented by Queen Victoria to the U.S. President Rutherford B. Hayes ; it has often been chosen by presidents for use in the Oval Office in the White House . 
 = = Overland searches = = 
 In 1854 , John Rae , while surveying the <unk> Peninsula for the Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) , discovered further evidence of the lost men 's fate . Rae met an Inuk near Pelly Bay ( now <unk> , Nunavut ) on 21 April 1854 , who told him of a party of 35 to 40 white men who had died of starvation near the mouth of the Back River . Other Inuit confirmed this story , which included reports of cannibalism among the dying sailors . The Inuit showed Rae many objects that were identified as having belonged to Franklin and his men . In particular , Rae brought from the Pelly Bay Inuit several silver forks and spoons later identified as belonging to Fitzjames , Crozier , Franklin , and Robert <unk> Sargent , a shipmate aboard Erebus . Rae 's report was sent to the Admiralty , which in October 1854 urged the HBC to send an expedition down the Back River to search for other signs of Franklin and his men . 
 Next were Chief Factor James Anderson and HBC employee James Stewart , who travelled north by canoe to the mouth of the Back River . In July 1855 , a band of Inuit told them of a group of <unk> ( Inuktitut for " whites " ) who had starved to death along the coast . In August , Anderson and Stewart found a piece of wood inscribed with " Erebus " and another that said " Mr. Stanley " ( surgeon aboard Erebus ) on Montreal Island in Chantrey Inlet , where the Back River meets the sea . 
 Despite the findings of Rae and Anderson , the Admiralty did not plan another search of its own . Britain officially labelled the crew deceased in service on 31 March 1854 . Lady Franklin , failing to convince the government to fund another search , personally commissioned one more expedition under Francis Leopold McClintock . The expedition ship , the steam schooner Fox , bought via public subscription , sailed from Aberdeen on 2 July 1857 . 
 In April 1859 , sledge parties set out from Fox to search on King William Island . On 5 May , the party led by Royal Navy Lieutenant William Hobson found a document in a cairn left by Crozier and Fitzjames . It contained two messages . The first , dated 28 May 1847 , said that Erebus and Terror had wintered in the ice off the northwest coast of King William Island and had wintered earlier at Beechey Island after circumnavigating Cornwallis Island . " Sir John Franklin commanding the Expedition . All well " , the message said . The second message , written in the margins of that same sheet of paper , was much more ominous . Dated 25 April 1848 , it reported that Erebus and Terror had been trapped in the ice for a year and a half and that the crew had abandoned the ships on 22 April . Twenty @-@ four officers and crew had died , including Franklin on 11 June 1847 , just two weeks after the date of the first note . Crozier was commanding the expedition , and the 105 survivors planned to start out the next day , heading south towards the Back River . This note contains significant errors ; most notably the date of the expedition 's winter camp at <unk> Island is incorrectly given as 1846 – 47 rather than 1845 – 46 . 
 The McClintock expedition also found a human skeleton on the southern coast of King William Island . Still clothed , it was searched , and some papers were found , including a seaman 's certificate for Chief Petty Officer Henry Peglar ( b . 1808 ) , Captain of the <unk> , HMS Terror . However , since the uniform was that of a ship 's steward , it is more likely that the body was that of Thomas Armitage , gun @-@ room steward on HMS Terror and a shipmate of Peglar , whose papers he carried . At another site on the western extreme of the island , Hobson discovered a lifeboat containing two skeletons and relics from the Franklin expedition . In the boat was a large amount of abandoned equipment , including boots , silk handkerchiefs , scented soap , sponges , slippers , hair combs , and many books , among them a copy of The Vicar of Wakefield . McClintock also took testimony from the Inuit about the expedition 's disastrous end . 
 Two expeditions between 1860 and 1869 by Charles Francis Hall , who lived among the Inuit near Frobisher Bay on Baffin Island and later at Repulse Bay on the Canadian mainland , found camps , graves , and relics on the southern coast of King William Island , but none of the Franklin expedition survivors he believed would be found among the Inuit . Though he concluded that all of the Franklin crew were dead , he believed that the official expedition records would yet be found under a stone cairn . With the assistance of his guides Ebierbing and Tookoolito , Hall gathered hundreds of pages of Inuit testimony . Among these materials are accounts of visits to Franklin 's ships , and an encounter with a party of white men on the southern coast of King William Island near Washington Bay . In the 1990s , this testimony was extensively researched by David C. Woodman , and was the basis of two books , <unk> the Franklin Mystery ( 1992 ) and Strangers Among Us ( 1995 ) , in which he reconstructs the final months of the expedition . 
 The hope of finding these lost papers led Lieutenant Frederick Schwatka of the U.S. Army to organise an expedition to the island between 1878 and 1880 . Traveling to Hudson Bay on the schooner Eothen , Schwatka , assembling a team that included Inuit who had assisted Hall , continued north by foot and dog sled , interviewing Inuit , visiting known or likely sites of Franklin expedition remains , and wintering on King William Island . Though Schwatka failed to find the hoped @-@ for papers , in a speech at a dinner given in his honour by the American Geographical Society in 1880 , he noted that his expedition had made " the longest sledge journey ever made both in regard to time and distance " of 11 months and 4 days and 4 @,@ 360 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 710 mi ) , that it was the first Arctic expedition on which the whites relied entirely on the same diet as the Inuit , and that it established the loss of the Franklin records " beyond all reasonable doubt " . The Schwatka expedition found no remnants of the Franklin expedition south of a place known as Starvation Cove on the Adelaide Peninsula . This was well north of Crozier 's stated goal , the Back River , and several hundred miles away from the nearest Western outpost , on the Great Slave Lake . Woodman wrote of Inuit reports that between 1852 and 1858 Crozier and one other expedition member were seen in the Baker Lake area , about 400 kilometres ( 250 mi ) to the south , where in 1948 Farley Mowat found " a very ancient cairn , not of normal Eskimo construction " inside which were shreds of a hardwood box with dovetail joints . 
 = = Contemporary search expeditions = = 
 1848 : 
 East : James Clark Ross , ( HMS Enterprise , HMS Investigator ) only to Somerset Island because of ice . 
 Center : Rae – Richardson Arctic Expedition Mackenzie River and along the coast . 
 West : HMS Plover , HMS Herald to Bering Strait ; William Pullen reaches Mackenzie by whaleboat . 
 1850 : 
 West : Richard Collinson ( HMS Enterprise ) , Robert McClure ( HMS Investigator ) to Bering Strait . McClure frozen in at Banks Island , when rescued becomes first man to cross the northwest passage . Collinson reaches Coronation Gulf , furthest east of any ship . 
 East : Horatio Austin ( HMS Resolute ) , Erasmus Ommanney ( HMS Assistance ) , plus 2 steam tenders , Pioneer and Intrepid ( <unk> John Bertie Cator 1850 ) . Ommanney finds Franklin 's Beechey Island camp . Austin 's four and the below ships gather around Beechey Island , are frozen in and in spring send out sledge expeditions in all directions . They leave the Arctic before winter in 1851 . 
 East : Charles Forsyth ( Prince Albert ) financed by Lady Franklin ; sledge on Somerset Island to Fury Beach . 
 East : William Penny ( Lady Franklin and Sophia ) 
 East : John Ross ( schooner Felix ) 
 East : Edwin de Haven ( USS Rescue , USS Advance ) = First Grinnell Expedition 
 1851 : William Kennedy ( Prince Albert again ) finds Bellot Strait proving that Somerset Island is an island . 
 1852 : 
 Edward Augustus Inglefield in northern Baffin Bay . 
 Edward Belcher in five ships ; much sledge exploration ; rescues McClure ; 4 ships abandoned in the ice . <unk> crushed by ice . 
 Elisha Kane led the Second Grinnell Expedition 
 Boat expedition up the Wellington Channel under the command of R. M <unk> , R.N. , in <unk> Forlorn Hope 
 1854 : John Rae learns where Franklin lost his ship . 
 1855 : Anderson and Stewart descend the Back River and find relics in Chantry Inlet . 
 1857 : Francis Leopold McClintock finds relics at King William Island , including a ship 's boat on runners containing two corpses . 
 1869 : Charles Francis Hall at King William Island 
 1875 : Allen Young blocked at Peel Sound 
 1878 : Frederick Schwatka at King William Island 
 = = Scientific expeditions = = 
 = = = King William Island excavations ( 1981 – 82 ) = = = 
 In June 1981 , Owen Beattie , a professor of anthropology at the University of Alberta , began the 1845 – 48 Franklin Expedition Forensic Anthropology Project ( FEFAP ) when he and his team of researchers and field assistants travelled from Edmonton to King William Island , traversing the island 's western coast as Franklin 's men did 132 years before . FEFAP hoped to find artifacts and skeletal remains in order to use modern forensics to establish identities and causes of death among the lost 129 . 
 Although the trek found archaeological artifacts related to 19th @-@ century Europeans and undisturbed disarticulated human remains , Beattie was disappointed that more remains were not found . Examining the bones of Franklin crewmen , he noted areas of pitting and scaling often found in cases of Vitamin C deficiency , the cause of scurvy . After returning to Edmonton , he compared notes from the survey with James <unk> , an Arctic archaeologist , and noticed skeletal patterns suggesting cannibalism . Seeking information about the Franklin crew 's health and diet , he sent bone samples to the Alberta Soil and Feed Testing Laboratory for trace element analysis and assembled another team to visit King William Island . The analysis would find an unexpected level of 226 parts per million ( ppm ) of lead in the crewman 's bones , which was 10 times higher than the control samples , taken from Inuit skeletons from the same geographic area , of 26 – 36 ppm . 
 In June 1982 , a team made up of Beattie ; Walt <unk> , a graduate student in anthropology at the University of Alberta ; Arne Carlson , an archaeology and geography student from Simon Fraser University in British Columbia ; and <unk> <unk> , an Inuk student and field assistant , were flown to the west coast of King William Island , where they retraced some of the steps of McClintock in 1859 and Schwatka in 1878 – 79 . Discoveries during this expedition included the remains of between six and fourteen men in the vicinity of McClintock 's " boat place " and artifacts including a complete boot sole fitted with makeshift cleats for better traction . 
 = = = Beechey Island excavations and exhumations ( 1984 – 86 ) = = = 
 After returning to Edmonton in 1982 and learning of the lead @-@ level findings from the 1981 expedition , Beattie struggled to find a cause . Possibilities included the lead solder used to seal the expedition 's food tins , other food containers lined with lead foil , food colouring , tobacco products , pewter tableware , and lead @-@ wicked candles . He came to suspect that the problems of lead poisoning compounded by the effects of scurvy could have been lethal for the Franklin crew . However , because skeletal lead might reflect lifetime exposure rather than exposure limited to the voyage , Beattie 's theory could be tested only by forensic examination of preserved soft tissue as opposed to bone . Beattie decided to examine the graves of the buried crewmen on Beechey Island . 
 After obtaining legal permission , Beattie 's team visited Beechey Island in August 1984 to perform autopsies on the three crewmen buried there . They started with the first crew member to die , Leading Stoker John Torrington . After completing Torrington 's autopsy and exhuming and briefly examining the body of John Hartnell , the team , pressed for time and threatened by the weather , returned to Edmonton with tissue and bone samples . Trace element analysis of Torrington 's bones and hair indicated that the crewman " would have suffered severe mental and physical problems caused by lead poisoning " . Although the autopsy indicated that pneumonia had been the ultimate cause of the crewman 's death , lead poisoning was cited as a contributing factor . 
 During the expedition , the team visited a place about 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) north of the grave site to examine fragments of hundreds of food tins discarded by Franklin 's men . Beattie noted that the seams were poorly soldered with lead , which had likely come in direct contact with the food . The release of findings from the 1984 expedition and the photo of Torrington , a 138 @-@ year @-@ old corpse well preserved by permafrost in the tundra , led to wide media coverage and renewed interest in the lost Franklin expedition . 
 Recent research has suggested that another potential source for the lead may have been the ships ' fresh @-@ water systems rather than the tinned food . <unk> Farrer argued that " it is impossible to see how one could ingest from the canned food the amount of lead , 3 @.@ 3 mg per day over eight months , required to raise the PbB to the level 80 μg / dL at which symptoms of lead poisoning begin to appear in adults and the suggestion that bone lead in adults could be ' swamped ' by lead ingested from food over a period of a few months , or even three years , seems scarcely tenable . " In addition , tinned food was in widespread use within the Royal Navy at that time and its use did not lead to any significant increase in lead poisoning elsewhere . However , and uniquely for this expedition only , the ships were fitted with converted railway locomotive engines for auxiliary propulsion which required an estimated one tonne of fresh water per hour when steaming . It is highly probable that it was for this reason that the ships were fitted with a unique water distillation system which , given the materials in use at the time , would have produced large quantities of water with a very high lead content . William Battersby has argued that this is a much more likely source for the high levels of lead observed in the remains of expedition members than the tinned food . 
 A further survey of the graves was undertaken in 1986 . A camera crew filmed the procedure , shown in Nova 's television documentary , Buried in Ice in 1988 . Under difficult field conditions , Derek <unk> , a radiologist and medical doctor from the University of Minnesota , and radiology technician Larry Anderson took many X @-@ rays of the crewmen prior to autopsy . Barbara <unk> , an Arctic clothing specialist , and Roger Amy , a pathologist , assisted in the investigation . 
 Beattie and his team had noticed that someone else had attempted to exhume Hartnell . In the effort , a pickaxe had damaged the wooden lid of his coffin , and the coffin plaque was missing . Research in Edmonton later showed that Sir Edward Belcher , commander of one of the Franklin rescue expeditions , had ordered the exhumation of Hartnell in October 1852 , but was thwarted by the permafrost . A month later , Edward A. Inglefield , commander of another rescue expedition , succeeded with the exhumation and removed the coffin plaque . 
 Unlike Hartnell 's grave , the grave of Private William Braine was largely intact . When he was exhumed , the survey team saw signs that his burial had been hasty . His arms , body , and head had not been positioned carefully in the coffin , and one of his undershirts had been put on backwards . The coffin seemed too small for him ; its lid had pressed down on his nose . A large copper plaque with his name and other personal data punched into it adorned his coffin lid . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ 2 excavations ( 1992 ) = = = 
 In 1992 , a team of archaeologists and forensic anthropologists identified a site , which they referenced as " <unk> @-@ 2 " , on the western shores of King William Island . The site matches the physical description of Leopold McClintock 's " boat place " . Excavations there uncovered nearly 400 bones and bone fragments , and physical artefacts ranging from pieces of clay pipes to buttons and brass fittings . Examination of these bones by Anne Keenleyside , the expedition 's forensic scientist , showed elevated levels of lead and many cut @-@ marks " consistent with de @-@ fleshing " . On the basis of this expedition , it has become generally accepted that at least some groups of Franklin 's men resorted to cannibalism in their final distress . On 18 June 2015 , a study accepted for publication in the Journal of <unk> concluded that in addition to the de @-@ fleshing of bones , 35 " bones had signs of breakage and ' pot polishing , ' which occurs when the ends of bones heated in boiling water rub against the cooking pot they are placed in " , which " typically occurs in the end stage of cannibalism , when starving people extract the marrow to eke out the last bit of calories and nutrition they can . " 
 = = = Wreck searches ( 1992 – 93 ) = = = 
 In 1992 , Franklin author David C. Woodman , with the help of magnetometer expert Brad Nelson , organised " Project <unk> " to search for the wreck reported by Inuit testimony to lie off the waters of Adelaide Peninsula . Enlisting both a National Research Council and a Canadian Forces patrol aircraft , each fitted with a sensitive magnetometer , a large search area to the west of Grant Point was surveyed from an elevation of 200 feet ( 61 m ) . Over 60 strong magnetic targets were identified , of which five were deemed to have characteristics most congruent to those expected from Franklin 's ships . 
 In 1993 , Dr. Joe McInnis and Woodman organised an attempt to identify the priority targets from the year before . A chartered aircraft landed on the ice at three of the locations , a hole was drilled through the ice , and a small sector @-@ scan sonar was used to image the sea bottom . Unfortunately , due to ice conditions and uncertain navigation , it was not possible to exactly confirm the locations of the holes , and nothing was found although hitherto @-@ unknown depths were found at the locations that were consistent with Inuit testimony of the wreck . 
 = = = King William Island ( 1994 – 95 ) = = = 
 In 1994 Woodman organised and led a land search of the area from Richard Collinson Inlet to ( modern ) Victory Point in search of the buried " vaults " spoken of in the testimony of the contemporary Inuit hunter <unk> . A 10 @-@ person team spent 10 days in the search , sponsored by the Royal Canadian Geographical Society , and filmed by the CBC Focus North . No trace of the vaults was found . 
 In 1995 , an expedition was jointly organised by Woodman , George Hobson , and American adventurer Steven Trafton – with each party planning a separate search . Trafton 's group travelled to the Clarence Island to investigate Inuit stories of a " white man 's cairn " there but found nothing . Dr. Hobson 's party , accompanied by archaeologist Margaret <unk> , investigated the " summer camp " found a few miles to the south of Cape Felix , where some minor Franklin relics were found . Woodman , with two companions , travelled south from Wall Bay to Victory Point and investigated all likely campsites along this coast , finding only some rusted cans at a previously unknown campsite near Cape Maria Louisa . 
 = = = Wreck searches ( 1997 – 2013 ) = = = 
 In 1997 , a " Franklin 150 " expedition was mounted by the Canadian film company Eco @-@ Nova to use sonar to investigate more of the priority magnetic targets found in 1992 . Senior archaeologist was Robert Grenier , assisted by Margaret <unk> , and Woodman again acted as expedition historian and search coordinator . Operations were conducted from the Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker Laurier . Approximately 40 square kilometres ( 15 sq mi ) were surveyed , without result , near Kirkwall Island . When detached parties found Franklin relics , primarily copper sheeting and small items , on the beaches of islets to the north of O 'Reilly Island the search was diverted to that area , but poor weather prevented significant survey work before the expedition ended . A documentary , " Oceans of Mystery : Search for the Lost Fleet " , was produced by Eco @-@ Nova about this expedition . 
 In 2000 , James Delgado of the Vancouver Maritime Museum organised a re @-@ enactment of the historic St. Roch passage westward through the Northwest Passage using the RCMP vessel Nadon supported by the Canadian Buoy Tender Simon Fraser . Knowing that ice would delay the transit in the area of King William Island , he offered the use of the Nadon as a search vessel to his friends Hobson and Woodman , and using the Nadon 's Kongsberg / Simrad <unk> forward @-@ looking sonar , the survey of the northern search area around Kirkwall Island was continued without result . 
 Three expeditions were mounted by Woodman to continue the magnetometer mapping of the proposed wreck sites , a privately sponsored expedition in 2001 , and the Irish @-@ Canadian Franklin Search Expeditions of 2002 and 2004 . These made use of sled @-@ drawn magnetometers working on the sea ice and completed the unfinished survey of the northern ( Kirkwall Island ) search area ( 2001 ) , and the entire southern O 'Reilly Island area ( 2002 and 2004 ) . All high @-@ priority magnetic targets were identified by sonar through the ice as geological in origin . In 2002 and 2004 , small Franklin artefacts and characteristic explorer tent sites were found on a small islet northeast of O 'Reilly Island during shore searches . 
 In August 2008 , a new search was announced , to be led by Robert Grenier , a senior archaeologist with Parks Canada . This search hoped to take advantage of the improved ice conditions , using side @-@ scan sonar from a boat in open water . Grenier also hoped to draw from newly published Inuit testimony collected by oral historian Dorothy Harley Eber . Some of Eber 's informants have placed the location of one of Franklin 's ships in the vicinity of the Royal Geographical Society Island , an area not searched by previous expeditions . The search was to also include local Inuit historian Louie <unk> , who has found other significant remains of the expedition and would represent the indigenous culture . 
 On 25 July 2010 , HMS Investigator , which had become icebound and was subsequently abandoned while searching for Franklin 's expedition in 1853 , was found in shallow water in Mercy Bay along the northern coast of Banks Island in Canada 's western Arctic . The Parks Canada team reported that it was in good shape , upright in about 11 metres ( 36 feet ) of water . 
 In August 2013 , a new search was announced by Parks Canada . 
 = = = Victoria Strait Expedition ( 2014 ) = = = 
 On 1 September 2014 , a larger search by a Canadian team under the banner of the " Victoria Strait Expedition " found two items on Hat Island in the Queen Maud Gulf near Nunavut 's King William Island — a wooden object , possibly a plug for a deck <unk> , the iron pipe through which the ship 's chain cable would descend into the chain locker below ; and part of a boat @-@ launching davit bearing the stamps of two Royal Navy broad arrows . 
 On 9 September 2014 , the expedition announced that on 7 September it had located one of Franklin 's two ships . The ship is preserved in very good condition , with side @-@ scan sonar picking up even the deck planking . The wreck lies at the bottom of the eastern portion of Queen Maud Gulf , west of O 'Reilly Island . On 1 October at the House of Commons , Prime Minister Stephen Harper confirmed that the wreck is indeed HMS Erebus . 
 = = = Scientific conclusions = = = 
 The FEFAP field surveys , excavations and exhumations spanned more than 10 years . The results of this study from King William Island and Beechey Island artefacts and human remains showed that the Beechey Island crew had most likely died of pneumonia and perhaps tuberculosis , which was suggested by the evidence of Pott 's disease discovered in Braine . <unk> reports pointed to lead poisoning as a likely contributing factor . Blade cut marks found on bones from some of the crew were seen as signs of cannibalism . Evidence suggested that a combination of cold , starvation and disease including scurvy , pneumonia and tuberculosis , all made worse by lead poisoning , killed everyone in the Franklin party . 
 = = Other factors = = 
 Franklin 's chosen passage down the west side of King William Island took Erebus and Terror into " ... a ploughing train of ice ... [ that ] does not always clear during the short summers ... " , whereas the route along the island 's east coast regularly clears in summer and was later used by Roald Amundsen in his successful navigation of the Northwest Passage . The Franklin expedition , locked in ice for two winters in Victoria Strait , was naval , not well @-@ equipped or trained for land travel . Some of the crew members heading south from Erebus and Terror hauled many items not needed for Arctic survival . McClintock noted a large quantity of heavy goods in the lifeboat at the " boat place " and thought them " a mere accumulation of dead weight , of little use , and very likely to break down the strength of the sledge @-@ crews " . In addition , cultural factors might have prevented the crew from seeking help as quickly as possible from the Inuit or adopting their survival techniques . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 1845 , 19 May : Franklin expedition sails from England 
 1845 , July : Expedition docks in Greenland , sends home five men and a batch of letters 
 1845 , 28 July : Last sighting of expedition by Europeans ( a whaling ship in Baffin Bay ) 
 1845 – 46 : Expedition winters on Beechey Island . Three crewmen die of tuberculosis and are buried . 
 1846 : Erebus and Terror leave Beechey Island and sail down Peel Sound towards King William Island 
 1846 , 12 September : Ships trapped in the ice off King William Island 
 1846 – 47 : Expedition winters on King William Island 
 1847 , 28 May : Date of first note , says " All well " 
 1847 , 11 June : Franklin dies 
 1847 – 48 : Expedition again winters off King William Island , after the ice fails to thaw in 1847 
 1848 , 22 April : Erebus and Terror abandoned after one year and seven months trapped in the ice 
 1848 , 25 April : Date of second note , saying 24 men have died and the survivors plan to start marching south on 26 April to the Back River 
 1850 ( ? ) : Inuit board an abandoned ship , which is icebound off King William Island 
 1850 ( ? ) : Inuit see 40 men walking south on King William Island 
 1851 ( ? ) : Inuit hunters see four men still trying to head south , last verified sighting of survivors ( as reported to Charles Hall ) 
 1852 – 58 ( ? ) : Inuit may have seen Crozier and one other survivor much further south in the Baker Lake area 
 1854 : John Rae interviews local Inuit , who give him items from the expedition and tell him the men starved to death , after resorting to cannibalism 
 1859 : McClintock finds the abandoned boat and the messages on an admiralty form in a cairn on King William Island 
 2014 : Ryan Harris , an underwater archeologist who was Parks Canada 's project lead for the 2014 search , announced the finding in September of an underwater wreck that he said was " indisputably " one of Franklin 's two ships . Further investigation has determined that it is HMS Erebus and the news was confirmed 1 October in the Canadian House of Commons . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 The most meaningful outcome of the Franklin expedition was the mapping of several thousand miles of hitherto unsurveyed coastline by expeditions searching for Franklin 's lost ships and crew . As Richard <unk> noted , " the loss of the expedition probably added much more [ geographical ] knowledge than its successful return would have done " . At the same time , it largely quelled the Admiralty 's appetite for Arctic exploration . There was a gap of many years before the Nares expedition and when Nares declared there was " no thoroughfare " to the North Pole , his words marked the end of the Royal Navy 's historical involvement in Arctic exploration , the end of an era in which such exploits were widely seen by the British public as worthy expenditures of human effort and monetary resources . As a writer for The Athenaeum put it , " We think that we can fairly make out the account between the cost and results of these Arctic Expeditions , and ask whether it is worth while to risk so much for that which is so difficult of attainment , and when attained , is so worthless . " The navigation of the Northwest Passage in 1903 – 05 by Roald Amundsen with the Gjøa expedition effectively ended the centuries @-@ long quest for the Northwest Passage . 
 = = = Cultural legacy = = = 
 For years after the loss of the Franklin Party , the Victorian media portrayed Franklin as a hero who led his men in the quest for the Northwest Passage . A statue of Franklin in his home town bears the inscription " Sir John Franklin – Discoverer of the North West Passage " , and statues of Franklin outside the Athenaeum in London and in Tasmania bear similar inscriptions . Although the expedition 's fate , including the possibility of cannibalism , was widely reported and debated , Franklin 's standing with the Victorian public was undiminished . The expedition has been the subject of numerous works of non @-@ fiction , including two books by Ken <unk> , Fatal Passage and Lady Franklin 's Revenge . 
 The mystery surrounding Franklin 's last expedition was the subject of a 2006 episode of the NOVA television series Arctic Passage ; a 2007 television documentary , " Franklin 's Lost Expedition " , on Discovery HD Theatre ; as well as a 2008 Canadian documentary , Passage . In an episode of the 2009 ITV1 travel documentary series Billy Connolly : Journey to the Edge of the World , presenter Connolly and his crew visited Beechey Island , filmed the gravesite , and gave details of the Franklin expedition . 
 In memory of the lost expedition , one of Canada 's Northwest Territories subdivisions was known as the District of Franklin . Including the high Arctic islands ; this jurisdiction was abolished when the area was set off into the newly created Nunavut Territory on 1 April 1999 . 
 On 29 October 2009 , a special service of thanksgiving was held in the chapel at the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich , to accompany the rededication of the national monument to Franklin there . The service also included the solemn re @-@ interment of the remains of Lieutenant Henry Thomas Dundas Le <unk> , the only remains ever repatriated to England , entombed within the monument in 1873 . The event brought together members of the international polar community and invited guests included polar travellers , photographers and authors and descendants of Franklin , Captain Francis Rawdon Moira Crozier and their men , and the families of those who went to search for them , including Admiral Sir Francis Leopold McClintock , Rear Admiral Sir John Ross and Vice Admiral Sir Robert McClure among many others . The gala was directed by the Rev Jeremy Frost and polar historian Huw Lewis @-@ Jones and was organised by <unk> and the High Commission of Canada to the United Kingdom . It was a celebration of the contributions made by the United Kingdom in the charting of the Canadian North , which honoured the loss of life in the pursuit of geographical discovery . The Navy was represented by Admiral Nick Wilkinson , prayers were led by the Bishop of Woolwich and among the readings were eloquent tributes from Duncan Wilson , chief executive of the Greenwich Foundation and H.E. James Wright , the Canadian High Commissioner . At a private drinks reception in the Painted Hall following this Arctic service , Chief Marine Archaeologist for Parks Canada Robert Grenier spoke of his ongoing search for the missing expedition ships . The following day , a group of polar authors went to London 's Kensal Green Cemetery to pay their respects to the Arctic explorers buried there . After some difficulty , McClure 's gravestone was located . It is hoped that his memorial , in particular , may be conserved in the future . Many other veterans of the searches for Franklin are buried there , including Admiral Sir Horatio Thomas Austin , Admiral Sir George Back , Admiral Sir Edward Augustus Inglefield , Admiral Bedford Clapperton Trevelyan Pim , and Admiral Sir John Ross . Franklin 's redoubtable wife Jane Griffin , Lady Franklin , is also interred at Kensal Green in the vault , and commemorated on a marble cross dedicated to her niece Sophia Cracroft . 
 = = = = Portrayal in fiction and the arts = = = = 
 From the 1850s through to the present day , Franklin 's last expedition inspired numerous literary works . Among the first was a play , The Frozen Deep , written by Wilkie Collins with assistance and production by Charles Dickens . The play was performed for private audiences at Tavistock House early in 1857 , as well as at the Royal Gallery of Illustration ( including a command performance for Queen Victoria ) , and for the public at the Manchester Trade Union Hall . News of Franklin 's death in 1859 inspired elegies , including one by Algernon Charles Swinburne . 
 Fictional treatments of the final Franklin expedition begin with Jules Verne 's Journeys and Adventures of Captain Hatteras , ( 1866 ) , in which the novel 's hero seeks to retrace Franklin 's footsteps and discovers that the North Pole is dominated by an enormous volcano . Mark Twain briefly satirized the fate of the expedition and its subsequent searches in the beginning of the story " Some Learned Fables for Good Old Boys and Girls " ( 1875 ) . The German novelist Sten Nadolny 's The Discovery of <unk> ( 1983 ; English translation 1987 ) takes on the entirety of Franklin 's life , touching only briefly on his last expedition . Other recent novelistic treatments of Franklin include Mordecai Richler 's Solomon Gursky Was Here ( 1989 ) , William T. <unk> 's The Rifles ( 1994 ) , John Wilson 's North With Franklin : The Journals of James Fitzjames ( 1999 ) ; and Dan Simmons 's The Terror ( 2007 ) - the latter of which is being developed as an AMC television series , announced in February 2013 . The expedition has also been the subject of a horror role @-@ playing game supplement , The Walker in the Wastes . Most recently , Clive Cussler 's 2008 novel Arctic Drift incorporates the ordeal of the Franklin expedition as a central element in the story , and Richard Flanagan 's Wanting ( 2009 ) deals with Franklin 's deeds in both Tasmania and the Arctic . 2013 ’ s novel The White Passage rounds out the list with a vaguely science @-@ fiction take on the concepts of time @-@ travel and the consequences of an alternate fate of the lost expedition . 
 On 12 January 2012 , BBC Radio 4 broadcast a radio play entitled " Erebus " based on the Franklin expedition . 
 Franklin 's last expedition also inspired a great deal of music , beginning with the ballad " Lady Franklin 's Lament " ( also known as " Lord Franklin " ) , which originated in the 1850s and has been recorded by dozens of artists , among them Martin Carthy , Pentangle , Sinéad O 'Connor , the <unk> , and John Walsh . Other Franklin @-@ inspired songs include Fairport Convention 's " I 'm Already There " , and James Taylor 's " Frozen Man " ( based on Beattie 's photographs of John Torrington ) . 
 The influence of the Franklin expedition on Canadian literature has been especially significant . Among the best @-@ known contemporary Franklin ballads is " Northwest Passage " by the late Ontario folksinger Stan Rogers ( 1981 ) , which has been referred to as the unofficial Canadian national anthem . The distinguished Canadian novelist Margaret Atwood has also spoken of Franklin 's expedition as a sort of national myth of Canada , remarking that " In every culture many stories are told , ( but ) only some are told and retold , and these stories bear examining ... in Canadian literature , one such story is the Franklin expedition . " Other recent treatments by Canadian poets include a verse play , Terror and Erebus , by Gwendolyn MacEwen that was broadcast on Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) radio in the 1960s , as well as David Solway 's verse cycle , Franklin 's Passage ( 2003 ) . Dominique Fortier 's 2008 French language novel , Du bon usage des étoiles , creatively considers the Franklin expedition from a variety of perspectives and genres and was both shortlisted and a finalist for several literary awards in Canada ( 2009 Governor General 's Awards ) . Sheila Fischman 's English translation of the novel , On the Proper Use of Stars , was also shortlisted for the 2010 Governor General 's Awards for French to English Translation . 
 In the visual arts , the loss of Franklin 's expedition inspired a number of paintings in both the United States and Britain . In 1861 , Frederic Edwin Church unveiled his great canvas " The Icebergs " ; later that year , prior to taking it to England for exhibition , he added an image of a broken ship 's mast in silent tribute to Franklin . In 1864 , Sir Edwin Landseer 's Man Proposes , God <unk> caused a stir at the annual Royal Academy exhibition ; its depiction of two polar bears , one chewing on a tattered ship 's ensign , the other gnawing on a human ribcage , was seen at the time as in poor taste , but has remained one of the most powerful imaginings of the expedition 's final fate . The expedition also inspired numerous popular engravings and illustrations , along with many panoramas , dioramas , and magic lantern shows . 
 = Li 'l Sebastian = 
 " Li 'l Sebastian " is the sixteenth episode and season finale of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 46th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 19 , 2011 . In the episode , as the parks department prepares a funeral for Pawnee 's famous miniature horse Li 'l Sebastian , Leslie and Ben struggle to keep their workplace romance a secret . The episode was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Dean Holland . 
 " Li 'l Sebastian " , which originally aired back @-@ to @-@ back along with " The Bubble " , ended with several major developments . These included Leslie being approached to run for political office , and Tom 's decision to quit his job to run an entertainment company . The exact outcome of the newly introduced storylines had not yet been determined when the episode first aired . The writing staff considered killing off a human character instead of Li 'l Sebastian , but decided against it . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur called the episode 's final scene , which was filmed in the completely white , 15 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 400 m2 ) office of Tom 's entertainment company , " maybe the craziest thing that 's ever been on our series . " 
 The episode featured guest appearances by Megan Mullally as Ron 's ex @-@ wife Tammy , Ben Schwartz as Tom 's friend Jean @-@ Ralphio and retired basketball player Detlef Schrempf as himself . " Li 'l Sebastian " received critical acclaim and , according to Nielsen Media Research , was seen by an estimated 3 @.@ 72 million household viewers . Combined with an estimated 4 @.@ 27 million household viewers with " The Bubble , " the two episodes ' ratings were about even with the previous week 's episodes , " The Fight " and " Road Trip . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) announces Li 'l Sebastian , Pawnee 's beloved celebrity miniature horse , has died and the parks department will hold a memorial service for him . Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) suggests they hire Entertainment 720 for the event , a production company recently started by his friend Jean @-@ Ralphio ( Ben Schwartz ) . Jean @-@ Ralphio encourages Tom to come work with him on the company , but Tom is reluctant to leave his city hall job . Meanwhile , the extremely health @-@ conscious Chris ( Rob Lowe ) finds out he has tendonitis , and takes the news so seriously that he questions his own mortality . Leslie and Ben ( Adam Scott ) continue their romance despite a no @-@ dating policy at city hall , but they have difficulty keeping it a secret . Ron ( Nick Offerman ) finds out and warns them that Chris will fire them if he learns about it . 
 As the city prepares for the memorial service , Leslie and Ben are caught making out by a maintenance worker named George ( Biff Yeager ) , so they send him home with a gift certificate in exchange for his silence . Unfortunately , George had the propane for Li 'l Sebastian 's eternal flame , which results in later confusion behind the scenes , that Leslie and Ben struggle to fix throughout the night . Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) is sent to get propane for the flame but buys lighter fluid instead ; this causes a huge fireball to shoot into the air when Ron lights it , which singes off his eyebrows , part of his mustache and hair . Leslie and Ben are relieved , however , when the crowd applauds in the belief the fireball was staged . Entertainment 720 's show also proves to be a hit with the crowd , which makes Tom further contemplate quitting his job . 
 At a party afterward , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) receives praise for his Li 'l Sebastian tribute song , " 5 @,@ 000 Candles in the Wind . " April ( Aubrey Plaza ) sells many Mouse Rat CDs at an inflated price , which spurs Andy to ask her to become the group 's manager . Indirectly responsible for nearly killing Ron , Leslie and Ben agree to no more secret displays of affection at work . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , who previously dated Chris and had trouble getting over him , offers comfort to Chris for his depression . This makes him appear romantically interested in Ann once again . A conflicted Tom decides to resign and accept a job with Entertainment 720 . Meanwhile , Ron is confronted by his evil ex @-@ wife Tammy ( Megan Mullally ) at the party . But both Ron and Tammy are horrified to learn his other ex @-@ wife , also named Tammy ( whom he calls " Tammy 1 " ) has also arrived in town . 
 Leslie is approached by scouts looking for potential candidates for elected office , which has always been one of her dreams . Impressed by the memorial service and the harvest festival Leslie previously organized , they believe she would be a good candidate for upcoming city council seats , or possibly the mayoral position . With the expected increased media attention on her personal life , the scouts ask whether Leslie has any secret scandals in her life . She denies any such scandals exist , thus omitting her secret relationship with Ben , and the scouts promise to contact her about preparing an electoral run . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Li 'l Sebastian " , the third season finale of Parks and Recreation , was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Dean Holland . It was originally broadcast on May 19 , 2011 , and ran back @-@ to @-@ back with the episode " The Bubble " , which aired immediately before . The two are stand @-@ alone episodes that were not originally designed to be shown together . However , because the show premiered late as a mid @-@ season replacement in January , the two episodes aired together so the third season could conclude at the end of the television season . 
 The final few minutes of " Li 'l Sebastian " introduced major developments for several of the characters , including Leslie being approached with the idea to run for elected office , which has been a lifelong dream for her . Additionally , Tom decides to leave city hall to pursue his entrepreneurial ambitions , a progression of his character that had been building throughout the third season . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur said he believes characters should change and their situations should change throughout the season , so he wanted them to be in a very different place at the end of the season than where they were from the beginning . Schur also described his fellow co @-@ creator Greg Daniels ' theory about finale episode as : " write the juiciest , most exciting cliffhanger @-@ y possible scenario you can write , and then you have all summer to figure out how to get yourself out of it " . Although Schur said the writing staff had a general idea of where the newly introduced storylines should go , the exact stories had not been completely worked out yet and the writers would be brainstorming how to handle them over the summer . 
 " Li 'l Sebastian " featured a guest appearance by Megan Mullally as Ron 's ex @-@ wife , Tammy Swanson . Mullally , the real @-@ life wife of Nick Offerman , previously appeared in the episodes " Ron and Tammy " and " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " . Ben Schwartz reprised his recurring role as Tom 's friend Jean @-@ Ralphio Saperstein . The episode also features a cameo appearance by Detlef Schrempf , a retired basketball player who played for the Indiana Pacers ; Parks and Recreation is set in Indiana . Schrempf plays himself in the episode and is hired by Tom 's new entertainment company to simply hang around the office and play basketball . Schrempf previously appeared in the second season episode " Telethon " . Andy 's band Mouse Rat , which has appeared in previous episodes starting with the first season finale " Rock Show " , also appeared in " Li 'l Sebastian " . Mark Rivers played the drums , Andrew Burlinson played guitar and Parks screenwriter Alan Yang played bass guitar . 
 The character Li 'l Sebastian , a miniature horse beloved by the residents of Pawnee , was first introduced in " Harvest Festival " , which was also written by Goor . The writers considered having a human character die in " Li 'l Sebastian " rather than the miniature horse , like previously @-@ mentioned characters Mayor Gunderson or Councilman Bill Dexhart . However , they decided that having an animal character die felt less morbid and more appropriate for the finale of a comedy series . The episode ends with Tom and Jean @-@ Ralphio in their new Entertainment 720 headquarters , a completely white 15 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 400 m2 ) room with modern decor and unusual furniture . Schur described the setting as " maybe the craziest thing that 's ever been on our series . ... Every time I watch it in the edit bay , I have this weird crisis : ' Is this OK that this scene is how we 're ending this entire season ? ' It 's truly nuts . It 's like a hallucinogenic nightmare . " 
 Schur said his favorite scene in the episode was when Leslie arrives at her secret meet @-@ up spot with Ben , only to find Ron waiting there , and awkwardly tries to insist there is no affair . Schur said : " The scene that unfolds is my favorite Leslie Knope moment of the whole year . [ Ron ] almost doesn 't say a word for the entire scene , but still makes you laugh 50 times . " Immediately after " Li 'l Sebastian " first aired , a " Producer 's Cut " version was made available on the official NBC.com website , which included an additional six minutes of material . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 While trying to have a moment of silence for Li 'l Sebastian in the parks department office , the staff is interrupted when a custodian playing the Shania Twain song " Man ! I Feel Like a Woman ! " on his radio . Ron discovers Leslie and Ben 's affair after they accidentally pocket dial him while sexually role @-@ playing with political figures . At one point , Leslie tells Ben she is going to kiss him both like former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt , and Associate Justice of the Supreme Court Ruth Bader Ginsburg . At another , Ben impersonates former President Ronald Reagan , which prompts Leslie , pretending to be United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , to say , " Oh , President Reagan , my blazer popped open . " In a different scene , Andy seeks to write a song for Li 'l Sebastian that is 5 @,@ 000 times better than Elton John 's " Candle in the Wind " , which inspires him to write the original song " 5 @,@ 000 Candles in the Wind " . Other songs played during Li 'l Sebastian 's memorial service include " Wild Horses " by The Rolling Stones and " A Horse with No Name " by America . In an attempt to explain to someone that she and Ben were hugging , Leslie explains she recently won a McArthur Genius Grant and that Ben was simply congratulating her . In addition , during Tom and Jean @-@ Ralphio 's eulogy presentation for Lil ' Sebastian , a still of the <unk> Nebula in Sagittarius is seen . The image is more popularly recognized as the cover art for progressive rock band King Crimson 's 1971 album " Islands . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Due to the 9 p.m. broadcast of " Search Committee " , the one @-@ hour seventh season finale of comedy series The Office , Parks and Recreation was not shown in its regular 9 : 30 p.m. broadcast on May 19 . " Li 'l Sebastian " aired at 10 : 30 p.m. , immediately following " The Bubble " at 10 p.m. In its original American broadcast , " Li 'l Sebastian " was seen by an estimated 3 @.@ 72 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . A rating point represents one percent of the total number of television sets in American households , and a share means the percentage of television sets in use tuned to the program . This marked a drop in viewership for Parks and Recreation compared to earlier in the night , as " The Bubble " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 27 million households . Combined , the ratings were about even with the average ratings for the previous week , in which two Parks and Recreation episodes were also shown back @-@ to @-@ back , although from a 9 : 30 p.m. to 10 : 30 p.m. time block : " The Fight " had been seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 55 million household viewers , while " Road Trip " was seen by 3 @.@ 54 million households . In its 10 : 30 p.m. timeslot , " Li 'l Sebastian " was outperformed by the fourth season finale of the ABC medical drama series Private Practice , which was seen by 7 @.@ 45 million household viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Li 'l Sebastian " received highly positive reviews . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called it the best Parks and Recreation episode so far , and compared the cliffhanger and " many of the bittersweet moments leading to it " to the comedy series Freaks and Geeks . James Poniewozik of Time magazine strongly praised " Li 'l Sebastian " , and called it one of the best episodes of the season . He said Li 'l Sebastian 's funeral brought out the best in the characters , and that the episode " combined slapstick , authentic stakes and a holistic picture of the oddball history and commonalities that bond the folks we 've come to know in Pawnee " . Henry Hanks of CNN called it " one of the funniest half @-@ hours of any show this season " , and compared the Li 'l Sebastian funeral to the funeral scenes in the Mary Tyler Moore Show episode " Chuckles Bites the Dust " . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow called the episode a " triumphant exclamation point at the end of Parks and Recreation 's third season " , and described every moment as " uproariously funny " . Meslow particularly praised the twists and major character developments of the final 10 minutes , and said it demonstrates how much the show and characters have changed since the series debuted . 
 Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said " Li 'l Sebastian " was a great showcase for not only each of the characters , but the setting of Pawnee as well , and that the episode " illustrated each part of Pawnee that we have come to know and love so much " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix had the " both the scope and the out @-@ of @-@ control but not frantic style " of " The Harvest Festival " . He also enjoyed the scene with Leslie and Ben , and said he believed the show could get great " comic mileage " out of their continued secret relationship together . Paste magazine writer Garrett Martin called the episode a " tour de force that expertly wrapped up an excellent season " . Garrett said the show 's characters were " so vivid and instantly memorable " that the death of Li 'l Sebastian really felt like a major event , even though he had only previously appeared in one other episode . Matt Fowler of IGN said " Li 'l Sebastian " was hilarious and demonstrated " how marvelously great this series is at creating a truly lovable ensemble " . He also enjoyed seeing Tom succeed with his concert , and claimed the Li 'l Sebastian funeral scene was surprisingly powerful . 
 Rick Porter of Zap2it said Parks was at the " top of its game " . Porter praised that the final scenes presented so many changes for the characters but never felt out of control , which he attributed to " the cast 's ability to play things at just the right level and the writers for knowing just how cartoonish Pawnee can be without tipping too far " . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell said although the episode felt like a " somber affair " and less momentous than the previous episode " Harvest Festival " , he said the cliffhangers were suspenseful and on par with major drama shows like the ABC series Desperate Housewives . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic praised the episode , and said he found particularly hilarious the scene about Leslie and Ben accidentally pocket dialing Ron during their sexual roleplaying . However , McHatton said he did not believe Tom 's decision to start an entertainment company had " much of a traction past the first five minutes of next season " . Joel Keller of TV Squad felt the major changes the characters undergo at the end of the episode felt " rushed " , but admitted they were " natural outcropping of the characters and what we 've seen of them this year " . 
 " Li 'l Sebastian " was voted the fourth funniest half @-@ hour season finale of 2011 in Entertainment Weekly 's second annual TV Season Finale Awards , the winners of which are determined by voters . Ron losing his facial hair was voted the third @-@ funniest individual moment , the death of Li 'l Sebastian was voted the fifth best death , and the mystery over who " Tammy No. 1 " is , and why " Tammy No. 2 " fears her , was voted the fourth @-@ best " Non @-@ Romantic Cliffhanger " . 
 = School Rumble = 
 School Rumble ( スクールランブル , <unk> <unk> ) is a Japanese shōnen manga series written and illustrated by Jin Kobayashi . First serialized in Weekly Shōnen Magazine from October 22 , 2002 to July 23 , 2008 , all 345 chapters were later collected in 22 tankōbon volumes by Kodansha . Magazine Special published School Rumble Z monthly from August 20 , 2008 to May 20 , 2009 . A romance comedy centering on relationships between Japanese high school students , School Rumble focuses on a love triangle involving the series ' two protagonists , Tenma Tsukamoto and Kenji Harima , and one of their classmates , Oji Karasuma . The series often discards realism in favor of comedic effect . 
 School Rumble 's popularity has resulted in its adaptation into multiple forms of media . TV Tokyo broadcast a 26 @-@ episode anime program between October 2004 and April 2005 . In December 2005 , a two @-@ part original video animation ( OVA ) entitled School Rumble : Extra Class was released . A second season , School Rumble : 2nd Semester , aired between April and September 2006 . Finally , two more episodes , collectively entitled School Rumble : Third Semester , were bundled with the Japanese manga volumes 21 and 22 . Three video games have been produced — two for the PlayStation 2 in July 2005 and July 2006 , and one for the PlayStation Portable in 2005 . Two light novels written by Hiroko Tokita and illustrated by Kobayashi were published in April 2004 and December 2007 ; four official guidebooks illustrated by Kobayashi and written by his editors have also been released . 
 Del Rey Manga publishes the English translation of School Rumble . In the translation , Del Rey Manga maintained the traditional Japanese name order to preserve puns based on the characters ' names . Funimation published the first and second anime seasons and the Extra Class OVAs in English . School Rumble has been translated into additional languages , although the final two episodes , the video games , and guidebooks have yet to be released outside Japan . 
 The manga was well received by Japanese @-@ language readers ; several volumes have appeared in the top manga sales charts . The North American English translations were less popular , but still ranked several times in the top 100 as well as ranking 145th for overall manga series sales in 2008 . Critics of the English @-@ language translation have been positive overall , praising Kobayashi for his art style and overall use of humor . However , the manga has received some criticism , mostly centered on some of the jokes and repetitive plot . The anime adaptation also sold well in Japan and was praised by Kobayashi and — for the English @-@ language translation — critics . The decision by Media Factory to aggressively pursue its intellectual property rights for School Rumble is believed by proponents of fansubs to have had a negative impact on the franchise 's release and sales in the North American market . 
 In 2009 , Kobayashi said " School Rumble is an important piece that I want to draw more , but I wanted to do more other things so I ended it . When I have some time , I would like to draw their adult days in a seinen magazine . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 School Rumble is a romantic shōnen comedy revolving around the daily lives of the students of Class 2 @-@ C at the fictional Yagami High School , along with their friends and families . The main female protagonist is Tenma Tsukamoto , an unremarkable second @-@ year high school student who secretly admires her eccentric , enigmatic , nice @-@ guy classmate , Oji Karasuma . Tenma struggles to confess her feelings to Karasuma . He remains oblivious to her interest , instead seeking fulfillment by indulging in curry . The main male protagonist , delinquent Kenji Harima , similarly yearns for Tenma , attending school solely to be near her . Like Tenma , Harima has difficulty declaring his love , and whenever he summons the courage to do so , circumstances conspire against him . 
 Harima complicates the love triangle through constant bumbling , and misunderstandings among the students aggravate the situation . Harima becomes involved with Tenma 's close friend , Eri Sawachika , after the pair are thrown together in mutually embarrassing situations . Later in the series , he develops a friendship with Tenma 's younger sister , Yakumo Tsukamoto , who becomes Harima 's assistant on a manga he writes . The plots of Harima 's stories portray a Harima @-@ like hero fighting to save a Tenma @-@ like damsel in various historical or fantastical situations , usually in battle against an obvious facsimile of Karasuma . After the hero saves the heroine , she always falls in love with him . Yakumo 's relationship with Harima causes problems with Class 2 @-@ C 's student representative , Haruki Hanai , who has a crush on Yakumo , with the sisters ' shared surname causing Harima and Hanai to misinterpret the object of each others ' respective infatuations . Although Harima manages to engineer romantic encounters with Tenma , her relationship with Karasuma nevertheless progresses , and Harima 's bonds with Eri and Yakumo grow stronger . Eventually Tenma musters the courage to confess her love , but shortly after Karasuma loses his memory . His amnesia gives a purpose to Tenma 's life ; she concentrates on her studies to become a doctor and help Karasuma . 
 Although School Rumble focuses on Harima and Tenma , the series explores a number of supporting characters . These include Tenma 's friends Mikoto Suo , who runs a kenpo dojo where her childhood friend , Hanai , trains , and Akira Takano , a mysterious and uncannily perceptive girl . As the story progresses , more major characters are introduced into the relationship web . 
 School Rumble Z , the " parallel comedy " , ends with Class 2 @-@ C 's graduation ceremony . At this point most of the plot @-@ lines are settled , but there is no clear resolution for the main protagonists . Karasuma still suffers from memory loss , and although Harima attends the ceremony with Eri , their relationship status remains the same . There is a scene in the last chapter which could either be an imagination from Max or a flashforward , which shows Harima and Eri visiting Karasuma and the Tsukamoto sisters together , with Eri carrying a child in her arms . 
 = = Development and production = = 
 Jin Kobayashi began writing School Rumble , his debut work , in 2002 . He stated to an audience at Honolulu 's 2006 Kawaii Kon convention that he started writing the series because he found the idea of a manga involving a delinquent falling in love interesting . Kobayashi 's favorite character , Kenji Harima , is based largely on an amalgam of various friends , although he estimates " about 30 % " of Harima is a reflection of himself . However , despite putting most of his personal feelings into the female characters , he stated that <unk> Suga , a minor supporting character , is the most autobiographical . Most of the other characters are based on memories of former high @-@ school classmates ; Kobayashi recalled that he had no real idea of their voices when drawing them , and it was not until much later , when he heard the voice actors ' interpretations during the production of the anime series , that he knew how they should sound . He acknowledged that some characters are more developed than others ; in reply to a fan question about the mysterious Akira Takano , he admitted that , despite the closeness he feels for her , he did not put much emphasis on Takano and planned to develop her love @-@ life slowly . Kobayashi intentionally centered his story arcs around misunderstandings which he then resolves , since he believes " if there 's no misunderstanding then there 's no funny story . " He claims that none of his stories are based on real @-@ life events , although when pressed admits the possibility of some resemblances but without divulging specific details . 
 Kobayashi and his editors collaborated on the plotlines . Kobayashi would then draw the basic illustrations for each chapter before passing his material to assistants to finish . As the series ' manga artist , Kobayashi also designed the cover art . Originally , the fifth volume 's front cover was to feature Akira Takano , but after re @-@ reading the volume Kobayashi concluded that since much of its plot in that volume revolves around Karen Ichijo , she should be on the cover instead . Desiring to feature a male character , he placed Harima on the cover of volume six . Kobayashi designed a poster to commemorate the ending of the series with the final chapter of School Rumble Z. 
 An anime adaptation of the series was never envisaged by Kobayashi , and he was skeptical of the project when first approached . Negotiations and preparation took some time , but he claims to be happy with the end result . On viewing the first anime footage , Kobayashi was astonished ; he recalls in an interview his emotions at the time , stating " I was incredibly touched by it . Completely overcome . " Impressed with the adaptation of his work , he praises the anime staff for their achievement , although conceding that School Rumble probably lent itself to the anime format . He cites the fishing episode , for which he supplied the voice acting for several minor parts , as his favorite . 
 Kobayashi allowed the voice actors who voiced his characters significant freedom to interpret them as they chose . There were a number of cast changes throughout the production ; Ami <unk> , the voice actress for Tenma , had initially auditioned for the role of Yakumo , and between School Rumble 's first and second seasons the voice actors for both Karen Ichijo and Yoko Sasakura were replaced . Mako Sakurai took over Karen 's role from Yuuka Nanri , and Aya Hirano replaced Akiko <unk> as Yoko . 
 The artbox design for Funimation 's North American release of the School Rumble anime resembles a miniature metal locker , and each of the individually released DVDs comes with heavy duty magnets . The discs include subtitled interviews with the Japanese voice actors , which were compiled onto a third DVD for the full first season release . In 2007 , Funimation ran a drawing contest prior to releasing the anime in North America . The grand prize included a new computer with software for developing anime and manga . The United Kingdom anime release by Revelation Films saw the same limited edition box as Funimation , along with two standard editions . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 Jin Kobayashi wrote and illustrated both School Rumble and School Rumble Z. School Rumble was serialized by Kodansha in Weekly Shōnen Magazine from October 2002 to July 2008 . It further appeared in issues of Shōnen Magazine 's Magazine Special , and comprised one chapter of the seasonal Shōnen Magazine Wonder ( <unk> ) . The collected works were released in Japan by Kodansha . School Rumble Z was produced in Magazine Special from August 2008 to May 2009 . Concluding the series , a compiled volume was released on June 17 , 2009 . 
 As a guide to the contents of each chapter , musical notations were added before the chapter number . In School Rumble , chapters marked with a sharp sign ( ♯ ) concern the main plot development focusing around Tenma and Harima , while side stories dealing with supporting characters are indicated by a flat sign ( ♭ ) . The one exception to this pattern in the first series is the chapter that appears in Shōnen Magazine Wonder , which uses the natural sign ( ♮ ) . School Rumble Z uses the natural sign for every chapter . The manga volumes of School Rumble contain original bonus chapters that use no musical notation ; these are normally one page in length , but the seventh volume spreads its bonus chapter over several pages with each page telling a self @-@ contained story . 
 Del Rey Manga , in North America , and Tanoshimi in the United Kingdom licensed School Rumble for an English @-@ language release . It has also been translated into other languages , although the German @-@ language release which Tokyopop initially published was cancelled and later continued by Egmont Manga & Anime . Del Rey released the first English @-@ language volume on February 28 , 2006 , and the latest — volumes 14 @-@ 16 in an omnibus — on July 27 , 2010 . Following Kodansha 's lead , the Del Rey translation places the main plot chapters first followed by the side stories . Del Rey also retained the Japanese naming order to preserve puns and humor involving the names of the characters . The manga ceased to be published in North America after Del Rey became defunct . As of December 2012 , Kodansha USA has not resumed the series ' publication as they have with other Del Rey titles . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 TV Tokyo adapted the School Rumble manga for two 26 @-@ episode television sketch show series , and five additional episodes . The first season was broadcast in Japan from October 10 , 2004 to March 29 , 2005 , followed by two original video animation ( OVA ) episodes entitled School Rumble : Extra Class ( <unk> , School Rumble OVA <unk> <unk> ) , which were released on December 22 , 2005 . The second season , School Rumble : 2nd Semester ( <unk> , School Rumble <unk> ) , ran from April 2 to September 24 , 2006 . 
 Although a third series — School Rumble : Third Semester ( <unk> , School Rumble <unk> ) — was drawn up in the form of 24 episode synopses , the series was never animated . Instead a two @-@ episode mini @-@ series was released as episodes 25 and 26 of School Rumble : Third Semester . The first 24 episodes follow the manga 's storyline between the end of School Rumble : 2nd Semester and the Third Semester mini @-@ series ; the promotional videos of the mini @-@ series on the anime 's website instead of previews of a new season confirmed that the remaining 24 episodes would not be animated . The School Rumble : Third Semester episodes were released with special editions of volumes 21 and 22 of the School Rumble manga , the first on July 17 and the second on September 17 , 2008 . 
 School Rumble , School Rumble : 2nd Semester , and School Rumble : Extra Class were later licensed for an English @-@ language audience by Funimation in North America , Madman Entertainment in Australasia and the first three volumes of season one by Revelation Films in the United Kingdom . On September 1 , 2009 Funimation re @-@ released School Rumble : First Semester and Extra class as a compilation . 2nd Semester was re @-@ released as an entire season with a new rating of TV @-@ MA . The anime has also been released in other languages , and Funimation have made several dubbed episodes of School Rumble and School Rumble : 2nd Semester available as streaming content on the Internet . The Funimation Channel began airing the first season of School Rumble on September 1 , <unk> Rumble : 2nd Semester and the Extra Class OVA has also aired on the Funimation Channel . The 2008 's Future Film Festival in Bologna , Italy screened School Rumble : 2nd Semester . 
 The anime 's first season focuses on Tenma , Harima , and Karasuma , and Harima 's relationships with other females including Sawachika and Yakumo . Its second season involves more of the secondary cast . The Extra Class OVAs are compiled from various first season storylines . Both the Third Semester synopses and episodes return to the main cast . The anime 's structure has been compared to Azumanga Daioh , with thematic influences from Full Metal Panic ? <unk> . In places it makes deliberate use of unconventional nomenclature ; the title of episode 25 of season one is a set of pictograms , while episode 26 's title has 187 characters in the Japanese original . In season two , the Japanese title for episode 26 consists of just a period . 
 The narrative of the School Rumble anime is designed to mirror that of the manga , which results in multiple short story segments with no significant connection . Shown from the perspective of its characters — notably Tenma and Harima as they attempt similar ploys to get their crush to notice their affection — the anime uses absurdist humor which often combines elements of popular culture to explore the love @-@ triangle , with jokes that work on multiple levels . One such example , highlighted by Lisa Marie , reviewer for Anime Today , is the bike chase scene in episode 1 of season one . She notes that while anyone can appreciate the chase 's inherent humor , those familiar with Initial D will find another level of appreciation that nevertheless does not interfere with viewers who do not catch the deeper reference . Lisa Marie comments " I certainly admit watching an insane bike chase cross paths with Initial D 's famous <unk> has a bit more cachet when you know why there 's a <unk> rendered race car in slow moving Eurobeat . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Two anime soundtracks and five maxi single albums based on the anime 's opening and closing themes have been released , with all but the second season 's closing theme having both a regular and limited edition . In addition , three two @-@ disc drama CDs and three radio dramas have been released on CD . Eight image albums — one for each of the main characters — have also been released , in both a regular and limited edition run . 
 On December 5 , 2004 , Yokohama <unk> held a concert entitled School Rumble <unk> Come ! come ! well @-@ come ? party ( スクールランブル <unk> Come ! come ! well @-@ come ? party ) , featuring the voice acting cast of School Rumble . The event was released on DVD on March 24 , 2005 . Announced around the time of the Japanese release of volume 15 , from July 21 through July 25 , 2005 a stage play called School Rumble Super <unk> School Rumble – <unk> dayo Harima @-@ kun ! - ( School Rumble <unk> 〜 <unk> 、 <unk> ! 〜 ) recapping Season 1 of School Rumble was performed . It was released on DVD on October 10 , 2005 . Unicorn Table , the soundtrack artists for School Rumble , performed songs from the anime from December 7 – 9 , 2007 at the New York Anime Festival , and again on April 26 , 2008 at the Rochester Institute of Technology in Rochester , New York for the Tora @-@ Con anime convention . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Three video games based on School Rumble have been developed and released in Japan . Marvelous Entertainment published the first game for the PlayStation 2 entitled School Rumble : Sleep Helps a Girl Grow ( スクールランブル <unk> ? , School Rumble : <unk> Ko wa <unk> ) on July 21 , 2005 . It was later reissued on August 10 , 2006 , as a The Best range budget release . Marvelous Entertainment released a second game , entitled School Rumble : 2nd Semester – Summer Training Camp ( of fear ? ) ! ! Ghost 's Appearing in the Western @-@ styled Building ! ? Fighting Over the Treasure ! ! ! ( <unk> <unk> ( ? ) <unk> ! <unk> ! ? <unk> ! ! ! <unk> ? , School Rumble <unk> <unk> no ( ? ) <unk> ! <unk> ni <unk> <unk> ! ? <unk> o <unk> <unk> <unk> ! ! ! no Maki ) on July 20 , 2006 , also for the PlayStation 2 . The story revolves around the School Rumble cast hearing a rumor of treasure hidden within a mansion . Two versions were produced ; a regular and a limited edition , the latter of which included a drama CD , memorial album , and a special box with variant cover art . On June 28 , 2007 , this game was also re @-@ released as a " Best Collection " . School Rumble : Sis , This is serious ! ( スクールランブル <unk> ! ? , School Rumble : <unk> Jiken Desu ! ) , published on July 7 , 2005 for the PlayStation Portable by Bandai . It has an original story based around Karasuma suffering a sudden collapse . Although the story centers on Tenma , the player can take the perspective of other characters to obtain clues for solving the mystery . 
 School Rumble has been the basis of two light novels and four guidebooks . The light novels , School Rumble : Koi , <unk> <unk> ni ( スクールランブル 〜 <unk> 、 <unk> 〜 ) and School Rumble : Me wa <unk> no Me ( スクールランブル 〜 <unk> 〜 , School Rumble : Me is Me for Megalodon ) , were written by Hiroko Tokita and illustrated by Jin Kobayashi and published in April 2004 and December 2007 respectively . They were later translated by Tong Li Comics into Traditional Chinese . Jin Kobayashi and his editors also wrote and illustrated four official guidebooks for the series : School Rumble : Private File , School Rumble : Official File , School Rumble : Pleasure File , and School Rumble : Treasure File . 
 School Rumble has spawned lots of merchandise featuring its characters , including T @-@ shirts and figurines . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 2004 , School Rumble 's Japanese license holder , Media Factory , declared its titles off @-@ limits to fan @-@ made subtitled translations — a practice known as fansubbing . The directory website <unk> later removed all links to fansubs of Media Factory 's work in response to a cease @-@ and @-@ desist notice issued by the license holder , although fansub group ' Wannabe <unk> ' continued their fansubbing regardless . Media Factory @-@ owned anime has been the subject of debate over the validity of fansubbing practice . Proponents believe School Rumble would have more quickly received an English license had fansubs been allowed to circulate more freely , generating viewer interest . 
 = = = Taiwanese television station fine = = = 
 On January 19 , 2012 , the Taiwanese children 's channel Momo Kids TV was reported to have received a fine of NT $ 600 @,@ 000 ( about $ 20 @,@ 333 in U.S. currency ) for broadcasting an episode of School Rumble on December 26 , which according to parental complaints contained " high school students watching a pornographic movie together " , along with " a scene of jiggling breasts " and " actors moaning in pornographic movies . " However , it is worth noting that the show has aired on various international Cartoon Network stations without controversy . 
 = = Sales = = 
 The School Rumble manga had a successful sales run in Japan and the North American English market . In Japan , several volumes managed to chart : Volume 13 was the ninth best @-@ selling manga for the week of June 21 , 2006 , before falling to tenth the following week ; Volume 15 reached 4th place for the week of December 20 , also falling to 10th the following week ; and Volume 17 came 7th for the week of June 20 , 2007 , subsequently dropping to 9th . School Rumble Z ranked 18th for the week of June 15 , 2009 . Del Rey 's North American translation sold well , although not quite as well as in Japan . Volume 3 was ranked 99th in September 2006 ; volume 4 was 96th in December ; volume 5 was 98th in April 2007 ; volume 12 was 141st in November 2008 ; and volume 12 was 169th in May 2009 . Overall the series ranked as the 145th best @-@ selling English translated manga series for 2008 . 
 Similarly , the anime adaptation of School Rumble also sold very well in Japan according to the Oricon charts . The Japanese DVD release of First Semester saw fluctuating sales for each volume with each charting within the top 45 . Volumes 1 and 5 have the best showings at five times at 15 and twice at 17 respectively , while the final three volumes ( 7 through 9 ) were the least successful with volume 8 being the lowest ranking twice at 45 . While the 2nd Semester continued to sell well , overall sales did not chart as well as the previous season . Most of the DVDs ranked in the a range from 50s to 70s and all of them ranked just twice . Volume 1 ranked the best at 41 , followed by volume 4 at 49 ; volume 6 ranked lowest at 100 . The Extra Class OVA also ranked once at 66 . 
 The DVD of the voice actor 's live performance , come ! come ! well @-@ come Party , ranked once at 177 on Oricon charts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Manga series = = = 
 Although generally well @-@ received , the manga has also attracted some criticism . Eduardo M. Chavez , of Mania.com , recalls being initially put off by the title , which for him conjured images of battles more physical than emotional . After glancing through the first volume , he was surprised to find his assumption wrong , and concluded that it was appropriately named . While he gives a largely positive review , Chavez finds the series ' artwork " simple " and unimpressive . He notes that the first volume becomes slightly repetitive , so praises the way that Kobayashi introduces new themes to the second , bringing variety to the setting . Remarking on Kobayashi 's ability to draw on numerous influences , Chavez applauds the manga artist for finding fresh ways of using old themes , preventing School Rumble from becoming derivative . He reserves his highest praise for the " flat " chapters dealing with Yakumo . In the next two volumes Chavez approves of the mixture of comedy and romance and the way the characters " grow up " , although acknowledging that while the manga 's style suits his personal preferences it will not be to everyone 's taste . Jason Thompson in Manga : The Complete Guide criticises jokes as " predictable " and gives the manga 2 stars of 5 . 
 Sakura Eries , also of Mania.com , gave volumes five , six , and eight to eleven positive ratings overall . She noted that volume five may appeal to readers more interested in the side characters , and that appreciating Kobayashi 's humor in the second half of chapter eight " requires a bit more mental effort " . In volume ten , she remarks that while Kobayashi borrows the oft @-@ used cliché of a disastrous school play , he manages to add enough twists to make it unique . The play 's climax , however , confused her more than it amused her . 
 Carlo Santos , of Anime News Network , gave the English releases of volumes two , three , four , and seven mixed — but largely favorable — B @-@ range reviews . Volume nine he awards a C rating . He approved of the character of Harima , particularly enjoying jokes comparing him to St. Francis of Assisi . Santos found the bonus chapters in volumes three and four , that deal with Yakumo , touching . On the other hand , he criticizes various aspects of the artwork and , by volume seven , laments the staleness of recycled jokes . Despite volume nine 's strong start , by its end he relates that , although there were some funny moments , he had become weary of its repetitive plot . A fellow reviewer from Anime News Network , Carl Kimlinger , decided after reviewing four volumes that while the early volumes do not assist plot development , neither do they detract from the manga 's appeal ; he too had a positive impression overall . Kimlinger found the later volumes better and more entertaining , although not always during the romantic moments . 
 Chavez praised Del Rey 's translation for retaining the manga 's original identity ; the header , bumper artwork , character biographies , and front covers are all but identical to the Japanese . Eries also thanked Del Rey 's translation notes for clearing up some misconceptions for her , although she later concluded that their quality has deteriorated as the series progresses . 
 = = = Anime series = = = 
 Like the manga , the anime has been well received but does not avoid criticism ; in particular the quality of the animation for both seasons , including the OVAs , has attracted mixed reviews . Some of the humor and romantic elements have been derided while the English dubbing and soundtrack have been universally praised . Most reviewers took the position that , even if they dislike certain elements , the series as a whole contains something that makes them want to see more ; a view summed up by Chris Beveridge of Mania.com , who writes : 
 The stories are really quite simple as well as being things we 've seen done dozens of times before . Yet it manages to infuse it with a great deal of fun and humor even if it is familiar . There 's a certain energy here that works in the shows [ sic ] favor as well as bringing in some different elements in terms of the characters . It also doesn 't hurt that several of the characters really are quite dim which is a nice contrast from the usual kind of leads . 
 Beveridge cautioned that because the anime was designed around the non @-@ linear format of the manga , its transitions might at first be troublesome for the viewer , but by the final volume finds the anime in all its aspects far superior . 
 While School Rumble is generally recognised as a shōnen title targeting the young male market , Katherine Luther , staff reviewer for About.com , refers to it as a shōjo title aimed at girls and young women . Lisa Marie , reviewer for <unk> 's Anime Today podcast , agrees that others , notably males , might see the series as shōjo . Luther calls the first DVD " the perfect back @-@ to @-@ school accessory " , while Marie characterizes School Rumble as " insane " , asserting it appears on the surface more laid back than other titles like Excel Saga and <unk> + <unk> . However , it uses its " cast to break [ ... ] every rule of reality , but it plays everything so straight [ that ] it takes you a moment to realize what just happened doesn 't make any sense . " A fan of the subgenre , she praises the anime it for its surreal humour , and for being " anime newbie friendly " in that its jokes work on multiple levels . Not all are of Japanese origin — such as a reference to the long triangular resolution of Star Wars ' Return of the Jedi — giving the series broad appeal . 
 Anime News Network 's reviewers found much to enjoy about the first series , although Theron Martin warns that the first DVD should be " watched in small doses , as trying to tackle too much of it in one sitting will elevate the suicide rate of your brain cells " . Carl Kimlinger comments that " from the moment the words ' School Rumble ' come spinning onto the screen , you know you 're in for ... undiluted good times " , and that the title is " two of the greatest animation non @-@ sequiturs you 're likely to see anytime soon " . Carlo Santos praises volume six 's bizarre comedy , but laments its romantic elements as being too generic . Overall , his rating is mediocre , saying that " although this disc technically marks the end of [ the first season of ] School Rumble , it 's really more of a pause , seeing as how the last few episodes simply ride along with the plot rather than try to reach a dramatic finish " . Reviewers from Mania.com followed this pattern ; Dani Moure was skeptical of the series ' long @-@ term entertainment value , but like fellow reviewer Danielle Van Gorder , found his early indifference fading as the story develops . IGN 's Jeff Harris , N.S. Davidson , and David F. Smith gave mostly positive reviews , although Davidson believes the audio and extras had begun to wane by volume five . Jakub <unk> of <unk> rated the first season an 8 / 10 , stating that he enjoyed it more than some other anime series he had previously watched , and the style — if not always the color — of Funimation 's metallic locker artbox for School Rumble 's English translation of the first season was welcomed . 
 According to Theron Martin , the OVA series School Rumble : Extra Class was made mostly for devoted fans ; claiming that familiarity with the series is almost a necessity before watching it , although he later came to the view that it may also be useful as a sampler of the series . Chris Beveridge gives the OVA series an overall negative review . He did not highlight a single specific reason , instead observing that although all elements that " make the TV series enjoyable are certainly present here , they just feel weaker " . However , it did make him want to watch more of the television series , thus serving its intended purpose in keeping interest in the series alive . Katherine Luther endorsed the view that viewers need to be familiar with the story , but reviewed the OVA positively . While she noted lulls in the action , she believes fans will be able to overlook this . Unlike Martin , Luther did not believe the OVA is a good introduction to School Rumble , due to its short sequences and seemingly random nature . 
 Zac Bertschy of Anime News Network declined to post commentary on the preview announcement for the second season , claiming " we assume if you loved School Rumble , you 're gonna check out the sequel regardless of what anyone says , so why bother reviewing it ? " David F. Smith from IGN gave the first part of season two a rating of 6 / 10 , with lower scores for the Funimation extras and higher ones for the plot and story . Specifically , Smith praised the anime for never taking itself seriously , and the studio for not cutting its budget for sight gags — something he notes that other companies do . Tim Jones from THEM Anime Reviews found the second season funny and <unk> , and Bamboo Dong of Anime News Network praised the second season for not conforming to the conventions of reality . She complimented it for focusing more on the other students and their relationships than on the main love triangle . Chris Beveridge claimed that , although it comes across well , the season should not be watched in a marathon sitting . He was more critical of Funimation 's packaging , preferring the first season 's metal locker boxart to the packing for the half @-@ season sets . 
 = = = General = = = 
 Kobayashi , Jin ( 2002 – 2008 ) . School Rumble ( in Japanese ) 1 – 22 . Japan : Kodansha . 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = Danube crested newt = 
 The Danube crested newt or Danube newt ( Triturus dobrogicus ) is a species of newt found in central and eastern Europe , along the basin of the Danube river and some of its tributaries and in the Dnieper delta . It has a smaller and more slender body than the other crested newts in genus Triturus but like these , males develop a conspicuous jagged seam on back and tail during breeding season . 
 For half of the year or longer , adults live in slow @-@ flowing river margins , lakes , or ponds , where reproduction takes place . Males perform a courtship display , and females lay around 200 eggs individually onto leaves of aquatic plants . Larvae develop two to four months in the water before reaching metamorphosis . For the remainder of the year , the newts live in shady land habitats , usually forests . Although not yet considered threatened , Danube crested newt populations have declined significantly , the reason being mainly habitat loss . The species is protected by law in the European Union . 
 = = Systematics and taxonomy = = 
 The Danube crested newt was described as a variety of the northern crested newt ( Triturus cristatus ) by C. <unk> in 1903 . Later , it was considered a subspecies until genetic analysis supported its recognition as a separate species in the crested newt species complex . The northern crested newt is its likely sister species according to a molecular phylogenetic study based on mitochondrial DNA ; analysis of nuclear DNA gives however some conflicting results regarding this sister relationship . 
 Separated populations from the Danube Delta and the Pannonian Basin ( see Distribution and habitats ) were described as two subspecies , T. dobrogicus dobrogicus and T. dobrogicus <unk> , in 2000 . Later genetic study , however , did not support the distinction of these two forms . 
 = = Description = = 
 Measuring 13 to 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) long in total , the Danube crested newt is the smallest crested newt species . It has a more slender , elongate body than the other species , well adapted to swimming , with a narrow head and relatively short limbs . This body shape has evolved through an increase in the number of rib @-@ bearing vertebrae : there are 16 – 17 of them in T. dobrogicus , the highest number among the crested newts . 
 The Danube crested newt 's back and sides are dark brown with black spots and white stippling . The belly is orange to red ( in other crested newts , it is usually yellow or orange – yellow ) , with small or medium @-@ sized black blotches that have sharp edges . Like all crested newts , T. dobrogicus males develop a crest on their back and tail during breeding phase , which can be quite high and jagged and usually starts between the eyes and nostrils . Another feature of males at breeding season is a bluish @-@ white stripe along the tail . 
 = = Distribution and habitats = = 
 The Danube crested newt is found in three allopatric areas of distribution from central to eastern Europe : 
 Pannonian basin : From easternmost Austria through Czech Republic ( small part in the southeast ) , Slovakia , Hungary , northern Croatia , Bosnia @-@ Hercegovina ( marginally ) , northern Serbia to the east of Romania and southeast of Ukraine ( <unk> region ) . This includes the middle floodplains of the Danube river and some of its tributaries , including the Drava , Sava and Tisza . 
 Lower Danube and Danube delta : Separated from the Pannonian basin by an area where the northern crested newt occurs , this central part ranges from southern Romania , northern Bulgaria , and small parts of southern Moldova to the Odessa region of southern Ukraine . 
 Dnieper delta : This small area of distribution in southern Ukraine was reported in 2005 . It is now isolated by steppe from the Danube basin , but it has been suggested that these areas were connected through marshlands during the last glacial maximum , when the level of the Black Sea was around 100 metres lower than today . This range may also extend to the lower basins of the Dniester and Bug rivers . 
 In addition to the northern crested newt to the north , the Danube crested newt 's range borders that of the Italian crested newt ( T. carnifex ) in the west , and that of the Macedonian ( T. <unk> ) and Balkan ( T. <unk> ) crested newts in the south . 
 Compared to the other crested newt species , the Danube crested newt is more adapted to life along a river system and frequently occurs in flowing water and together with fish . Typical breeding sites are slow @-@ flowing river margins , oxbow lakes , flooded marshland , larger ponds , or ditches , provided abundant underwater vegetation is available . During land phase , the newts live in deciduous forests or groves , bushlands , or meadows . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Danube crested newts have the longest aquatic phase in the genus Triturus . Adults move to their breeding sites in February or March and usually stay there for six months ; occasionally , they may even stay longer or return to the water in autumn . Males court females with a display of ritualised body movements . When they have gained the female 's interest , they guide it over a spermatophore they deposit on the ground , which the female then takes up with her cloaca . The eggs are fertilised internally . As in other crested newts , a female lays around 200 eggs per season , which are folded individually into leaves of aquatic plants . Larvae develop over two to four months until they reach metamorphosis and leave the water . 
 Both in water and on land , the newts are largely nocturnal . In their aquatic habitats , they hide under vegetation , and on land , they use structures such as logs , rocks , or small animal burrows for cover . They feed mainly on different invertebrates , but in the water may also prey on tadpoles and smaller newts . Predators include herons and other birds , snakes such as the grass snake , and various carnivorous mammals . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The population of the Danube crested newt has declined significantly , and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed its conservation status as " near threatened " . The main threat is habitat destruction by humans , especially through drainage , damming , or pollution . Hybridisation with other crested newt species and a loss of breeding ponds because of decreasing spring rain in the southern range ( possibly due to global warming ) are also seen as threats . Like the other crested newts , T. dobrogicus is listed in the Bern Convention ( appendix II ) and the EU Habitats Directive ( annexes II and IV ) , and capture , disturbance , killing , trade , and destruction of habitats are prohibited . 
 = Whale shark = 
 The whale shark ( Rhincodon typus ) is a slow @-@ moving filter feeding shark and the largest known extant fish species . The largest confirmed individual had a length of 12 @.@ 65 m ( 41 @.@ 5 ft ) and a weight of about 21 @.@ 5 t ( 47 @,@ 000 lb ) . Unconfirmed claims of considerably larger individuals , over 14 m ( 46 ft ) long and weighing at least 30 t ( 66 @,@ 000 lb ) , are not uncommon . It holds many records for sheer size in the animal kingdom , most notably being by far the largest living <unk> vertebrate . It is the sole member of the genus Rhincodon and the only extant member of the family , <unk> ( called <unk> and <unk> before 1984 ) , which belongs to the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes . The species originated about 60 million years ago . 
 The whale shark is found in open waters of the tropical oceans and is rarely found in water below 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) . Modeling suggests a lifespan of about 70 years , but measurements have proven difficult . They have very large mouths and are filter feeders , which is a feeding mode that occurs in only two other sharks , the megamouth shark and the basking shark . They feed almost exclusively on plankton and , therefore , are completely harmless to humans . 
 The species was distinguished in April 1828 after the <unk> of a 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) specimen in Table Bay , South Africa . Andrew Smith , a military doctor associated with British troops stationed in Cape Town , described it the following year . The name " whale shark " directly refers to the fish 's size , being as large as some species of whales and also that it is a filter feeder like baleen whales . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The whale shark inhabits all tropical and warm @-@ temperate seas . The fish is primarily pelagic , living in the open sea but not in the greater depths of the ocean . Seasonal feeding aggregations occur at several coastal sites such as the southern and eastern parts of South Africa ; Saint Helena Island in the South Atlantic Ocean ; Gulf of Tadjoura in Djibouti , Gladden Spit in Belize ; Ningaloo Reef in Western Australia ; Lakshadweep , Gulf of Kutch and Saurashtra coast of Gujarat in India ; Útila in Honduras ; Southern Leyte ; <unk> , <unk> and Batangas in the Philippines ; off Isla Mujeres and Isla Holbox in Yucatan and Bahía de los Ángeles in Baja California , México ; Ujung Kulon National Park in Indonesia ; <unk> Bay National Park in <unk> , Papua , Indonesia ; Nosy Be in Madagascar Off Tofo Reef near Inhambane in Mozambique ; the Tanzanian islands of Mafia , Pemba , Zanzibar ; Gulf of Tadjoura in Djibouti , the Ad <unk> Islands in the Gulf of Oman and Al <unk> islands in the Arabian Sea ; and , very rarely , Eilat , Israel and Aqaba , Jordan . Although typically seen offshore , it has been found closer to land , entering lagoons or coral atolls , and near the mouths of estuaries and rivers . Its range is generally restricted to about 30 ° latitude . It is capable of diving to depths of at least 1 @,@ 286 m ( 4 @,@ 219 ft ) , and is migratory . On 7 February 2012 , a large whale shark was found floating 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) off the coast of Karachi , Pakistan . The length of the specimen was said to be between 11 and 12 m ( 36 and 39 ft ) , with a weight of around 15 @,@ 000 kg ( 33 @,@ 000 lb ) . 
 In 2011 , more than 400 whale sharks gathered off the Yucatan Coast . It was one of the largest gatherings of whale sharks recorded . Aggregations in that area are among the most reliable seasonal gatherings known for whale sharks , with large numbers occurring in most years between May and September . Associated ecotourism has grown rapidly to unsustainable levels . 
 = = Description = = 
 Whale sharks have a mouth that can be 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) wide , containing 300 to 350 rows of tiny teeth and 10 filter pads which it uses to filter feed . Whale sharks have five large pairs of gills . The head is wide and flat with two small eyes at the front . Whale sharks are grey with a white belly . Their skin is marked with pale yellow spots and stripes which are unique to each individual . The whale shark has three prominent ridges along its sides . Its skin can be up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The shark has a pair of dorsal fins and pectoral fins . Juveniles ' tails have a larger upper fin than lower fin , while the adult tail becomes semilunate . The whale shark 's spiracles are just behind its eyes . 
 The whale shark is the largest non @-@ cetacean animal in the world . The average size of adult whale sharks is estimated at 9 @.@ 7 m ( 31 @.@ 82 ft ) and 9 t ( 20 @,@ 000 lb ) . Several specimens over 18 m in length have been reported The largest verified specimen was caught on 11 November 1947 , near Baba Island , in Karachi , Pakistan . It was 12 @.@ 65 m ( 41 @.@ 50 ft ) long , weighed about 21 @.@ 5 t ( 47 @,@ 000 lb ) , and had a girth of 7 m ( 23 @.@ 0 ft ) . Stories exist of vastly larger specimens – quoted lengths of 18 m ( 59 ft ) and 45 @.@ 5 t ( 100 @,@ 000 lb ) are common in the popular literature , but no scientific records support their existence . In 1868 , the Irish natural scientist Edward Perceval Wright obtained several small whale shark specimens in the Seychelles , but claimed to have observed specimens in excess of 15 m ( 49 @.@ 2 ft ) , and tells of shark specimens surpassing 21 m ( 68 @.@ 9 ft ) . 
 In a 1925 publication , Hugh M. Smith described a huge animal caught in a bamboo fish trap in Thailand in 1919 . The shark was too heavy to pull ashore , but Smith estimated the shark was at least 17 m ( 56 ft ) long , and weighed around 37 t . These measurements have been exaggerated to 43 t ( 95 @,@ 000 lb ) and a more precise 17 @.@ 98 m ( 59 @.@ 0 ft ) in recent years . A shark caught in 1994 off Tainan County , southern Taiwan , reportedly weighed 35 @.@ 8 t ( 79 @,@ 000 lb ) . There have even been unverified claims of whale sharks of up to 23 metres ( 75 ft ) and 100 tonnes ( 220 @,@ 000 lb ) . In 1934 , a ship named the <unk> came across a whale shark in the southern Pacific Ocean , rammed it , and the shark became stuck on the prow of the ship , supposedly with 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) on one side and 12 @.@ 2 m ( 40 ft ) on the other . No reliable documentation exists for these claims and they remain " fish stories " . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The whale shark is a filter feeder – one of only three known filter feeding shark species ( along with the basking shark and the megamouth shark ) . It feeds on plankton including copepods , krill , fish eggs , Christmas Island red crab larvae and small nektonic life , such as small squid or fish . It also feeds on clouds of eggs during mass spawning of fish and corals . The many rows of vestigial teeth play no role in feeding . Feeding occurs either by ram filtration , in which the animal opens its mouth and swims forward , pushing water and food into the mouth , or by active suction feeding , in which the animal opens and closes its mouth , sucking in volumes of water that are then expelled through the gills . In both cases , the filter pads serve to separate food from water . These unique , black sieve @-@ like structures are presumed to be modified gill rakers . Food separation in whale sharks is by cross @-@ flow filtration , in which the water travels nearly parallel to the filter pad surface , not perpendicularly through it , before passing to the outside , while denser food particles continue to the back of the throat . This is an extremely efficient filtration method that minimises fouling of the filter pad surface . Whale sharks have been observed " coughing " , presumably to clear a build @-@ up of particles from the filter pads . Whale sharks migrate to feed and possibly to breed . 
 The whale shark is an active feeder , targeting concentrations of plankton or fish . It is able to ram filter feed or can gulp in a stationary position . This is in contrast to the passive feeding basking shark , which does not pump water . Instead , it swims to force water across its gills . 
 A juvenile whale shark is estimated to eat 21 kg ( 46 pounds ) of plankton per day . 
 The BBC program Planet Earth filmed a whale shark feeding on a school of small fish . The same documentary showed footage of a whale shark timing its arrival to coincide with the mass spawning of fish shoals and feeding on the resultant clouds of eggs and sperm . 
 = = Behavior toward divers = = 
 Despite its size , the whale shark does not pose significant danger to humans . Whale sharks are docile fish and sometimes allow swimmers to catch a ride , although this practice is discouraged by shark scientists and conservationists because of the disturbance to the sharks . Younger whale sharks are gentle and can play with divers . Underwater photographers such as Fiona Ayerst have photographed them swimming close to humans without any danger . 
 The shark is seen by divers in many places , including the Bay Islands in Honduras , Thailand , the Philippines , the Maldives , the Red Sea , Western Australia ( Ningaloo Reef , Christmas Island ) , Taiwan , Panama ( Coiba Island ) , Belize , Tofo Beach in Mozambique , <unk> Bay ( Greater St. Lucia Wetland Park ) in South Africa , the Galapagos Islands , Saint Helena , Isla Mujeres , La Paz , Baja California Sur and Bahía de los Ángeles in Mexico , the Seychelles , West Malaysia , islands off eastern peninsular Malaysia , India , Sri Lanka , Oman , Fujairah , and Puerto Rico . Juveniles can be found near the shore in the Gulf of Tadjoura , near Djibouti . 
 = = In captivity = = 
 Two whale sharks were featured as the main attraction of Osaka Aquarium <unk> and as of 2005 , three whale sharks were in captivity at the Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium in Japan . The <unk> Aquarium in Kagoshima , Japan , also features a single adult whale shark as a major attraction . One was also on display in the Taiwan , Kenting National Museum of Biology and Aquarium and 5 are on display at the Yantai Aquarium in China . Four whale sharks , two males , Taroko and Yushan , and two females , Alice and Trixie , live in the Georgia Aquarium , in Atlanta , USA . Two male whale sharks , Ralph and Norton , died in captivity at the Georgia Aquarium on 11 January 2007 , and 13 June 2007 , respectively . The two females were added on 3 June 2006 and two more males in 2007 . All six whale sharks were imported from Taiwan , where whale sharks are called tofu sharks because of the taste and texture of the flesh ; the fishery from which they came has since closed . Two whale sharks live at Polar Ocean World in Qingdao , China . One whale shark was at the Atlantis Hotel in Dubai , but was released in March 2010 @.@ there are also 2 whale sharks in the <unk> aquarium in Mexico City . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Neither mating nor pupping of whale sharks has been observed . 
 The capture of a female in July 1996 that was pregnant with 300 pups indicated whale sharks are ovoviviparous . The eggs remain in the body and the females give birth to live young which are 40 to 60 cm ( 16 to 24 in ) long . Evidence indicates the pups are not all born at once , but rather the female retains sperm from one mating and produces a steady stream of pups over a prolonged period . They reach sexual maturity at around 30 years and their lifespan is an estimated 70 to 100 years . 
 On 7 March 2009 , marine scientists in the Philippines discovered what is believed to be the smallest living specimen of the whale shark . The young shark , measuring only 38 cm ( 15 in ) , was found with its tail tied to a stake at a beach in Pilar , Sorsogon , Philippines , and was released into the wild . Based on this discovery , some scientists no longer believe this area is just a feeding ground ; this site may be a birthing ground , as well . Both young whale sharks and pregnant females have been seen in the waters of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic Ocean , where numerous whale sharks can be spotted during the summer . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 There is currently no robust estimate of the global whale shark population . The species is considered vulnerable by the IUCN due to its long life span and late maturation . It is listed , along with six other species of sharks , under the CMS Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks . In 1998 , the Philippines banned all fishing , selling , importing , and exporting of whale sharks for commercial purposes , followed by India in May 2001 , and Taiwan in May 2007 . They are currently listed as a vulnerable species , but continue to be hunted in parts of Asia , such as Taiwan and China . In 2016 they are now listed as endangered . 
 In 2006 , Resorts World Sentosa announced its plans to bring in whale sharks for their marine life park . This was met with opposition from seven notable conservation societies . In 2009 , the plan was shelved in favour of a search for other alternatives . 
 In 2010 , the Gulf of Mexico oil spill resulted in 4 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 barrels ( 780 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil flowing into an area south of the Mississippi River Delta , where one @-@ third of all whale shark sightings in the northern part of the gulf have occurred in recent years . Sightings confirmed that the whale sharks were unable to avoid the oil slick , which was situated on the surface of the sea where the whale sharks feed for several hours at a time . No dead whale sharks were found . 
 This species was also added to Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) in 2003 to regulate the international trade of live specimens and its parts . 
 = = Human culture = = 
 In Vietnamese culture , the whale shark is revered as a deity called <unk> Ông , which literally translates as " Lord Fish " . 
 In the Philippines , it is called <unk> and <unk> . The whale shark is featured on the reverse of the Philippine 100 @-@ peso bill . By law snorkelers must maintain a distance of four feet from the sharks and there is a fine and possible jail time for anyone who touches the animals . 
 = Execution by elephant = 
 Execution by elephant was a common method of capital punishment in South and Southeast Asia , particularly in India , where Asian elephants were used to crush , dismember , or torture captives in public executions . The animals were trained and versatile , able to kill victims immediately or to torture them slowly over a prolonged period . Most commonly employed by royalty , the elephants were used to signify both the ruler 's absolute power and his ability to control wild animals . 
 The sight of elephants executing captives both horrified and attracted the interest of European travelers , and was recorded in numerous contemporary journals and accounts of life in Asia . The practice was eventually suppressed by the European empires that colonised the region in the 18th and 19th centuries . While primarily confined to Asia , the practice was occasionally adopted by Western powers , such as Ancient Rome and Carthage , particularly to deal with mutinous soldiers . 
 = = Cultural aspects = = 
 The intelligence , <unk> and versatility of elephants gave it considerable advantages over other wild animals such as lions and bears used as executioners by the Romans . Elephants are more tractable than horses : while a horse can be trained to charge into battle , it will not willingly trample an enemy soldier , and will instead step over him . Elephants will trample their enemies , hence the popularity of war elephants with generals such as Hannibal . Elephants can be trained to execute prisoners in a variety of ways , and can be taught to prolong the agony of the victim by inflicting a slow death by torture or to kill the condemned quickly by stepping on the head . 
 Historically , the elephants were under the constant control of a driver or mahout , thus enabling a ruler to grant a last @-@ minute reprieve and display merciful qualities . Several such exercises of mercy are recorded in various Asian kingdoms . The kings of Siam trained their elephants to roll the convicted person " about the ground rather slowly so that he is not badly hurt " . The Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great is said to have " used this technique to chastise ' rebels ' and then in the end the prisoners , presumably much chastened , were given their lives " . On one occasion , Akbar was recorded to have had a man thrown to the elephants to suffer five days of such treatment before pardoning him . Elephants were occasionally used in trial by ordeal in which the condemned prisoner was released if he managed to fend off the elephant . 
 The use of elephants in such fashion went beyond the common royal power to dispense life and death . Elephants have long been used as symbols of royal authority ( and still are in some places , such as Thailand , where white elephants are held in reverence ) . Their use as instruments of state power sent the message that the ruler was able to preside over very powerful creatures who were under total command . The ruler was thus seen as maintaining a moral and spiritual domination over wild beasts , adding to their authority and mystique among subjects . 
 = = Geographical scope = = 
 Execution by elephant has been done in many parts of the world , by both Western and Eastern empires . The earliest records of such executions date back to the classical period . However , the practice was already well established by that time and continued well into the 19th century . While African elephants are significantly larger than Asian elephants , African powers were not known to make as much use of the animals in warfare or ceremonial affairs compared to their Asian counterparts . 
 = = = Asian powers = = = 
 = = = = South Asia = = = = 
 = = = = = Sri Lanka = = = = = 
 Elephants were widely used across the Indian subcontinent and South Asia as a method of execution . The English sailor Robert Knox , writing in 1681 , described a method of execution by elephant which he had witnessed while being held captive in Sri Lanka . Knox says the elephants he witnessed had their tusks fitted with " sharp Iron with a socket with three edges " . After impaling the victim 's body with its tusks , the elephant would " then tear it in pieces , and throw it limb from limb " . 
 The 19th century traveler James Emerson Tennent comments that " a Kandyan [ Sri Lankan ] chief , who was witness to such scenes , has assured us that the elephant never once applied his tusks , but , placing his foot on the prostrate victim , plucked off his limbs in succession by a sudden movement of his trunk . " Knox 's book depicts exactly this method of execution in a famous drawing , " An Execution by an <unk> " ( see right ) . 
 Writing in 1850 , the British diplomat Henry Charles <unk> described a visit to one of the elephants that had been used by Sri Vikrama <unk> , the last king of Kandy , to execute criminals . Crushing by elephant had been abolished by the British after they overthrew the Kandyan kingdom in 1815 but the king 's execution elephant was still alive and evidently remembered its former duties . <unk> comments : 
 During the native dynasty it was the practice to train elephants to put criminals to death by trampling upon them , the creatures being taught to prolong the agony of the wretched sufferers by crushing the limbs , avoiding the vital parts . With the last tyrant king of Candy , this was a favourite mode of execution and as one of the elephant executioners was at the former capital during our sojourn there we were particularly anxious to test the creature 's sagacity and memory . The animal was mottled and of enormous size , and was quietly standing there with his keeper seated upon his neck ; the noble who accompanied us desired the man to dismount and stand on one side . 
 The chief then gave the word of command , ordering the creature to ' slay the wretch ! ' The elephant raised his trunk , and twined it , as if around a human being ; the creature then made motions as if he were depositing the man on the earth before him , then slowly raised his back @-@ foot , placing it alternately upon the spots where the limbs of the sufferer would have been . This he continued to do for some minutes ; then , as if satisfied that the bones must be crushed , the elephant raised his trunk high upon his head and stood motionless ; the chief then ordered him to ' complete his work , ' and the creature immediately placed one foot , as if upon the man 's abdomen , and the other upon his head , apparently using his entire strength to crush and terminate the wretch 's misery . 
 = = = = = India = = = = = 
 Elephants were used as executioners of choice in India for many centuries . Hindu and Muslim rulers executed tax evaders , rebels and enemy soldiers alike " under the feet of elephants " . The Hindu Manu Smriti or Laws of Manu , written down around AD 200 , prescribed execution by elephants for a number of offences . If property was stolen , for instance , " the king should have any thieves caught in connection with its disappearance executed by an elephant . " For example , in 1305 , the sultan of Delhi turned the deaths of Mongol prisoners into public entertainment by having them crushed by elephants . 
 During the Mughal era , " it was a common mode of execution in those days to have the offender trampled underfoot by an elephant . " Captain Alexander Hamilton , writing in 1727 , described how the Mughal ruler Shah Jahan ordered an offending military commander to be carried " to the Elephant Garden , and there to be executed by an Elephant , which is reckoned to be a shameful and terrible Death " . The Mughal Emperor Humayun ordered the crushing by elephant of an imam he mistakenly believed to be critical of his reign . Some monarchs also adopted this form of execution for their own entertainment . Another Mughal ruler , the emperor Jahangir , is said to have ordered a huge number of criminals to be crushed for his amusement . The French traveler François Bernier , who witnessed such executions , recorded his dismay at the pleasure that the emperor derived from this cruel punishment . Nor was crushing the only method used by the Mughals ' execution elephants ; in the Mughal sultanate of Delhi , elephants were trained to slice prisoners to pieces " with pointed blades fitted to their tusks " . The Muslim traveler Ibn Battuta , visiting Delhi in the 1330s , has left the following eyewitness account of this particular type of execution by elephants : 
 Upon a certain day , when I myself was present , some men were brought out who had been accused of having attempted the life of the Vizier . They were ordered , accordingly , to be thrown to the elephants , which had been taught to cut their victims to pieces . Their hoofs were cased with sharp iron instruments , and the extremities of these were like knives . On such occasions the elephant @-@ driver rode upon them : and , when a man was thrown to them , they would wrap the trunk about him and toss him up , then take him with the teeth and throw him between their fore feet upon the breast , and do just as the driver should bid them , and according to the orders of the Emperor . If the order was to cut him to pieces , the elephant would do so with his irons , and then throw the pieces among the assembled multitude : but if the order was to leave him , he would be left lying before the Emperor , until the skin should be taken off , and stuffed with hay , and the flesh given to the dogs . 
 Other Indian polities also carried out executions by elephant . The Maratha Chatrapati Sambhaji ordered this form of death for a number of conspirators , including the Maratha official <unk> <unk> in the late seventeenth century . Another Maratha leader , the general <unk> , inflicted the punishment for breaches in military discipline . The contemporary historian <unk> Khan reported that " for a trifling offense he [ <unk> ] would cast a man under the feet of an elephant . " 
 The early 19th century writer Robert Kerr relates how the king of Goa " keeps certain elephants for the execution of malefactors . When one of these is brought forth to dispatch a criminal , if his keeper desires that the offender be destroyed speedily , this vast creature will instantly crush him to atoms under his foot ; but if desired to torture him , will break his limbs successively , as men are broken on the wheel . " The naturalist Georges @-@ Louis Leclerc , Comte de Buffon cited this flexibility of purpose as evidence that elephants were capable of " human reasoning , [ rather ] than a simple , natural instinct " . 
 Such executions were often held in public as a warning to any who may transgress . To that end , many of the elephants were especially large , often weighing in excess of nine tons . The executions were intended to be gruesome and often were . They were sometimes preceded by torture publicly inflicted by the same elephant used for the execution . An account of one such torture @-@ and @-@ execution at Baroda in 1814 has been preserved in The Percy Anecdotes : 
 The man was a slave , and two days before had murdered his master , brother to a native chieftain , called Ameer Sahib . About eleven o 'clock the elephant was brought out , with only the driver on his back , surrounded by natives with bamboos in their hands . The criminal was placed three yards behind on the ground , his legs tied by three ropes , which were fastened to a ring on the right hind leg of the animal . At every step the elephant took , it jerked him forward , and every eight or ten steps must have dislocated another limb , for they were loose and broken when the elephant had proceeded five hundred yards . The man , though covered in mud , showed every sign of life , and seemed to be in the most excruciating torments . After having been tortured in this manner for about an hour , he was taken to the outside of the town , when the elephant , which is instructed for such purposes , was backed , and put his foot on the head of the criminal . 
 The use of elephants as executioners continued well into the latter half of the 19th century . During an expedition to central India in 1868 , Louis <unk> described the execution of a criminal by an elephant . A sketch depicting the execution showed the condemned being forced to place his head upon a pedestal , and then being held there while an elephant crushed his head underfoot . The sketch was made into a woodcut and printed in " Le Tour du Monde " , a widely circulated French journal of travel and adventure , as well as foreign journals such as Harper 's Weekly . 
 The growing power of the British Empire led to the decline and eventual end of elephant executions in India . Writing in 1914 , Eleanor Maddock noted that in Kashmir , since the arrival of Europeans , " many of the old customs are disappearing – and one of these is the dreadful custom of the execution of criminals by an elephant trained for the purpose and which was known by the hereditary name of ' Gunga Rao ' . " 
 = = = = Southeast Asia = = = = 
 Elephants are widely reported to have been used to carry out executions in Southeast Asia , and were used in Burma and Malaysia from the earliest historical times as well as in the kingdom of Champa on the other side of the Indochinese Peninsula . In Siam , elephants were trained to throw the condemned into the air before trampling them to death . Alexander Hamilton provides the following account from Siam : 
 For Treason and Murder , the Elephant is the Executioner . The condemned Person is made fast to a Stake driven into the Ground for the Purpose , and the Elephant is brought to view him , and goes twice or thrice round him , and when the Elephant 's Keeper speaks to the monstrous Executioner , he <unk> his Trunk round the Person and Stake , and pulling the Stake from the Ground with great Violence , tosses the Man and the Stake into the Air , and in coming down , receives him on his Teeth , and making him off again , puts one of his fore Feet on the <unk> , and squeezes it flat . 
 The journal of John Crawfurd records another method of execution by elephant in the kingdom of Cochinchina ( modern south Vietnam ) , where he served as a British envoy in 1821 . Crawfurd recalls an event where " the criminal is tied to a stake , and [ Excellency 's favourite ] elephant runs down upon him and crushes him to death . " 
 = = = = West Asia = = = = 
 During the medieval period , executions by elephants were used by several West Asian imperial powers , including the Byzantine , Sassanid , Seljuq and Timurid empires . When the Sassanid king Khosrau II , who had a harem of 3 @,@ 000 wives and 12 @,@ 000 female slaves , demanded as a wife <unk> , the daughter of the Christian Arab Na <unk> , Na <unk> refused to permit his Christian daughter to enter the harem of a Zoroastrian ; for this refusal , he was trampled to death by an elephant . 
 The practice appears to have been adopted in parts of the Muslim Middle East . Rabbi <unk> of Ratisbon , a twelfth @-@ century Jewish traveler , reported an execution by this means during his stay in Seljuk @-@ ruled northern Mesopotamia ( modern Iraq ) : 
 At Nineveh there was an elephant . Its head is not protruding . It is big , eats about two wagon loads of straw at once ; its mouth is in its breast , and when it wants to eat it protrudes its lip about two cubits , takes up the straw with it , and puts it in its mouth . When the sultan condemns anyone to death , they say to the elephant , " this person is guilty . " It then seizes him with its lip , casts him aloft and slays him . 
 = = = Western empires = = = 
 The Romans , Carthaginians and ancient Macedonians occasionally used elephants for executions while also making use of war elephants for military purposes , most famously in the case of Hannibal . Deserters , prisoners of war and military criminals are recorded by ancient chroniclers to have been put to death under the foot of an elephant . Perdiccas , who became regent of Macedon on the death of Alexander the Great in 323 BC , had mutineers from the faction of Meleager thrown to the elephants to be crushed in the city of Babylon . The Roman writer Quintus Curtius Rufus relates the story in his Historiae <unk> Magni : " Perdiccas saw that they [ the mutineers ] were paralyzed and at his mercy . He withdrew from the main body some 300 men who had followed Meleager at the time when he burst from the first meeting held after Alexander 's death , and before the eyes of the entire army he threw them to the elephants . All were trampled to death beneath the feet of the beasts ... " . 
 Similarly , the Roman writer Valerius Maximus records how the general Lucius Aemilius Paulus <unk> " after King Perseus was vanquished [ in 167 BC ] , for the same fault ( desertion ) threw men under elephants to be trampled ... And indeed military discipline needs this kind of severe and abrupt punishment , because this is how strength of arms stands firm , which , when it falls away from the right course , will be subverted . " 
 There are fewer records of elephants being used as straightforward executioners for the civil population . One such example is mentioned by Josephus and the deuterocanonical book of 3 Maccabees in connection with the Egyptian Jews , though the story is likely apocryphal . 3 Maccabees describes an attempt by Ptolemy IV Philopator ( ruled 221 – 204 BC ) to enslave and brand Egypt 's Jews with the symbol of Dionysus . When the majority of the Jews resisted , the king is said to have rounded them up and ordered them to be trampled on by elephants . The mass execution was ultimately thwarted , supposedly by the intervention of angels , following which Ptolemy took an altogether more forgiving attitude towards his Jewish subjects . 
 = New York State Route 22 = 
 New York State Route 22 ( NY 22 ) is a north – south state highway in eastern New York , in the United States . It runs parallel to the state 's eastern edge from the outskirts of New York City to the hamlet of Mooers in Clinton County . At 337 miles ( 542 km ) , it is the state 's longest north – south route and the third longest overall , after NY 5 and NY 17 . Many of the state 's major east – west roads intersect with Route 22 just before crossing the state line into the neighboring New England states . 
 Almost all of Route 22 is a two @-@ lane rural road that only passes through small villages and hamlets . The exceptions are its southern end in the heavily populated Bronx and lower Westchester County , and a section that runs through the city of Plattsburgh near the northern end . The rural landscape that the road passes through varies from horse country and views of the picturesque reservoirs of the New York City watershed in the northern suburbs of the city , to dairy farms further upstate in the hilly Taconic and Berkshire mountains , to the undeveloped , heavily forested Adirondack Park along the shores of Lake Champlain . An 86 @-@ mile ( 138 km ) section from Fort Ann to Keeseville is part of the All @-@ American Road known as the Lakes to Locks Passage . 
 The southernmost section of the road was known as the White Plains Post Road in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , a major highway connecting New York City to White Plains , the Westchester county seat . Route 22 in its modern form was established in 1930 as one of the principal routes from New York City to Canada . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 22 starts as an urban arterial road , passing through the most populous communities along its route within its first 15 miles ( 24 km ) . After running northerly from its origin in the Bronx it veers slightly to the northeast in the vicinity of a traffic circle near Kensico Dam before heading northward for good as a mostly two @-@ lane rural route all the way to the Canadian border . 
 The majority of NY 22 's 337 @-@ mile ( 542 km ) routing is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) ; however , several sections are maintained by other jurisdictions . The southernmost of these is in the Bronx , where the entirety of NY 22 within the borough is maintained by the New York City Department of Transportation ( NYCDOT ) . In Westchester County , NY 22 is mostly locally maintained within the city of Mount Vernon and is county @-@ maintained within the city of White Plains . In Clinton County , the route is locally maintained within the city of Plattsburgh . 
 = = = Bronx to Kensico Dam = = = 
 Route 22 starts as Provost Avenue at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) in the Bronx , intersecting with East 233rd Street about 0 @.@ 2 miles ( 0 @.@ 3 km ) later . It soon crosses the Westchester county line into Mount Vernon and becomes South Third Avenue , beginning a 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) section in that county . Shortly after the county line , Route 22 makes a sharp turn to the right at the South Columbus Avenue intersection . It parallels the nearby Hutchinson River Parkway as it heads into the New York City suburbs of Bronxville and Tuckahoe . At Wilson Woods Lake , it crosses a pair of railroad tracks and becomes North Columbus Avenue , then has its first interchange with a limited @-@ access road at the Cross County Parkway . 
 Two country clubs on either side herald NY 22 's entry into the suburb of Eastchester . It makes a turn to the northeast , passing the Vernon Hills Shopping Center to the right . After leaving Eastchester , NY 22 continues north into the village of Scarsdale . 
 The route parallels the Bronx River Parkway ( BRP ) as it enters Westchester 's county seat , White Plains . Within the city of White Plains , NY 22 is maintained by Westchester County with the unsigned designations of County Route 53 ( CR 53 ) from the Scarsdale line to NY 125 , CR 108 between NY 125 and Westchester Avenue , and CR 87 from Broadway to the North Castle line . NY 22 also intersects NY 125 and NY 119 in downtown White Plains , then bends to the northwest along North Broadway , eventually intersecting the Cross @-@ Westchester Expressway ( Interstate 287 or I @-@ 287 ) . White Plains Rural Cemetery is visible to the west as NY 22 continues northward out of the city . 
 In North White Plains , the area that the road passes through becomes a little less developed as it goes over a gentle rise from which a short connector runs downhill to the traffic circle where the BRP ends and the Taconic State Parkway begins , just south of Kensico Dam . 
 = = = Kensico Reservoir to Brewster = = = 
 While the Taconic State Parkway continues along the northwest heading Route 22 had been following , Route 22 itself veers to the northeast along the reservoir 's south shore towards a short concurrency with NY 120 , just north of IBM 's Armonk headquarters and the " Duke 's Trees angle " , the westernmost point in Connecticut . For the first time , NY 22 runs parallel to New York 's eastern border , intersecting I @-@ 684 for the first of several times just north of the short portion of that highway in Connecticut . A short distance later , NY 433 , one of the state 's shortest highways , heads south from NY 22 into Greenwich . 
 After that junction , NY 22 bends back to the north , paralleling I @-@ 684 as a narrow , shaded meandering two @-@ lane rural route through the Westchester countryside of large wooded lots and houses well @-@ screened from the road . In downtown Bedford , the first settlement since White Plains , the highway overlaps with NY 172 for a few blocks , then intersects NY 121 at its southern terminus . Route 22 itself follows a due @-@ north heading from the hamlet , passing the John Jay Homestead State Historic Site ( the first National Historic Landmark along the highway ) , and Harvey School , before it briefly widens at a major intersection with NY 35 near Katonah . Two miles north of that junction , NY 22 becomes parallel to I @-@ 684 into the Town of Somers and the hamlet of Goldens Bridge . On the other side of the interstate , accessible via NY 138 , is the Goldens Bridge train station on Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Harlem Line , which begins a long parallel alignment with NY 22 at this point . 
 The railroad 's Purdy 's station is a short distance west of the next junction , NY 116 , after which NY 22 crosses under I @-@ 684 , remaining between it and the railroad tracks . Turning left onto Hardscrabble Road , it follows the tracks away from the interstate to the site of the next station , North Salem 's hamlet of Croton Falls . Just north of the hamlet , Route 22 crosses under the tracks , and is joined by US 202 . Immediately afterward , the road crosses back under the railroad again and enters Putnam County , following the Croton River north past the spillway of East Branch Reservoir . 
 After paralleling the reservoir for almost two miles ( 3 km ) , a third route , US 6 , joins the concurrency just east of the village of Brewster . The three routes cross under a high , long bridge carrying I @-@ 84 , then veer east to an interchange with the north end of I @-@ 684 . US 6 and 202 continue east for Danbury while NY 22 uses the northbound on @-@ ramp of the I @-@ 684 roadway . The short expressway connector that carries northbound I @-@ 684 traffic to northbound NY 22 is NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = = Harlem Valley , <unk> and Berkshires = = = 
 Route 22 continues heading northeast along a narrow strip of land between the East Branch and Bog Brook reservoirs . It then resumes its northward heading , following a much straighter course than it had up to this point , on two lanes through wooded areas of the town of Patterson , where two local state highways , NY 312 and 164 , come in from the west . The highway gradually expands to three and sometimes four lanes as it passes through built @-@ up areas of strip development . Shortly after intersecting a third state highway , NY 311 , and passing another strip plaza , NY 22 crosses into Dutchess County . 
 After another supermarket strip to the east , a long , gentle divided bend in the road almost a mile long ends with an overpass where NY 55 comes in from the west . It joins NY 22 as the two routes , returning to two lanes , pass through the eastern fringe of the village of Pawling and then by Trinity @-@ Pawling School . Past the village , the railroad tracks edge closer to the highway as NY 22 enters the scenic Harlem Valley , which lends its name to the railroad line . The road curves more gently and takes longer straightaways , with lower density of residential and commercial development . Two miles from Pawling , the Appalachian Trail crosses the road next to the line 's Appalachian Trail station . The flag stop allows hikers access to the nearby Pawling Nature Preserve . 
 Routes 22 and 55 continue their long curve into the town of Dover , past the Harlem Valley – Wingdale station next to the road across from the now @-@ closed buildings of Harlem Valley Psychiatric Center . The NY 55 concurrency ends when that road heads towards Connecticut at Wingdale . The road continues through Dover Plains and into Amenia , where an overlap with NY 343 begins . The railroad line ends at Wassaic , the most distant Metro @-@ North station from the city in direct miles . Route 343 remains joined with Route 22 into the hamlet of Amenia , where it separates and heads towards state line . At the same junction , US 44 comes in from Millbrook to begin an overlap with Route 22 . The valley opens up as the southern <unk> loom ahead . Shortly after crossing into the Town of North East , the highway passes by the large Coleman Station Historic District . 
 After intersecting with NY 199 at its eastern end , NY 22 and US 44 veer northeast into the small village of Millerton in the northern protrusion of Dutchess County 's Oblong , an area once the subject of a boundary dispute between New York and Connecticut in the late 17th century . US 44 continues eastward towards Connecticut while NY 22 resumes its northward course into the shadow of the ridge ahead , where three states converge near the 2 @,@ 311 @-@ foot ( 704 m ) Brace Mountain , Dutchess County 's highest , and Connecticut 's highest point on Mount <unk> 's southern slope . At another gentle curve , NY 22 slips into Columbia County and the town of <unk> . North of the county line , Massachusetts becomes the state behind <unk> Mountain and the other peaks visible to the east . The southernmost route from New York to the Massachusetts state line , NY 344 , leaves for <unk> Falls State Park at the hamlet of Copake Falls . 
 The next major junction is in Hillsdale where NY 23 crosses NY 22 on its way to Catamount Ski Area , which straddles the New York – Massachusetts state line . At the hamlet of Green River , NY 71 , the state 's shortest two @-@ digit route , begins at NY 22 heading east into Massachusetts . NY 22 then crosses into Austerlitz , where the surrounding terrain becomes much more wooded and the valleys become narrower . In the center of town , East Hill Road offers a short detour to <unk> , the farm where Edna St. Vincent Millay lived . A short distance later , NY 22 intersects with NY 203 at its eastern end . 
 Route 22 then veers sharply to the northeast , resuming a northward direction only a short distance from the state line , a few hundred feet to the east . It then rounds a mountain and heads west , paralleling the New York State Thruway 's Berkshire section ( I @-@ 90 ) for a mile . NY <unk> ( an unsigned reference route ) leaves to the east , where it becomes Massachusetts Route 102 at the state line . After Thruway exit B3 , NY 22 resumes its northerly heading . From here it intersects NY 295 , then passes <unk> Lake . NY 22 then straightens out to reach New Lebanon , where it intersects US 20 . New York 's longest east – west route ( US 20 ) overlaps with its longest north – south route ( NY 22 ) for a mile before the former continues to Pittsfield and the latter returns to the border @-@ paralleling course , which takes it into Rensselaer County . 
 As NY 22 continues north , it remains , at first , within a mile of Massachusetts , moving to the east to intersect with NY 43 in Stephentown . North of that junction , it begins to run through a deep , isolated , lightly populated valley in the New York section of the Berkshires . Wide curves take the road through Berlin , where Berlin Mountain , the highest peak in the state outside of the Catskills and Adirondacks , caps the eastern skyline . Route 22 trends further west , then back east to where NY 2 crosses via an overpass at Petersburgh on its way to Petersburg Pass , the northernmost crossing of the New York – Massachusetts state line . The next road to head east from NY 22 , NY 346 at North Petersburgh , enters Vermont . 
 Shortly afterward , the highway descends gently from the Berkshires to meet another major state road , NY 7 , and overlaps with it for a short distance . Two miles after that concurrency ends , NY 22 follows the upper <unk> River to Hoosick Falls , the first village it has passed through since Millerton . There are no other state routes here , but after another 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , at North Hoosick , NY 67 comes in from the east and the two roads overlap as they leave Rensselaer County . 
 = = = Washington County = = = 
 Almost immediately after the joined roads cross the county line , NY 67 splits off to the west , crossing the Hoosick back into Rensselaer County , while NY 22 straightens out again to go due north . After 4 miles ( 6 km ) , it reaches Cambridge , where NY 313 forks off to the east . In the middle of town , NY 372 , a local connector to Greenwich , ends . 
 North of Cambridge , the highway continues through a rolling landscape of fields and farms , the low transitional country between the Appalachians and the Adirondacks . Beyond NY 29 's eastern terminus at Greenwich Junction , Route 22 heads eastward again through 18 miles ( 29 km ) of countryside until , just before reaching Granville , it comes within 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 800 m ) of the state line , the closest it has come to that boundary since Austerlitz . At the village 's south end , NY 22 intersects NY 149 and the two routes overlap for several blocks until NY 149 begins its short journey to Vermont . Just north of Granville , the first of NY 22 's two suffixed routes , NY 22A , begins its route running closely parallel to the state line and then into Vermont , where it becomes Vermont Route 22A , paralleling the parent route for some distance on the other side of the state line . 
 Immediately after this junction , NY 22 begins a long curve away from the state line that has it running due west at the end of NY 40 in North Granville . It heads northwest a little further until , after passing between Great Meadows and Washington state prisons , it reaches US 4 and turns right to join it , resuming its northward course . The overlap with US 4 , one of the few along Route 22 that pairs it with another north – south route , lasts for seven miles ( 11 km ) along the base of the Adirondack foothills between the low country and Lake George , before ending in Whitehall , where US 4 leaves to assume the east – west course it takes across northern New England . 
 = = = Adirondack Park and Lake Champlain = = = 
 As NY 22 bends westward after leaving Whitehall , it rounds the north end of the ridge to the west , offering views into Vermont . Once again the Vermont state line is very near NY 22 , but now it is separated from New York by water instead of land . The stream at the bottom of this valley , surrounded by the low lying Drowned Lands flood plain , is the inflow for Lake Champlain . The lake 's South Bay , which the road crosses immediately after this turn , is also the Blue Line . Route 22 has now entered Adirondack Park , the 6 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 25 @,@ 000 km2 ) Forest Preserve and National Historic Landmark , and the largest state @-@ level protected area in any state . Within the park , NY 22 mainly follows the lakeshore , closer to some of its more populated areas . 
 It continues along the hillside of Black Mountain , Washington County 's highest peak , as it meanders north on the narrowing isthmus between Lakes Champlain and George . Near the northern end , it crosses the Essex County line . Two miles later , it reaches the first settlement along its length within the Adirondack Park , Ticonderoga . The highway skirts the northeastern edge of the village , the site of key battles in both the French and Indian and Revolutionary Wars , as NY 74 comes in from the ferry to the east . This overlap lasts for almost two miles ( 3 km ) until NY 74 goes straight ahead at the intersection with NY 9N , while NY 22 turns right to join NY 9N , the longest suffixed route in the state , and return to its northbound orientation . 
 At first , Routes 22 and 9N veer west , away from the lake , but then return to its shoreline to avoid a nearby mountain , just before Crown Point . NY 185 , a small connector road , runs from 9N and 22 along the peninsula to become Vermont Route 17 ( VT 17 ) . They remain close to the widening lake for the next 15 miles ( 24 km ) through Port Henry to Westport , where 9N leaves heading west for Elizabethtown . Beyond that junction , Route 22 again turns inland , going through the easy pass around Split Rock Mountain . At Bouquet , it makes an abrupt right turn to go due east back to the lakeshore and ferry landing at Essex . Here , the route connects to the Charlotte – Essex Ferry via Dock Street , which leads to VT F @-@ 5 on the opposite side of Lake Champlain . 
 At <unk> , Route 22 heads to the northwest again , away from the lake , until it heads west and intersects US 9 in the town of Chesterfield , the other major north – south surface route up the state 's eastern side . Routes 22 and 9 join together , closely parallel to the Adirondack Northway ( I @-@ 87 ) , the only other route in the state to directly connect New York City with Canada . The three routes , spread over many miles in the southern part of the state , run through a narrow corridor for two miles ( 3 km ) until Routes 9 and 22 veer east again toward Keeseville . 
 Here , Route 9N ends and Routes 9 and 22 separate . The two will exchange corridors , with US 9 following the lake shore line while NY 22 remains mostly inland . NY 22 enters Clinton County just north of Keeseville , and then leaves Adirondack Park 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) beyond at the Peru town line . 
 = = = Clinton County = = = 
 Just south of the hamlet of Peru , the short NY 442 terminates at Route 22 . In the hamlet itself , after the Little Au Sable River crossing , NY 22 's other suffixed route , NY 22B , branches off further inland . NY 22 continues north of Peru , and returns to the Northway 's side again in a mile . After another five miles ( 8 km ) , it has its first exit on the Northway near the now @-@ closed Plattsburgh Air Force Base . It continues northeastward , crossing the Saranac River into Plattsburgh , the first city and most populous community NY 22 has passed through since White Plains . 
 NY 22 runs along South Catherine Street for a few blocks , then divides into one @-@ way couplets for the first time since Westchester County , with northbound traffic moving a block to the east to follow Oak Street , while southbound traffic comes down North Catherine Street . It parallels US 9 for a couple of blocks , intersecting NY 3 ( Cornelia Street ) just a block west of its eastern terminus at that highway . After Boynton Avenue , the separate streets reunite and turns northwest just before it has its second and final exit with the Northway . Just after the exit , NY 374 begins along the westbound route as NY 22 turns to the north once again . 
 The highway follows the railroad tracks into Beekmantown until it bears left at a fork , trending further west to Beekmantown Corners , where another short local road , County Route 58 , formerly NY 456 , comes to its western end . After crossing into the next town , Chazy , NY 22 bears left again at another fork to drift further to the west . The terrain around the road becomes increasingly wooded , with long unbroken stretches of pine , in the northern portion of the town . This is briefly broken at another western terminus of a short local road , County Route 23 , formerly NY 191 , in the hamlet of Sciota . 
 NY 22 continues past Sciota in a fairly straight north @-@ northwesterly course through more woods with small home and farm clearings . Those yield to mostly fields just before the Great Chazy River , after which NY 22 enters the hamlet of Mooers . NY 22 comes to an end upon intersecting US 11 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old roads = = = 
 The road from the modern @-@ day Bronx ( then part of Westchester County ) through White Plains to Bedford and points north was originally an old Indian path . This path was later used and widened by the first European settlers . During colonial times , the road was known as " the road to Bedford and Vermont " . Further north , near Lake Champlain , the route now used by Route 22 was used by the St. Francis Indians of Canada as they went south to find warmer fishing areas . The old road was also used heavily during the American Revolution to transport iron south from the mines in the Adirondacks . 
 Once White Plains became the county seat of Westchester in 1759 , the road between this village and the city of New York ( then encompassing only Manhattan ) became an important route and was established as the White Plains Post Road . Before 1797 , the main road heading to points north and east out of Manhattan went via Kingsbridge along the old Boston Post Road . A new bridge over the Harlem River ( the original Harlem Bridge ) was opened in 1797 , shortening the route out of Manhattan . This also relocated the Boston and White Plains Post roads to a new alignment along Third Avenue and Boston Road . The White Plains Post Road separated from the Boston Post Road in Bronxdale , with the road to Boston heading east and the road to White Plains heading north . The old White Plains Post Road roughly followed the alignment of modern @-@ day White Plains Road , which was laid out in 1863 . ( The original post road was to the east of the modern @-@ day avenue ) . The White Plains Post Road continued north through <unk> , Wakefield , and Mount Vernon , where the route shifted east to modern @-@ day White Plains Post Road , going through Bronxville and Scarsdale to White Plains . 
 The stretch from Salem to the Vermont border in Granville was part of the old Northern Turnpike , which began in Lansingburgh and went along modern @-@ day Route 40 . The Northern Turnpike was chartered on April 1 , 1799 . 
 = = = Public ownership = = = 
 In 1868 , the New York State Legislature formed a commission " to regulate , grade , widen , gravel , and improve the old White Plains Post Road " , which was amended in 1870 to " <unk> the road " between Mount Vernon and White Plains . The post road south of Mount Vernon , which was part of New York City , was later widened between 1902 and 1908 . 
 State highways were first formally defined by the state legislature in 1909 and given numeric designations , although these initial designations were not publicly signed . Portions of modern Route 22 were defined as part of legislative routes 1 and 22 . Legislative route 1 went from the New York City line north along the White Plains Post Road to White Plains , then detoured to Harrison ( via Westchester Avenue ) , before proceeding north to Armonk ( via modern NY 120 ) . Legislative route 1 continued north along modern NY 22 to Austerlitz , where it then turned northwest to Valatie ( via modern NY 203 and NY <unk> ) , then followed US 9 to Albany . Legislative route 22 had two segments . The southern segment began in Troy , following NY 7 to Hoosick , then went north along modern NY 22 up to Putnam Station ( south of Ticonderoga ) . 
 = = = Route 22 designation = = = 
 In 1924 , New York signed several major state roads with route numbers . Most of Legislative route 1 was designated as NY 22 , but with a direct route between White Plains and Armonk . Also , instead of continuing to Valatie , NY 22 initially ended at Hillsdale ( at the intersection with NY 23 ) . By 1929 , the road to Valatie had been improved and NY 22 was extended to US 9 , with a length of 139 miles ( 224 km ) . The middle section of modern NY 22 was designated in 1924 as NY 24 , running for 75 miles ( 121 km ) from Stephentown to Comstock . The portion of modern NY 22 north of Whitehall remained unnumbered in 1924 but gained a designation in 1925 when NY 30 , a route assigned in 1924 that linked Mechanicville to Whitehall , was extended north from Whitehall to the Canadian border north of Mooers . In the 1930 renumbering , the NY 24 and NY 30 designations were both reassigned elsewhere . The NY 22 designation was extended north along old NY 24 and NY 30 , incorporating newly improved roads between Austerlitz and Stephentown , resulting in a route length of 370 miles ( 595 km ) . The segment of old NY 22 between Austerlitz and Valatie was renumbered to NY 203 . 
 In December 1934 , at the insistence of the Automobile Club of New York , several numbered routes were extended and signed within New York City , with NY 22 being one of these routes . NY 22 was extended south from the Mount Vernon line in the Bronx along White Plains Road , then it shifted via East 233rd Street to Webster Avenue until Fordham Road ( US 1 ) . From Fordham Road , it continued south along the Grand Concourse ( overlapped with NY 100 ) , crossing into Manhattan via East 149th Street to the 145th Street Bridge . In Manhattan , the NY 22 / 100 pair continued south along Lenox Avenue , 110th Street , Fifth Avenue , 96th Street , and Park Avenue , ending at Houston Street ( NY 1A ) . By 1941 , the alignment within Mount Vernon was shifted east to use Columbus Avenue and South 3rd Avenue ( current NY 22 ) , continuing its route to New York City via East 233rd Street as before . On January 1 , 1970 , the NY 22 designation was removed from Manhattan and most of the Bronx , and the short piece remaining in the city was realigned to meet US 1 at its current southern terminus . 
 = = = U.S. Route 7 = = = 
 In the original plan for the U.S. Highway System , as approved by the Bureau of Public Roads in November 1926 , US 7 was defined as beginning in New York City and designated on the alignment of NY 22 to Amenia , where it shifted northeast into Sharon , Connecticut to use old New England Route 4 through Massachusetts and Vermont all the way to the Canadian border . Apparently New York State did not approve this plan , and by mid @-@ 1927 the official route log published by AASHO ( now known as AASHTO ) had been amended so that the southern end of US 7 began in Norwalk , Connecticut instead . 
 = = = State Route 9N concurrency = = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the stretch from Ticonderoga to Keeseville ( now concurrent with NY 9N ) was designated solely as Route 22 . The north end of NY 47 was also located at an intersection with Route 22 in Ticonderoga . At Westport , NY 22 connected to NY 195 , an east – west highway leading to Elizabethtown . At the time , Route 9N only stretched from Elizabethtown to Keeseville . NY 9N was extended southward to Lake George c . 1936 , supplanting NY 47 and NY 195 and becoming concurrent with NY 22 between Ticonderoga and Westport . 
 NY 8 originally extended eastward from Hague to a ferry across Lake Champlain at Putnam when it was assigned as part of the renumbering . In between the two locations , the route utilized modern NY 9N , Montcalm Street , NY 22 , and Wrights Ferry and Wrights roads . It was realigned in the early 1930s to continue east from Ticonderoga on what is now NY 74 to another ferry across the lake . NY 8 was altered again c . 1934 to follow NY 22 north from Ticonderoga to Crown Point , where it turned off the highway onto Bridge Road ( now NY 185 ) . Route 8 remained intact along this routing until c . 1968 , when Route 8 was truncated southwestward to NY 9N in Hague . 
 = = = Realignments = = = 
 Over the course of many years , several sections of NY 22 were straightened , realigned to new roads , or both . Some old alignments are still either county @-@ maintained or state @-@ maintained . Several of these are in Dutchess County . In Dover Plains , the southern leg of NY 22 's junction with NY 343 is maintained by the state as NY <unk> , a reference route . To the north in the town of Amenia , a 4 @.@ 03 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 49 km ) long loop off NY 22 between Wassaic and Amenia is designated as CR 81 . Another former routing of NY 22 in the town of Dover exists as CR 6 , a loop route between the hamlets of Wingdale and Dover Plains that runs along the west bank of the Ten Mile River . Within the 44 / 22 concurrency , the intersection with CR 5 south of Millerton is also a former alignment of Route 22 . 
 Before the construction of I @-@ 684 , NY 22 continued northeast along Sodom Road north of Brewster on what is now CR 50 , a dead @-@ end road maintained by Putnam County . Modern NY 22 joins the I @-@ 684 roadway at exit 10 ( the northern terminus of I @-@ 684 ) and connects to the surface road on the opposite side of the Croton River via the NY <unk> connector . South of Copake Falls , the state also still maintains an old alignment designated as NY <unk> . North of Copake Falls , the northern half of the original alignment was designated as an extension of NY 344 . 
 = = = Mooers area = = = 
 The segment of NY 22 north of US 11 , named <unk> Road , was state @-@ maintained until September 1 , 1988 , when ownership and maintenance of that part of the route was transferred to Clinton County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the county and the state of New York . Following the swap , it was co @-@ designated as CR 34 by Clinton County . In 2008 , the signed northern terminus of NY 22 was moved to the east end of its overlap with US 11 in Mooers . The official alignment of NY 22 was not changed , however , as the New York State Department of Transportation still considered the Canadian border to be NY 22 's northern terminus until ca . July 2014 . 
 The road is celebrated and described in Benjamin Swett 's 2007 photographic travelogue , Route 22 . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 22 has two suffixed routes , both in the North Country . 
 NY 22A ( 10 @.@ 61 miles or 17 @.@ 08 kilometres ) is a spur connecting NY 22 to the Vermont state line south of Fair Haven . Once in Vermont , the route becomes VT 22A . The route was assigned in the early 1940s . 
 NY 22B ( 10 @.@ 90 miles or 17 @.@ 54 kilometres ) is a bypass around the southern and western extents of Plattsburgh . NY 22B begins at NY 22 in Peru and continues north through Schuyler Falls to <unk> , where it terminates at NY 3 near Clinton County Airport . It was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Harry and the Potters = 
 Harry and the Potters are an American rock band known for spawning the genre of wizard rock . Founded in Norwood , Massachusetts in 2002 , the group is primarily composed of brothers Joe and Paul DeGeorge , who both perform under the persona of the title character from the Harry Potter book series . Harry and the Potters are known for their elaborate live performances , and have developed a cult following within the Harry Potter fandom . 
 The band is often backed up by musicians like Ernie Kim , Andrew MacLeay , Brad <unk> , John Clardy , Mike <unk> , Jacob Nathan , Ben Macri , Phillip Dickey , Jason Anderson and Zach Burba . Most of them played drums . The band 's most recent songs feature drummer Mike <unk> and bassist Paul <unk> . 
 Since 2002 , Harry and the Potters have released three studio albums , three singles and three extended plays . The duo founded the independent record label Eskimo Laboratories , and appeared in the documentary films We Are Wizards and Wizard <unk> . They also co @-@ founded charity organisation The Harry Potter Alliance , and formed the Wizard Rock EP of the Month Club , an extended play syndicate . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 2002 ) = = = 
 The origins were quite accidental . In Cambridge , MA , Paul DeGeorge ( born ( 1979 @-@ 06 @-@ 10 ) June 10 , 1979 ) was developing vaccines for a biotech firm as a chemical engineer . Paul had recently graduated from Tufts University . Outside the lab , Paul was a musician whose indie band — The Secrets — had toured in the northeast from 2001 to 2002 . To promote his band , Paul co @-@ founded a small indie label called Eskimo Laboratories . One of the other bands in Eskimo ’ s stable of talent included a juvenile act called Ed in the <unk> [ sic ] , which was fronted by Paul 's 14 @-@ year @-@ old brother Joe . Joe DeGeorge ( born ( 1987 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 ) July 4 , 1987 ) was a student at Norwood High School . He and his school friend Andrew MacLeay ( A.K.A. Shaggy ) had been playing in rock bands together since they were 11 and 12 years old . A couple of years earlier after reading the Harry Potter books , Paul formulated the premise for Harry and the Potters where the principle Harry Potter characters would be the musicians : Harry as the front man , Ron on guitar , Hermione on bass and Hagrid on drums . Then a crisis of sorts struck the brothers on June 22 , 2002 . During a barbecue at the DeGeorge family ’ s Norwood Massachusetts home , Joe had advertised a concert with Ed and the <unk> and several other indie bands . The venue was the back yard shed . Perhaps the venue was too modest but while an audience had arrived , the bands did not . To rescue a nearly lost opportunity , while waiting hopefully for a band to show , Harry and the Potters came into existence over the next hour when the two brothers wrote seven Potter @-@ themed songs . They performed that first concert as Harry and the Potters for six people who remained of their audience . Of those seven backyard songs , six were to make it onto the band 's first album in 2003 . 
 = = = Harry and the Potters and Voldemort Can 't Stop the Rock ! ( 2003 – 04 ) = = = 
 After recruiting drummer Ernie Kim , the band recorded their eponymous debut album over a weekend in the DeGeorge family living room . Released in June 2003 under the Eskimo Laboratories record label , the album contains six of the seven songs composed on June 22 , 2002 and another twelve written spontaneously and immediately thereafter recorded . In " the summer of " 2003 , Harry and the Potters set out on an American tour , performing at libraries . The fifth Harry Potter book – Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix – came out that summer and on June 21 , 2003 , the highly anticipated day of release , the band played five sets in a span of 24 hours . The library gigs drew crowds of mostly children and their parents . The brothers played a show at the library in Dorchester , Massachusetts that August where they noticed the children in the audience singing along . Joe said , " Paul forgot the words to one of the songs . [ The kids ] were like , ' You sang it wrong ! ' " Paul said , " They 'd be like , ' Hey , why 'd you skip that song ? ' because they knew the exact sequence of the album . " The DeGeorge brothers quickly developed an on @-@ stage persona of dressing in the fashion of wizard @-@ school Hogwarts : white shirts under gray crew @-@ neck sweaters , red @-@ and @-@ yellow striped ties , wire @-@ rim glasses . In a show of quirky egalitarianism , both brothers play the role of Harry Potter and dress almost identically ; Paul is older and to conform to the character ’ s persona , he is Harry of Year 7 ; while Joe is the Harry of Year 4 . 
 During May and June 2004 , the band worked on their next album , Voldemort Can 't Stop the Rock ! in the DeGeorge family shed . Following the release , the band toured heavily . The two brothers drove 13 @,@ 000 miles across the U.S and into Canada in their " Potter Mobile " , a silver 1998 Ford <unk> minivan with a black lightning bolt emblazoned on its hood . In live concerts , Paul and Joe used pre @-@ recorded backing tracks for much of the tour , but during the second half , Joe called on his childhood friend and former bandmate Andrew MacLeay to join the band temporarily as drummer . During the Voldemort Can 't Stop the Rock ! tour , Paul and Joe DeGeorge received a letter from Warner Brothers that stated that the brothers were breaking copyright laws . Although Paul sent a letter to Warner Brothers in an attempt to smooth things over , Marc Brandon , the company representative , asked to speak to Paul personally . The two later settled upon a Gentlemen 's agreement that , in essence , would allow Harry and the Potters to continue to sell music online and tour , but all other merchandise could only be sold at live shows . 
 = = = Harry and the Potters and the Power of Love ( 2005 – 06 ) = = = 
 The following winter , the band began their first overseas tour . In February 2005 , they toured the United Kingdom – playing London , Manchester , Milton Keynes , Chester , and Liverpool – and then followed it by playing some gigs in the Netherlands to coincide with the release of the Dutch translation of Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince which took place in November 2005 . In the Netherlands , they played one of their earliest songs " Platform Nine and 3 / 4 " in Dutch . In late 2005 , Harry and the Potters enjoyed more tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek critical success from respectable quarters . The web based music ’ zine Pitchfork Media even hailed Harry and the Potters as having one of the best five live shows in 2005 , quipping that " The Decemberists wish they could lit @-@ rock like this . " In the fall of 2005 , Joe entered Clark University in Worcester , Massachusetts . While Harry and the Potters play infrequently at rock clubs and other venues — a Yule Ball at the Middle East Downstairs in Cambridge , MA in December 2005 attracted an audience of 600 with 200 turned away at the door 
 The previous year was the watershed when a joke between two colorblind , Massachusetts @-@ born brothers had developed into something they had never imagined . The band continued its odd success and toured early in the year with a new wave ' sock puppet rock band ' called Uncle Monsterface who opened for in March 2006 . During the summer , they embarked on their 3rd cross @-@ country summer tour ( " Summer Reading and Rocking Tour 2006 " ) , this time accompanied by fellow wizard rock band Draco and the Malfoys . Brad <unk> from Draco and the Malfoys handled drumming duties for the Potters for the entirety of their summer tour . They returned to home recording with the Harry and the Potters and the Power of Love but with a bigger sound and with the assistance recording veteran Kevin <unk> . While in the earlier albums the band 's musical style was goofy inept pop @-@ punk , the single " Scarred for Life " became musically darker reflecting the penultimate book Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince . " Scarred for Life " ‘ s scenario takes as its central conceit a Harry Potter who has started a hardcore rock band . Paul and Joe departed from their proud DIY home recording and sought a studio for Scarred for Life " and their split single with the <unk> . Paul and Joe DeGeorge feel that the songs on the " Scarred for Life " are among their " most badass songs . " 
 = = = Extended plays and film appearances ( 2007 – 09 ) = = = 
 By 2007 , Harry and the Potters and their unexpected fan based indie music genre of wizard rock have grown into an international phenomenon . Recently , the band has engaged in charity side @-@ projects and activism within the Harry Potter community . In January 2007 , Harry and the Potters created the Wizard Rock EP of the Month Club , a mail order subscription club that released an extended play by a different wizard rock band each month . Reflecting wizard rock 's literacy focus , the club raises funds for First Book , a non @-@ profit organization that gives children the ability to read and own their first new books . In 2007 , the Club raised over $ 13 @,@ 000 for the organization . They released their first extended play The Enchanted Ceiling in 2007 . May 2007 was also the beginning of their large 70 @-@ show summer @-@ library tour across the US and Canada called simply " Summer Tour 2007 " . Like their initial year in 2003 , the summer of 2007 would see the release of another Harry Potter book . Harry and the Potters scheduled the mid @-@ point of the tour to arrive back in their home state and celebrate the July 21 midnight release of the seventh book , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows at Harvard Yard . The festivities became an excuse for a meet @-@ up of a number of wizard rock bands including The Hungarian <unk> and their nemesis Draco and the Malfoys which all played to a large crowd of Harry Potter fans in the Cambridge , Massachusetts college venue . Harry and the Potters resumed their tour which finally wound @-@ up in late August . In Vancouver on July 7 , 2007 , hundreds of people crowded outside the Vancouver Public Library to see Harry and the Potters . ABC News reported that the band usually charge $ 5 to $ 10 for tickets to their shows , though some performances are free . Harry and the Potters said 600 people turned out for a recent show , July 10 , 2007 , in Portland , Oregon . 
 In February 2008 , Harry and the Potters launched a website called Unlimited Enthusiasm . The website led users through a series of images and eventually to a forum , which contained much speculation concerning the nature of Unlimited Enthusiasm . Unlimited Enthusiasm ended up being the name of their Summer 2008 tour alongside bands Uncle Monsterface and Math The Band . Harry and the Potters undertook a summer tour , Unlimited Enthusiasm , with Math the Band , Uncle Monsterface and Jason Anderson . One of the stops in that tour was <unk> . This fall they released a short punk rock EP , In the <unk> as part of the Wizard Rock EP of the Month Club . Two full @-@ length feature film projects documenting Harry and the Potters and the wizard rock movement , We Are Wizards and The Wizard <unk> , were released in 2008 . 
 The band played its 500th show in June 2009 at Norwood Elementary School ( MA ) the founding members ' hometown . The group continued the Wizard Rock EP of the Month Club in 2009 , and as a member of the club , they released their third extended play The Yule Ball EP , which featured a CD and a DVD of their performance at the Fourth Annual Yule Ball . 
 = = = Further career ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 In April 2010 , the group announced a series of shows in the Midwestern United States , Scandinavia , and Ireland for July and August . 
 In Summer 2011 , Harry and the Potters embarked on another summer tour entitled , Ride The Lightning . The tour was to the biggest since 2007 , playing dates all throughout the United States . The first show was held May 25 in Portland , ME and the last show was July 31 at the Knitting Factory in New York . Drummer Jacob Nathan played with the group throughout the tour . Jacob is a member of the band 926 Main Street Apt . 2 that he formed with Joe DeGeorge and Emily Barnett while attending college at Clark University " 
 In 2015 , Harry and the Potters released their third single " Hedwig Lives " for digital download . 
 = = Lyrical themes and style = = 
 Harry and the Potters couple their rough @-@ edged music with themed lyrics , which define the band as much as the costumes . The straight @-@ forward but quirky presentation of adolescent concerns and <unk> in the simplest of worries gives the songs their easy likeability . They poke fun at awkward situations from the books . For example , in the song " The Human <unk> " , they sing , " Maybe you shouldn 't have brought up Cedric Diggory / Because I 'd rather not talk about your dead ex @-@ boyfriends over coffee . " Two other examples of the bands distinctive take on teenage angst are seen in the song " Save Ginny Weasley " where they sing , " Are you petrified of being petrified ? " and the song " The Godfather . " where the gothic or mock @-@ morbid line " Why do I always think that I am going to die ? " is sung to an up @-@ beat tune . 
 For the Harry Potter fandom , Harry and the Potters refer to words and phrases in the books , including Hogwarts , Harry 's Firebolt , Felix Felicis , the Flying Car , wizard chess , platform nine and three @-@ quarters , The Burrow , the three @-@ headed dog Fluffy , Mrs. Norris , the basilisk , The Marauder 's Map , various spells and incantations , and the Invisibility Cloak . 
 Harry and the Potters with its strong persona or theme is as much a performance art project as it is a rock band . Musically , they sound much like other indie rock music with the exception that the band adheres to a novel conceit : the Harry Potter books will inspire the lyrics . As Joe said in a 2005 interview , " We try to take the themes from the books and amplify them . " Their musical sound is described as " simple , catchy rock – think The White Stripes crossed with Raffi – where everyone sings along which is easy because in songs like ' Voldemort Can 't Stop the Rock ' the title is pretty much the only line . " Another reviewer ’ s ear hears " a touch of the Ramones in their ultra simple lyrics . " 
 The band is organized quite simply with Paul and Joe playing their songs in a simple basic guitar @-@ synth @-@ and @-@ drums indie pop style and they sing in the semi @-@ deadpan way ; a review found the vocal delivery similar to that of They Might Be Giants . The raison d ’ être of the band is to put enough energy and spirit into their songs to make them fun . 
 The band is not musically polished . Paul has joked that , if they had known of the band ’ s popularity , they might have made " an effort to sing in tune . But it ’ s hard to anticipate that sort of thing when you ’ re just writing silly songs and recording them in your living room over a weekend . " . While musicianship is not the strength of the band , Paul says that the fans " know we 're not the best singers and keyboard players , but we 're okay . And they think , well , I could do that , too . I think that ’ s really encouraging to people ... " Paul sees the brothers as a " bridge between this mainstream phenomena of Harry Potter and the indie rock underground . Plus , we ’ re also pretty strong adherents to the DIY ideal . " The two brothers promote this ideal of making music independently and have fused the legions of fans on to the DIY free @-@ for @-@ all of indie rock and punk music , albeit of the silly kind . 
 The Washington Post describes the brothers as having vast quantities of both passion and ability to engage an audience : the " combination of their happy , who @-@ cares personalities and Harry Potter fanaticism has cast a spell over book @-@ loving teens across the country . " Paul said , " the band is neither geeky nor cool but ' geeky @-@ cool ' . I think the indie @-@ rock community at the very least realizes we 're taking a very DIY approach to this . " 
 = = Campaigning and activism = = 
 In 2005 the duo co @-@ founded the non @-@ profit organisation The Harry Potter Alliance with Andrew Slack , Seth <unk> and Sarah Newberry , an organization that uses the Harry Potter books as a platform for inspiring real @-@ world activism , which amongst other activities , helps " wake the world up " to the genocide in Darfur . The projects invites its members to inform their local senator to support the Darfur Accountability and Divestment Act . The Harry Potter Alliance raises awareness for these projects by holding wizard rock concerts and by selling memorabilia to help fund these campaigns . 
 Harry and the Potters have also collaborated the Harry Potter Alliance complication album , Rocking Out Against <unk> with a song entitled “ Don ’ t Believe It ” . The purpose of the album was to achieve the right to free press and against media consolidation by asking site viewers to contact their member of congress to support S 2332 , the " The Media Ownership Act of 2007 . " Paul said their third EP , the 2007 The Enchanted Ceiling was recorded in their living room . 
 Harry and the Potters actively promote literacy . Another example of this literary activism is the reference to Tipper Gore and the Parents Music Resource Center ( PMRC ) in the song " Voldemort Can 't Stop The Rock , " which contains the verse , " And we won 't let the Dark Lord ruin our party / Just like Tipper Gore tried with the PMRC . " 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Harry and the Potters have influenced similar acts , such as Draco and the Malfoys , The Whomping Willows and The Remus <unk> . Wizard rock bands generally play all @-@ ages shows at libraries , bookstores and schools , as the promotion of reading is a hallmark of the genre . In turn , because of their active promotion of literacy , young @-@ adult and teen librarians have been promoting the band . While Harry and the Potters would become notable for making libraries their primary venue , Joe DeGeorge did not see a future in the modest venues , " I think we thought we 'd play a few libraries . " Paul added , " We thought it would be short @-@ lived . We weren 't like super fans , so we didn 't understand this whole ( Harry Potter ) subculture when we started . " As The Washington Post wrote , " wizard rock is an escape into a different world – a world of non @-@ judgmental fun where grown @-@ ups dress as wizards , evil is vanquished by song , and reading is cool . " The peculiar success of Harry and the Potters has led Paul to " sense a growing affection for us amongst other musicians " and at home . The Boston Phoenix has called Harry and the Potters the " Pink Floyd of <unk> . " 
 In 2005 there was a tidal wave of new wizard rock bands . The brothers do @-@ it @-@ yourself musical ethos has caught on with bands forming as fellow Potter fans are picking up instruments for the first time . Like Harry and the Potters , these new bands also take on the persona , or dress as a Harry Potter @-@ themed character . Though most fans of the music are previous fans of Harry Potter , some bands have attracted listeners outside of the Harry Potter fanbase . Paul and Joe are aware of around 200 other Harry Potter @-@ related rock bands who at least record and post songs on the Internet . The Boston Phoenix wondered — in spite of fully booked calendars — how long wizard rock would last once there are no new stories to riff on , as their musical identity is contingent on the lasting success and popularity of a book series . " In some ways , " said Paul , " we want to tie things off and consider it a done deal . We ’ ve always viewed this as a project that had a finite life and end point . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Harry and the Potters ( 2003 ) 
 Voldemort Can 't Stop the Rock ! ( 2004 ) 
 Harry and the Potters and the Power of Love ( 2006 ) 
 = Addie Joss = 
 Adrian " Addie " Joss ( April 12 , 1880 – April 14 , 1911 ) , nicknamed " The Human Hairpin , " was an American pitcher in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He pitched for the Cleveland Bronchos , later known as the Naps , between 1902 and 1910 . Joss , who was 6 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) and weighed 185 pounds ( 84 kg ) , pitched the fourth perfect game in baseball history . His 1 @.@ 89 career earned run average ( ERA ) is the second @-@ lowest in MLB history , behind Ed Walsh . 
 Joss was born and raised in Wisconsin , where he attended St. Mary 's College and the University of Wisconsin . He played baseball at St. Mary 's and then played in a semipro league where he caught the attention of Connie Mack . Joss did not sign with Mack 's team , but he attracted further major league interest after winning 19 games in 1900 for the Toledo Mud Hens . Joss had another strong season for Toledo in 1901 . 
 After an offseason contract dispute between Joss , Toledo and Cleveland , he debuted with the Cleveland club in April 1902 . Joss led the league in shutouts that year . By 1905 , Joss had completed the first of his four consecutive 20 @-@ win seasons . Off the field , Joss worked as a newspaper sportswriter from 1906 until his death . In 1908 , he pitched a perfect game during a tight pennant race that saw Cleveland finish a half @-@ game out of first place ; it was the closest that Joss came to a World Series berth . The 1910 season was his last , and Joss missed most of the year due to injury . 
 In April 1911 , Joss became ill and he died the same month due to tuberculous meningitis . He finished his career with 160 wins , 234 complete games , 45 shutouts and 920 strikeouts . Though Joss played only nine seasons and missed significant playing time due to various ailments , the National Baseball Hall of Fame 's Board of Directors passed a special resolution for Joss in 1977 which waived the typical ten @-@ year minimum playing career for Hall of Fame eligibility . He was voted into the Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1978 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Addie Joss was born in Woodland , Dodge County , Wisconsin . His parents Jacob and Theresa ( née <unk> ) worked as farmers ; his father , a cheesemaker who was involved in local politics , had emigrated from Switzerland . A heavy drinker of alcohol , he died from liver complications in 1890 , when Joss was 10 years old ; Joss remained sober throughout his life as a result of his father 's death . Joss attended elementary school in Juneau and Portage and high school at Wayland Academy in Beaver Dam , Wisconsin . By age 16 he finished high school and began teaching himself . He was offered a scholarship to attend St. Mary 's College ( also known as Sacred Heart College ) in Watertown , where he played on the school 's baseball team . He also attended the University of Wisconsin ( now University of Wisconsin @-@ Madison ) , where he studied engineering . Officials in Watertown were impressed with the quality of play of St. Mary 's and put the team on a semipro circuit . During his time on the semipro circuit , Joss employed his unique pitching windup , which involved hiding the ball until the very last moment in his delivery . 
 Connie Mack also sent a scout to watch Joss and later offered the young pitcher a job playing on his Albany club in the Western League , which Joss declined . In 1899 , Joss played for a team in Oshkosh , earning $ 10 per week ( $ 284 in today 's dollars ) . After player salaries were frozen by team owners , Joss joined the junior team in Manitowoc , which had been split into two teams , as a second baseman and was soon promoted to the senior squad , where he was developed into a pitcher . He was seen by a scout for the Toledo Mud Hens and in 1900 accepted a position with the team for $ 75 per month ( $ 2 @,@ 133 ) . While in Ohio he was considered " the best amateur pitcher in the state . " He started the Mud Hens ' season opener on April 28 and earned the win in the team 's 16 – 8 victory . He won 19 games for the club in 1900 . 
 = = = Contract dispute = = = 
 Midway through the 1901 season , the Boston Americans of the upstart American League offered $ 1 @,@ 500 ( $ 42 @,@ 666 ) to Toledo to buy out Joss 's contract . The St. Louis Browns of the National League ( NL ) matched Boston 's offer ; Toledo rejected both offers . Joss continued to pitch for the Mud Hens and by the end of the 1901 season he had won 27 games and had 216 strikeouts ( some sources say 25 games ) . He became known as " the god of the Western League . " 
 After the season ended , Joss returned to Wisconsin where he led Racine to the 1901 Wisconsin baseball state championship against Rube Waddell 's Kenosha squad . He also enrolled at Beloit College and played American football . It was reported that Joss had signed with the Brooklyn Dodgers of the National League as early as August 18 and received a $ 400 advance ( $ 11 @,@ 378 ) , but Joss denied receiving any money . Mud Hens owner Charles Stroebel stated that he had signed Joss and other Mud Hens players for the 1902 season on August 12 and that the Western League was under the protection of the National League through September 1901 . Before 1901 ended , the Cleveland Bronchos offered $ 500 ( $ 14 @,@ 222 ) to Toledo in exchange for Joss and manager Bob Gilks , who would be a scout for Cleveland . Toledo and Joss agreed and Joss was now a member of the American League , which was paying a premium on baseball talent to rival the National League . Dodgers owner Charles Ebbets invited Joss for a meeting , which Joss declined , and Joss let it be known that he had told Stroebel he would play for the Mud Hens for the 1902 season and received a $ 150 ( $ 4 @,@ 103 ) advance in February 1902 . 
 In March 1902 , Joss signed with Cleveland . Toledo sportswriters took exception to Joss , one writing that " he voluntarily signed a contract [ with Toledo ] for this season but when Bill Armour of Cleveland showed him the $ 500 bill he forgot his pledge and sneaked off like a whipped cur . " Stroebel later argued that Joss had returned only $ 100 of the $ 150 advance ; he not returning the entire advance , Joss was charged with a felony and Stroebel pursued legal action . Joss made his major league debut with the Bronchos on April 26 , and two days later he arrived in Toledo to turn himself in , accompanied by Bronchos majority owner Charles Somers , who was also American League vice president . The court set bond at $ 500 ( $ 13 @,@ 675 ) . Stroebel also filed a civil suit against the Bronchos , stating that his business had been interfered with , but Stroebel agreed to withdraw his charges in July when he accepted Bronchos pitcher Jack <unk> . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Cleveland Bronchos / Naps ( 1902 – 07 ) = = = 
 Joss made his major league debut with the Cleveland Bronchos ( also known as the Bluebirds ) against the St. Louis Browns . The Browns ' Jesse Burkett hit a shallow pop fly in the direction of right fielder Zaza Harvey . Home plate umpire Bob Caruthers ruled that Harvey did not make a clean catch , so Burkett was credited with a hit . ( Harvey and witnesses said the ball never hit the ground . ) Joss finished his major league debut with a one @-@ hitter . 
 Joss compiled a 17 – 13 record and 2 @.@ 77 ERA during his major league rookie season . He led the American League with five shutouts . 
 On October 11 , 1902 , Joss married Lillian <unk> in Monroe , Michigan . <unk> was in attendance when Joss made his professional debut with the Mud Hens in 1900 . The couple had a son , Norman , and a daughter , Ruth . Following the conclusion of the 1902 season , Joss was selected to the All @-@ Americans , an all @-@ star team from the American League who played exhibition games against their counterparts from the National League . To begin the 1903 season , the Cleveland organization changed the team 's name to the " Naps " in honor of shortstop Nap Lajoie . In Joss ' second year , he went 18 – 13 and lowered his ERA from the season before to 2 @.@ 19 . His walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) was a MLB @-@ low 0 @.@ 948 . 
 For the 1904 season , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Joss went 14 – 10 with a 1 @.@ 59 ERA and did not give up a home run during the season . Illness during the season reduced his starts . He had his first of four 20 @-@ win seasons in 1905 as he ended the season with a 20 – 12 record and 2 @.@ 01 ERA . He finished with a career @-@ high 132 strikeouts . In 1906 his 1 @.@ 72 ERA was third in the league and he finished with a 21 – 9 record and tied a career @-@ high with nine shutouts . To begin the 1907 season , Joss won his first 10 starts . He threw two one @-@ hitters on the season , the first on September 4 against the Detroit Tigers and the second on September 25 versus the New York Highlanders . When teammate Heinie Berger threw his own one @-@ hitter on September 26 , it marked just the second time since 1900 that two pitchers from the same team had thrown back @-@ to @-@ back one @-@ hitters . Joss finished the season with career @-@ bests in wins ( finished 27 – 11 ) and 338 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . His win total tied with Doc White for highest in the American League and his WHIP was second @-@ best ( behind Cy Young ) while both his complete game ( 34 ) and shutout ( 6 ) totals were third @-@ best in the league . 
 = = = 1908 season and perfect game = = = 
 Before the 1908 season started , the Naps ' home field , League Park , was expanded by about 4 @,@ 000 seats . The Detroit Tigers , Chicago White Sox , and Naps were engaged in a race for the post @-@ season described as " one of the closest and most exciting known . " Three games remained in the regular season and the Naps were a half @-@ game behind the Detroit Tigers as they headed into a October 2 , 1908 , match @-@ up against the Chicago White Sox , who trailed the Naps by one game . Game attendance was announced at 10 @,@ 598 , which was labeled by sportswriter Franklin Lewis as an " excellent turnout for a weekday . " The Naps faced future Hall of Fame pitcher Ed Walsh and recorded four hits ; they were struck out by Walsh 15 times . The Naps ' Joe Birmingham scored the team 's only run , which came in the third inning . The tension in the ballpark was described by one writer as " a mouse working his way along the grandstand floor would have sounded like a shovel scraping over concrete . " In the ninth inning , Joss retired the first two batters then faced pinch hitter John Anderson . Anderson hit a line drive that would have resulted in a double had it not gone foul . He then hit a ball to Naps third baseman Bill Bradley which Bradley bobbled before throwing to first baseman George Stovall . Stovall dug the ball out of the ground to preserve the Naps ' 1 – 0 lead . With the win , Joss recorded a perfect game , the second in American League history . He accomplished the feat with just 74 pitches , the lowest known pitch count ever achieved in a perfect game . Fans swarmed the field . After the game , Joss said , " I never could have done it without Larry Lajoie 's and Stovall 's fielding and without Birmingham 's base running . Walsh was marvelous with his splitter , and we needed two lucky strikes to win . " 
 For the season , Joss averaged 0 @.@ 83 walks per nine innings , becoming one of 29 pitchers in MLB history to average less than one walk per nine innings . His season @-@ ending WHIP of <unk> is the fifth @-@ lowest single @-@ season mark in MLB history . The Naps finished with a 90 – 64 record , a half @-@ game behind Detroit . It was the closest Joss ever got to a World Series appearance . 
 = = = Final years with Naps ( 1909 – 10 ) = = = 
 After amassing four consecutive 20 @-@ win seasons , he struggled in 1909 as a result of fatigue ; by September he was shut down for the season . Joss finished the year with a 14 – 13 record in 242 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and recorded a 1 @.@ 71 ERA . He finished fourth in the American League in ERA and third in WHIP ( .944 ) . 
 He pitched a second no @-@ hitter on April 20 , 1910 against the White Sox , becoming the first pitcher in MLB history to no @-@ hit the same team twice , a feat not matched until Tim Lincecum of the San Francisco Giants no @-@ hit the San Diego Padres in both 2013 and 2014 . In the second inning , the White Sox ' Freddy Parent hit a ball toward third base . Bill Bradley failed to field the ball cleanly and thus his throw to first base was not in time to get Parent out . The initial ruling on the field was a base hit but it was later changed to an error . Joss gave up two walks and recorded 10 assists . He made just 13 appearances that season due to a torn ligament in his right elbow . He made his last appearance of the season on July 25 , and left the game in the fifth inning due to arm soreness . The Naps finished 71 – 82 . In his final major league season , Joss finished with a 5 – 5 record in 107 1 ⁄ 3 innings . The Naps finished the year 71 – 81 . This marked the fifth time in Joss ' nine years that the franchise finished with a losing record . 
 = = = Career marks = = = 
 Of his 160 major league wins , 45 were shutouts . Joss ' 1 @.@ 89 career ERA is ranked second all @-@ time ( to Ed Walsh ) , while his 0 @.@ 97 WHIP is the lowest career WHIP in MLB history . He finished with a 160 – 97 record , 234 complete games , and 920 strikeouts . 
 Joss 's repertoire included a fastball , a " slow ball " ( today known as a changeup ) , and an " extremely effective " curve . Baseball historians Rob Neyer and Bill James ranked Joss ' fastball third ( 1900 – 1904 ) and sixth ( 1905 – 1909 ) in the major leagues . George Moriarty explained that Joss had only one curveball because " he believed that with a few well mastered deliveries he could acquire great control and success with less strain on his arm . " In an era filled with spitball pitchers , Joss achieved his success without ever altering the baseball . Joss threw with a corkscrew windup motion , described as " an exaggerated pinwheel motion . " Shortstop Roger Peckinpaugh described his windup : " He would turn his back toward the batter as he wound up , hiding the ball all the while , and then whip around and fire it in . " 
 Illness and injury accompanied Joss throughout much of his professional career . In 1903 , a high fever forced him to miss the last month of the season . He contracted malaria in April 1904 and then missed several starts with a back injury in 1905 . 
 = = Journalism and engineering interests = = 
