 Joss was concerned about supporting his family after his baseball career ended ; many players of the day had little education and few marketable job skills beyond their abilities on the diamond . As sportswriter Franklin Lewis wrote , " Only a handful of players in the rough , stirring , early days of the major leagues arrived from campuses . And when they did , sometimes the shock was too great for them . Some grizzled holdovers from the 1890s were around and they bore down heavily on the eardrums of the so @-@ called college @-@ boy set . " Joss was hired as a sports columnist after the 1906 season for the Toledo News @-@ Bee . He also served as their Sunday sports editor . His writings proved so popular that sales of the paper increased and a special phone line was installed in his office to field the large volume of calls he received from fans . The increased popularity gave him an advantage when negotiating with the Naps before the 1907 season , and the club agreed to pay him $ 4 @,@ 000 ( $ 101 @,@ 586 ) . ( By 1910 , player salaries averaged only $ 2 @,@ 500 . ) 
 He later also wrote for the Cleveland Press and covered the World Series for the News @-@ Bee and Press from 1907 – 1909 . The Press introduced Joss in columns this way : " Of all the baseball players in the land , Addie Joss is far and away the best qualified for this work . A scholarly man , an entertaining writer , an impartial observer of the game . " Biographer Scott <unk> wrote that " the writer was becoming as well @-@ known as the ballplayer . " An editorial in the Toledo Blade said , " In taking his vocation seriously , [ Joss ] was , in return , taken seriously by the people , who recognized in him a man of more than usual intelligence and one who would have adorned any profession in which he had elected to engage . " 
 During the 1908 – 1909 offseasons , Joss worked on designing an electric scoreboard that would later be known as the Joss Indicator . The Naps decided to install the scoreboard , which allowed spectators to monitor balls and strikes at League Park . 
 = = Death and benefit game = = 
 Joss attended spring training with Cleveland before the start of the 1911 season . He collapsed on the field from heat prostration on April 3 in an exhibition game in Chattanooga , Tennessee . He was taken to a local hospital and released the next day . As early as April 7 , press reports had taken note of his ill health , but speculated about " <unk> poisoning " or " nervous indigestion . " The Naps traveled to Toledo for exhibition games on April 10 and Joss went to his home on Fulton Street where he was seen by his personal physician , Dr. George W. Chapman . Chapman thought Joss could be suffering from nervous indigestion or food poisoning . By April 9 , as Joss was coughing more and had a severe headache , Chapman changed his diagnosis to pleurisy and reported that Joss would not be able to play for one month and would need ten days of rest to recover . Joss could not stand on his own and his speech was slurred . On April 13 , Chapman sought a second opinion from the Naps ' team doctor , who performed a lumbar puncture and diagnosed Joss with tuberculous meningitis . The disease had spread to Joss ' brain and he died on April 14 , 1911 at age 31 . 
 Joss was well @-@ liked by his peers and baseball fans . Upon hearing of his death , the Press wrote " every train brings flowers " and " floral tributes by the <unk> are hourly arriving at the Joss home from all sections of the country . " His family arranged for the funeral to take place on April 17 . On that day , the Naps were to face the Detroit Tigers in the Tigers ' home opener . Naps players signed a petition stating that they would not attend the game so they could instead attend the funeral . They asked for the game to be rescheduled , but the Tigers balked at the request . American League president Ban Johnson initially supported the Tigers ' position , but he ultimately sided with the Naps . Naps owner Charles Somers and 15 Naps players attended the funeral , which was officiated by player @-@ turned @-@ evangelist Billy Sunday . 
 The first " all @-@ star " game was played as a benefit for Joss 's family on July 24 , 1911 . The Naps invited players from the other seven American League teams to play against them . Visiting club players who were involved in the game included Home Run Baker , Ty Cobb , Eddie Collins , Sam Crawford , Walter Johnson , Tris Speaker , Gabby Street , and Smokey Joe Wood . " I 'll do anything they want for Addie Joss ' family " , Johnson said . Washington Senators manager Jimmy McAleer volunteered to manage the all @-@ stars . " The memory of Addie Joss is sacred to everyone with whom he ever came in contact . The man never wore a uniform who was a greater credit to the sport than he " , McAleer said . The game was attended by approximately 15 @,@ 270 fans and raised nearly $ 13 @,@ 000 ( $ 330 @,@ 154 ) to help Joss ' family members pay remaining medical bills . The Naps lost 5 – 3 . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Boston Globe sports editor Jason Nason campaigned for Joss ' induction into the Hall of Fame starting in the 1950s . Sportswriter Red Smith wrote in 1970 in support of Joss . " Could you write a history of baseball without mentioning Joss ? Nobody ever has . That ought to be the measure of a man 's fitness for the Hall of Fame , the only measure . " However , Warren Giles , then @-@ chairman of the Hall of Fame 's Veterans Committee , pointed out to baseball historian Bob Broeg in 1972 that induction to the Hall required " participation in ten championship seasons . " Joss had been on the Cleveland roster in 1911 and participated in spring training , falling ill just before regular season play commenced . Hence it was argued he had " participated " in the 1911 season , his tenth . The Hall 's Board of Directors waived the eligibility requirements for Joss . Joe <unk> , a member of the Commissioner 's office , worked to allow Joss to become eligible for the Hall and succeeded in 1977 . Joss was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1978 . He is the only player in the Hall of Fame whose regular season playing career lasted fewer than ten years . 
 In 1981 , Lawrence Ritter and Donald Honig included him in their book The 100 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time . They described what they called " the Smoky Joe Wood Syndrome " , where a player of truly exceptional talent has a career curtailed by injury or illness . They argued that such a player should still be included among the greatest all @-@ time players , in spite of career statistics that would not quantitatively rank him with the all @-@ time greats . They believed that Joss ' career ERA was proof enough of his greatness to be included . Baseball author John Tierney wrote : " Joss is remembered for a remarkably low career ERA , but it should be noted that he pitched in a time before earned runs were compiled as an official statistic , and his career ended in 1910 , before the American League introduced its new baseball in 1911 , leading to a nearly 25 percent increase in runs scored . " 
 Joss was inducted into the Cleveland Indians Hall of Fame on July 29 , 2006 . He was inducted in the same class as Ray Chapman , Rocky <unk> , Al López , Sam McDowell , Al Rosen and Herb Score . 
 = Finland Plot = 
 In Thailand politics , the Finland Plot , Finland Plan , Finland Strategy or Finland Declaration ( Thai : <unk> ์ , <unk> ์ <unk> ์ , <unk> ์ ) are names of a controversial conspiracy theory espoused by Sondhi Limthongkul and supporters affiliated with the People 's Alliance for Democracy ( PAD ) in 2006 describing a plot allegedly developed by Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra and former left @-@ wing student leaders to overthrow the Thai monarch , take control of the nation , and establish a communist state . The plot allegedly originated in Finland . 
 The allegations had a negative impact on the popularity of Thaksin and his government , despite the fact that no evidence was ever produced to verify the existence of a plot . Thaksin and his Thai Rak Thai party vehemently denied the accusations and sued the accusers . The leaders of the 2006 military coup claimed Thaksin 's alleged disloyalty as one of their rationales for seizing power . 
 = = Background = = 
 Protests against Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra increased throughout 2005 and 2006 due to a variety of factors , including his April 2005 appearance at a merit @-@ making ceremony at the Temple of the Emerald Buddha , the September 2005 cancellation of Sondhi Limthongkul 's <unk> <unk> television show , Thaksin 's November 2005 plan to give local communities control of public schools , Thaksin 's sale of Shin Corporation in January 2006 , and Thaksin 's alleged role in the March 2006 destruction of the Phra <unk> <unk> shrine . 
 = = Finland Plot = = 
 In May 2006 , on the eve of King Bhumibol Adulyadej 's 60th anniversary celebrations , the Sondhi Limthongkul @-@ owned Manager Daily newspaper published the details of what it called the " Finland Plan , " " Finland Declaration , " or " Finland Strategy . " The articles claimed that Thaksin and former student leaders of Thailand 's 1970s democratic movement met in Finland in 1999 to develop a plan to institute rule by a single party , overthrow the monarchy and establish a republic , and hold elections for provincial governors . The 5 @-@ part article was titled " Finland Strategy : Thailand 's Revolution Plan ? " was written by Pramote <unk> and appeared on 17 , 19 , 22 , 23 and 24 May 2006 . Thaksin 's alleged co @-@ conspirators apparently included Thai Rak Thai party members <unk> <unk> ( Secretary @-@ General to the Premier ) , <unk> <unk> ( Deputy Prime Minister ) , <unk> <unk> ( Minister of Information and Communications Technology ) , <unk> <unk> ( Former Deputy Science Minister ) , <unk> <unk> ( Deputy Interior Minister ) , and <unk> <unk> ( Deputy Transport Minister ) , all of whom had been affiliated with the Communist Party of Thailand following the massacre of 6 October 1976 . 
 The allegations were taken up by several prominent critics , including leaders of the People 's Alliance for Democracy , constitution drafter Chai @-@ <unk> <unk> , Senator Sophon <unk> , writer Pramote <unk> , and Democrat leader <unk> <unk> . 
 None of the accusers provided any evidence to back up their allegations . Sondhi noted that his source was a Thai Rak Thai worker who had recently " defected . " 
 = = Variations and denials = = 
 Variations of the original theory were also proposed , including the claim that the plot involved overseas groups intent on overthrowing the Chakri dynasty , the claim that media consolidation was a core component of the conspiracy , the claim that the Plan was aimed at maintaining a constitutional monarchy while reducing the powers of the monarch to a mere figurehead , and the claim that a law designed to further decentralize central administrative power to the Thai provinces , and the claim that Thaksin wanted to establish a government based on the model of western democracies . 
 Another variation claimed that Thaksin 's co @-@ conspirators were former members of the Communist Party of Thailand including Deputy Transport Minister <unk> <unk> and had applied a theory of orthodox Marxism to map out the TRT strategy to promote capitalism . This variation claimed that Thailand during the 1970s was still a semi @-@ feudal society and needed to become a capitalist society as part of the transition to socialism . The communists then worked with Thaksin to fully develop Thailand 's capitalist economic system , destroy all remnants of feudalism , and privatize state @-@ owned assets , while at the same time establishing a single @-@ party dictatorship , all in order to create a socialist dictatorship . 
 The allegations were roundly denied by Thaksin Shinawatra and the leadership of his Thai Rak Thai party , including <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 On 30 May , Thaksin Shinawatra and Thana <unk> , a lawyer from the Thai Rak Thai party , sued Sondhi , editor <unk> <unk> , columnist Pramote <unk> , executive <unk> <unk> , and webmaster <unk> <unk> for libel . The lawsuit alleged that the articles were intended to ruin Thai Rak Thai and Thaksin 's political future by making the public believe the party was planning to overturn the constitutional monarchy . Thaksin 's lawsuit attracted criticism and claims that Thaksin was trying to censor the media . 
 = = Impact of the allegations = = 
 The allegations had a negative impact on the popularity of Thaksin and his government . Thaksin was forced to expend a significant amount of time and political capital on damage control , explaining his position and swearing his loyalty to the monarchy . 
 In an editorial , the influential anti @-@ Thaksin newspaper The Nation noted : 
 Whether or not such a plot really exists may be impossible to prove . But Sondhi and the others should know better than to stir up an already volatile political situation with irresponsible accusations that have a potential to inflame further hatred and violence between opposing groups . 
 The Nation noted that the actual existence of the Plot was not important — the mere invocation of royalty would be enough to damage the Thai Rak Thai party . Many commentators noted the similarity between the Finland Plot allegations and the allegations used justify the massacre of students on 6 October 1976 , which in the context of the Thailand political crisis , might justify a military coup . The Thai military eventually successfully executed a coup against the Thaksin government on 19 September 2006 . One of the junta 's stated rationales for the coup was that Thaksin had insulted the King . 
 = My Truth = 
 My Truth is the second studio album by Swedish recording artist Robyn . It was released on 17 May 1999 through BMG Sweden . Robyn collaborated with producers including Lindström & Ekhé , Christian Falk , Billy Mann , Thomas <unk> and Masters at Work during its recording . A pop and R & B record , My Truth is an autobiographical album for which Robyn co @-@ wrote all fourteen songs . Certain lyrics reflects on the abortion the singer had in the fall of 1998 , which sparked controversy when RCA Records began formulating a North American release . When she refused to make alterations to the album per request by the label , the plans to release My Truth outside of Sweden were cancelled . 
 Sweden @-@ based music critics were generally positive towards My Truth and commended Robyn 's growth as a songwriter . At the Swedish Grammis Awards in 2000 , the album won the award for Female Pop / Rock Artist . Overseas critics were divided in their opinions of My Truth ; they felt it was more mature than the singer 's debut album Robyn Is Here ( 1995 ) , but criticised the lack of catchy hooks . The album peaked at number two on the Sverigetopplistan albums chart and received a platinum certification by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) . My Truth was supported by four singles — " Electric " , " Play " , " My Only Reason " and " Main Thing " . Lead single " Electric " achieved commercial success ; it peaked at number six on the Swedish singles chart and was certified gold . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Robyn 's debut studio album Robyn Is Here was issued in Sweden in 1995 , followed by a North American release two years later . The record sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , per sales reports provided by BMG Sweden , and spawned the releases of the top @-@ ten singles " Do You Know ( What It Takes ) " and " Show Me Love " . Robyn Is Here also achieved a platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of one million units . In 1998 , Robyn returned to Sweden after spending nearly 12 months on tour in North America . She told Billboard , " I returned [ to Stockholm ] from my year in the U.S. [ and ] I was so extremely tired of everything , including myself and my music . " She then began working on her second studio album , to be titled My Truth . Robyn enlisted Ulf Lindström , Johan Ekhé , Christian Falk , Billy Mann , Cherno Jah , Masters at Work , Ken <unk> and Internal Dread to produce the project . She had previously collaborated with Lindström , Ekhé and Falk on Robyn Is Here . 
 Robyn was involved in the writing process for the entirety of My Truth , co @-@ writing all fourteen tracks . She teamed up with Swedish rapper Petter for a Swedish @-@ language duet titled " Det gör ont ibland " . The collaboration came about when the two were at a friend 's country house . Petter said the song came together quickly , despite their different musical styles . The track was produced by rapper Thomas <unk> with additional production by Robyn , Lindström and Ekhé . She recorded another duet for the album , titled " Healthy Love " , with singer Cindy <unk> . In the fall of 1998 , Robyn had an abortion , which she revealed to the public months later in an issue of Café Magazine . Following the abortion , she penned the songs " 88 Days " and " Giving You Back " , to help her cope with the incident . At the time of the album 's completion , she deemed the latter among the best songs she had written thus far . She began using songwriting as a coping mechanism during production of Robyn Is Here when she wrote " In My Heart " about her parents ' divorce . She wanted My Truth to be positive in spirit , but acknowledged there is " some sadness expressed " . She said , " Every song is about something I 've been through that I think is important to talk about . I have tried to turn these experiences into inspiring songs about my life . " Eric Broms photographed the artwork for My Truth , which sees Robyn wearing a feather headpiece designed by Sebastian Wahl . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Described by commentators as an autobiographical album , My Truth is a pop and R & B record . Music critic John Lucas from AllMusic conceived it as " hardly a radical departure " from Robyn Is Here , yet more mature with " intelligent and introspective " lyrics and greater focus on the lyrical content as a whole . " Det gör ont ibland " featuring Petter is located on the pregap of the first track as a hidden track . Aftonbladet 's Per Bjurman interpreted the first track , " Play " , as slightly world music @-@ tinged , while Lucas deemed it " as playful a song as [ Robyn ] ' s ever recorded " . It is followed by the R & B piece " My Only Reason " . Next is the ballad " Underneath the Heart " , which was likened by one critic to the catalogue of American singer Toni Braxton . 
 The fourth track , " Electric " , is an electronic funk song with elements of reggae music . The title track holds a " convinced relativism " , according to Robert Christgau , while " Main Thing " , a cover of Shot 's 1986 single , explores deep house , disco and funk genres . The ninth track , " Giving You Back " , is a piano ballad that addresses Robyn 's abortion as she sings " I 'm giving you back to where you came from but I 'm not forgetting who you are " . David Schmader of The Stranger opined that it features a directness that is " unprecedented in pop " , and compared its piano elements to those found in Braxton 's work . The following track , " 88 Days " , lyrically reflects on the abortion while showcasing a pop and R & B sound . The thirteenth and final track , " Universal Woman " , for which Robyn received sole writing credit , exhibits both intelligence and emotional authority , according to Bjurman . 
 = = Release = = 
 My Truth was released in Sweden on 17 May 1999 through BMG Sweden . Around this time , RCA Records , Robyn 's international label , were formulating the marketing plans for the album in the United States ; the initial reports anticipated the release of an airplay single in September 1999 , followed by the album in January 2000 . Due to the inclusion of two songs that reflected on the abortion incident , RCA asked Robyn to re @-@ record portions of the album for the American market and pop radio . On top of this , American music magazine Billboard published an article in June 1999 that falsely claimed she had a miscarriage rather than an abortion . Ultimately , Robyn refused to alter the record and a compromise was not reached . The negotiations came to an end after six months and the plans to release My Truth abroad were cancelled . Robyn 's manager Alex <unk> said , " I guess Robyn had moved in a direction that [ RCA ] didn 't expect . " According to Robyn , the label wanted an album like Robyn Is Here and thus were not interested in investing in My Truth . In 2001 , she parted ways with RCA and entered a new record deal with Jive Records and Zomba . 
 " Electric " was released as My Truth 's lead single on 29 April 1999 , including both the radio edit and the extended album version . The record became Robyn 's third top @-@ ten entry on the Sverigetopplistan singles chart , peaking at number six . On 18 May 1999 , it received a gold certification by the Swedish Recording Industry Association ( GLF ) for sales of 15 @,@ 000 units . " Play " was selected as the second single in June 1999 , and released a month later on 21 July with the previously unreleased song " Good Thang " as the B @-@ side . " Play " peaked at number 31 on the Swedish singles chart . The third single , " My Only Reason " , was released on 22 November 1999 with " Det gör ont ibland " as its B @-@ side . The single underperformed on the singles chart ; it peaked at number 53 and only charted for one week . " Main Thing " was issued as the fourth and final single on 4 December 2000 and did not appear on any charts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reception of My Truth was generally positive in the Swedish press . Per Bjurman of Aftonbladet said that while the lyrical content of Robyn Is Here was charming , My Truth showed the singer 's growth and maturity as a songwriter . He judged the album proved Robyn as a full @-@ fledged musician and named it one of the best Swedish albums of the year . Daniel <unk> , writing for <unk> , opined that Robyn had succeeded with the record and commended the musical direction . A writer for <unk> highlighted " Main Thing " and " Electric " , but critiqued the album 's cheap production . Similarly , Karolina <unk> of Dagens Nyheter disliked the " flat " production by Lindström & Ekhé and Mann , but argued Robyn 's improvement as a vocalist partly saved the album . The album earned Robyn her first Grammis at the 2000 ceremony in the category of Female Pop / Rock Artist . The jury deemed it a " brilliant " follow @-@ up to her debut album and praised the personal lyrics . 
 As the album was not released outside of Sweden , it attracted little attention from overseas music critics . However , John Lucas did review the album on behalf of AllMusic , writing that " there are no truly weak moments " and praised it for being " much more organic and mature " than Robyn Is Here . On the other hand , he felt it lacked " instant " and " irresistible " hooks and criticised the " uniformity of sound that can make some songs drift in and out without really making any impression " . He concluded , " Not a commercial blockbuster then , nor a perfect listen , but this album does mark an important step forward for Robyn as an artist . " A negative opinion came from music critic Robert Christgau , who considered My Truth " as strained as you might fear " , and used it as an example of Robyn 's " awkward stage that hits <unk> stars like clockwork " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 My Truth debuted at number two on the Swedish albums chart , and was certified gold by the GLF for sales of 40 @,@ 000 units on 18 May 1999 , just one day after its release . The album sold 50 @,@ 000 copies in its first four weeks . It remained on the albums chart for 27 non @-@ consecutive weeks , 11 of which were in the top 10 . On 1 October 1999 , My Truth received a platinum certification by the GLF , indicating sales of 80 @,@ 000 copies . In 2001 , Billboard reported it had surpassed sales of 130 @,@ 000 units in Sweden . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of My Truth . 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] " Det gör ont ibland " is located in the pregap of track 1 ( referred to as track 0 ) as a hidden track 
 ^ [ b ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ [ c ] signifies an additional producer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of My Truth . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Frank Lukis = 
 Air Commodore Francis William Fellowes ( Frank ) Lukis , CBE ( 27 July 1896 – 18 February 1966 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . A veteran of World War I , he first saw combat as a soldier in the Australian Imperial Force at Gallipoli . In 1917 , Lukis transferred to the Australian Flying Corps and flew with No. 1 Squadron in the Middle East , where he was twice mentioned in despatches . A member of the Australian Air Corps following the war , he transferred to the fledgling RAAF in 1921 , and became the first Commanding Officer of the newly re @-@ formed No. 3 Squadron at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , in 1925 . 
 Lukis went on to lead No. 1 Squadron in the early 1930s , and was promoted to group captain in 1938 . Appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire the same year , he was in charge of RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , during the early years of World War II . He later held forward commands in the South West Pacific theatre , including Northern Area ( later North @-@ Eastern Area ) , for which he was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire , and No. 9 Operational Group ( later Northern Command ) . Lukis also served on the Air Board , the RAAF 's controlling body , as Air Member for Personnel . After retirement from the Air Force in 1946 , he became a manager with Australian National Airways , and was active in veterans ' associations . He died in 1966 at the age of sixty @-@ nine . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Born on 27 July 1896 in <unk> , Western Australia , Frank Lukis was the son of grazier William Fellowes Lukis and his wife Jean . He was educated at The High School , Perth , and later worked on the family farm . In October 1914 , he joined the Australian Imperial Force as part of the 10th Light Horse Regiment , the only such regiment raised in Western Australia . Ranked corporal , Lukis sailed from Fremantle aboard A47 Mashobra on 17 February 1915 , seeing combat first at Gallipoli and then in Egypt . At Gallipoli , the 10th Light Horse went into action in the Battles of the Nek and Hill 60 , before being withdrawn in December and redeployed to Egypt . There it took part in the campaign against the Turks in Sinai , including the Battle of Romani . 
 Lukis was commissioned as a second lieutenant in July 1916 and promoted to lieutenant in December . On 25 February 1917 , he transferred to the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) and was posted to No. 1 Squadron ( also known until 1918 as No. 67 Squadron , Royal Flying Corps ) , operating in Sinai and Palestine . He undertook reconnaissance missions as an observer in Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2s from April to September 1917 . In January 1918 he completed pilot training and began flying fighter and ground attack sorties in Bristol Fighters . He was twice mentioned in despatches for distinguished service with the AFC in the Middle East , the first gazetted on 16 January 1918 , and the second on 12 January 1920 . Lukis finished the war a flight commander with the temporary rank of captain , and returned to Australia on 5 March 1919 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 With the disbandment of the wartime AFC , Lukis joined the short @-@ lived Australian Air Corps early in 1920 . He transferred to the newly formed Royal Australian Air Force in March the following year . Ranked flying officer ( honorary flight lieutenant ) , he was one of the original twenty @-@ one officers on the Air Force 's strength at its formation , and became popularly known as " Luke " . In February 1922 , he surveyed the air route between Perth and Port Augusta , South Australia . He took part in one of the embryonic service 's earliest public flying displays in May that year , when he and another pilot flew Airco DH.9s in mock dogfights with four Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s during the New South Wales Aerial Pageant at Victoria Park , Sydney . On 21 January 1925 , he married Florence St Aubyn Allen at St Mary 's Anglican Church , West Perth ; the couple later had two sons . The previous year , Lukis had been best man at the wedding of Squadron Leader Frank McNamara , the AFC 's only Victoria Cross recipient in World War I. 
 No. 3 Squadron was re @-@ formed at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria , on 1 July 1925 , with Lukis as its Commanding Officer ( CO ) . Over the next week , operating DH.9s and S.E.5s , the unit established itself at the Air Force 's newest base , RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales . Alerted to a forthcoming inspection by the Chief of the Air Staff , Group Captain Richard Williams , Lukis had the foresight to engage in a speedy beautification program at the base , arranging delivery of pot plants and shrubs ; the notoriously fastidious Williams concluded the inspection by pronouncing himself " happily surprised ... that so much had been done so quickly " . For the duration of his tour as No. 3 Squadron commander , Lukis doubled as CO of the base . He was promoted squadron leader on 2 July 1927 , and handed over command to Squadron Leader Harry Cobby on 13 January 1930 . Lukis served as CO of No. 1 Squadron from 1930 to 1934 , interrupted in 1931 by a posting to Britain to attend RAF Staff College , Andover . Raised to wing commander , he was placed in charge of No. 1 Aircraft Depot at RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , in 1936 . He held command of No. 1 Flying Training School at Point Cook from January 1938 to November 1939 , receiving appointment as an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 1938 King 's Birthday Honours , and promotion to group captain in July the same year . 
 = = World War II = = 
 The CO of RAAF Station Laverton from December 1939 , Lukis was made acting air commodore and posted to Townsville , Queensland , on 8 May 1941 as the inaugural Air Officer Commanding Northern Area . Described by Major General Lewis H. Brereton , commander of the US Far East Air Force , as " a dark , husky , energetic man with a keen sense of humour " who was very much " alive to the situation " , Lukis was in charge of air defence for the north coast of Australia . His task was complicated by the poor standard and quantity of available equipment , with only CAC Wirraways as fighters . In January 1942 , Northern Area was split into North @-@ Western Area and North @-@ Eastern Area , Lukis remaining in charge of the latter as a temporary air commodore . The following month , he warned higher command of the poor state of preparedness and low morale of Australian Army troops at Port Moresby , New Guinea , due to lack of air cover and apparent lack of interest from government echelons . In March , seventeen P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks of No. 75 Squadron , newly formed under North @-@ Eastern Area Command , were deployed ; the unit would shortly distinguish itself in the Battle of Port Moresby . 
 By the end of April 1942 , Lukis ' forces consisted of three squadrons ( general purpose , transport , and fighter ) at Townsville , one general purpose squadron at RAAF Station Amberley in southern Queensland , and four squadrons ( three general purpose and one fighter ) at Port Moresby . Posted to RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , as Air Member for Personnel , he handed over command of North @-@ Eastern Area to Group Captain ( later Air Commodore ) Harry Cobby on 25 August . On 23 March 1943 , Lukis was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire for the " courage , enterprise and devotion " that he had displayed at North @-@ Eastern Area . As Air Member for Personnel , he occupied a seat on the Air Board , the RAAF 's controlling body that was chaired by the Chief of the Air Staff . In this position he clashed with Group Officer Clare Stevenson , Director of the Women 's Auxiliary Australian Air Force , over plans to reduce the number of female officers in technical roles . Stevenson was forced to apologise to Lukis for going over his head to the Deputy Chief of the Air Staff to voice her opposition to the scheme ; nevertheless , cuts to these positions did not eventuate . 
 In November 1943 , Lukis took over No. 9 Operational Group ( No. 9 OG ) , the RAAF 's main mobile formation in the Pacific at the time , after its commander , Air Commodore Joe Hewitt , was sacked by the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , over allegations of poor discipline and morale . The change in leadership dismayed the US @-@ led South West Pacific Area Command , whose senior air officers , Lieutenant General George Kenney and Major General Ennis Whitehead , did not hold Lukis in the same high regard that they did his predecessor . For the next two months , No. 9 OG supported the Allied invasion of New Britain . On 17 January 1944 , Lukis mounted an operation with a force of seventy @-@ three aircraft comprising Bristol Beaufort light bombers and Kittyhawk and Spitfire fighters , which was the largest strike undertaken by the Australians to that date . However it encountered no opposition , and Lukis voiced his concerns to Whitehead that the " mopping up " role he had been assigned was costing his fighter pilots the opportunity to engage in air @-@ to @-@ air combat . 
 As the Pacific conflict shifted further north , No. 9 OG 's operational tasking lessened and it became colloquially known in the RAAF as the " Non @-@ Ops Group " . When ordered to transfer one of his fighter wings , No. 73 , to the Admiralty Islands for convoy escort in late February , Lukis complained directly to Kenney that it was a waste of resources , but was over @-@ ruled . The rest of No. 9 OG became a garrison force in New Guinea , and was renamed Northern Command on 11 April 1944 to better reflect this new status ; its original mobile strike role was taken over by No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) . Lukis was again considered for the position of Air Member for Personnel when the incumbent , acting Air Vice Marshal Adrian Cole , was removed from his position following accusations of drunkenness at an RAAF Headquarters meeting in November 1944 . In the event , Lukis remained in charge of Northern Command . The following April , he took command of No. 2 Training Group in Melbourne , and held this post for the remainder of the Pacific War . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Lukis took up his final RAAF posting , as Air Officer Commanding Eastern Area , in December 1945 . With the end of hostilities , he was summarily retired along with a number of other senior commanders and veterans of World War I , ostensibly to make way for the advancement of younger and equally capable officers . According to RAAF historian Alan Stephens , the Air Board believed that Lukis " had not taken a role commensurate with his seniority during the war , a strange accusation to make against a man who had been Air Member for Personnel and AOC of the RAAF 's most important operational group in the Southwest Pacific Area " . He was officially discharged on 2 May 1946 . Employed by Australian National Airways ( ANA ) after leaving the Air Force , Lukis become airfield manager at Essendon , Melbourne . He took over the airline 's Canberra office in 1952 , before joining a stockbroking firm in 1957 , the year that ANA merged with Ansett Airways to become Ansett @-@ ANA . Active in veterans ' organisations , he served as president of the Air Force Association in Victoria during 1947 – 48 , and helped found the Commonwealth Club in Canberra in 1954 . Survived by his wife and children , Frank Lukis died in Melbourne of cancer on 18 February 1966 , and was cremated . 
 = Anatomy = 
 Anatomy is the branch of biology concerned with the study of the structure of organisms and their parts . Anatomy is inherently tied to embryology , comparative anatomy , evolutionary biology , and phylogeny , as these are the processes by which anatomy is generated over immediate ( embryology ) and long ( evolution ) timescales . Human anatomy is one of the basic essential sciences of medicine . 
 The discipline of anatomy is divided into macroscopic and microscopic anatomy . Macroscopic anatomy , or gross anatomy , is the examination of an animal 's body parts using unaided eyesight . Gross anatomy also includes the branch of superficial anatomy . Microscopic anatomy involves the use of optical instruments in the study of the tissues of various structures , known as histology , and also in the study of cells . 
 The history of anatomy is characterized by a progressive understanding of the functions of the organs and structures of the human body . Methods have also improved dramatically , advancing from the examination of animals by dissection of carcasses and cadavers ( corpses ) to 20th century medical imaging techniques including X @-@ ray , ultrasound , and magnetic resonance imaging . 
 Anatomy and physiology , which study ( respectively ) the structure and function of organisms and their parts , make a natural pair of related disciplines , and they are often studied together . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Derived from the Greek <unk> <unk> " I cut up , cut open " from ἀνά ana " up " , and <unk> <unk> " I cut " , anatomy is the scientific study of the structure of organisms including their systems , organs and tissues . It includes the appearance and position of the various parts , the materials from which they are composed , their locations and their relationships with other parts . Anatomy is quite distinct from physiology and biochemistry , which deal respectively with the functions of those parts and the chemical processes involved . For example , an anatomist is concerned with the shape , size , position , structure , blood supply and innervation of an organ such as the liver ; while a physiologist is interested in the production of bile , the role of the liver in nutrition and the regulation of bodily functions . 
 The discipline of anatomy can be subdivided into a number of branches including gross or macroscopic anatomy and microscopic anatomy . Gross anatomy is the study of structures large enough to be seen with the naked eye , and also includes superficial anatomy or surface anatomy , the study by sight of the external body features . Microscopic anatomy is the study of structures on a microscopic scale , including histology ( the study of tissues ) , and embryology ( the study of an organism in its immature condition ) . 
 Anatomy can be studied using both invasive and non @-@ invasive methods with the goal of obtaining information about the structure and organization of organs and systems . Methods used include dissection , in which a body is opened and its organs studied , and endoscopy , in which a video camera @-@ equipped instrument is inserted through a small incision in the body wall and used to explore the internal organs and other structures . Angiography using X @-@ rays or magnetic resonance angiography are methods to visualize blood vessels . 
 The term " anatomy " is commonly taken to refer to human anatomy . However , substantially the same structures and tissues are found throughout the rest of the animal kingdom and the term also includes the anatomy of other animals . The term <unk> is also sometimes used to specifically refer to animals . The structure and tissues of plants are of a dissimilar nature and they are studied in plant anatomy . 
 = = Animal tissues = = 
 The kingdom Animalia or metazoa , contains multicellular organisms that are heterotrophic and motile ( although some have secondarily adopted a sessile lifestyle ) . Most animals have bodies differentiated into separate tissues and these animals are also known as eumetazoans . They have an internal digestive chamber , with one or two openings ; the gametes are produced in multicellular sex organs , and the zygotes include a blastula stage in their embryonic development . <unk> do not include the sponges , which have undifferentiated cells . 
 Unlike plant cells , animal cells have neither a cell wall nor chloroplasts . Vacuoles , when present , are more in number and much smaller than those in the plant cell . The body tissues are composed of numerous types of cell , including those found in muscles , nerves and skin . Each typically has a cell membrane formed of phospholipids , cytoplasm and a nucleus . All of the different cells of an animal are derived from the embryonic germ layers . Those simpler invertebrates which are formed from two germ layers of ectoderm and endoderm are called diploblastic and the more developed animals whose structures and organs are formed from three germ layers are called triploblastic . All of a triploblastic animal 's tissues and organs are derived from the three germ layers of the embryo , the ectoderm , mesoderm and endoderm . 
 Animal tissues can be grouped into four basic types : connective , epithelial , muscle and nervous tissue . 
 = = = Connective tissue = = = 
 Connective tissues are fibrous and made up of cells scattered among inorganic material called the extracellular matrix . Connective tissue gives shape to organs and holds them in place . The main types are loose connective tissue , adipose tissue , fibrous connective tissue , cartilage and bone . The extracellular matrix contains proteins , the chief and most abundant of which is collagen . <unk> plays a major part in organizing and maintaining tissues . The matrix can be modified to form a skeleton to support or protect the body . An exoskeleton is a thickened , rigid cuticle which is stiffened by mineralisation , as in crustaceans or by the cross @-@ linking of its proteins as in insects . An endoskeleton is internal and present in all developed animals , as well as in many of those less developed . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Epithelial tissue is composed of closely packed cells , bound to each other by cell adhesion molecules , with little intercellular space . Epithelial cells can be squamous ( flat ) , cuboidal or columnar and rest on a basal lamina , the upper layer of the basement membrane , the lower layer is the reticular lamina lying next to the connective tissue in the extracellular matrix secreted by the epithelial cells . There are many different types of epithelium , modified to suit a particular function . In the respiratory tract there is a type of ciliated epithelial lining ; in the small intestine there are microvilli on the epithelial lining and in the large intestine there are intestinal villi . Skin consists of an outer layer of keratinised stratified squamous epithelium that covers the exterior of the vertebrate body . <unk> make up to 95 % of the cells in the skin . The epithelial cells on the external surface of the body typically secrete an extracellular matrix in the form of a cuticle . In simple animals this may just be a coat of glycoproteins . In more advanced animals , many glands are formed of epithelial cells . 
 = = = Muscle tissue = = = 
 Muscle cells ( <unk> ) form the active contractile tissue of the body . Muscle tissue functions to produce force and cause motion , either locomotion or movement within internal organs . Muscle is formed of contractile filaments and is separated into three main types ; smooth muscle , skeletal muscle and cardiac muscle . Smooth muscle has no striations when examined microscopically . It contracts slowly but maintains <unk> over a wide range of stretch lengths . It is found in such organs as sea anemone tentacles and the body wall of sea cucumbers . Skeletal muscle contracts rapidly but has a limited range of extension . It is found in the movement of appendages and jaws . <unk> striated muscle is intermediate between the other two . The filaments are staggered and this is the type of muscle found in earthworms that can extend slowly or make rapid contractions . In higher animals striated muscles occur in bundles attached to bone to provide movement and are often arranged in antagonistic sets . Smooth muscle is found in the walls of the uterus , bladder , intestines , stomach , esophagus , respiratory airways , and blood vessels . Cardiac muscle is found only in the heart , allowing it to contract and pump blood round the body . 
 = = = Nervous tissue = = = 
 Nervous tissue is composed of many nerve cells known as neurons which transmit information . In some slow @-@ moving radially symmetrical marine animals such as ctenophores and cnidarians ( including sea anemones and jellyfish ) , the nerves form a nerve net , but in most animals they are organized longitudinally into bundles . In simple animals , receptor neurons in the body wall cause a local reaction to a stimulus . In more complex animals , specialised receptor cells such as chemoreceptors and photoreceptors are found in groups and send messages along neural networks to other parts of the organism . Neurons can be connected together in ganglia . In higher animals , specialized receptors are the basis of sense organs and there is a central nervous system ( brain and spinal cord ) and a peripheral nervous system . The latter consists of sensory nerves that transmit information from sense organs and motor nerves that influence target organs . The peripheral nervous system is divided into the somatic nervous system which conveys sensation and controls voluntary muscle , and the autonomic nervous system which involuntarily controls smooth muscle , certain glands and internal organs , including the stomach . 
 = = Vertebrate anatomy = = 
 All vertebrates have a similar basic body plan and at some point in their lives , ( mostly in the embryonic stage ) , share the major chordate characteristics ; a stiffening rod , the notochord ; a dorsal hollow tube of nervous material , the neural tube ; pharyngeal arches ; and a tail posterior to the anus . The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column and is above the notochord and the gastrointestinal tract is below it . Nervous tissue is derived from the ectoderm , connective tissues are derived from mesoderm , and gut is derived from the endoderm . At the posterior end is a tail which continues the spinal cord and vertebrae but not the gut . The mouth is found at the anterior end of the animal , and the anus at the base of the tail . The defining characteristic of a vertebrate is the vertebral column , formed in the development of the segmented series of vertebrae . In most vertebrates the notochord becomes the nucleus <unk> of the intervertebral discs . However , a few vertebrates , such as the sturgeon and the coelacanth retain the notochord into adulthood . Jawed vertebrates are typified by paired appendages , fins or legs , which may be secondarily lost . The limbs of vertebrates are considered to be homologous because the same underlying skeletal structure was inherited from their last common ancestor . This is one of the arguments put forward by Charles Darwin to support his theory of evolution . 
 = = = Fish anatomy = = = 
 The body of a fish is divided into a head , trunk and tail , although the divisions between the three are not always externally visible . The skeleton , which forms the support structure inside the fish , is either made of cartilage , in cartilaginous fish , or bone in bony fish . The main skeletal element is the vertebral column , composed of articulating vertebrae which are lightweight yet strong . The ribs attach to the spine and there are no limbs or limb girdles . The main external features of the fish , the fins , are composed of either bony or soft spines called rays , which with the exception of the caudal fins , have no direct connection with the spine . They are supported by the muscles which compose the main part of the trunk . The heart has two chambers and pumps the blood through the respiratory surfaces of the gills and on round the body in a single circulatory loop . The eyes are adapted for seeing underwater and have only local vision . There is an inner ear but no external or middle ear . Low frequency vibrations are detected by the lateral line system of sense organs that run along the length of the sides of fish , and these respond to nearby movements and to changes in water pressure . 
 Sharks and rays are basal fish with numerous primitive anatomical features similar to those of ancient fish , including skeletons composed of cartilage . Their bodies tend to be dorso @-@ ventrally flattened , they usually have five pairs of gill slits and a large mouth set on the underside of the head . The dermis is covered with separate dermal <unk> scales . They have a cloaca into which the urinary and genital passages open , but not a swim bladder . Cartilaginous fish produce a small number of large , yolky eggs . Some species are ovoviviparous and the young develop internally but others are oviparous and the larvae develop externally in egg cases . 
 The bony fish lineage shows more derived anatomical traits , often with major evolutionary changes from the features of ancient fish . They have a bony skeleton , are generally laterally flattened , have five pairs of gills protected by an operculum , and a mouth at or near the tip of the snout . The dermis is covered with overlapping scales . Bony fish have a swim bladder which helps them maintain a constant depth in the water column , but not a cloaca . They mostly spawn a large number of small eggs with little yolk which they broadcast into the water column . 
 = = = Amphibian anatomy = = = 
 Amphibians are a class of animals comprising frogs , salamanders and caecilians . They are tetrapods , but the caecilians and a few species of salamander have either no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size . Their main bones are hollow and lightweight and are fully ossified and the vertebrae interlock with each other and have articular processes . Their ribs are usually short and may be fused to the vertebrae . Their skulls are mostly broad and short , and are often incompletely ossified . Their skin contains little keratin and lacks scales , but contains many mucous glands and in some species , poison glands . The hearts of amphibians have three chambers , two atria and one ventricle . They have a urinary bladder and nitrogenous waste products are excreted primarily as urea . Amphibians breathe by means of buccal pumping , a pump action in which air is first drawn into the <unk> region through the nostrils . These are then closed and the air is forced into the lungs by contraction of the throat . They supplement this with gas exchange through the skin which needs to be kept moist . 
 In frogs the pelvic girdle is robust and the hind legs are much longer and stronger than the forelimbs . The feet have four or five digits and the toes are often webbed for swimming or have suction pads for climbing . Frogs have large eyes and no tail . Salamanders resemble lizards in appearance ; their short legs project sideways , the belly is close to or in contact with the ground and they have a long tail . Caecilians superficially resemble earthworms and are limbless . They burrow by means of zones of muscle contractions which move along the body and they swim by undulating their body from side to side . 
 = = = Reptile anatomy = = = 
 Reptiles are a class of animals comprising turtles , tuataras , lizards , snakes and crocodiles . They are tetrapods , but the snakes and a few species of lizard either have no limbs or their limbs are much reduced in size . Their bones are better ossified and their skeletons stronger than those of amphibians . The teeth are conical and mostly uniform in size . The surface cells of the epidermis are modified into horny scales which create a waterproof layer . Reptiles are unable to use their skin for respiration as do amphibians and have a more efficient respiratory system drawing air into their lungs by expanding their chest walls . The heart resembles that of the amphibian but there is a septum which more completely separates the oxygenated and deoxygenated bloodstreams . The reproductive system is designed for internal fertilisation , with a copulatory organ present in most species . The eggs are surrounded by amniotic membranes which prevents them from drying out and are laid on land , or develop internally in some species . The bladder is small as nitrogenous waste is excreted as uric acid . 
 Turtles are notable for their protective shells . They have an inflexible trunk encased in a horny carapace above and a plastron below . These are formed from bony plates embedded in the dermis which are overlain by horny ones and are partially fused with the ribs and spine . The neck is long and flexible and the head and the legs can be drawn back inside the shell . Turtles are vegetarians and the typical reptile teeth have been replaced by sharp , horny plates . In aquatic species , the front legs are modified into flippers . 
 <unk> superficially resemble lizards but the lineages diverged in the Triassic period . There is one living species , Sphenodon punctatus . The skull has two openings ( fenestrae ) on either side and the jaw is rigidly attached to the skull . There is one row of teeth in the lower jaw and this fits between the two rows in the upper jaw when the animal chews . The teeth are merely projections of bony material from the jaw and eventually wear down . The brain and heart are more primitive than those of other reptiles , and the lungs have a single chamber and lack bronchi . The tuatara has a well @-@ developed parietal eye on its forehead . 
 Lizards have skulls with only one fenestra on each side , the lower bar of bone below the second fenestra having been lost . This results in the jaws being less rigidly attached which allows the mouth to open wider . Lizards are mostly quadrupeds , with the trunk held off the ground by short , sideways @-@ facing legs , but a few species have no limbs and resemble snakes . Lizards have moveable eyelids , eardrums are present and some species have a central parietal eye . 
 Snakes are closely related to lizards , having branched off from a common ancestral lineage during the Cretaceous period , and they share many of the same features . The skeleton consists of a skull , a hyoid bone , spine and ribs though a few species retain a vestige of the pelvis and rear limbs in the form of pelvic spurs . The bar under the second fenestra has also been lost and the jaws have extreme flexibility allowing the snake to swallow its prey whole . Snakes lack moveable eyelids , the eyes being covered by transparent " spectacle " scales . They do not have eardrums but can detect ground vibrations through the bones of their skull . Their forked tongues are used as organs of taste and smell and some species have sensory pits on their heads enabling them to locate warm @-@ blooded prey . 
 Crocodilians are large , low @-@ slung aquatic reptiles with long snouts and large numbers of teeth . The head and trunk are dorso @-@ ventrally flattened and the tail is laterally compressed . It undulates from side to side to force the animal through the water when swimming . The tough keratinised scales provide body armour and some are fused to the skull . The nostrils , eyes and ears are elevated above the top of the flat head enabling them to remain above the surface of the water when the animal is floating . Valves seal the nostrils and ears when it is submerged . Unlike other reptiles , crocodilians have hearts with four chambers allowing complete separation of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood . 
 = = = Bird anatomy = = = 
 Birds are tetrapods but though their hind limbs are used for walking or hopping , their front limbs are wings covered with feathers and adapted for flight . Birds are endothermic , have a high metabolic rate , a light skeletal system and powerful muscles . The long bones are thin , hollow and very light . Air sac extensions from the lungs occupy the centre of some bones . The sternum is wide and usually has a keel and the caudal vertebrae are fused . There are no teeth and the narrow jaws are adapted into a horn @-@ covered beak . The eyes are relatively large , particularly in nocturnal species such as owls . They face forwards in predators and sideways in ducks . 
 The feathers are outgrowths of the epidermis and are found in localized bands from where they fan out over the skin . Large flight feathers are found on the wings and tail , contour feathers cover the bird 's surface and fine down occurs on young birds and under the contour feathers of water birds . The only cutaneous gland is the single uropygial gland near the base of the tail . This produces an oily secretion that waterproofs the feathers when the bird preens . There are scales on the legs , feet and claws on the tips of the toes . 
 = = = Mammal anatomy = = = 
 Mammals are a diverse class of animals , mostly terrestrial but some are aquatic and others have evolved flapping or gliding flight . They mostly have four limbs but some aquatic mammals have no limbs or limbs modified into fins and the forelimbs of bats are modified into wings . The legs of most mammals are situated below the trunk , which is held well clear of the ground . The bones of mammals are well ossified and their teeth , which are usually differentiated , are coated in a layer of prismatic enamel . The teeth are shed once ( milk teeth ) during the animal 's lifetime or not at all , as is the case in cetaceans . Mammals have three bones in the middle ear and a cochlea in the inner ear . They are clothed in hair and their skin contains glands which secrete sweat . Some of these glands are specialised as mammary glands , producing milk to feed the young . Mammals breathe with lungs and have a muscular diaphragm separating the thorax from the abdomen which helps them draw air into the lungs . The mammalian heart has four chambers and oxygenated and deoxygenated blood are kept entirely separate . Nitrogenous waste is excreted primarily as urea . 
 Mammals are amniotes , and most are viviparous , giving birth to live young . The exception to this are the egg @-@ laying monotremes , the platypus and the echidnas of Australia . Most other mammals have a placenta through which the developing foetus obtains nourishment , but in marsupials , the foetal stage is very short and the immature young is born and finds its way to its mother 's pouch where it latches on to a nipple and completes its development . 
 = = = = Human anatomy = = = = 
 Humans have the overall body plan of a mammal . Humans have a head , neck , trunk ( which includes the thorax and abdomen ) , two arms and hands and two legs and feet . 
 Generally , students of certain biological sciences , paramedics , <unk> and <unk> , physiotherapists , occupational therapists , nurses , and medical students learn gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy from anatomical models , skeletons , textbooks , diagrams , photographs , lectures and tutorials , and in addition , medical students generally also learn gross anatomy through practical experience of dissection and inspection of cadavers . The study of microscopic anatomy ( or histology ) can be aided by practical experience examining histological preparations ( or slides ) under a microscope . 
 Human anatomy , physiology and biochemistry are complementary basic medical sciences , which are generally taught to medical students in their first year at medical school . Human anatomy can be taught regionally or systemically ; that is , respectively , studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest , or studying by specific systems , such as the nervous or respiratory systems . The major anatomy textbook , Gray 's Anatomy , has been reorganized from a systems format to a regional format , in line with modern teaching methods . A thorough working knowledge of anatomy is required by physicians , especially surgeons and doctors working in some diagnostic specialties , such as histopathology and radiology . 
 Academic anatomists are usually employed by universities , medical schools or teaching hospitals . They are often involved in teaching anatomy , and research into certain systems , organs , tissues or cells . 
 = = Invertebrate anatomy = = 
 Invertebrates constitute a vast array of living organisms ranging from the simplest unicellular eukaryotes such as <unk> to such complex multicellular animals as the octopus , lobster and dragonfly . They constitute about 95 % of the animal species . By definition , none of these creatures has a backbone . The cells of single @-@ cell protozoans have the same basic structure as those of multicellular animals but some parts are specialised into the equivalent of tissues and organs . Locomotion is often provided by cilia or flagella or may proceed via the advance of <unk> , food may be gathered by phagocytosis , energy needs may be supplied by photosynthesis and the cell may be supported by an endoskeleton or an exoskeleton . Some protozoans can form multicellular colonies . 
 <unk> are multicellular organism , different groups of cells of which have separate functions . The most basic types of metazoan tissues are epithelium and connective tissue , both of which are present in nearly all invertebrates . The outer surface of the epidermis is normally formed of epithelial cells and secretes an extracellular matrix which provides support to the organism . An endoskeleton derived from the mesoderm is present in echinoderms , sponges and some cephalopods . <unk> are derived from the epidermis and is composed of chitin in arthropods ( insects , spiders , ticks , shrimps , crabs , lobsters ) . Calcium carbonate constitutes the shells of molluscs , brachiopods and some tube @-@ building polychaete worms and silica forms the exoskeleton of the microscopic diatoms and <unk> . Other invertebrates may have no rigid structures but the epidermis may secrete a variety of surface coatings such as the <unk> of sponges , the gelatinous cuticle of cnidarians ( polyps , sea anemones , jellyfish ) and the collagenous cuticle of annelids . The outer epithelial layer may include cells of several types including sensory cells , gland cells and stinging cells . There may also be protrusions such as microvilli , cilia , bristles , spines and tubercles . 
 Marcello Malpighi , the father of microscopical anatomy , discovered that plants had tubules similar to those he saw in insects like the silk worm . He observed that when a ring @-@ like portion of bark was removed on a trunk a swelling occurred in the tissues above the ring , and he unmistakably interpreted this as growth stimulated by food coming down from the leaves , and being captured above the ring . 
 = = = Arthropod anatomy = = = 
 Arthropods comprise the largest phylum in the animal kingdom with over a million known invertebrate species . 
 Insects possess segmented bodies supported by a hard @-@ jointed outer covering , the exoskeleton , made mostly of chitin . The segments of the body are organized into three distinct parts , a head , a thorax and an abdomen . The head typically bears a pair of sensory antennae , a pair of compound eyes , one to three simple eyes ( ocelli ) and three sets of modified appendages that form the mouthparts . The thorax has three pairs of segmented legs , one pair each for the three segments that compose the thorax and one or two pairs of wings . The abdomen is composed of eleven segments , some of which may be fused and houses the digestive , respiratory , excretory and reproductive systems . There is considerable variation between species and many adaptations to the body parts , especially wings , legs , antennae and mouthparts . 
 Spiders a class of arachnids have four pairs of legs ; a body of two segments — a cephalothorax and an abdomen . Spiders have no wings and no antennae . They have mouthparts called chelicerae which are often connected to venom glands as most spiders are venomous . They have a second pair of appendages called pedipalps attached to the cephalothorax . These have similar segmentation to the legs and function as taste and smell organs . At the end of each male pedipalp is a spoon @-@ shaped <unk> that acts to support the copulatory organ . 
 = = Other branches of anatomy = = 
 Superficial or surface anatomy is important as the study of anatomical landmarks that can be readily seen from the exterior contours of the body . It enables physicians or veterinary surgeons to gauge the position and anatomy of the associated deeper structures . Superficial is a directional term that indicates that structures are located relatively close to the surface of the body . 
 Comparative anatomy relates to the comparison of anatomical structures ( both gross and microscopic ) in different animals . 
 Artistic anatomy relates to anatomic studies for artistic reasons . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Ancient = = = 
 Ancient Greek anatomy and physiology underwent great changes and advances throughout the early medieval world . Over time , this medical practice expanded by a continually developing understanding of the functions of organs and structures in the body . Phenomenal anatomical observations of the human body were made , which have contributed towards the understanding of the brain , eye , liver , reproductive organs and the nervous system . 
 The city of Alexandria was the stepping @-@ stone for Greek anatomy and physiology . Alexandria not only housed the biggest library for medical records and books of the liberal arts in the world during the time of the Greeks , but was also home to many medical practitioners and philosophers . Great patronage of the arts and sciences from the Ptolemy rulers helped raise Alexandria up , further rivaling the cultural and scientific achievements of other Greek states . 
 Some of the most striking advances in early anatomy and physiology took place in Hellenistic Alexandria . Two of the most famous Greek anatomists and physiologists of the third century were Herophilus and Erasistratus . These two physicians helped pioneer human dissection for medical research . They also conducted vivisections on the cadavers of condemned criminals , which was considered taboo until the Renaissance – Herophilus was recognized as the first person to perform systematic dissections . Herophilus became known for his anatomical works making impressing contributions to many branches of anatomy and many other aspects of medicine . Some of the works included classifying the system of the pulse , the discovery that human arteries had thicker walls then veins , and that the atria were parts of the heart . Herophilus ’ s knowledge of the human body has provided vital input towards understanding the brain , eye , liver , reproductive organs and nervous system , and characterizing the course of disease . Erasistratus accurately described the structure of the brain , including the cavities and membranes , and made a distinction between its cerebrum and cerebellum During his study in Alexandria , Erasistratus was particularly concerned with studies of the circulatory and nervous systems . He was able to distinguish the sensory and the motor nerves in the human body and believed that air entered the lungs and heart , which was then carried throughout the body . His distinction between the arteries and veins – the arteries carrying the air through the body , while the veins carried the blood from the heart was a great anatomical discovery . Erasistratus was also responsible for naming and describing the function of the epiglottis and the valves of the heart , including the <unk> . During the third century , Greek physicians were able to differentiate nerves from blood vessels and tendons and to realize that the nerves convey neural impulses . It was Herophilus who made the point that damage to motor nerves induced paralysis . Herophilus named the meninges and ventricles in the brain , appreciated the division between cerebellum and cerebrum and recognized that the brain was the " seat of intellect " and not a " cooling chamber " as propounded by Aristotle Herophilus is also credited with describing the optic , oculomotor , motor division of the trigeminal , facial , vestibulocochlear and hypoglossal nerves 
 Great feats were made during the third century in both the digestive and reproductive systems . Herophilus was able to discover and describe not only the salivary glands , but the small intestine and liver . He showed that the uterus is a hollow organ and described the ovaries and uterine tubes . He recognized that spermatozoa were produced by the testes and was the first to identify the prostate gland . 
 In 1600 BCE , the Edwin Smith Papyrus , an Ancient Egyptian medical text , described the heart , its vessels , liver , spleen , kidneys , hypothalamus , uterus and bladder , and showed the blood vessels diverging from the heart . The Ebers Papyrus ( c . 1550 BCE ) features a " treatise on the heart " , with vessels carrying all the body 's fluids to or from every member of the body . 
 The anatomy of the muscles and skeleton is described in the Hippocratic Corpus , an Ancient Greek medical work written by unknown authors . Aristotle described vertebrate anatomy based on animal dissection . <unk> identified the difference between arteries and veins . Also in the 4th century BCE , <unk> and Erasistratus produced more accurate anatomical descriptions based on vivisection of criminals in Alexandria during the Ptolemaic dynasty . 
 In the 2nd century , Galen of Pergamum , an anatomist , clinician , writer and philosopher , wrote the final and highly influential anatomy treatise of ancient times . He compiled existing knowledge and studied anatomy through dissection of animals . He was one of the first experimental physiologists through his vivisection experiments on animals . Galen 's drawings , based mostly on dog anatomy , became effectively the only anatomical textbook for the next thousand years . His work was known to Renaissance doctors only through Islamic Golden Age medicine until it was translated from the Greek some time in the 15th century . 
 = = = Medieval to early modern = = = 
 Anatomy developed little from classical times until the sixteenth century ; as the historian Marie Boas writes , " Progress in anatomy before the sixteenth century is as mysteriously slow as its development after 1500 is startlingly rapid " . Between 1275 and 1326 , the anatomists Mondino de Luzzi , Alessandro <unk> and Antonio <unk> at Bologna carried out the first systematic human dissections since ancient times . Mondino 's Anatomy of 1316 was the first textbook in the medieval rediscovery of human anatomy . It describes the body in the order followed in Mondino 's dissections , starting with the abdomen , then the thorax , then the head and limbs . It was the standard anatomy textbook for the next century . 
 Leonardo da Vinci ( 1452 – 1519 ) was trained in anatomy by Andrea del Verrocchio . He made use of his anatomical knowledge in his artwork , making many sketches of skeletal structures , muscles and organs of humans and other vertebrates that he dissected . 
 Andreas Vesalius ( 1514 – 1564 ) ( Latinized from Andries van <unk> ) , professor of anatomy at the University of Padua , is considered the founder of modern human anatomy . Originally from Brabant , Vesalius published the influential book De humani corporis fabrica ( " the structure of the human body " ) , a large format book in seven volumes , in 1543 . The accurate and intricately detailed illustrations , often in allegorical poses against Italianate landscapes , are thought to have been made by the artist Jan van <unk> , a pupil of Titian . 
 In England , anatomy was the subject of the first public lectures given in any science ; these were given by the Company of Barbers and Surgeons in the 16th century , joined in 1583 by the <unk> lectures in surgery at the Royal College of Physicians . 
 = = = Late modern = = = 
 In the United States , medical schools began to be set up towards the end of the 18th century . Classes in anatomy needed a continual stream of cadavers for dissection and these were difficult to obtain . Philadelphia , Baltimore and New York were all renowned for body snatching activity as criminals raided graveyards at night , removing newly buried corpses from their coffins . A similar problem existed in Britain where demand for bodies became so great that grave @-@ raiding and even anatomy murder were practised to obtain cadavers . Some graveyards were in consequence protected with watchtowers . The practice was halted in Britain by the Anatomy Act of 1832 , while in the United States , similar legislation was enacted after the physician William S. Forbes of Jefferson Medical College was found guilty in 1882 of " complicity with resurrectionists in the despoliation of graves in Lebanon Cemetery " . 
 The teaching of anatomy in Britain was transformed by Sir John Struthers , Regius Professor of Anatomy at the University of Aberdeen from 1863 to 1889 . He was responsible for setting up the system of three years of " pre @-@ clinical " academic teaching in the sciences underlying medicine , including especially anatomy . This system lasted until the reform of medical training in 1993 and 2003 . As well as teaching , he collected many vertebrate skeletons for his museum of comparative anatomy , published over 70 research papers , and became famous for his public dissection of the Tay Whale . From 1822 the Royal College of Surgeons regulated the teaching of anatomy in medical schools . Medical museums provided examples in comparative anatomy , and were often used in teaching . Ignaz Semmelweis investigated puerperal fever and he discovered how it was caused . He noticed that the frequently fatal fever occurred more often in mothers examined by medical students than by midwives . The students went from the dissecting room to the hospital ward and examined women in childbirth . Semmelweis showed that when the trainees washed their hands in chlorinated lime before each clinical examination , the incidence of puerperal fever among the mothers could be reduced dramatically . 
 Before the era of modern medical procedures , the main means for studying the internal structure of the body were palpation and dissection . It was the advent of microscopy that opened up an understanding of the building blocks that constituted living tissues . Technical advances in the development of achromatic lenses increased the resolving power of the microscope and around 1839 , Matthias Jakob Schleiden and Theodor Schwann identified that cells were the fundamental unit of organization of all living things . Study of small structures involved passing light through them and the <unk> was invented to provide sufficiently thin slices of tissue to examine . Staining techniques using artificial dyes were established to help distinguish between different types of tissue . The fields of cytology and histology developed from here in the late 19th century . The invention of the electron microscope brought a great advance in resolution power and allowed research into the ultrastructure of cells and the organelles and other structures within them . About the same time , in the 1950s , the use of X @-@ ray diffraction for studying the crystal structures of proteins , nucleic acids and other biological molecules gave rise to a new field of molecular anatomy . 
 Short wavelength electromagnetic radiation such as X @-@ rays can be passed through the body and used in medical radiography to view interior structures that have different degrees of opaqueness . Nowadays , modern techniques such as magnetic resonance imaging , computed tomography , fluoroscopy and ultrasound imaging have enabled researchers and practitioners to examine organs , living or dead , in unprecedented detail . They are used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes and provide information on the internal structures and organs of the body to a degree far beyond the imagination of earlier generations . 
 = Battle of Morotai = 
 The Battle of Morotai , part of the Pacific War , began on 15 September 1944 , and continued until the end of the war in August 1945 . The fighting started when United States and Australian forces landed on the southwest corner of Morotai , a small island in the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) , which the Allies needed as a base to support the liberation of the Philippines later that year . The invading forces greatly outnumbered the island 's Japanese defenders and secured their objectives in two weeks . Japanese reinforcements landed on the island between September and November , but lacked the supplies needed to effectively attack the Allied defensive perimeter . Intermittent fighting continued until the end of the war , with the Japanese troops suffering heavy loss of life from disease and starvation . 
 Morotai 's development into an Allied base began shortly after the landing , and two major airfields were ready for use in October . These and other base facilities played an important role in the Liberation of the Philippines during 1944 and 1945 . Torpedo boats and aircraft based at Morotai also harassed Japanese positions in the NEI . The island 's base facilities were further expanded in 1945 to support the Australian @-@ led Borneo Campaign , and Morotai remained an important logistical hub and command center until the Dutch reestablished their colonial rule in the NEI . 
 = = Background = = 
 Morotai is a small island located in the Halmahera group of eastern Indonesia 's Maluku Islands . Most of the island 's interior is rugged and covered in thick jungle . The Doroeba Plain in Morotai 's south @-@ west corner is the largest of the island 's few lowland areas . Prior to the outbreak of war , Morotai had a population of 9 @,@ 000 and had not been commercially developed . It formed part of the Netherlands East Indies and was ruled by the Dutch through the Sultanate of Ternate . The Japanese occupied Morotai in early 1942 during the Netherlands East Indies campaign but did not garrison or develop it . 
 In early 1944 , Morotai became an area of importance to the Japanese military when it started developing the neighbouring larger island of Halmahera as a focal point for the defence of the southern approaches to the Philippines . In May 1944 , the Imperial Japanese Army 's 32nd Division arrived at Halmahera to defend the island and its nine airstrips . The division had suffered heavy losses when the convoy carrying it from China ( the Take Ichi convoy ) was attacked by US submarines . Two battalions from the 32nd Division 's 211th Infantry Regiment were initially deployed to Morotai to develop an airstrip on the Doroeba Plain . Both battalions were withdrawn to Halmahera in mid @-@ July , however , when the airstrip was abandoned because of drainage problems . Allied code breakers detected the Japanese build up at Halmahera and Morotai 's weak defenses , and passed this information on to the relevant planning staff . 
 In July 1944 , General Douglas MacArthur , the commander of the South West Pacific Area , selected Morotai as the location for air bases and naval facilities needed to support the liberation of Mindanao in the Philippines , which at the time was planned for 15 November . While Morotai was undeveloped , it was preferred over Halmahera as the larger and much better @-@ defended island was judged too difficult to capture and secure . The occupation of Morotai was designated Operation Tradewind . The landing was scheduled to take place on 15 September 1944 , the same day as the 1st Marine Division 's landing at Peleliu . This schedule allowed the main body of the United States Pacific Fleet to simultaneously protect both operations from potential Japanese counter @-@ attacks . 
 As little opposition was expected at Morotai , Allied planners decided to land the invasion force close to the airfield sites on the Doroeba Plain . Two beaches in the south @-@ west coast of the island were selected as suitable landing sites , and were designated Red Beach and White Beach . The Allied plan called for all three infantry regiments of the 31st Division to be landed across these beaches on 15 September and swiftly drive inland to secure the plain . As Morotai 's interior had no military value , the Allies did not intend to advance beyond a perimeter needed to defend the airfields . Planning for the construction of airfields and other base installations was also conducted prior to the landing , and tentative locations for these facilities had been selected by 15 September . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 At the time of the Allied landings , Morotai was defended by approximately 500 Japanese soldiers . The main unit was the 2nd Provisional Raiding Unit , which had gradually arrived on the island between 12 – 19 July 1944 , to replace the 32nd Division 's battalions when they were withdrawn . The 2nd Provisional Raiding Unit comprised four companies and was manned by Japanese officers and Formosan soldiers . Small elements of several other infantry , military police and support units were also present on the island . The 2nd Provisional Raiding Unit 's commander , Major <unk> Kawashima , deployed the unit in the south @-@ west sector of the island and used the smaller units to establish lookout posts and detachments around Morotai 's coastline . The largest of these outposts was on the island 's north @-@ east end at Cape <unk> , which consisted of about 100 men . The Japanese force was too small and widely dispersed to be able to mount an effective defense , so the 32nd Division ordered it to build dummy camps and use other deceptions in an attempt to trick the Allies into thinking that Morotai was strongly held . 
 The Allied force assigned to Morotai outnumbered the island 's defenders by more than one hundred to one . The Tradewind Task Force was established on 20 August under the command of Major General Charles P. Hall and numbered 40 @,@ 105 U.S. Army soldiers and 16 @,@ 915 United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) and Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) personnel . The Tradewind Task Force came under the overall command of the United States Sixth Army ; its main combat elements were the XI Corps headquarters , the 31st Infantry Division and the 126th Regimental Combat Team ( RCT ) from the 32nd Infantry Division . These units were supported by engineers and a large anti @-@ aircraft group . The Tradewind Task Force also included large numbers of construction and other line of communications units whose role was to swiftly develop the island into a major base . The 6th Infantry Division was designated the force reserve but remained on the mainland of New Guinea . General MacArthur accompanied the force onboard USS Nashville but was not in direct command of the operation . 
 The landing force was supported by powerful air and naval forces . The United States Fifth Air Force provided direct support while the Thirteenth Air Force and No. 10 Operational Group RAAF conducted strategic missions in the NEI and Philippines . The naval force was designated Task Force 77 and was organised into two attack groups , four reinforcement groups , a support group and an escort carrier group . The attack and reinforcement groups were responsible for transporting the assault force and subsequent support units and comprised twenty @-@ four destroyers , four frigates , two Australian LSIs , five APDs , one LSD , twenty @-@ four LCIs , forty @-@ five LSTs , twenty LCTs and eleven LCIs armed with rockets . The support group was made up of two Australian heavy cruisers , three US light cruisers and eight US and two Australian destroyers . The escort carrier group comprised six escort carriers and ten destroyer escorts and provided anti @-@ submarine and combat air patrol . Task Force 38 @.@ 4 with two fleet carriers , two light aircraft carriers , one heavy cruiser , one light cruiser and thirteen destroyers was also available to support Task Force 77 if required . 
 = = = Preliminary attacks = = = 
 Preliminary air attacks to suppress the Japanese air forces in the vicinity of Morotai began in August 1944 . At this time , the Allied intelligence services estimated that there were 582 Japanese aircraft within 400 miles ( 640 km ) of Morotai , 400 of which were in the objective area . The Allied air forces conducted heavy raids on airfields in the <unk> , Celebes , Ceram , Ambon , <unk> and other areas . US Navy carrier @-@ borne aircraft also attacked Japanese air units based at Mindanao and mounted further attacks on Halmahera and Celebes . These attacks were successful , and by 14 September it was estimated that only 60 aircraft remained in the vicinity of Morotai . 
 To preserve surprise , the Allies did not bombard Morotai prior to the invasion and conducted only a few photographic reconnaissance flights over the island . An Allied Intelligence Bureau patrol had been landed in the island in June but the information it collected was not passed on to the Sixth Army . Although the Tradewind Taskforce had little information on the invasion beaches or Japanese positions , the Sixth Army did not land any of its own reconnaissance patrols on Morotai , as it was feared that these could warn the island 's defenders that an attack was imminent . 
 The Tradewind Taskforce embarked onto the invasion convoy at several bases in north @-@ west New Guinea , and conducted landing rehearsals at Aitape and Wakde Island in early September . The convoy gathered at <unk> Bay on 11 September and set out for Morotai the next day . Its voyage was uneventful , and the convoy arrived off Morotai on the morning of 15 September without having been detected by Japanese forces . 
 = = Allied landings = = 
 The battle of Morotai began at 6 : 30 on the morning of 15 September . Allied warships conducted a two @-@ hour @-@ long bombardment of the landing area to suppress any Japanese forces there . This bombardment set several native villages on fire , but caused few Japanese casualties as they did not have many troops in the area . 
 The first wave of American troops landed on Morotai at 8 : 30 and did not encounter any opposition . The 155th and 167th <unk> landed at Red Beach and the 124th RCT at White Beach . Once ashore , the assault troops assembled into their tactical units and rapidly advanced inland . By the end of the day the 31st Division had secured all of its D @-@ Day objectives and held a perimeter 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) inland . There was little fighting and casualties were very low on both sides . The Japanese 2nd Provisional Raiding Unit was unable to offer any resistance to the overwhelming Allied force , and withdrew inland in good order . Japanese 7th Air Division aircraft based at Ceram and Celebes began a series of nightly air raids on Morotai on 15 September , but these had little effect on the Allied force . 
 The lack of resistance was fortunate for the Allies due to unexpectedly poor beach conditions . While the limited pre @-@ invasion intelligence suggested that Red and White beaches were capable of supporting an amphibious landing , they were in fact highly unsuitable for this purpose . Both beaches were muddy and difficult for landing craft to approach owing to rocky ridges and coral reefs . As a result , soldiers and equipment had to be landed through deep surf . This delayed the operation and caused a large quantity of equipment to be damaged . Like many of his soldiers , General MacArthur was forced to wade through chest @-@ high surf when he came ashore . On the morning of D @-@ Day a survey party determined that a beach on the south coast of Morotai was much better suited to LSTs . This beach , which was designated Blue Beach , became the primary Allied landing point from 16 September . 
 The 31st Division continued its advance inland on 16 September . The division met little opposition and secured the planned perimeter line around the airfield area that afternoon . From 17 September , the 126th Infantry Regiment landed at several points on Morotai 's coastline and offshore islands to establish radar stations and observation posts . These operations were generally unopposed , though patrols landed in northern Morotai made numerous contacts with small Japanese parties . The 2nd Provisional Raiding Unit attempted to infiltrate into the Allied perimeter on the night of 18 September but was not successful . 
 A detachment from the Netherlands Indies Civil Administration ( NICA ) was responsible for civil affairs on Morotai . This detachment came ashore on 15 September , and reestablished Dutch sovereignty over Morotai 's civilian population . Many natives subsequently provided NICA with intelligence on Japanese dispositions on Morotai and Halmahera and others acted as guides for American patrols . 
 On 20 September , the 31st Division advanced further inland to secure an expanded perimeter . This was necessary to provide room for additional bivouacs and supply installations after General MacArthur 's headquarters decided to expand airfield construction on the island . The advance met little resistance and was completed in one day . On 22 September , a Japanese force attacked the headquarters of the 1st Battalion , 167th Infantry Regiment but was easily repulsed . The following day , a company from the 126th Infantry Regiment unsuccessfully attacked a fortified Japanese unit near <unk> on the island 's west coast . The 126th resumed its attack on 24 September and secured the position . US forces continued intensive patrolling until 4 October when the island was declared secure . U.S. casualties during the initial occupation of Morotai numbered 30 dead , 85 wounded , and one missing . Japanese casualties were much higher , numbering over 300 dead and 13 captured . 
 The American ground troops did not require the heavy air support available to them , and the fast carrier group was released for other duties on 17 September . The six escort carriers remained in support , but their aircraft saw little action . Four of the <unk> were released on 25 September , and the remaining two departed on 4 October . The destroyer escort USS Shelton ( DE @-@ 407 ) was sunk by Japanese submarine RO @-@ 41 on 3 October while escorting the CVE group . Several hours later a TBF Avenger from the escort carrier USS Midway attacked USS Seawolf ( SS @-@ 197 ) 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of where Shelton had been torpedoed , in the mistaken belief that she was the submarine responsible . After dropping two bombs , the TBF Avenger guided USS Richard M. Rowell ( DE @-@ 403 ) to the area and the destroyer escort sank Seawolf after five attempts , killing all the submarine 's crew . It was later determined that while Seawolf was traveling in a designated " submarine safety lane " , the CVE pilots had not been properly briefed on the lane 's existence and location , and that the submarine 's position had not been provided to USS Richard M. Rowell . 
 The U.S. Navy established a PT boat base at Morotai on 16 September when the tenders USS <unk> ( AGP @-@ 7 ) and USS Oyster Bay ( AGP @-@ 6 ) arrived with motor torpedo boat squadrons 9 , 10 , 18 and 33 and their 41 boats . The PT boats ' primary mission was to prevent the Japanese from moving troops from Halmahera to Morotai by establishing a blockade of the 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) -wide strait between the two islands . 
 Elements of the 31st Division embarked from Morotai in November to capture several islands off New Guinea from which Japanese outposts could observe Allied movements . On 15 November 1 @,@ 200 troops from the 2nd Battalion , 167th Infantry Regiment and attached units were landed at <unk> Island in the <unk> islands ; the next day , Bras Island was attacked . The <unk> Islands were declared secure on 18 November after resistance from 172 Japanese troops of the 36th Infantry Division was overcome . On 19 November , a force of 400 US troops built around F Company , 124th Infantry Regiment occupied the undefended Asia Islands . These were the first offensive operations overseen by the Eighth United States Army , and the naval commander for both operations was Captain Lord Ashbourne of the Royal Navy on board HMS Ariadne . Radar and LORAN stations were subsequently established on the islands . 
 = = Base development = = 
 The rapid development of Morotai into a major military base was a key goal of the operation . Pre @-@ invasion plans called for the construction of three large airstrips within forty @-@ five days of 15 September , with the first to be operational immediately after the landing . The plans also included accommodation and supply facilities for 60 @,@ 000 air force and army personnel , a 1 @,@ 900 @-@ bed hospital , bulk fuel storage and handling installations and ship docking facilities . To construct these facilities , the Tradewind Task Force included 7 @,@ 000 engineer service troops , of whom 84 percent were American and the remainder Australian . 
 Work began on base facilities before Morotai was secured . Survey parties began transit surveys of the airfield sites on 16 September , which determined that their planned alignment was unworkable . Plans to complete the Japanese airfield were also abandoned , as it would have interfered with larger airfields to be built to the east . It was instead cleared and used as an emergency " crash strip . " Work on the first new airstrip ( called Wama Drome ) began on 23 September after the site was cleared . By 4 October Wama Drome 's runway was operable for 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) and was supporting heavy bomber raids on Balikpapan in Borneo . Construction of the even larger <unk> Drome , which was to have two runways parallel to Wama Drome , began in late September and by 17 October it had a usable 7 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 100 m ) runway . Construction work was accelerated from October 18 after the United States Third Fleet was withdrawn from providing direct support to the planned landing at Leyte . When the two airstrips were completed in November they boasted three large runways and hardstandings for 253 aircraft , including 174 heavy bombers . Although the air base construction required the destruction of native villages , the American and Australian airfield engineers were assisted from 1 October by about 350 native laborers recruited by the NICA detachment . 
 Other base facilities were erected concurrently with the construction of the airstrips . Work on fuel storage facilities began shortly after the landing , and the first was ready on 20 September . A jetty for oil tankers and a larger tank farm were completed in early October , and storage facilities continued to be expanded until November , when capacity for 129 @,@ 000 barrels ( 20 @,@ 500 m3 ) of fuel was available . Several docks capable of accommodating liberty ships were constructed on Morotai 's west coast , and the first was completed on 8 October . In addition , twenty LST landings were constructed on Blue Beach to facilitate the loading and unloading of these ships . Other major construction projects included an extensive road network , a naval installation , 28 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 600 m2 ) of warehousing , and clearing land for supply dumps and bivouacs . A 1 @,@ 000 @-@ bed hospital was also built after the original plans for a 1 @,@ 900 @-@ bed facility were revised . The main difficulties encountered were overcoming the mud caused by unusually heavy rains and finding sufficient water supplies . 
 A revision to Allied plans meant that Morotai played a much greater role in the liberation of the Philippines than had been originally envisioned . The invasion of Mindanao was postponed in September 1944 in favour of a landing at Leyte in the central Philippines in late October . The air bases at Morotai were the closest Allied air strips to Leyte , and fighters and bombers based on the island attacked targets in the southern Philippines and NEI in support of the landing at Leyte on 25 October . After airfields were completed at Leyte , Morotai was also used as a staging point for fighters and bombers traveling to the Philippines . 
 = = Subsequent fighting = = 
 = = = Japanese response = = = 
 The Japanese military recognized that its forces in the Philippines would be threatened if the Allies developed airfields on Morotai . In an attempt to disrupt the airfield construction program , the Japanese Army commanders on Halmahera sent large numbers of reinforcements to Morotai between late September and November . These troops included the main body of the 211th Infantry Regiment , the 3rd Battalion of the 210th Infantry Regiment and three raiding detachments . The commander of the 211th Infantry Regiment , Colonel <unk> Ouchi , assumed command of the Japanese forces on Morotai on 12 October . Allied codebreakers were often able to warn the forces at Morotai of attempts to run the blockade , and PT boats destroyed a large number of the barges the Japanese used to transport troops from Halmahera . The Allies were , however , unable to completely stop the Japanese buildup . 
 The Japanese counter @-@ offensive on Morotai was not successful . The troops brought to the island suffered from high rates of disease and it proved impossible to bring sufficient supplies through the Allied air and naval blockade . As a result , while the 2nd Provisional Raiding Unit raided the US perimeter on several occasions , the reinforcements were unable to mount larger attacks and did not impede Allied airfield construction activities . The Japanese force subsequently withdrew into central Morotai where many soldiers died from disease or starvation . The last Japanese supply barges from Halmahera reached Morotai on 12 May 1945 . 
 In late December 1944 , the US 33rd Infantry Division 's 136th Infantry Regiment was brought to Morotai from New Guinea to attack the Japanese 211th Infantry Regiment in the west of the island . After landing on the island 's west coast , the American regiment moved into Japanese @-@ held territory on 26 December and advanced on the Japanese position from the south @-@ west and north . The 136th was supported by a battalion of the 130th Infantry Regiment advancing overland from the Doroeba Plain , artillery units stationed on islands off Morotai 's coast and one hundred native porters . The 3rd Battalion of the 167th Infantry Regiment also participated in this operation and made a difficult march from Morotai 's south coast into the interior to prevent the Japanese from scattering into small groups in the island 's mountains . 
 In early January 1945 , the American force determined that two battalions of the Japanese 211th Regiment were at Hill 40 , about four miles ( 6 km ) north of the Allied perimeter . The attack on this position began on 3 January 1945 when the 136th Infantry Regiment 's 1st and 2nd battalions advanced from the south @-@ west and encountered strong resistance . The regiment used a large quantity of ammunition in this attack , and aerial resupply was needed to replenish its supplies . Both American battalions resumed their attack the next day with the support of a highly effective artillery bombardment , and reached the main Japanese position in the afternoon . During this period the 3rd Battalion of the 136th Regiment advanced on Hill 40 from the north , and destroyed the 211th Regiment 's 3rd Battalion in a series of battles . This Japanese battalion had been stationed on the coast to receive supplies from Halmahera and mounted several unsuccessful attacks on the American battalion 's beachhead after it landed in December . 
 The 136th Infantry Regiment completed its attack on Hill 40 on 5 January . The Regiment 's 1st and 2nd Battalions advanced from the west and south @-@ west and the 3rd Battalion from the north , meeting little resistance . The 1st and 2nd Battalions continued north to pursue Japanese remnants until 14 January , by which time the regiment claimed to have killed 870 Japanese soldiers and captured ten for a loss of 46 killed and 127 wounded and injured . The 3rd Battalion , 167th Infantry Regiment linked up with the 136th on 7 January after overrunning the main Japanese radio station on the island on 4 January . In mid @-@ January , the 136th Regiment was withdrawn to the Allied perimeter where it rejoined the 33rd Division , which was staging through Morotai en route for the Allied landing in Luzon . 
 = = = Air attacks and Allied mopping up = = = 
 The Japanese 7th Air Division continued to raid Morotai for months after the Allied landing . The air division conducted 82 raids on Morotai involving 179 sorties between 15 September 1944 and 1 February 1945 . The aircraft used in these raids flew from Ceram and the Celebes and landed at airfields on Halmahera before proceeding to their targets . While 54 of the raids caused no damage , the others resulted in the destruction of forty @-@ two Allied aircraft and damage to another thirty @-@ three . Allied casualties from air attack were 19 killed and 99 wounded . The most successful raid was conducted on the night of 22 November when 15 Allied planes were destroyed and eight damaged . The regular Japanese air raids ceased at the end of January 1945 , though a final attack took place on 22 March . USAAF night fighters had only limited success as raiders were normally detected only shortly before they entered anti @-@ aircraft gun defended zones ; these guns shot down most of the 26 Japanese aircraft lost over Morotai . The official history of the USAAF 's night fighter force states that Morotai " was probably the most difficult task undertaken by American night fighters during World War II " due to the difficulty of detecting incoming raiders . 
 The PT boat force at Morotai was reduced to a single squadron by February 1945 but remained active until the end of the war . As well as patrolling around Morotai , the boats operated in the eastern NEI to raid Japanese positions and support Australian and Dutch scouting parties . In May 1945 PT boats and the Australian Z Special Unit rescued the Sultan of Ternate along with his court and harem during an operation codenamed Project <unk> after he was mistreated by the Japanese . By the end of the war the PT boats had conducted nearly 1 @,@ 300 patrols and destroyed 50 barges and 150 small craft off Morotai and Halmahera . 
 The 31st Division remained at Morotai until 12 April 1945 when it departed to participate in the liberation of Mindanao , and was replaced by the 93rd Infantry Division . The 93rd Division was a segregated African American unit , and was mainly used for security and labor tasks during the war . Once established on Morotai the division conducted intensive patrols with the aim of destroying the remaining Japanese force on the island . At this time most of the Japanese on Morotai were located along the island 's west coast , and generally stayed close to native gardens . The 93rd Division landed patrols along Morotai 's west and north coasts from April onwards , and these fought scattered skirmishes with small Japanese forces . One of the division 's main goals was to capture Colonel Ouchi , and this was achieved by a patrol from the 25th Infantry Regiment on 2 August . Ouchi was one of the highest @-@ ranked Japanese officers to be captured before the end of the war . The American force also used propaganda broadcasts and leaflets to encourage Japanese soldiers on Morotai to surrender , with some success . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Morotai remained an important Allied base after Leyte was secured . Aircraft of the Thirteenth Air Force and Australian First Tactical Air Force ( formerly No. 10 Operational Group RAAF ) were based at Morotai and attacked targets in the NEI and southern Philippines until the end of the war . From April 1945 , the island was also used by the Australian I Corps to mount the Borneo Campaign . Australian Army engineers expanded the base facilities at Morotai to support this operation . Due to overcrowding , some Australian camp sites were located outside the American perimeter . 
 Morotai was the scene of a number of surrender ceremonies following the surrender of Japan . About 660 Japanese troops on Morotai capitulated to Allied forces after 15 August . The 93rd Division also accepted the surrender of the 40 @,@ 000 Japanese troops at Halmahera on 26 August after the Japanese commander there was brought to Morotai on a US Navy PT boat . On 9 September 1945 , Australian General Thomas Blamey accepted the surrender of the Japanese Second Army at a ceremony held on the I Corps ' sports ground at Morotai . Private Teruo Nakamura , the last confirmed Japanese holdout on Morotai or elsewhere , was captured by Indonesian Air Force personnel on 18 December 1974 . 
 The facilities on Morotai continued to be heavily used by the Allies in the months after the war . The Australian force responsible for the occupation and military administration of the eastern NEI was headquartered at Morotai until April 1946 , when the Dutch colonial government was reestablished . The island was also one of the sites where the Australian and NEI militaries conducted war crimes trials of Japanese personnel . 
 = Prince William , Duke of Gloucester = 
 Prince William , Duke of Gloucester ( 24 July 1689 – 30 July 1700 ) , was the son of Princess Anne , later Queen of England , Ireland and Scotland from 1702 , and her husband , Prince George , Duke of Cumberland . He was their only child to survive infancy . Styled Duke of Gloucester , he was viewed by contemporaries as a Protestant champion because his birth seemed to cement the Protestant succession established in the " Glorious Revolution " that had deposed his Catholic grandfather James II the previous year . 
 Gloucester 's mother was estranged from her brother @-@ in @-@ law and cousin , William III , and her sister , Mary II , but supported links between them and her son . He grew close to his uncle William , who created him a Knight of the Garter , and his aunt Mary , who frequently sent him presents . At his nursery in Campden House , Kensington , he befriended his Welsh body @-@ servant , Jenkin Lewis , whose memoir of the Duke is an important source for historians , and operated his own miniature army , called the " Horse Guards " , which eventually comprised 90 boys . 
 Gloucester 's precarious health was a constant source of worry to his mother . His death , in 1700 at the age of eleven , precipitated a succession crisis as his mother was the only individual remaining in the Protestant line of succession established by the Bill of Rights 1689 . The English Parliament did not want the throne to revert to a Catholic , and so passed the Act of Settlement 1701 , which settled the throne of England on Electress Sophia of Hanover , a cousin of King James II , and her Protestant heirs . 
 = = Birth and health = = 
 In late 1688 , in what became known as the " Glorious Revolution " , the Roman Catholic King James of England , Scotland and Ireland was deposed by his Protestant nephew and son @-@ in @-@ law , Dutch stadtholder William Henry of Orange . William and his wife , James 's elder daughter Mary , were recognised by the English and Scottish parliaments as king and queen . As they had no children , Mary 's younger sister , Anne , was designated their heiress presumptive in England and Scotland . The accession of William and Mary and the succession through Anne were enshrined in the Bill of Rights 1689 . 
 Anne was married to Prince George of Denmark and Norway , and in their six years of marriage Anne had been pregnant six times , but none of her children had survived . At the end of her seventh pregnancy , at 5 a.m. on 24 July 1689 , she was delivered of a son in Hampton Court Palace . As it was usual for the births of potential heirs to the throne to be attended by several witnesses , the King and Queen and " most of the persons of quality about the court " were present . Three days later , the newborn baby was baptised William Henry after his uncle King William by Henry Compton , Bishop of London . The King , who was one of the godparents along with the Marchioness of Halifax and the Lord Chamberlain , Lord Dorset , declared him Duke of Gloucester , although the peerage was never formally created . Gloucester was second in line to the throne after his mother , and because his birth secured the Protestant succession , he was the hope of the revolution 's supporters . The ode The Noise of Foreign Wars , attributed to Henry Purcell , was written in celebration of the birth . Other congratulatory odes , such as Purcell 's last royal ode Who Can From Joy Refrain ? and John Blow 's The Duke of Gloucester 's March and A Song upon the Duke of Gloucester , were to follow on his birthdays in later years . However , supporters of James , the Jacobites , spoke of Gloucester as " a sickly and doomed usurper " . 
 Despite being described as a " brave <unk> [ sic ] boy " , Gloucester became ill with convulsions when he was three weeks old , so his mother moved him into Craven House , Kensington , hoping that the air from the surrounding gravel pits would have a beneficial effect on his health . His convulsions were possibly symptomatic of meningitis , likely contracted at birth and which resulted in hydrocephalus . As was usual among royalty , Gloucester was placed in the care of a governess , Lady Fitzhardinge , and was suckled by a wet nurse , Mrs. Pack , rather than his mother . As part of his treatment , Gloucester was driven outside every day in a small open carriage , pulled by Shetland ponies , to maximise his exposure to the air of the gravel pits . The effectiveness of Gloucester 's treatment having exceeded their expectations , Princess Anne and Prince George acquired a permanent residence in the area , Campden House , a Jacobean mansion , in 1690 . It was here that Gloucester befriended Welsh body @-@ servant Jenkin Lewis , whose memoir of his master is an important source for historians . 
 Throughout his life , Gloucester suffered from a recurrent " ague " , which was treated with regular doses of Jesuit 's bark ( an early form of quinine ) by his physician , John Radcliffe . Gloucester disliked the treatment intensely , and usually vomited after being given it . Possibly as a result of hydrocephalus , he had an enlarged head , which his surgeons pierced intermittently to draw off fluid . He could not walk properly , and was apt to stumble . Nearing the age of five , Gloucester refused to climb stairs without two attendants to hold him , which Lewis blamed on indulgent nurses who over @-@ protected the boy . His father <unk> him until he agreed to walk by himself . Corporal punishment was usual at the time , and such treatment would not have been considered harsh . 
 = = Education = = 
 Gloucester 's language acquisition was delayed : he did not speak correctly until the age of three , and consequently the commencement of his education was postponed by a year . The Reverend Samuel Pratt , a Cambridge graduate , was appointed the Duke 's tutor in 1693 . Lessons concentrated on geography , mathematics , Latin , and French . Pratt was an enemy of Jenkin Lewis , and they frequently disagreed over how Gloucester should be educated . Lewis remained Gloucester 's favourite attendant because , unlike Pratt , he was knowledgeable in military matters and could therefore help him with his " Horse Guards " , a miniature army consisting of local children . Over a couple of years from 1693 , the size of the army grew from 22 to over 90 boys . 
 Princess Anne had fallen out with her sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law , William and Mary , and reluctantly agreed to the advice of her friend , the Countess of Marlborough , that Gloucester should visit his aunt and uncle regularly to ensure their continued goodwill towards him . In an attempt to heal the rift , Anne invited the King and Queen to see Gloucester drill the " Horse Guards " . After watching the boys ' display at Kensington Palace , the King praised them , and made a return visit to Campden House the following day . Gloucester grew closer to his aunt and uncle : the Queen bought him presents from his favourite toy shop regularly . Her death in 1694 led to a superficial reconciliation between Anne and William , which occasioned a move to St James 's Palace , London . Gloucester having tired of him , Lewis only attended St James 's every two months . 
 On his seventh birthday , Gloucester attended a ceremony at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , to install him as a knight of the Order of the Garter , an honour the King had given him six months before . Gloucester became ill during the celebratory banquet afterwards and left early , but after his recovery went deer hunting in Windsor Great Park , where he was blooded by Samuel Masham , his father 's page . Princess Anne wrote to the Countess of Marlborough , " My boy continues yet very well , and looks better , I think , than ever he did in his life ; I mean more healthy , for though I love him very well , I can 't brag of his beauty . " 
 During the trial of Sir John Fenwick , who was implicated in a plot to assassinate King William , Gloucester signed a letter to the King promising his loyalty . " I , your Majesty 's most dutiful subject , " the letter read , " had rather lose my life in your Majesty 's cause than in any man 's else , and I hope it will not be long ere you conquer France . " Added to the letter was a declaration by the boys in Gloucester 's army : " We , your Majesty 's subjects , will stand by you while we have a drop of blood . " 
 In 1697 , Parliament granted King William £ 50 @,@ 000 to establish a household for the Duke of Gloucester , though the King only permitted the release of £ 15 @,@ 000 , keeping the difference for himself . The establishment of Gloucester 's own household in early 1698 revived the feud between Anne and William . William was determined to limit Anne 's involvement in the household , and therefore appointed , against her wishes , the low church Gilbert Burnet , Bishop of Salisbury , as Gloucester 's preceptor . Anne was high church , and Burnet , knowing she was unhappy , attempted to decline the appointment , but the King insisted he accept it . Anne 's anger was only placated by an assurance from King William that she could choose all the lower servants of the household . The Earl of Marlborough , a friend of Anne 's , was appointed Gloucester 's governor , after the Duke of Shrewsbury declined the office on the grounds of ill health . Shortly before the King sailed for the Netherlands , he received Anne 's choices from Marlborough but he refused to confirm them . His favourite , the Earl of Albemarle , eventually convinced him to agree to Anne 's appointments , and the King 's acceptance was sent from the Netherlands in September 1698 . The Marlboroughs ' twelve @-@ year @-@ old son , Lord Churchill , was appointed Gloucester 's Master of the Horse , and became a friend and playmate . Abigail Hill , a kinswoman of the Countess of Marlborough , was appointed his laundress , and Abigail 's brother , Jack Hill , was made one of Gloucester 's gentlemen of the bedchamber . 
 Burnet lectured Gloucester for hours at a time on subjects such as the feudal constitutions of Europe and law before the time of Christianity . Burnet also encouraged Gloucester to memorise facts and dates by heart . Government ministers inspected Gloucester 's academic progress every four months , finding themselves " amazed " by his " wonderful memory and good judgement " . His childhood troop was disbanded , and King William made him the honorary commander of a real regiment of Dutch <unk> . In 1699 , he attended the trials in the House of Lords of Lord Mohun and Lord Warwick , who were accused of murder . Mohun was acquitted ; Warwick was found guilty of manslaughter but escaped punishment by pleading privilege of peerage . 
 = = Death = = 
 As he neared his eleventh birthday , Gloucester was assigned Mary 's old apartments in Kensington Palace . At his birthday party at Windsor , on 24 July 1700 , he complained of a sudden fatigue , but was initially thought to have overheated himself while dancing . By nightfall , he was suffering from a sore throat and chills , followed by a severe headache and a high fever the next day . A physician , Hannes , did not arrive until 27 July . Gloucester was immediately bled , but his condition continued to deteriorate . Over the next day , he developed a rash and suffered a bout of diarrhoea . A second physician , Gibbons , arrived early on 28 July , followed by Radcliffe that evening . 
 The physicians could not agree on a diagnosis . Radcliffe thought he had scarlet fever , while others thought it was smallpox . They administered " cordial powders and cordial <unk> " . Gloucester was bled , to which Radcliffe strongly objected . He told his colleagues , " you have destroyed him and you may finish him " . He prescribed blistering , which was no more effective . In great pain , Gloucester passed the evening of 28 July " in great <unk> and dejections of spirits ... towards morning , he complained very much of his blisters . " Anne , who had spent an entire day and night by her son 's bedside , now became so distressed that she fainted . However , by midday on 29 July , Gloucester was breathing more easily and his headache had diminished , leading to hopes that he would recover . The improvement was fleeting , and that evening , he was " taken with a convulsing sort of breathing , a defect in swallowing and a total deprivation of all sense " . Prince William died close to 1 a.m. on 30 July 1700 , with his parents beside him . In the end , the physicians decided the cause of death was " a malignant fever " . An autopsy revealed severe swelling of the lymph nodes in the neck and an abnormal amount of fluid in the ventricles of his brain : " four and a half ounces of a limpid humour were taken out . " A modern diagnosis is that Gloucester died of acute bacterial pharyngitis , with associated pneumonia . Had he lived , though , it is almost certain the prince would have succumbed to complications of his hydrocephalus . 
 King William , who was in the Netherlands , wrote to Marlborough , " It is so great a loss to me as well as to all England , that it pierces my heart . " Anne was prostrate with grief , taking to her chamber . In the evenings , she was carried into the garden " to divert her melancholy thoughts " . Gloucester 's body was moved from Windsor to Westminster on the night of 1 August , and he lay in state in the Palace of Westminster before being entombed in the Royal Vault of the Henry VII Chapel in Westminster Abbey on 9 August . As was usual for royalty in mourning , his parents did not attend the funeral service , instead remaining in seclusion at Windsor . 
 In an allusion to Prince William 's death , Tory politician William Shippen wrote : 
 So by the course of the revolving spheres , 
 <unk> 'er a new @-@ discovered star appears , 
 Astronomers , with pleasure and amaze , 
 Upon the infant luminary gaze . 
 They find their heaven 's enlarged , and wait from thence 
 Some blest , some more than common influence , 
 But suddenly , alas ! The fleeting light , 
 Retiring , leaves their hopes involv 'd in endless night . 
 Gloucester 's death destabilised the succession , as his mother was the only person remaining in the Protestant line to the throne established by the Bill of Rights 1689 . Although Anne had ten other pregnancies after the birth of Gloucester , all her subsequent children died , either in the womb or immediately after birth . The English parliament did not want the throne to revert to a Catholic , so it passed the Act of Settlement 1701 , which settled the throne of England on a cousin of King James , Sophia , Electress of Hanover , and her Protestant heirs . Anne succeeded King William in 1702 , and reigned until her death on 1 August 1714 . Sophia predeceased her by a few weeks , and so Sophia 's son George ascended the throne as the first British monarch of the House of Hanover . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 William was styled as : His Royal Highness Prince William , Duke of Gloucester . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 6 January 1696 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 Gloucester bore the royal arms , differenced by an inescutcheon of the Danish coat of arms and a label of three points Argent , the centre point bearing a cross Gules . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Free Speech , " The People 's Darling Privilege " = 
 Free Speech , " The People ’ s Darling Privilege " : Struggles for Freedom of Expression in American History is a non @-@ fiction book about the history of freedom of speech in the United States written by Michael Kent Curtis and published in 2000 by Duke University Press . The book discusses the evolution of free speech in the U.S. within the context of the actions of individuals and how they affected change . The author writes that protests and actions by citizens helped to evolve the notions surrounding free speech in the U.S. before definitive statements on the matter from U.S. courts . Curtis writes that free speech rights were first developed in " the forum of public opinion " , and that , " The history of free speech shows the need for broadly protective free speech rules applied generally and equally " . 
 For his work on Free Speech , " The People ’ s Darling Privilege " , Curtis received the Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Award and the Mayflower Cup Award . Critics gave the book a positive reception . A review in Columbia Journalism Review called it a " rich and original study " , and The Journal of American History said that it includes " fine analytic discussions " . Perspectives on Political Science called the book " an extremely valuable contribution to the literature addressing the history of free speech in America . " Timothy C. Shiell of the University of Wisconsin – Stout reviewed it for The Historian and wrote , " Michael Kent Curtis offers a major contribution to the scholarship of both that era and of free speech . " 
 = = Author = = 
 Curtis ' previous book , No State Shall <unk> : The Fourteenth Amendment and the Bill of Rights , was published in 1986 . The Journal of Information Ethics said that before the book 's publication , Curtis had " written quite extensively on the subject " of freedom of speech , and cited articles in Constitutional Commentary ( 1995 ) , and Wake Forest Law Review ( 1996 ) . With J. Wilson Parker , Davison Douglas , and Paul Finkelman , Curtis served as editor of the 2003 work , Constitutional Law in Context . In 2002 , Curtis was a professor of law at Wake Forest University , where he taught American legal and constitutional history , free speech law , and constitutional law . In 2004 , Curtis was a professor of Public and Constitutional Law at Wake Forest University . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Structured in chronological order , Free Speech , " The People ’ s Darling Privilege " discusses the development of free speech through controversies which arose during the history of the United States . These include the Quasi @-@ War with France , the 1798 Alien and Sedition Acts , conflict regarding speech related to abolitionism and criticism of slavery , and speech related to criticism of the American Civil War . Curtis discusses the efforts of abolitionists Elijah Lovejoy and Hinton Helper . 
 The book discusses in detail attempts by U.S. President Abraham Lincoln to curtail free speech during the American Civil War . He comments on the ways attitudes about free speech affected events in history related to this period of time , " The weakness of the popular free @-@ speech tradition ( especially in the South ) encouraged violence that did not end with the Civil War ... [ but was ] revived during Reconstruction to silence those who supported civil and political rights for blacks " . Curtis discusses conflict involving people related to these historical events , including editors , political activists , and politicians . The author discusses advocates of free speech before the recognition of this right in the U.S. court system . 
 Curtis writes that despite the actions of the government , it is the actions of individuals through speech and protest that allow democracy to function appropriately . The author states that , " again and again , people in power have treated speech that advocated lawful change through democratic process as an incitement to lawless action " . Curtis says that free speech rights in the U.S. , which at present are believed to be given through 20th century court rulings , were actually developed first in " the forum of public opinion " . He says , " The history of free speech shows the need for broadly protective free speech rules applied generally and equally " . 
 He writes that during the 18th and 19th centuries in the U.S. , protests by individuals and the press predated court judgments regarding the development of free speech . The author says , " as Madison had expected , constitutional guarantees of liberty do their work at popular levels as well as at the level of institutions such as the Supreme Court of the United States , state supreme courts , Congress , and state legislatures . Popular views limit and channel both legislation and private action , each of which can either constrain or empower speech " . Curtis says that , " The similarity of current suppression theories to those of the past suggests caution . Historic attempts to use these ideas to suppress democratic discussion of positive social change should make us wary of attempts to resurrect them for benevolent purposes " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 For his work on the book , Michael Kent Curtis was recognized with the Hugh M. Hefner First Amendment Award , which recognizes contributions to the First Amendment . He also received the Mayflower Cup Award , which honors the best non @-@ fiction work by an individual from North Carolina , from the North Carolina Literary and Historical Association . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 In a review of the book for the Columbia Journalism Review , James Boylan said Curtis ' work is a " rich and original study " . Reviewing the book for The Journal of American History , Michael P. <unk> called it a " very fine book " that is " gracefully written and engaging to read " . He said , " After Curtis 's book , nobody should be able to say that the Bill of Rights was unlikely to be on the minds of the drafters of the Fourteenth Amendment . " <unk> wrote , " <unk> into the stories are fine analytic discussions . " 
 Writing in Perspectives on Political Science , Paul Weizer described the book as " an extremely valuable contribution to the literature addressing the history of free speech in America . " Weizer said , " Although there are countless books on the theories behind the speech guarantee embedded in our Constitution , Curtis brings a fresh perspective . Most First Amendment books begin with Supreme Court decisions from the early 1900s ; Curtis reminds us that modern ideas about the protection of expression originated much earlier . " As to the writing quality of the book , Weizer wrote , " The first hundred years of American history are rich with stories such as this . Curtis does an outstanding job of bringing them to life . He is to be commended for keeping editorial comments to a minimum and allowing the participants to make his points for him . The book is painstakingly documented to provide first @-@ person accounts from sources such as newspapers and town meetings . " Weizer recommended the book for those researching the subject matter , writing , " For specialists on free speech issues , the book provides remarkable detail . " 
 In a review for The Historian , Timothy C. Shiell of the University of Wisconsin – Stout wrote , " In providing the first detailed history of free speech from the Sedition Act of 1798 to the Fourteenth Amendment of the 1860s , Michael Kent Curtis offers a major contribution to the scholarship of both that era and of free speech . " Shiell wrote on the views put forth by the author in the book , " Curtis does not limit this erudite work to historical narration . He also addresses political and legal movements and ideas that influenced and were influenced by free @-@ speech controversies such as theories of democracy , justifications for broad protections of free speech , and the doctrines of content neutrality and heckler 's veto . His treatment of justifications for suppression is especially valuable . " Shiell concluded his review writing , " For at least these three reasons — the historical detail , the review of relevant legal and political theory , and the lessons from history — this book is a ' must read ' for anyone interested in the period from 1798 to 1870 or in the development of free @-@ speech theory and practice in the United States . " 
 Gordon Moran reviewed the book for the Journal of Information Ethics , writing , " In this book , Prof. Curtis ... provides a thorough account of the evolution of free speech , in theory and practice , from pre @-@ Revolutionary times through the Civil War and the Fourteenth Amendment ( 1868 ) . As a history book , it is worthy of being in the library of every high school , college , and university that teaches American history , and would also be very useful and instructive as a textbook for university courses in American studies and advanced courses in American history . " In a review for The Journal of Southern History , William <unk> wrote , " This is more a work of history than of law . Although the author summarizes the reasoning of legislatures and courts that overrode the First Amendment , he does not analyze the unfolding of constitutional doctrines . " <unk> concluded , " At 437 pages of text , the book is too long . The writing suffers from repetition . For example , the author reminds us again and again that the southern states feared that debates over slavery would lead to slave revolts @-@ one time was sufficient to make the point . The chapters also jump around in time and subject . Pruning and redrafting would have improved the book for a wider audience . The story certainly deserves one . " 
 In his book Freedom of Speech : A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution , author Keith Werhan placed Free Speech , " The People 's Darling Privilege " among " leading works on free speech " during the American Civil War . Werhan noted that the book includes " excellent discussions " of the Alien and Sedition Acts . In addition to Werhan , Steven J. Heyman 's book Free Speech and Human Dignity also recommended Free Speech , " The People 's Darling Privilege " for " leading works " on freedom of speech . Author Margaret Kohn recommended Free Speech , " The People 's Darling Privilege " as a resource , " for extensive examples of the courts ' willingness to countenance restrictions on speech " , in her book Brave New Neighborhoods : The Privatization of Public Space . 
 In Free Expression and Democracy in America : A History , Stephen M. Feldman classed the book among " helpful sources on the history of free speech " . Writing in Lincoln 's Censor : Milo <unk> and Freedom of the Press in Civil War Indiana , David W. Bulla wrote , " Curtis showed how freedom of the press has both functional and formal protections " . Judge Andrew P. Napolitano recommended Curtis ' book in his books The Constitution in Exile , and Constitutional Chaos , writing , " Michael Kent Curtis offers an excellent and detailed account of the troubled affair between Clement Vallandigham and Abraham Lincoln in this work . " 
 In Constitutional Democracy : Creating and Maintaining a Just Political Order , Walter F. Murphy wrote that Curtis " beautifully detailed " an incident when the U.S. Post Office refused to deliver abolitionist writings through their service . In his book Eloquence and Reason : Creating a First Amendment Culture , Robert L. Tsai recommended Curtis ' book , " for an account of antebellum debates over the scope of the First Amendment " . In her book <unk> Gotham : Erotic Publishing and Its Prosecution in Nineteenth @-@ Century New York , Donna Dennis recommended Free Speech , " The People 's Darling Privilege " , " for evidence of commitment to freedom of speech and freedom of press among abolitionists " . 
 = X @-@ Men : First Class = 
 X @-@ Men : First Class ( stylized onscreen as X : First Class ) is a 2011 American superhero film , based on the X @-@ Men characters appearing in Marvel Comics . It is the fifth installment in the X @-@ Men film series . It serves as both a prequel and a soft @-@ reboot of the franchise . The film was directed by Matthew Vaughn and produced by Bryan Singer . The story is set primarily in 1962 during the Cuban Missile Crisis , and focuses on the relationship between Professor Charles Xavier ( James McAvoy ) and Erik <unk> / Magneto ( Michael Fassbender ) , and the origin of their groups — the X @-@ Men and the Brotherhood of Mutants , respectively , as they deal with the Hellfire Club led by Sebastian Shaw ( Kevin Bacon ) , who is bent on world domination . The film co @-@ stars Rose Byrne , January Jones and Oliver Platt . The film also introduces new actors to the series Nicholas Hoult and Jennifer Lawrence who , like McAvoy and Fassbender , reimagine popular characters from the franchise ( Beast and Mystique ) that have already been established in previous films , namely the original trilogy . 
 Producer Lauren Shuler Donner first thought of a prequel based on the young X @-@ Men during the production of X2 , and later producer Simon Kinberg suggested to 20th Century Fox an adaptation of the comic series X @-@ Men : First Class , though the film does not follow the comic closely . Singer , who had directed both X @-@ Men and X2 , became involved with the project in 2009 , but he could only produce and co @-@ write First Class due to other projects . Matthew Vaughn , who was previously attached to both X @-@ Men : The Last Stand and Thor , became the director , and also wrote the final script with his writing partner Jane Goldman . First Class overtook a planned Magneto prequel that entered development hell and the Writer 's Guild of America arbitration gave a story credit to Magneto writer Sheldon Turner . 
 First Class entered production in August 2010 , with principal photography concluding in December and additional filming finishing in April 2011 , just a few weeks before the film 's premiere in June 2011 . The tight schedule proved a challenge to the six companies responsible for the extensive visual effects , which included computer @-@ generated sets and digital doubles for the actors . Locations included Oxford , the Mojave desert and Georgia , with soundstage work done in both Pinewood Studios and the 20th Century Fox stages in Los Angeles . The depiction of the 1960s drew inspiration from the James Bond films of the period . 
 First Class was a box @-@ office success , becoming the seventh highest @-@ grossing in the film series , and received positive reviews from critics and audiences , who praised the fresh revival of the franchise as well as the acting , writing , directing and Henry Jackman 's score . A sequel titled X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , also serving as a resolution to the original trilogy 's storyline , was released in May 2014 , with Singer returning as director and Vaughn as co @-@ writer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1944 , in a German concentration camp in occupied Poland , Nazi scientist Dr. Klaus Schmidt witnesses a young Erik Lehnsherr bend a metal gate with his mind when the child is separated from his mother . In his office , Schmidt orders Lehnsherr to move a coin on his desk , and kills the boy 's mother when Lehnsherr cannot . In grief and anger , Lehnsherr 's magnetic power manifests , killing two guards and destroying the room . Meanwhile , at a mansion in Westchester County , New York , child telepath Charles Xavier meets young shapeshifter Raven , whose natural form is blue @-@ skinned and scaly . Overjoyed to meet someone else " different " , he invites her to live with his family as his foster sister . 
 In 1962 , Lehnsherr is tracking down Schmidt , while Xavier graduates from the University of Oxford . In Las Vegas , CIA officer Moira MacTaggert follows U.S. Army Colonel Hendry into the Hellfire Club , where she sees Schmidt ( now known as Sebastian Shaw ) , with mutant telepath Emma Frost , cyclone @-@ producing Riptide , and teleporter Azazel . Threatened by Shaw and teleported by Azazel to the Joint War Room , Hendry advocates deployment of nuclear missiles in Turkey . Shaw , an energy @-@ absorbing mutant whose powers have de @-@ aged him , later kills Hendry . 
 MacTaggert , seeking Xavier 's advice on mutation , takes him and Raven to the CIA , where they convince Director <unk> that mutants exist and Shaw is a threat . Another CIA officer sponsors the mutants and invites them to the secret " Division X " facility . MacTaggert and Xavier find Shaw as Lehnsherr is attacking him , and rescue Lehnsherr from drowning , while Shaw escapes . Xavier brings Lehnsherr to Division X , where they meet young scientist Hank McCoy , a mutant with prehensile feet , who believes Raven 's DNA may provide a " cure " for their appearance . Xavier uses McCoy 's mutant @-@ locating device Cerebro to seek recruits against Shaw . Xavier and Lehnsherr recruit stripper Angel Salvadore , <unk> Armando Muñoz , Army prisoner Alex Summers , and runaway Sean Cassidy . They all create nicknames , and Raven dubs herself " Mystique " . 
 When Frost meets with a Soviet general in the USSR , Xavier and Lehnsherr capture Frost and discover that Shaw intends to start World War III and trigger mutant ascendency . Azazel , Riptide and Shaw attack Division X , killing everyone but the mutants , whom Shaw invites to join him . Salvadore accepts ; when Summers and Muñoz retaliate , Shaw kills Muñoz . In Moscow , Shaw compels the general to have the USSR install missiles in Cuba . Wearing a helmet that blocks telepathy , Shaw follows the Soviet fleet in a submarine to ensure the missiles break a US blockade . 
 Raven , thinking McCoy likes her in her natural form , tells him not to use the cure . When she later attempts to seduce Lehnsherr by taking the forms of various women , Lehnsherr tells her she is beautiful in her blue mutant form . McCoy uses the cure on himself but it backfires , giving him blue fur and leonine aspects . With McCoy piloting , the mutants and MacTaggert take a jet to the blockade line , where Xavier uses his telepathy to influence a Soviet sailor to destroy the ship carrying the missiles , and Lehnsherr uses his magnetic power to lift Shaw 's submarine from the water and deposit it on land . During the ensuing battle , Lehnsherr seizes Shaw 's helmet , allowing Xavier to immobilize Shaw . Lehnsherr tells Shaw he shares Shaw 's <unk> view of mutants but , to avenge his mother , kills Shaw — over Xavier 's objections — by forcing the Nazi coin from his childhood through Shaw 's brain . 
 Fearing the mutants , both fleets fire missiles at them , which Lehnsherr turns back in mid @-@ flight . MacTaggert tries to stop Lehnsherr by shooting him but he deflects the bullets , one of which hits Xavier in the spine . Lehnsherr rushes to help Xavier and , distracted , allows the missiles to fall harmlessly into the ocean . Parting with Xavier over their differing views on the relationship between mutants and humans , Lehnsherr leaves with Salvadore , Azazel , Riptide and Mystique . Later , a wheelchair @-@ bound Xavier and his mutants are at the mansion , where he intends to open a school . MacTaggert promises never to reveal his location and they kiss ; later at a CIA debriefing , she says she has no memory of recent events . Elsewhere Lehnsherr , now calling himself " Magneto " , frees Frost from confinement . 
 = = Cast = = 
 James McAvoy as Charles Xavier / Professor X : 
 The telepathic mutant leader and founder of the X @-@ Men . He is a close friend of Erik Lehnsherr until their differing views of mutantkind 's place in humanity create a schism between them . McAvoy was Vaughn 's top choice for Xavier , and , after being cast , auditioned with every actor considered for Magneto to test the duo 's chemistry . McAvoy said he did not read comic books as a child , but added that he was a fan of the X @-@ Men cartoons from the age of 10 . While he describes the older Charles Xavier as " a monk ... a selfless , egoless almost sexless force for the betterment of humanity and mortality " , he says that the younger Xavier is a very different person . " It 's quite fun because the complete opposite of that is an ego @-@ fueled , sexed up self @-@ serving dude . And not going too far with it , but he 's definitely got an ego and he 's definitely got a sex drive as well . " McAvoy admitted to feeling similarities between Xavier / Magneto and Martin Luther King Jr . / Malcolm X stating that the film was " sort of like meeting them at a point where they are still finding out who they are and you are still seeing some of the events that shaped them . " McAvoy avoided doing any callbacks to Patrick Stewart 's performance as Xavier as Vaughn told him and Michael Fassbender to only take the allusion to Xavier and Magneto 's old friendship in the other movies as inspiration . Vaughn stated that since he considered that Professor X was " a bit of a pious , sanctimonious boring character , and he 's got too much fucking power " , the script would make young Xavier more interesting by " making him more of a rogue " who would become more responsible as his mission of finding more mutants went <unk> Belcher as 12 @-@ year @-@ old Charles Xavier . 
 Michael Fassbender as Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto : 
 A mutant capable of manipulating and generating electromagnetic fields . He becomes Xavier 's friend and ally until their philosophical differences create a schism between them . Fassbender had auditioned for an earlier Matthew Vaughn project , and the director had remembered him and sent Fassbender the X @-@ Men script . Though Fassbender knew little of the superhero team , he became interested in the part after reading the script and familiarizing himself with Magneto in the comic books . Fassbender , who saw Lehnsherr as a Machiavellian character who is neither good nor evil , watched Sir Ian McKellen 's performances to get the flavor of Magneto , but ultimately chose to " paint a new canvas " with the character , " just going my own way and working with whatever is in the comic books and the script . " Vaughn said Lehnsherr " is straight up cool ; he 's Han Solo while Professor X is Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi " . Bill Milner as 14 @-@ year @-@ old Erik Lehnsherr . 
 Rose Byrne as Moira MacTaggert : 
 A CIA agent who befriends Xavier and Lehnsherr . Byrne said she was unfamiliar with both the comics and the film series , except for " what a juggernaut of a film it was " . The actress was cast late into production , which had already begun by the time she was picked for the role . MacTaggert was described by Byrne as " a woman in a man ’ s world , she ’ s very feisty and ambitious — you know , she ’ s got a toughness about her which I liked " . 
 Jennifer Lawrence as Raven Darkhölme / Mystique : 
 A shape @-@ shifting mutant who is Charles Xavier 's childhood friend and adoptive sister . After the dramatic Winter 's Bone , Lawrence sought First Class to do " something a little lighter " . Despite having not seen any of the X @-@ Men films , the actress watched them and became a fan , which led her to accept the role as well , as did the prospect of working with Vaughn , McAvoy and Fassbender . Vaughn said Lawrence was picked because " she could pull off the challenging dichotomy that Raven faces as she transforms into Mystique ; that vulnerability that shields a powerful inner strength . " Lawrence had some reservations about her performance due to Mystique 's previous portrayal by Rebecca Romijn , as she considered Romijn to be " the most gorgeous person in the world " , and felt their portrayals were very contrasting , feeling hers was " sweet and naive " while Romijn was " sultry and mean " . The actress went on a diet and had to work out for two hours daily to keep in shape , and for Mystique 's blue form , Lawrence had to undergo an eight @-@ hour make @-@ up process similar to that of Romijn on the other films . The first day with make @-@ up even caused blisters to appear on Lawrence 's upper <unk> Lily as 9 @-@ year @-@ old Raven Darkhölme : with the actress wearing a slip @-@ on bodysuit and facial appliances which only took one hour and a half to apply , as subjecting a child actor to the extensive make @-@ up was impractical . 
 Rebecca Romijn as adult Raven Darkhölme : a brief uncredited cameo , which Vaughn added as an in @-@ joke — the script has Raven " <unk> [ ing ] Brigitte Bardot or Marilyn Monroe , like an older sex icon of those times " . 
 January Jones as Emma Frost 
 An extremely strong mutant telepath who can also change her entire body into hard diamond form which grants her superhuman strength , stamina , psionic immunity , and durability , at the cost of using her telepathic abilities . She is a member of the Hellfire Club . Prior to Jones ' casting , Alice Eve was the subject of what Variety called " widespread Internet reports " that Eve " was set to play Emma Frost , although no deal was in place . " Jones accepted the role to get something different from her job in the TV series Mad Men . While discovering that like the show First Class was set in the 1960s , the actress considered that : " [ Frost ] ' s so , so far from Betty and from Mad Men , and it takes place in that time but it doesn ’ t feel like a period movie . " The actress described the revealing costumes of the character as " insane , " saying , " She 's got quite the bod , which is very intimidating " . The actress stated that she did only a limited exercise routine to keep in shape , as " I 'm a petite person , so I didn 't want to go into a strict workout and eating regime . " 
 Nicholas Hoult as Dr. Hank McCoy / Beast : 
 A genius scientist who has mutant abilities similar to those of the great apes . He attempts to cure himself of what he believes to be physically debilitating aspects of his mutation only to be transformed into a frightening @-@ looking blue @-@ furred <unk> with leonine attributes . Despite his new appearance , he is kind and caring at heart . Broadway actor Benjamin Walker was previously cast as Beast , but eventually turned down the role to star in the Broadway musical Bloody Bloody Andrew Jackson . Hoult was chosen for being " gentle with a capability of being fierce " , and admitted to being both an X @-@ Men fan and enthusiastic on both returning to the action genre after 2010 's Clash of the Titans and working with the film 's cast . The actor had to use makeup that took four hours to apply when Hank becomes the Beast , which include a mask , contact lenses , a furry muscle suit and fake teeth . As Vaughn wanted Beast to look more feral than the version Kelsey Grammer played in X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , the redesign went through various tests , which tried to make Beast not resemble any particular animal but still look like Hoult , as well as with a furry body , which makeup artist Alec Gillis of Amalgamated Dynamics likened to " something akin to a wolf 's pelt on his face , his arms @-@ everywhere " . The suits employed actual dyed fur from fox pelts . 
 Oliver Platt as Man In Black Suit : 
 A CIA agent and head of Division X , a government agency working with the X @-@ Men . Vaughn had considered his friend Dexter Fletcher for the part , but the studio felt the cast had too many British actors , and Fletcher himself declined , to direct Wild Bill . 
 Jason Flemyng as Azazel : 
 A mutant who has the ability to teleport , and is also a member of the Hellfire Club . Flemyng , who had previously been considered for Beast in The Last Stand , said he did not want more make @-@ up heavy roles after playing <unk> in Clash of the Titans , but made an exception for Azazel as he liked working with Vaughn . Due to the Cold War setting , Flemyng tried to imply that Azazel is Russian to partly explain his pleasure in killing CIA agents . The actor spent eight weeks with fight training , particularly with swords , and had to undergo a four @-@ hour make @-@ up process , which like Mystique was designed by Spectral Motion — but did not include Azazel 's tail , which was computer @-@ generated . Shuler Donner considered that the problems with the shade of red on Azazel 's skin - " some looked like the Devil , some like a man wearing red paint " - was overcome by adding scars that made him more human , eyes brighter than Flemyng 's own , and " a black mane of hair that seemed to tie everything in " . 
 Lucas Till as Alex Summers / Havok : 
 A mutant who has the ability to absorb energy and discharge it as blasts . The producers told Till his audition served for both Havok and Beast , and the actor replied that despite his lifelong dream of playing a superhero , " I know you 'll kill me , but if I get Beast , I 'm not in the movie . I 'm not going through that makeup everyday [ sic ] . " 
 Edi Gathegi as Armando Muñoz / Darwin : 
 A mutant with the ability of " reactive evolution . " Gathegi became interested in a role in the X @-@ Men films after seeing X2 , and had previously auditioned for Agent Zero in X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine . He read for Banshee while auditioning for First Class , and only learned he was playing Darwin a few days prior to the shoot . Gathegi worked out and entered an eating regime to get in shape , and also researched the comics about his character . All of Darwin 's transformations — getting gills , turning his skin into concrete — were done through computer graphics , with a computer @-@ generated version of Gathegi that could seamlessly blend in and out of the human form . 
 Kevin Bacon as Dr. Klaus Schmidt / Sebastian Shaw : 
 A former mutant Nazi scientist and the leader of the Hellfire Club , a secret society bent on taking over the world . He has the power of absorbing and redirecting kinetic and radiated energy . Producer Lauren Shuler Donner said Bacon was considered for Shaw for being an actor who could convey a villain " with different shades , that 's not always clear that he 's the bad guy " . Vaughn added that Bacon " had that bravado that Shaw needed " , while stating that the actor was his top choice along with Colin Firth . Bacon accepted the role as he was a fan of Vaughn 's Kick @-@ Ass , and liked both the character of Shaw and the script , which he described as " a fresh look at the franchise , but also the comic book movies in general " . The actor considered that Shaw was a sociopath to whom " the morality of the world did not apply " , with producer Simon Kinberg adding that Bacon portrayed him as " somebody , who in his mind , is the hero of the movie " . Bacon also said that , " aside from the kind of evil side , I portrayed him as kind of a Hugh Hefner type " . Vaughn discarded Shaw 's look from the comics as he felt he would " look like an Austin Powers villain " . 
 Caleb Landry Jones as Sean Cassidy / Banshee : 
 A mutant capable of emitting incredibly strong ultrasonic screams , sonic blasts , sonic bursts , and sonic waves used in various ways including as a means of flight . Jones auditioned without knowing what X @-@ Men character he was up for , saying he auditioned because it was a superhero that fit his <unk> : " I 've got red hair and freckles , I 'm not gonna be Batman , Robin or Spider @-@ Man " . The actor also stated that the script defined the character more than the comics , as Banshee went through various reinventions in print . Given Banshee gets involved with MacTaggert in the comics , Jones also tried to " look at her just a little bit differently , you know , when I can . " As Jones suffers from <unk> , using the rig that was to depict Banshee 's flight required much preparation time with the stunt team . 
 Zoë Kravitz as Angel Salvadore : 
 A mutant with dragonfly wings which are tattooed on her body and possesses acidic saliva . The make @-@ up team took four hours to apply Angel 's wing tattoo on Kravitz , and the visual effects team had to erase the tattoo in case the scene required Angel with the computer @-@ generated wings . To depict flight , Kravitz stood on elevated platforms and was dangled on wires , at times from a helicopter to allow for varied camera angles . 
 Matt Craven as CIA Director <unk> : 
 A director of the CIA . 
 Álex González as Janos Quested / Riptide : 
 A mutant member of the Hellfire Club , with the ability to create powerful whirlwinds from his hands and body . First Class marks the first English @-@ language film for González , who auditioned while taking English classes in London . He enjoyed playing a villain as most of his film roles in Spain were for " good guys " , and compared Riptide 's respectable and polite personality , which can suddenly be dropped to perform fierce attacks , to a hurricane ; in a translation of a Portuguese @-@ language interview , he is quoted as saying , " When I see a hurricane from far , it is calm . The only thing I can see is a kind of tube . But from inside , up close , it is really dangerous . " 
 Rade Šerbedžija as Russian General 
 A high @-@ ranking Soviet military official during the early 1960s . 
 Glenn Morshower as Colonel Robert Hendry 
 A US Army officer coerced by the Hellfire Club . 
 Other cast members include Annabelle Wallis as Amy , a young woman who has heterochromia ; Don Creech as CIA Agent Stryker , father of Major William Stryker ( a character who appears in X2 , X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine , X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , and X @-@ Men : Apocalypse ) ; Michael Ironside ; Ray Wise ; James Remar ; Brendan Fehr ; and Aleksander Krupa also portrayed small roles in this film . Hugh Jackman reprises his role as Logan / Wolverine in an uncredited cameo in a bar , dismissing an approach by Xavier and Lehnsherr to join them . Jackman said he accepted the offer to appear because " it sounded perfect to me " , particularly for Wolverine being the only character with a swear word . X @-@ Men creator Stan Lee , who appeared in the first and third movie and regularly cameos in other Marvel @-@ based movies , explained that he was unable to participate in First Class because " they shot it too far away " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 During the production of X2 , producer Lauren Shuler Donner had discussed the idea of a film focusing on the young X @-@ Men with the crew , which was met with approval ; the concept was revived during the production of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand . One of The Last Stand 's writers , Zak Penn , was hired to write and direct this spin @-@ off , but this idea later fell through . Penn explained in 2007 that " the original idea was to have me do a young X @-@ Men spin @-@ off , a spin @-@ off of the young X @-@ Men characters . But someone came up with a pretty interesting idea [ ... ] it was this guy who worked with me named Mike <unk> , he worked a lot with me on X3 . He came up with how to do a young X @-@ Men movie which is not what you 'd expect . " 
 Around the same time , in December 2004 , 20th Century Fox hired screenwriter Sheldon Turner to draft a spin @-@ off X @-@ Men film , and he chose to write Magneto , pitching it as " The Pianist meets X @-@ Men . " According to Turner , the script he penned was set from 1939 to 1955 , following Magneto trying to survive in Auschwitz . He meets Xavier , a young soldier , during the liberation of the camp . He hunts down the Nazi war criminals who tortured him , and this lust for vengeance turns him and Xavier into enemies . In April 2007 , David S. Goyer was hired to direct . The film would take place mostly in flashbacks with actors in their twenties , with Ian McKellen 's older Magneto as a framing device , and some usage of the computer @-@ generated facelift applied to him in the prologue of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , McKellen reiterated his hope to open and close the film . The Magneto film was planned to shoot in Australia for a 2009 release , but it was delayed by the 2007 @-@ 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . 
 As producer Simon Kinberg read the comic series X @-@ Men : First Class , he suggested studio 20th Century Fox to adapt it . Kinberg , however , did not want to follow the comic too much , as he felt " it was not fresh enough in terms of storytelling " , considering them too similar to Twilight and John Hughes movies , and also because the producers wanted an adaptation that would introduce new characters . Both Kinberg and Shuler Donner said that they wanted characters with visuals and powers that had not been seen and that worked well as an ensemble , even if they did not work together in the comics . Shuler Donner later said that the original idea was to green @-@ light First Class depending on the success of X @-@ Men Origins : Magneto . That project was seeking approval to film in Washington , D.C. , and by December 2008 , Goyer said filming would begin if X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine was successful . The story was moved forward to 1962 , and involves Xavier and Magneto battling a villain . 
 In 2008 , Josh Schwartz was hired to write the screenplay , while declining the possibility of directing X @-@ Men : First Class . Fox later approached Bryan Singer , director of X @-@ Men and X2 , in October 2009 . Schwartz later said that Singer dismissed his work as " he wanted to make a very different kind of movie " , with the director instead writing his own treatment which was then developed into a new script by Jamie Moss . 
 In 2009 , Ian McKellen confirmed that he would not be reprising his role as Magneto in the Origins movie citing his age , and Shuler Donner stated that the movie might never be made , stating it was " at the back of the queue " in the studio 's priorities . Both Donner and Bryan Singer have stated that Magneto would not be produced as the plot of X @-@ Men : First Class " superseded " the story of the planned film . Singer denied using Sheldon Turner 's script for Magneto as inspiration to write his draft of First Class , but the Writer 's Guild of America arbitration still credited Turner for the film 's story , while Moss and Schwartz 's collaborations ended up uncredited . Singer set the film in a period where Xavier and Magneto were in their twenties , and seeing that it was during the 1960s , added the Cuban Missile Crisis as a backdrop , considering it would be interesting to " discuss this contemporary concept in a historical context " . Shuler Donner suggested the Hellfire Club as the villains . 
 In addition to Moss , Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz were hired to rewrite the script . Miller compared it tonally to Singer 's work on the first two X @-@ Men films . The pair centered the film on Xavier and Magneto 's relationship , and wrote the other characters and storylines in terms of " how they fit in the tension between Erik and Charles " . Singer dropped out of the director 's position in March 2010 due to his commitment to a Jack the Giant Killer adaptation . He formalized his duties from director to producer . 
 The producers listed various possible directors , but at first did not consider Matthew Vaughn because he started working on The Last Stand before backing out . After seeing Vaughn 's satirical superhero film Kick @-@ Ass ( 2010 ) , Kinberg decided to contact Vaughn to see if he would be interested in First Class . When Fox offered Vaughn the " chance to reboot X @-@ Men and put your stamp all over it " , he first thought the studio was joking , but accepted after discovering that it was to be set in the 1960s . The director stated that First Class would become the opportunity to combine many of his dream projects : " I got my cake and ate it , managed to do an X @-@ Men movie , and a Bond thing , and a Frankenheimer political thriller at the same time " . Vaughn signed on as Singer 's replacement in May 2010 , and Fox subsequently announced a June 3 , 2011 release date . Vaughn also rewrote the script with his screenwriting partner Jane Goldman , adding new characters and changing existing character arcs and dynamics — for instance , the idea of a love triangle between Xavier , Magneto and Moira MacTaggert was cut . The character of Sunspot was also cut , as the director felt that " we didn 't have enough time or money " to make the character work . Vaughn and Goldman considered including mentions to the Civil Rights Movement , but ultimately the director felt that " I had enough political subplot in this movie " . Vaughn stated that his biggest concern was to both make Erik and Charles ' friendship believable given the short timespan of the film , and on how the character of Magneto was built - " Shaw was the villain , but now you 're seeing all those elements of Shaw going into Magneto . " An action scene that was to have been set in a dream sequence with revolving rooms was scrapped after the release of Inception ( 2010 ) . 
 Describing his thought process towards the material , Vaughn said he was motivated by " unfinished business " with Marvel , having been previously involved with the production of both X @-@ Men : The Last Stand and Thor . Vaughn declared that he was more enthusiastic about First Class than The Last Stand due to not being constrained by the previous installments , and having the opportunity to " start fresh " , while " nodding towards " the successful elements from those films . Vaughn compared First Class to both Batman Begins ( 2005 ) , which restarted a franchise with an unseen approach , and the 2009 Star Trek film , which paid homage to the original source material while taking it in a new direction with a fresh , young cast . Regarding continuity , Vaughn said his intention was " to make as good a film that could stand on its own two feet regardless of all the other films " and also that could " reboot and start a whole new X @-@ Men franchise " . Goldman added the film was kind of an " alternate history " for the X @-@ Men , saying that while rebooting , the writers did not want to go fully " against the canon of the X @-@ Men trilogy " , comparing to the various approaches the comic had in over fifty years of publication . 
 The film also rescues a central concept in the comics , the fact that radiation is one of the causes of genetic mutation in the X @-@ Men fictional universe , and incorporates it in the storyline , resurrecting the concept which went unused in the last years , as writers in the comics more recently have attributed the phenomenon of mutation mostly to evolution and natural selection . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on August 31 , 2010 , in Oxford , England , which included St Aldate 's street and some of the University of Oxford 's buildings , and lasted for two days . Production then moved to Pinewood Studios in Iver , and to Georgia in October , including Tybee Island , Thunderbolt and Savannah , after sites in Louisiana , North Carolina and West Michigan were considered . Jekyll Island was chosen over Tybee Island after a producer reviewed the locations on Google Earth and thought the water near Jekyll looked more blue . Palm trees were planted into the island 's sand so that it would look more like a tropical beach , but the cold weather caused many of the palm trees to become brown or die only days into the shoot , necessitating significant digital color correction from the visual effects team . Additional location shooting took place in Russia . A section of the plot is set in the Argentine coastal city of Villa <unk> , but was filmed in another province of the country with no beach but with mountains instead . Washington , D.C. , the Mojave Desert and Fox 's soundstages in Los Angeles also served as locations . The Englefield House in Berkshire served as the X @-@ Mansion , and had its interior decoration adapted to resemble the way the mansion looked in the previous films . Both the submarine and the X @-@ Jet were built on hydraulic sets so that they could be rotated for the vehicles ' movements . Principal photography ended in December , but additional filming , primarily in California at Los Angeles and Long Beach , continued into April 2011 , leaving only three to four weeks for post @-@ production before the film 's scheduled premiere in June . The tight schedule to meet the release date led Vaughn to declare that he had " never worked under such time pressure " . The film cost approximately $ 160 million to produce without tax breaks , with the eventual cost around $ 140 million . 
 The 1960s setting of X @-@ Men : First Class was technologically inspired by the James Bond films of that era , also added to the international feel of the characters . Kinberg said the series was a major influence for the way they " did a cool job representing the period , in a way it still felt muscular and action @-@ oriented " , and Vaughn added that Magneto was his attempt to recreate Sean Connery 's Bond in both style and the " badass , charming , ruthless and sweet " personality . The director said his goal was to " feel like a ' 60s Bond film , but with a little bit of reality it could be grounded in . I wanted there to be just a hint of this world of the mutants coming through . A mutant in this world having powers needed to be the equivalent of you or I sneezing , as normal as possible , at least until the humans start seeing it for the first time . " At the same time , Vaughn tried to do the " bloody hard balancing " of modern and antique to recreate the 1960s in way it was " not so alien to the kids that it looked like a period piece . " The director also tried to depict the era still in a realistic way , particularly " that 60s misogynist vibe " with women in skimpy suits , and <unk> 's reliability as a CIA agent being questioned . 
 Vaughn said he shot the film in a way it resembled the productions of the 1960s , with " very traditional framing , and camera movement when it needs to move , not just throwing it around and whizz @-@ bang " , and using the anamorphic format " to create a widescreen experience , which is emblematic of ' 60s movies , such as the James Bond films " . The director had to hire five cinematographers - with sole credit being given to John Mathieson , who came halfway through the shoot and did " forty @-@ five percent , fifty @-@ five percent " of the film - and four assistant directors to successfully convey the look he wanted for the film . Visual effects supervisor Matt Johnson added that for the lighting of the digital interior of Cerebro , " keeping with the ' 60s vibe , we put in some old school elements such as lens flare and chromatic aberration and edge fringing . " The aesthetics of the decade were also invoked by designers Simon Clowes and Kyle Cooper of Prologue Films , who were responsible for the end credits and tried to do something that " could be done with traditional optical " . The credits animation depicts DNA strands through simple geometric shapes , drawing inspiration from both Saul Bass and Maurice Binder 's work in the Bond films . 
 The origin story made the X @-@ Men costumes resemble the ones in the original comics , while still being functional , with the yellow parts resembling Kevlar and the blue looking like ballistic nylon , and resembling 1962 apparel in both the fabrics and the " Space Age fashion " . The costumes tried to convey the character personalities — for instance , Xavier wore loose clothes , and Emma Frost 's costumes were white and shimmery . Magneto 's costume at the film 's ending also closely resembled the original version from the comics , and three versions of his helmet were made , two to fit Fassbender 's head and one for Bacon 's . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 First Class employed 1 @,@ 150 visual effects shots , which were done by six companies : Rhythm & Hues was responsible for Emma Frost , Mystique and Angel , as well as set extensions ; Cinesite handled Azazel , the visuals for Cerebro and environment effects ; Luma Pictures did Banshee , Havok and Darwin ; Moving Picture Company did Beast , Riptide , and the scene where Shaw 's yacht is destroyed and he escapes in a submarine ; Digital Domain created Sebastian Shaw 's powers , and Weta Digital was responsible for the climactic battle in Cuba . The overall coordination was provided by visual effects designer John Dykstra , who said the biggest difficulty was the tight schedule : " It was slightly less than a year and I 've never done anything like that before ( Spider @-@ Man was frequently two years ) . " British company <unk> employed special 3D scanners to digitize data of the sets and actors which would be used by the effects companies . This allowed for computer @-@ generated sets such as the mirrored nuclear reactor where Magneto battles Shaw — for which the effects team used the mirror maze fight in Enter the Dragon as a reference — and the domed walls of Cerebro . Digital models of Washington and Moscow were also created based on photographs of the actual cities , with the Russian one in particular having vehicles and military hardware based on videos of a 1962 Red Square , and a digital army doing an actual Soviet @-@ style march . With the exception of scenes featuring the actors on ships ( shot on a small bridge set ) and the X @-@ Jet ( done on a set replicating the front two @-@ thirds of the aircraft , which was mounted atop a roller wheel so it could be spun ) the naval battle was entirely digital , featuring a simulated ocean and high resolution 3D models of the X @-@ Jet , Shaw 's submarine and 16 warships . The designs were mostly based on real vehicles , with the jet being a modified SR @-@ 71 Blackbird , the submarine a combination of various models from the 1940s and 1950s , and replicas of the actual US and USSR fleets in the 1960s — though a few were not in service in 1962 . A particular Soviet cruiser was a larger version of the Kresta I and II , leading Weta to dub it the Kresta III . Practical effects were still used whenever possible , such as having on location most of the objects young Erik throws after his mother 's death , actors and stuntmen dangled from wires , and real explosions and light effects as reference for Havok 's beams . 
 While in the comics Shaw 's absorption power was depicted by having him grow up to ten times his original size , First Class instead does what company Digital Domain called a " kinetic echo " , where a digital Kevin Bacon would be rippled , deformed and at times multiplied in repeated " iterations " that appear in a short period , to " see [ Shaw ] displace and deform in a kinetic and organic way " . According to Dykstra , the biggest problem with Frost 's diamond body was depicting it " without looking like she was made of Jell @-@ o or the polygon model of a human being " . The morphed Frost , which the visual effects tried to make look more like a faceted crystal than glass , was <unk> into Jones in the live @-@ action plates , while still retaining the actress ' eyes and lips . As the character kept on going in and out of her diamond form , a motion capture tracking suit could not be employed , so instead the effects team used both gray and chrome balls and a jumpsuit covered in mirrors — which also served as a lighting reference . For Angel 's digital wings , the animators studied slow @-@ motion footage of dragonflies to create the wing pattern in a realistic way , and the designers added iridescence to " make the wings prettier " . The visual of Banshee 's screams was done through a digital ring @-@ like structure based on renderings of sound waves such as <unk> photography . The visual for Havok 's blasts employed similar rings , concentrated in beams or rings of light which were then match moved into Till 's mimed throwing . For Banshee 's flight , the visual effects team used digital doubles only for distant shots , with closer ones employing Jones shot in a special flight rig . Azazel 's teleporting was made to resemble the " inky smoky effects " used with Nightcrawler , who appeared in X2 and is Azazel 's son in the comics . However , while Nightcrawler only left a smoke trail , the visual effects team had Azazel accompanied by digital fire and smoke " because he was more closely aligned with the devil " . The fire was also used " as a mask to hide or reveal the body " , according to effects supervisor Matt Johnson . Since the visible part of whirlwinds are the dust and dirt sucked up by them , the ones Riptide produces were made to resemble " a tornado of gas , made out of nothingness " by visual effects supervisor Nicolas <unk> . The final product was mostly a practical effect made with dry ice , which was augmented by computer @-@ generated imagery . The visual effects team portrayed Mystique 's abilities slightly differently due to this being a younger version , with " the scales being slightly longer and the transformation being slightly showier than when she became the more mature Rebecca . " For Beast , computer graphics depicted his simian @-@ like feet , the transformation sequence , and a few facial replacements for when Beast opened his mouth wider than the mask on Hoult 's face allowed . 
 = = Music = = 
 Henry Jackman , who had worked with Vaughn in Kick @-@ Ass , composed the score . Following the James Bond influences on First Class , Jackman drew inspiration from John Barry 's work in the said series , which he described as " extremely posh pop music " . Jackman started his work with a " Superman @-@ style theme " , which is only featured in the final parts of the film as Vaughn thought it was too " successful and triumphant " for a disjointed and up @-@ and @-@ coming team . Therefore , Vaughn reworked a ' stretched ' half time version of the theme into the remainder of the film . The themes for Magneto and Shaw have similarities to reflect their " perverted father @-@ son " relationship , with even a seamless transition during the scene where Shaw is killed to represent <unk> 's full transformation into Magneto . 
 In a roundtable interview with multiple news outlets , Vaughn responded to a question about choosing " Love Love " by the British band Take That for the end @-@ credits theme , explaining , " I bumped into [ the band 's lead singer ] Gary [ Barlow ] in [ Los Angeles ] , and we were just talking , and I said , ' Do you want to come and see a rough cut of it ? ’ And they came , and they wrote the song , and I listened to it , and I said , ‘ I think it ’ ll be a hit ’ , and if we can do a video which gets girls more interested ... we might get them to come and watch it . So it ’ s pure commerce , to be blunt , and I want women to see this film . " An instrumental of the song " Run ( I 'm a Natural Disaster ) " by Gnarls Barkley is used in the ' mutant recruitment ' scene . 
 All music composed by Henry Jackman . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The premiere for X @-@ Men : First Class took place at the Ziegfeld Theatre in New York City , on May 25 , 2011 . The promotional campaign aimed for non @-@ traditional partners , with Fox signing deals with Farmers Insurance Group , BlackBerry Playbook and the U.S. Army . Wrigley Australia issued an X @-@ Men themed edition of their 5 chewing gum . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 X @-@ Men : First Class was very well @-@ received . Review @-@ aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 87 % based on reviews from 269 critics , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 4 out of 10 . The site 's critic consensus was that " with a strong script , stylish direction , and powerful performances from its well @-@ rounded cast , X @-@ Men : First Class is a welcome return to form for the franchise . " On another review aggregator , Metacritic , the film received a score of 65 out of 100 based on 38 reviews indicating " generally favorable reviews . " 
 Among the major trade publications , Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter described the film as " audacious , confident and fueled by youthful energy " , and said that " director Vaughn impressively maintains a strong focus dedicated to clarity and dramatic power ... and orchestrates the mayhem with a laudable coherence , a task made easier by a charging , churning score by Henry Jackman ... " . Justin Chang of Variety said the film " feels swift , sleek and remarkably coherent " , and that " the visual effects designed by John Dykstra are smoothly and imaginatively integrated ... " Frank Lovece of Film Journal International lauded " a wickedly smart script with a multilayered theme that ... never loses sight of its ultimate story , and makes each emotional motivation interlock , often shockingly playing for keeps with its characters . This is not a kids ' movie . " 
 In consumer publications , Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly praised " the kind of youthful , Brit @-@ knockabout pop energy director Matthew Vaughn absorbed from his previous collaborations as producer of director Guy Ritchie 's bloke @-@ y larks " , and found McAvoy and Fassbender " a casting triumph . These two have , yes , real star magnetism , both individually and together : They 're both cool and intense , suave and unaffected , playful and dead serious about their grand comic @-@ book work . " Peter Howell of the Toronto Star called it " a blockbuster with brains " and said Vaughn " brings similar freshness to this comic creation as he did to Kick @-@ Ass , and manages to do so while hewing to the saga 's serious dramatic intent . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 X @-@ Men : First Class went on general release on June 3 , 2011 . In North America , the film opened on approximately 6 @,@ 900 screens at 3 @,@ 641 locations , debuting atop the weekend box office with earnings of $ 55 @.@ 1 million across the three days , including $ 3 @.@ 4 million in its Friday midnight launch . This opening was much lower than the opening weekends of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand ( $ 102 @.@ 7 million ) , X2 ( $ 85 @.@ 5 million ) , and X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine ( $ 85 @.@ 0 million ) , but slightly higher than the original film ( $ 54 @.@ 5 million ) . Executives at 20th Century Fox stated they had achieved their goal by opening with about the same numbers as the first X @-@ Men film and that it was an excellent start to a new chapter of the franchise . 
 First Class also opened 8 @,@ 900 locations in 74 overseas markets , which brought in $ 61 million during the weekend — standing third in the overseas ranking behind Pirates of the Caribbean : On Stranger Tides and The Hangover Part II . The film opened atop the box office in twenty countries , with the biggest grosses being in the United Kingdom ( $ 9 million , including previews ) , France ( $ 7 @.@ 1 million ) , Mexico ( $ 5 million ) , South Korea ( $ 5 @.@ 4 million ) and Australia ( $ 5 @.@ 1 million ) . In its second weekend X @-@ Men : First Class dropped 56 @.@ 2 percent , the second smallest second weekend drop in the franchise behind X2 : X @-@ Men United ( 53 @.@ 2 percent ) , and came in with $ 24 @.@ 1 million , in second place to Super 8 . Overseas , it rose to number two behind Kung Fu Panda 2 , with $ 42 @.@ 2 million . The film grossed $ 146 @,@ 408 @,@ 305 in the United States and Canada and $ 207 @,@ 215 @,@ 819 in foreign markets , bringing its worldwide total to $ 353 @,@ 624 @,@ 124 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 X @-@ Men : First Class was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray September 9 , 2011 in the US , and in the UK on October 31 , 2011 . The home release topped the sales charts in the United States with approximately 385 @,@ 000 DVDs . Blu @-@ ray accounted for 60 percent of first @-@ week disc sales , amounting to about 575 @,@ 000 discs . In the UK it sold 150 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The movie 's success led to the continuation of the film series , with the spin @-@ off The Wolverine in 2013 . A direct sequel , X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , was released on May 23 , 2014 . X @-@ Men : Apocalypse was released on May 27 , 2016 . 
 = Homansbyen Depot = 
 Homansbyen Depot ( Norwegian : Homansbyen <unk> ) , officially Kristiania <unk> ( " Kristiania Tramway Installation " ) was an Oslo Tramway depot at Sporveisgata 8 near Bislett in Oslo , Norway . It was constructed for Kristiania Sporveisselskab in 1874 and was the first tramway depot in the country . The facilities were designed by Henrik <unk> @-@ Meyer and featured an administrative office , a horse stable , a forge , a workshop , a weighing shed , and a wagon depot . It had space for 28 horse wagons , 16 sleds , and 116 horses . The administrative office was built in brick and housed apartments , offices , and a laboratory for the veterinarian . The depot was reconstructed several times , and taken out of use in 1966 . It was demolished three years later , and replaced with residential apartment blocks . 
 = = History = = 
 The tramway operating company Kristiania Sporveisselskab was established on October 2 , 1874 , and started scheduled horse tram services on October 6 , 1875 . The network comprised a line from Homansbyen over Stortorvet to Gamlebyen , with a branch line to Oslo West Station . Also in October 1874 , Kristiania <unk> bought 12 square kilometers ( 4 @.@ 6 sq mi ) of the square <unk> near Bislett , at the end of the Homansbyen Line , where the depot was built . It was constructed with a building housing the company 's administrative office , horse stables , a wagon depot , a forge , and a weighing shed . These installations were designed by the Norwegian architect Henrik <unk> @-@ Meyer . All installations but the head office were addressed to Sporveisgata 8 . The head office was addressed to <unk> . 
 When the Oslo Tramway was electrified in 1899 , a large reorganization of Homansbyen Depot took place . The horse stables were rebuilt to serve as tramway depots , requiring more space . The workshop was extended with additional rooms in the surrounding buildings . Plans for building a steam power station at the depot never materialised . 
 Kristiania Sporveisselskab acquired Kristiania Kommunale Sporveie in 1905 , and additional extensions of the depot were built . In 1907 , the administrative office was completely rebuilt two years later , and an additional 60 @-@ meter ( 200 ft ) long tramway depot was constructed in Pilestredet . When Oslo Sporveier acquired all the city 's private tram companies in 1924 , Homansbyen became the head office . Homansbyen also housed the payroll office . 
 During the World War II , on August 29 , 1944 , two armed men entered the payroll office in <unk> and stole 120 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , while demanding the local treasurer Knut <unk> and his assistant to hold their hands lifted . The two men have not been identified , but they are suspected to have come from Milorg , which had a deficit of money during the war . 
 When the Etterstad Depot became operational in 1966 , the Homansbyen Depot was closed and the property sold . The tramway installations were demolished in 1969 and replaced with apartment blocks , local schools , and offices . The only visible remains of the depot is the street name Sporveisgata ( " The Tramway Street " ) . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The installations of the depot were all built in brick and were rebuilt many times . The head office had two floors . The ground floor featured six rooms , four serving as offices . <unk> and coaches occupied the other two rooms . The second floor consisted of apartments for the stable keeper and depot inspector and a laboratory for the horse veterinarian . 
 The stable originally had stalls for 116 healthy and 12 ill horses . The stable was insured for 12 @,@ 000 Norwegian <unk> , twice the amount for the head office building . The wagon depot had space for 28 trams and 16 sleds . The 16 sleds were purchased between 1875 and 1879 , and replaced the horsecars during the winter . The forge had space for two smiths and featured a small room where the horses were shoed . 
 = = Location = = 
 The depot was located in Sporveisgata , between <unk> gate and the street junction Pilestredet – Sporveisgata . The street Sporveisgata was in the beginning only a branch from Pilestredet , but it became a street in its own right in 1879 , after the tramway installations had been constructed . While it was located in a branch to Pilestredet , the depot had Pilestredet 75 as its address . After the branch had its name changed to Sporveisgata , the address was renamed Sporveisgata 8 . 
 Initially , the depot was located at the very end of the Homansbyen Line . Consequently , trams traveling to the depot had to run from the terminus <unk> , via a curve from <unk> gate over Bislett and Pilestredet to Sporveisgata 8 . Sporveisgata stretches from <unk> in the south @-@ east to <unk> gate in the north @-@ west . As of 2012 , the nearest tram stops to the depot are Bislett on the Ullevål Hageby Line and Rosenborg on the Briskeby Line . 
 = Pulteney Bridge = 
 Pulteney Bridge crosses the River Avon in Bath , England . It was completed by 1774 , and connected the city with the newly built Georgian town of Bathwick . Designed by Robert Adam in a Palladian style , it is exceptional in having shops built across its full span on both sides . It has been designated as a Grade I listed building . 
 Within 20 years of its construction , alterations were made that expanded the shops and changed the façades . By the end of the 18th century it had been damaged by floods , but it was rebuilt to a similar design . Over the next century alterations to the shops included cantilevered extensions on the bridge 's north and south faces . In the 20th century several schemes were carried out to preserve the bridge and partially return it to its original appearance , enhancing its appeal as a tourist attraction . 
 The bridge is now 45 metres ( 148 ft ) long and 18 metres ( 58 ft ) wide . Although there have been plans to <unk> the bridge , it is still used by buses and taxis . The much photographed bridge and the weir below are close to the centre of the city , which is a World Heritage Site largely because of its Georgian architecture . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 One of only four bridges in the world to have shops across its full span on both sides , the structure was designed by Robert Adam ; his original drawings are preserved in the Sir John Soane 's Museum in London . 
 The bridge is named after Frances Pulteney , wife of William Johnstone . He was a wealthy Scottish lawyer and Member of Parliament . Frances was the third daughter of MP and government official Daniel Pulteney ( 1684 – 1731 ) and first cousin once removed of William Pulteney , 1st Earl of Bath . She inherited the Earl 's substantial fortune and estates close to Bath in Somerset after his death in 1764 and that of his younger brother and heir in 1767 , and the <unk> changed their surname to Pulteney . The rural Bathwick estate , which Frances and William inherited in 1767 , was across the river from the city and could only be reached by ferry . William made plans to create a new town , which would become a suburb to the historic city of Bath , but first he needed a better river crossing . The work of the <unk> is memorialised by Great Pulteney Street in Bathwick , and Henrietta Street and Laura Place , named after their daughter Henrietta Laura Johnstone . 
 Initial plans for the bridge were drawn up by Thomas Paty , who estimated it would cost £ 4 @,@ 569 to build , but that did not include the shops . A second estimate of £ 2 @,@ 389 was obtained from local builders John Lowther and Richard Reed ; it included two shops at each end of the bridge , but work did not begin before winter weather made construction of the pillars impossible . In 1770 the brothers Robert and James Adam , who were working on designs for the new town at Bathwick , adapted Paty 's original design . Robert Adam envisaged an elegant structure lined with shops , similar to the Ponte Vecchio and the Ponte di Rialto he would likely have seen when he visited Florence and Venice . Adam 's design more closely followed Andrea Palladio 's rejected design for the Rialto . The revised bridge was 15 metres ( 50 ft ) wide , rather than the 9 @.@ 1 metres ( 30 ft ) width envisaged by Paty , which overcame the objections of the local council about the bridge being too narrow . 
 Construction started in 1770 and was completed by 1774 at a cost of £ 11 @,@ 000 . The builders for the lower part of the bridge were local masons Reed and Lowther ; the shops were constructed by Singers and <unk> . 
 = = Development = = 
 Pulteney Bridge stood for less than 20 years in the form Adam created . In 1792 alterations were made during which the bridge was widened to 18 metres ( 58 ft ) and the shops enlarged , converting the original sixteen shops into six larger ones . Floods in 1799 and 1800 wrecked the north side of the bridge , which had been constructed with inadequate support . Thomas Telford suggested replacing the bridge with a single span cast iron bridge . However it was rebuilt by John Pinch senior , surveyor to the Pulteney estate , in a less ambitious version of Adam 's design . Nineteenth @-@ century shopkeepers changed the structure and appearance of their premises by changing windows , or expanding them by adding cantilevers over the river . Some painted advertisements on the outside of their shops , affecting the view from the river and Grand Parade . The western end pavilion on the south side was demolished in 1903 for road widening and its replacement was not an exact match . 
 In 1936 the bridge was designated an ancient monument . The city council bought several of the shops and made plans for the restoration of the original façade , which was completed in time for the Festival of Britain in 1951 . Further work was carried out in the 1960s to repair the underside <unk> of all three arches . More restoration of the southern street facade was needed in 1975 . The status of the bridge as an ancient monument was replaced in 1955 with its designation as a Grade I listed building . 
 In 2009 Bath and North East Somerset council put forward a proposal to close the bridge to motor traffic and turn it into a pedestrianised zone , but the plan was abandoned in September 2011 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The bridge features two ranges of shops designed in the Palladian style c . 1770 , between them forming a narrow street over the bridge . The street and buildings sit above three segmental arches of equal span . 
 The shops on the north side have cantilevered rear extensions . Consequently , the northern external façade of the bridge is asymmetrical , much altered and of no architectural merit , whereas the southern external side clearly shows the hand of Robert Adam . 
 Built of limestone , in classic Palladian style , the southern façade takes the form of a temple @-@ like central bay with symmetrical wings connecting to two flanking , terminating pavilions . The central bay is given eminence by a broken pediment supported by austere Doric <unk> . It in turn is flanked by two small bays , each with a small pointed pediment supported by shallow pilasters , which further emphasise and complement the central broken pediment sitting above a large Palladian window – the focal point of the building . On this southern side the structure comprises a principal floor at street level , with a low mezzanine separated by stone banding above . Beneath the principal floor is a sub @-@ floor constructed in the masonry between the spans of the bridge , its presence indicated by ocular windows placed symmetrically beneath the span of each arch . This ocular motif , on a reduced scale , is repeated symmetrically at mezzanine level beneath the central broken pediment . The two terminating pavilions , in reality slight projections , have shallow saucer domes concealed behind their pointed pediments . The roof is pitched and of Welsh slate . 
 The western mid @-@ stream pier was rebuilt in 1804 . Further alteration took place in 1895 , when the western pavilion was moved for the construction of the Grand Parade . The appearance changed yet again when the current weir , the scene of Javert 's suicide in the film version of Les Misérables , was constructed between 1968 and 1972 as part of a flood @-@ prevention scheme . Further restoration was undertaken in 1975 . 
 = Typhoon Elsie ( 1989 ) = 
 Typhoon Elsie , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Tasing , was one of the most intense known tropical cyclones to make landfall in the Philippines . A powerful Category 5 super typhoon , Elsie formed out of a tropical disturbance on October 13 , 1989 , and initially moved relatively slowly in an area of weak steering currents . On October 15 , the storm underwent a period of rapid intensification , attaining an intensity that corresponds to a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . After taking a due west track towards the northern Philippines , the storm intensified further , becoming a Category 5 super typhoon hours before making landfall in Luzon . After moving inland , the typhoon rapidly weakened to a tropical storm . Once back over water in the South China Sea , wind shear prevented re @-@ <unk> . Elsie eventually made landfall in Vietnam on October 22 and dissipated the following day over Laos . 
 In the Philippines , Elsie worsened the situation already left in the wakes of typhoons Angela and Dan . Although it was stronger than the previous two , Elsie caused far less damage due to the relatively sparse population in the area of landfall . During the storm 's passage , 47 people were killed and another 363 were injured . Damages throughout the country amounted to $ 35 @.@ 4 million and roughly 332 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Super Typhoon Elsie , the third typhoon to impact the Philippines within a 12 @-@ day span during 1989 , originated from a Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough ( TUTT ) over the western Pacific Ocean in mid @-@ October . By October 13 , a tropical disturbance developed out of the system roughly 1 @,@ 240 kilometres ( 770 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Manila , Philippines . At this time , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began to monitor the system as a tropical depression . Located between two other TUTT cells , the disturbance 's outflow was enhanced , allowing it to intensify . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert late on October 13 . Early the following day , the disturbance was designated as Tropical Depression 30W as it began to stall in an area of weak steering currents between two subtropical highs . 
 Shortly after being declared a depression , the JTWC upgraded the system to a tropical storm , giving it the name Elsie . At the same time , the JMA also upgraded the depression to a tropical storm . By October 15 , Elsie began to take a slow track to the west @-@ northwest and intensified . Later that day , a short @-@ wave trough passed to the north of the storm , again enhancing its outflow . This led to a period of rapid intensification , during which Elsie intensified from a tropical storm to the equivalent of a high @-@ end Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale in a 24 @-@ hour span . The JMA also upgraded Elsie to a typhoon , though they reported a much more gradual rate of intensification . After strengthening further to Category 4 intensity , maximum winds leveled out for most of October 17 . 
 On October 18 , another period of intensification took place as the storm neared the northern Philippines . Early in the day , Elsie was upgraded to a super typhoon , a storm with winds of at least 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Hours before making landfall in Luzon , the storm attained its peak intensity as a Category 5 super typhoon with winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 898 hPa ( mbar ) . The peak intensity of Elsie was assessed by the JMA at the same time . They reported that the typhoon attained winds of 175 km / h ( 115 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) and a minimum pressure of 915 hPa ( mbar ) . The center of Elsie crossed the Philippine coastline at around 0300 UTC on October 19 . 
 Rapid weakening took place as the storm moved over the mountainous terrain of northern Luzon . Roughly nine hours after crossing the coastline , Elsie was downgraded to a tropical storm . The weakened storm continued its westward track as it entered the South China Sea along a monsoonal surge . This surge also helped to keep Elsie as a tropical storm due to increased wind shear over the northern portion of the cyclone . The JMA , unlike the JTWC , did not downgrade Elsie to a tropical storm until October 21 . Failing to re @-@ intensify , Elsie eventually made landfall in central Vietnam on October 22 and degenerated into a remnant @-@ low pressure system early the following day . The remnants of Elsie were monitored by the JTWC on satellite imagery for a short time until the former typhoon dissipated over Laos . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 During the storm , roughly 50 @,@ 500 people sought refuge in shelters set up across the country . Throughout the Philippines , 47 people were killed by the typhoon , mostly from drowning . Sixteen of these fatalities occurred in Isabela Province , where Elsie made landfall . Heavy rains triggered several landslides across mountainous areas of the country . High winds also created deadly air @-@ borne debris , including roofing and tree limbs . Downed power lines across the northern provinces left most of Luzon without power . Officials stated that about 61 @,@ 300 homes were either damaged or destroyed by Elsie in the Philippines . In the wake of the typhoon , roughly 332 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Damages sustained by agriculture amounted to 105 million PHP ( $ 2 @,@ 253 @,@ 702 USD ) . In all , Typhoon Elsie killed 47 people and injured 363 others in the Philippines , and left roughly $ 35 @.@ 4 million in damages . 
 Although Elsie brushed Hainan Island in China and made landfall in northern Vietnam , little damage was reported in these regions . In addition to damages caused by Brian , Angela and Dan , roughly ¥ 1 @.@ 9 billion ( $ 278 @.@ 3 million ) was left in damages . 
 Following the storm , the Red Cross and World Food Council ( UNDRO ) set up shelters and began assisting residents in need of food and shelter . Several thousand residents were provided food , clothing and shelter across the country in mass @-@ feeding shelters . The UNDRO also contributed $ 461 @,@ 000 in funds to the Philippines . Another $ 46 @,@ 000 was provided by the Government of Norway and the Catholic Relief Services donated $ 50 @,@ 000 . The Government of Japan provided $ 300 @,@ 000 and the Government of the United States donated $ 25 @,@ 000 in response to the overall effects of Elsie and the three preceding storms . Two other non @-@ governmental organizations , the Lutheran World Federation and World Council of Churches allocated $ 10 @,@ 000 and $ 30 @,@ 000 , respectively , for the Philippines . 
 = SMS Preussen ( 1903 ) = 
 SMS Preussen was the fourth of five pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Braunschweig class in the Kaiserliche Marine ( the German Imperial Navy ) laid down in 1902 and commissioned 1905 . She was named for the state of Prussia Her sister ships were Braunschweig , Elsass , Hessen , and Lothringen . 
 Preussen served in the II Battle Squadron of the German High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career . She participated in a fleet advance in December 1914 in support of the Raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby during which the German fleet encountered and briefly clashed with a detachment of the British Grand Fleet . She had been temporarily assigned to guard ship duties in the Baltic in May 1916 , and so missed the Battle of Jutland . Due to her age , she did not rejoin the fleet , and instead continued to serve as a guard ship until 1917 , when she became a fleet tender . 
 After the war , Preussen was retained by the re @-@ formed Reichsmarine and converted into a depot ship for F @-@ type minesweepers . She was stricken in April 1929 and sold to ship breakers in 1931 . A 63 @-@ meter ( 207 ft ) section of her hull was retained as a target ; it was bombed and sunk in 1945 by Allied bombers at the end of World War II , and subsequently scrapped in 1954 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Preussen was laid down in 1902 , at the AG Vulcan in Stettin under construction number 256 . The fourth unit of her class , she was ordered under the contract name " K " as a new unit for the fleet . The ship cost 23 @,@ 990 @,@ 000 marks . Preussen was launched on 30 October 1903 and commissioned into the fleet on 12 July 1905 . 
 The ship was 127 @.@ 7 m ( 419 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 2 m ( 73 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 1 m ( 27 ft ) forward . The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines that drove three screws . Steam was provided by eight naval and six cylindrical boilers , all of which burned coal . Preussen 's powerplant was rated at 16 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 15 @,@ 781 ihp ; 11 @,@ 768 kW ) , which generated a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Preussen 's armament consisted of a main battery of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 guns in twin gun turrets , one fore and one aft of the central superstructure . Her secondary armament consisted of fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 inch ) SK L / 40 guns and eighteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) SK L / 35 quick @-@ firing guns . The armament suite was rounded out with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted submerged in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After commissioning in 1905 , Preussen was assigned to the II Battle Squadron of the German fleet . There she joined her sisters Braunschweig , Elsass , and Hessen . By the end of 1911 , three of the four new Helgoland @-@ class dreadnoughts had entered active duty with the I Squadron ; the only pre @-@ dreadnought remaining in I Squadron was Preussen 's sister Elsass . Preussen and seven other Braunschweig and Deutschland @-@ class ships made up the II Squadron . Preussen was present during the fleet cruise to Norway in July 1914 , which was cut short by the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and subsequent rise in international tensions . On 25 July the ship 's crew was made aware of Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia ; Preussen left Norway to rendezvous with the rest of the fleet the following day . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 After the outbreak of war in August 1914 , the High Seas Fleet conducted a series of operations designed to lure out a portion of the numerically superior British Grand Fleet and destroy it . By achieving a rough equality of forces , the German navy could then force a decisive battle in the southern portion of the North Sea . The first such operation in which the High Seas Fleet participated was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . The main fleet acted as distant support for Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruiser squadron while it raided the coastal towns . On the evening of 15 December , the fleet came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced the German fleet commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , that the entire Grand Fleet was deployed before him . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battlefleet back towards Germany . 
 Preussen , though assigned to the II Squadron , missed the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . She had been temporarily transferred to the Baltic to serve as a guard ship . Her sister ship , Lothringen , also missed the battle , as she had been deemed to be in too poor a condition to participate in the fleet advance . Jutland proved to Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the fleet commander , that the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were too vulnerable to take part in a major fleet action , and so detached the II Squadron from the High Seas Fleet . As a result , Preussen remained in service as a guard ship in the Baltic . From 1917 to the end of the war , she served as a fleet tender based in Wilhelmshaven . Preussen briefly held Edouard <unk> , a US Navy sailor captured after his ship was sunk by U @-@ 90 , in June 1918 ; <unk> would go on to escape from a German prisoner of war camp and win the Medal of Honor . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career = = = 
 The Treaty of Versailles , which ended the war , specified that Germany was permitted to retain six battleships of the " Deutschland or Lothringen types . " Preussen was among those ships chosen to remain on active service with the newly reformed Reichsmarine . The ship was converted into a parent ship for F @-@ type minesweepers at the Kriegsmarinewerft in Wilhelmshaven in 1919 ; the ship was disarmed and platforms for holding the minesweepers were installed . 
 Preussen served in this capacity with the newly reformed Reichsmarine until 1929 . She was stricken from the naval register on 5 April 1929 ; the Reichsmarine sold her to ship breakers on 25 February 1931 for 216 @,@ 800 Reichsmarks . Preussen was subsequently broken up for scrap in Wilhelmshaven , though a 63 m ( 207 ft ) length of her hull was retained as a testing target for underwater weapons , including torpedoes and mines . The section of hull was nicknamed " SMS <unk> ( " SMS Rectangle " ) . Allied bombers attacked and sank the section of Preussen 's hull in April 1945 . It was eventually raised and scrapped in late 1954 . 
 = The Drug in Me Is You = 
 The Drug in Me Is You is the debut studio album by American post @-@ hardcore band Falling in Reverse . Production for the album took place following lead singer Ronnie Radke 's departure from Escape the Fate in 2008 . Recording took place in December 2010 and lasted until February 2011 at Paint it Black Studios in Orlando , Florida . Michael Baskette , who worked with Radke on Escape the Fate 's Dying is Your Latest Fashion , returned as the executive producer for the album , alongside former bandmate Omar Espinosa and others as additional composers and production aids in the studio . The Drug in Me Is You was released on July 25 , 2011 , in Europe and Japan , and on July 26 , 2011 , in the United States . 
 The album charted at number 19 on the US Billboard 200 , selling 18 @,@ 000 copies in its first week in the United States . It also charted internationally on the national album charts in Australia , Canada and the United Kingdom . Upon release , The Drug in Me Is You received mixed reviews . Critics consistently noted the contrast between hardcore music and pop music on the tracks , but to mixed reception . Overall , the lyrics were viewed as being cliché while Radke 's singing and return to making music were noted . In addition , critics focused on the bitter relationship between Radke and his former band , Escape the Fate , in which reviewers noticed the choice to attack the band in many of the album 's tracks . The Drug in Me Is You was chosen by the Guitar World magazine as the album number 21 among the top 50 albums of 2011 . 
 It 's the only album that features the bassist Nason Schoeffler and short @-@ lived member Scott Gee on drums . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2006 , Ronnie Radke was involved in an altercation in Las Vegas that resulted in the fatal shooting of 18 @-@ year @-@ old Michael Cook , eventually leading to Radke 's two @-@ year imprisonment for parole violation . Following his incarceration and forced departure from his old band , Escape the Fate , Radke formed Falling in Reverse with the help of longtime friend Nason Schoeffler , who found band members and visited Radke while he was in prison . However , Radke was unable to work with the band prior to his release on December 12 , 2010 . After going through a few bassists and drummers , the band prepared to record their full @-@ length debut album . After the album finished production , bassist and founding member Nason Schoeffler and drummer Scott Gee left the band , making the album their only release with the band . Former Aiden , I Am Ghost , and The Bigger Lights drummer Ryan Seamen replaced Scott Gee and former <unk> member Mika Horiuchi took over bass for Schoeffler . 
 Originally conceived as a double album , the band 's debut was originally going to contain one disc of post @-@ hardcore and another with Pop punk . This was eventually scrapped in favor for a single album , soon confirmed to be titled , The Drug in Me Is You . The band also confirmed that Radke 's friend , Michael Baskette , who had previously worked on Blessthefall 's album Witness and Escape the Fate 's debut Dying is Your Latest Fashion ( which was also with Radke ) , would produce the album . Radke announced that the album would be released in 2011 by Epitaph Records , Radke 's former label with Escape the Fate . The album was slated for a July 26 , 2011 release date , with pre @-@ orders scheduled for June 7 . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In December 2010 , the band began composing songs together for the first time . They announced on December 20 that they would go to Orlando , Florida to record a full @-@ length debut album over a period of two months with a tentative release date of the first quarter of 2011 . The eleven song tracklist was released soon after . With the help of Executive Producer Michael " Elvis " Baskette , mixing and tracking for the album concluded on April 2 , 2011 . Speaking about working with Baskette as producer , Radke said , " The dude ’ s a genius , he really is . I don ’ t know if he ’ s under the radar or anything , but the guy knows what he ’ s doing . He ’ s a vocalist guy . That ’ s why me and him get along so well . " 
 The Drug in Me Is You has been described as post @-@ hardcore and pop punk . The songs also included synths , pop @-@ choruses , and other sounds . Radke commented on the inclusion of different genres in songs , comparing different parts of the same song to the sounds of Norma Jean , Underoath , and Katy Perry . Lyrically , according to Radke , some of the songs on the album had tones of being arrogant , comparing the attitude to that commonly found in rap music . This is because Radke has cited Eminem as one of his major influences , so much so that he even included a beat made by Eminem and Dr. Dre during a breakdown on the track " Sink or Swim " . In an interview , Radke 's experiences were compared to Eminem 's , noting that , " [ Eminem ] is someone who has been knocked down and knocked down , and he ’ s gotten back up again . Time and time again . And he ’ s triumphed . " While the album itself was written during Radke 's time in prison , he does not consider it a " Jailhouse record " , though some songs that did not make the album do address a prison theme . 
 The lyrics for the album were all written by Radke during his imprisonment . He has often called the album a breakup record , but with a band and not a girl . Radke said that , " I would think all day , for days and days , [ about ] what people would want to hear . I would dissect my old album and read all the fan letters and the reasons why they loved my band and why they listened to it . And I wrote about that , but in different ways . I don ’ t know why these kids love the tragedies that I write about . I guess they can relate to it . " Also on the writing process , Radke said that his lyrics were much more evolved than his past works and that he felt this was a high @-@ point for the post @-@ hardcore genre , owing success to being incarcerated and writing lyrics for two years with no other musical influences . The title , The Drug in Me Is You , came from Radke 's experiences concerning his previous self @-@ destructive behavior , which Radke explained that , " We named it that because ... It 's me , looking in the mirror , saying , ' I am my own worst [ enemy ] . I do the worst damage to myself — more than anybody else can to do me . ' " 
 Some things explored in the album were Radke 's personal experiences , which include his mother , the corruption of Las Vegas , and his incarceration in prison due to multiple run @-@ ins with the law involving narcotics and battery charges related to the death of Michael Cook . Radke stated that he chose not to write any songs about love because , " ... I 'm not going to lie ... and try to write songs on how much I love somebody . I do have love , but there will be a lot of songs about just what I ’ ve been through . " Several songs focused on his departure from Escape the Fate after they kicked him out and replaced him with former Blessthefall singer Craig Mabbitt , with songs on the album that directly attacked both Mabbitt and Escape the Fate bassist Max Green . Prior to the album 's release , Radke discussed what he intended to say about Escape the Fate on certain tracks , stating in an interview that he believed that the band 's first album without Radke , This War Is Ours , was named after the conflict over Mabbitt taking over Radke 's position in Escape the Fate . The band has since claimed it was not written about Radke , but he did not believe them . 
 = = Singles and promotion = = 
 To promote the album , the band announced the dates for their first live performances , which would take place at the end of July following their debut album 's release at certain locations in California , with one date scheduled in Texas on September 24 , 2011 . These shows were planned to be with supporting act Vampires Everywhere . However , the July dates were postponed due to issues with guitarist Jacky Vincent 's immigration visa , though the band voiced intentions to make these dates up . This meant that the band 's first live performances would be at the Vans Warped Tour 2011 from August 10 to August 14 for five shows on the Advent Clothing Stage throughout the western United States . However , the band played a few secret shows under the name " Goodbye Graceful " on August eighth and ninth in Anaheim and Los Angeles . Following the release of the album and some Warped Tour 2011 appearances , the band announced their first headlining tour across the United States , with locations beginning in New Mexico , looping around the east coast , and concluding in Colorado . The tour will begin on September 18 and end on October 11 , 2011 , with support acts Eyes Set to Kill and For All Those Sleeping . The band 's first supporting tour was to be a ten @-@ show tour in November 2011 with headliners Black Veil Brides and supporting acts Aiden and Drive @-@ A , but was canceled after Black Veil Brides dropped out when their lead vocalist Andy Biersack broke his nose . Emmure replaced Falling in Reverse on the second half of the Take A Picture , It Lasts Longer Tour with We Came As Romans and the band played an exclusive show at KROQ on November 8 to make up for the canceled shows . 
 The first single for the album , as well the band 's first single overall , " Raised by Wolves " , was released on June 10 , 2011 to iTunes , though it had leaked a few weeks earlier on May 29 . The track was featured on the iTunes Music Store as the " single of the week " , and was available as a free download for that week . On June 21 , the band released a 33 @-@ second preview of their second single , the eponymous track " The Drug in Me Is You " . The full single was released three days later . The band 's first music video was released for the track on June 28 , and was advertised by The New York Post the week before the album 's release . The album was streamed in its entirety by the band on their official website on July 15 . The Drug in Me Is You was released commercially in the United States on July 26 , 2011 , and was promoted alongside other albums released that week including : Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's Legendary Weapons , Katherine Jenkin 's From the Heart , All Shall Perish 's This is Where It Ends , and others . The album 's third single , " I 'm Not a Vampire " , was released on October 24 with an accompanying music video which features a satirical Celebrity Rehab theme , featuring Jeffree Star . On June 18 , they released their fourth single , " Good Girls , Bad Guys " with an accompanying music video . Their fifth single , " Pick Up the Phone " was released on October 15 , 2012 along with an iPhone 5 giveaway . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The Drug in Me Is You was speculated by news source Perez Hilton to sell anywhere from 17 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 copies in the United States during its first week of sales , placing it close behind predicted debuting chart toppers Eric Church ( Chief ) , Kelly Rowland ( Here I Am ) , and Joss Stone ( <unk> ) . The album ended up selling 18 @,@ 120 copies in its first week in the United States , charting at number 19 on the Billboard 200 . This almost exactly matched the first week sales of Escape the Fate ( 2010 ) , the third album by Radke 's former band , though Escape the Fate only charted at number 25 , seven spots lower than The Drug in Me Is You , despite equal sales . In its second week on sales , The Drug in Me is You dropped about 70 % in the United States , selling 5 @,@ 870 copies . This dropped the album 60 spots to number 79 on the Billboard 200 , and brought total US sales for the album to around 24 @,@ 000 copies . 
 On the Billboard charts , The Drug in Me Is You charted at number two on the Top Hard Rock Albums chart , number three on the Top Alternative Albums and Top Rock Albums charts , number four on the Top Independent Albums chart , and number 12 on the Top Digital Albums chart , for a total of six appearances on the US Billboard charts , including the Billboard 200 . Internationally , the album charted in the United Kingdom , peaking at number 125 on the national chart , as well as number four and number 17 on the UK Top 40 Rock Albums and Top Indie Albums charts , respectively . The album also peaked at number 21 on the Australian National Charts , and number 60 on the national Canadian Albums Chart . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its release , The Drug in Me Is You received generally mixed to positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from critics , the album received an average score of 71 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Alison <unk> of The Aquarian Weekly called the album , a " fun listen and decent starting @-@ off point " , and it " lets Radke get some things off his chest " . The track @-@ by @-@ track breakdown noted the songs having " fast guitars , heavy drums and shred guitar solos " . Kenneth E. <unk> of Arts and Entertainment Playground gave the album a four out of a possible five score overall . <unk> noted the mix of pop and hardcore , stating , " Hardcore and pop crashed together to become hardcore pop ... Much like Nine Inch Nails created the genre industrial rock , Falling in Reverse has created a unique sound ... " He gave a track @-@ by @-@ track review of the album , particularly emphasizing " Raised by Wolves " , " I 'm Not a Vampire " , and " Caught Like a Fly " . Things pointed out included : Michael Baskette 's production , the band 's instrumentation , and Radke 's melodies . The writer noted the repeated attacks at Escape the Fate but disliked the album 's lyrical quality . The resulting score was an 8 @.@ 9 out of 10 possible , with the tracks " I 'm Not a Vampire " , " Good Girls Bad Guys " , " Pick Up the Phone " , all pop tracks , being pointed out as particularly good . A Weekender correspondent noted that the album includes : " Aggressive rock ... metal and electronica into this collective mix of mayhem and definitely keeps listeners wondering what will come next . " Different parts of songs were complimented , such as the " immense hooks ... catchy choruses ... [ and ] vicious breakdowns " , as well as Radke 's lyrics being called " witty and poetic " . The correspondent 's review further states , " Radke has managed to imprint his dramatic personality into every aspect of ' The Drug In Me Is You . ' " 
 Conversely , Allmusic contributor Gregory Heaney gave the album an overall score of three out of a possible five , noting that the lyrics " feel more genuinely personal than his earlier work " , and that " there 's a real sense of urgent catharsis at work " . He concludes , " [ The ] combination of a tight , talented band and a tortured frontman doesn 't necessarily make Falling in Reverse a revelatory band , but is does make The Drug in Me Is You a very solid album . " Molly Walter of The University Leader felt the album was an attempt to recreate Escape the Fate prior to Radke 's departure and noted that " he fell short big time " , calling the album 's music " out of date and overdone " . Walter did comment on Radke 's singing but felt the lyrical content was conceited , concluding the review saying , " Face it , Ronnie , you did not magically turn tragedy into melody . You ’ re just not king of the music scene . " The Jam ! gives 3 @.@ 5 / 5 stars to The Drug in Me Is You and said , " In a world of poseurs , Ronnie Radke is the real deal . The lewd , crude and tattooed punk has survived jail , rehab and being turfed from Escape the Fate . Now he ’ s on the loose and up to no good with a new band — and a CD of post @-@ hardcore anthems that render his foul @-@ mouthed tales of sex , drugs and rock ’ n ’ roll with a mix of metalcore power and pop @-@ punk melody . Lock up everything . " 
 <unk> said ' I ’ m back … ” I can ’ t think of a more appropriate way to flow into the second track “ Tragic Magic . ” Ronnie Radke is most definitely back and he is not afraid to tell you so . ' This fairly slow tempo song obviously takes a few jabs at Radke ’ s former band Escape the Fate , but overall is a solid melodic song , The third track “ The Drug in Me is You ” was the second single and the band ’ s first video and might I add a very entertaining video . “ The Drug in Me is You , ” is a nicely constructed musical performance that is just flat out catchy . To me the song is about something most people can relate to , the battle you have with yourself , with your morality , with your demons . We all know that we can be our own worst enemy and the only person that you truly have to blame in many instances is yourself . “ Trying to consume , the drug in me is you and I ’ m so high on misery can ’ t you see , ” evokes the feeling that you are your own drug , the creator of your misery and if you need to point fingers at someone try looking in the mirror first . “ If we are born to die and we all die to live , then what ’ s the point of living life if life just contradicts ? ” Questions we all ask when we pick ourselves up off the floor and do the only thing we can do , try again . Life is what you make of it , if you have lost yourself , it is up to you to find your way again . I got all profound there for a second , it happens . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks are written and composed by Ronnie Radke , Michael ' Elvis ' Baskette and David <unk> except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for The Drug in Me Is You adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Norwich City F.C. = 
 Norwich City Football Club ( also known as The Canaries or City ) is an English professional football club playing in the Football League Championship . The club is based in Norwich , Norfolk . Norwich returned to the Premier League in 2015 , having first been promoted to the top flight in 1972 . Norwich have won the League Cup twice , in 1962 and 1985 . The club has never won the top flight , but finished third in 1993 . 
 The club was founded in 1902 . Since 1935 , Norwich have played their home games at Carrow Road and have a long @-@ standing and fierce rivalry with East Anglian rivals Ipswich Town , with whom they have contested the East Anglian Derby 134 times since 1902 . 
 The fans ' song " On the Ball , City " is regarded as being the oldest football song in the world which is still in use . The club plays in characteristic yellow and green kits and are <unk> known as The Canaries as a reference to their colours and club badge . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Norwich City F.C. was formed following a meeting at the Criterion Cafe in Norwich on 17 June 1902 and played their first competitive match against Harwich & Parkeston , at Newmarket Road on 6 September 1902 . Following a FA Commission , the club was ousted from the amateur game in 1905 , deemed a professional organisation . Later that year Norwich were elected to play in the Southern League and with increasing crowds , they were forced to leave Newmarket Road in 1908 , moving to The Nest , a disused chalk pit . The club 's original nickname was the Citizens , although this was superseded by 1907 by the more familiar Canaries after the club 's chairman ( who was a keen breeder of canaries ) dubbed his boys ' The Canaries ' and changing their strip to yellow and green . During the First World War , with football suspended and facing spiralling debts , City went into voluntary liquidation on 10 December 1917 . 
 The club was officially reformed on 15 February 1919 – a key figure in the events was Charles Frederick Watling , future Lord Mayor of Norwich and the father of future club chairman , Geoffrey Watling . When , in May 1920 , the Football League formed a third Division , Norwich joined the Third Division for the following season . Their first league fixture , against Plymouth Argyle , on 28 August 1920 , ended in a 1 – 1 draw . The club went on to endure a mediocre decade , finishing no higher than eighth but no lower than 18th . The following decade proved more successful for the club with a club @-@ record victory , 10 – 2 , over Coventry City and promotion as champions to the Second Division in the 1933 – 34 season under the management of Tom Parker . 
 = = = Move to Carrow Road and an FA Cup semi @-@ final = = = 
 With crowds continuing to rise , and with the Football Association raising concerns over the suitability of The Nest , the club considered renovation of the ground , but ultimately decided on a move to Carrow Road . The inaugural match , held on 31 August 1935 , against West Ham United , ended in a 4 – 3 victory to the home team and set a new record attendance of 29 @,@ 779 . The biggest highlight of the following four seasons was the visit of King George VI to Carrow Road on 29 October 1938 . However , the club was relegated to the Third Division at the end of the season . The league was suspended the following season as a result of the outbreak of the Second World War and did not resume until the 1946 – 47 season . City finished this and the following season in 21st place , the poor results forcing the club to apply for re @-@ election to the league . The club narrowly missed out on promotion under the guidance of manager Norman Low in the early 1950s , but following the return of Tom Parker as manager , Norwich finished bottom of the football league in the 1956 – 57 season . 
 The 1958 – 59 season saw Norwich reach the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup as a Third Division side , defeating two First Division sides on the way : Tottenham Hotspur and Matt Busby 's Manchester United . 
 = = = League Cup glory and a place in the First Division = = = 
 In the 1959 – 60 season , Norwich were promoted to the Second Division after finishing second to Southampton , and achieved a fourth @-@ place finish in the 1960 – 61 season . In 1962 Ron Ashman guided Norwich to their first trophy , defeating Rochdale 4 – 0 on aggregate in a two @-@ legged final to win the League Cup . 
 Sixth place in the league was the closest the club came to promotion to the First Division again during the 1960s , but after winning the division in the 1971 – 72 season under manager Ron Saunders , Norwich City reached the highest level of English football for the first time . They made their first appearance at Wembley Stadium in 1973 , losing the League Cup final 1 – 0 to Tottenham Hotspur . 
 = = = The John Bond era = = = 
 Relegation to the Second Division in 1974 came after Saunders had departed and been succeeded by John Bond , but the board of directors kept faith in Bond and were quickly rewarded . A highly successful first season saw promotion back to the First Division and another visit to Wembley , again in the League Cup final , this time losing 1 – 0 to Aston Villa . 
 = = = Promotion , silverware and more cup runs = = = 
 Bond departed to Manchester City in the autumn of 1980 and the club were relegated six months later , but bounced back the following season after finishing third under Bond 's successor Ken Brown . Norwich had also been the beneficiaries of one of English football 's first million @-@ pound transfers when they sold striker Justin Fashanu to Nottingham Forest in August 1981 . 
 The 1984 – 85 season was of mixed fortunes for the club ; under Ken Brown 's guidance , they reached the final of the Football League Cup at Wembley Stadium , having defeated Ipswich Town in the semi @-@ final . In the final , they beat Sunderland 1 – 0 , but in the league both Norwich and Sunderland were relegated to the second tier of English football . This made Norwich the first English club to win a major trophy and suffer relegation in the same season ; something which was not matched until Birmingham City also suffered relegation the season they won the League Cup 26 years later . 
 Norwich were also denied their first foray into Europe with the ban on English clubs after the Heysel Stadium disaster . City bounced back to the top flight by winning the Second Division championship in the 1985 – 86 season . This was the start of what remains in 2012 a club @-@ record nine consecutive seasons in the top division of English football . High league placings in the First Division in 1986 – 87 and 1988 – 89 would have been enough for UEFA Cup qualification , but the ban on English clubs remained . They also had good cup runs during this period , reaching the FA Cup semi @-@ finals in 1989 and again in 1992 . 
 = = = Early success in the Premier League era = = = 
 During 1992 – 93 , the inaugural season of the Premier League , Norwich City quickly emerged as surprise title contenders , before faltering in the final weeks to finish third behind the champions , Manchester United , and runners @-@ up Aston Villa . Their top scorer that season was Mark Robins , who had been signed from Manchester United the previous summer . The following season Norwich played in the UEFA Cup for the first time , losing in the third round to Inter Milan , but defeating Bayern Munich . Winning 2 – 1 , Norwich were the first British team to beat Bayern Munich in the Olympic Stadium . Mike Walker quit as Norwich City manager in January 1994 , to take charge of Everton and was replaced by 36 @-@ year @-@ old first team coach John Deehan who led the club to 12th place in the 1993 – 94 season in the Premier League . Norwich began the 1994 – 95 season well , despite the pre @-@ season loss of top scorer Chris Sutton to Blackburn Rovers for a national record £ <unk> , and by Christmas they were seventh in the league and a UEFA Cup place was a realistic possibility . However , Norwich then went into freefall , won only one of their final 20 league games and slumped to 20th place and relegation , ending a nine @-@ season run in the top flight . 
 = = = The Division One years = = = 
 Shortly before relegation , Deehan resigned as manager and his assistant Gary Megson took over until the end of the season . Martin O 'Neill , who had taken Wycombe Wanderers from the Conference to the Second Division with successive promotions , was appointed as Norwich City manager in the summer of 1995 . He lasted just six months in the job before resigning after a dispute with chairman Robert Chase over money to strengthen the squad . Soon after , Chase stepped down after protests from supporters , who complained that he kept selling the club 's best players and was to blame for their relegation . Chase 's majority <unk> was bought by Geoffrey Watling . 
 English television cook Delia Smith and husband Michael Wynn @-@ Jones took over the majority of Norwich City 's shares from Watling in 1996 , and Mike Walker was re @-@ appointed as the club 's manager . He was unable to repeat the success achieved during his first spell and was sacked two seasons later with Norwich mid @-@ table in Division One . Nigel Worthington took over as Norwich City manager in December 2000 following an unsuccessful two years for the club under Bruce Rioch and then Bryan Hamilton . He had been on the coaching staff under Hamilton who resigned with the club 20th in the First Division and in real danger of relegation to the third tier of English football for the first time since the 1960s . Worthington avoided the threat of relegation and , the following season , led City to a playoff final at the Millennium Stadium , which Norwich lost against Birmingham City on penalties . 
 = = = Return to the Premier League = = = 
 The 2003 – 04 campaign saw the club win the First Division title , finishing eight points clear of second @-@ placed West Bromwich Albion and returned to the top flight for the first time since 1995 . For much of the 2004 – 05 season however , the club struggled and , despite beating Manchester United 2 – 0 towards the end of the season , a last day 6 – 0 defeat away to Fulham condemned them to relegation . The club finished in ninth place in The Championship in the 2005 – 06 season and , as results in the 2006 – 07 season went against City , manager Nigel Worthington was sacked in October 2006 , directly after a 4 – 1 defeat by Burnley . On 16 October 2006 , Norwich revealed that former City player Peter Grant had left West Ham United to become the new manager , and in February 2007 , Grant replaced assistant Doug Livermore with his fellow Scot , Jim Duffy . Grant 's side struggled for most of the season and made a poor start to the 2007 – 08 season , with only two wins by mid October ; following a 1 – 0 defeat at fellow @-@ strugglers Queens Park Rangers , Grant left the club by " mutual consent " on 9 October 2007 . On 30 October 2007 , former Newcastle United manager Glenn Roeder was confirmed as Grant 's replacement . Roeder kept Norwich in the Championship with a 3 – 0 win over Queens Park Rangers , Norwich 's penultimate game of the season . 
 = = = Relegation and revival since 2009 = = = 
 On 14 January 2009 it was announced that Roeder had been relieved of his first team duties after 60 games in charge , and just 20 victories . A week later , Bryan Gunn was appointed as manager until the end of the season , but he was unable to prevent the club from being relegated on 3 May 2009 , after a 4 – 2 defeat away at already relegated Charlton Athletic . Following their relegation , their first game of the season resulted in a shock 7 – 1 home defeat against East Anglian rivals Colchester United . This was the club 's heaviest ever home defeat , succeeding a record that had stood since 1946 . Two fans entered the pitch and ripped up their season tickets after just 22 minutes when the team were already 4 – 0 down , and Gunn was sacked six days later . 
 On 18 August 2009 , Paul Lambert was announced as the new manager , leaving his post at Colchester , and nine months later led Norwich to promotion back to the Championship as League One Champions , after a single season in League One . The following season saw Norwich promoted to the Premier League , finishing second in the table behind QPR and completing the first back @-@ to @-@ back promotions from the 3rd tier to the 1st since Manchester City in 2000 . 
 The club finished in 12th place in their first season back in the Premier League . Manager Paul Lambert resigned within a month of the season 's close to take up the vacant managerial spot at league rivals Aston Villa , and was replaced by Chris Hughton . The 2012 – 13 season started poorly with a 5 – 0 defeat to Fulham and a bad run of form that was followed by a club record unbeaten run in the Premier League . A 1 – 0 home defeat to Luton Town on 26 January 2013 resulted in Norwich becoming the first English top @-@ flight team to lose a FA Cup tie to a non @-@ league side in 24 years . Norwich secured their third year in the Premier League with consecutive victories in the last two games of the season , to finish 11th in the league . However they were relegated back to the Championship after finishing 18th in the 2013 – 14 season . After a mediocre first half of the 2014 – 15 season , Neil Adams resigned which paved the way for the appointment of then Hamilton Academical manager Alex Neil in January 2015 . The appointment reinvigorated Norwich 's season and after narrowly missing out on automatic promotion back to the Premier League , victory in the 2015 Championship playoff final secured an immediate return to the top division of English football . This was only temporary relief , however , as at the end of the next season they were relegated again . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Norwich City 's nickname , " The Canaries " , has long influenced the team 's colours and crest . Originally , the club was nicknamed the Citizens ( " Cits " for short ) , and played in light blue and white halved shirts , although the halves were inconsistent ; " the blue was sometimes on the left hand side of the shirt and sometimes on the right . " The earliest known recorded link between the club and canaries , comes in an interview recorded in the Eastern Daily Press with newly appointed manager , John Bowman in April 1905 . The paper quotes him saying " Well I knew of the City 's existence ... I have ... heard of the canaries . " " This as far as we can tell is the first time that the popular pastime of the day ie ... rearing ... canaries was linked with Norwich City FC ... the club still played in blue and white , and would continue to do so for another two seasons . " But the city of Norwich had long connections with canaries owing to its 15th and 16th century links to Flemish weavers who had imported the birds to the Low Countries from the Dutch colonies in the Caribbean . 
 By February 1907 , the nickname Canaries had come more into vogue ; thoughts that an FA Cup tie against West Bromwich Albion ( nicknamed " Throstles " after a bird ) was " a bird <unk> contest " were dismissed by the polymath C.B. Fry as " humbug " but Bowman and Fry 's colleagues in the national press increasingly referred to the team as Canaries . 
 The following season , to match the nickname , City played for the first time in Canary livery ; " yellow shirts with green collars and cuffs . One paper produced the quote ' The Cits are dead but the Canaries are very much alive ' . " Apart from the obvious colour link , a canary may seem an odd choice ; however , many English football clubs have adopted small birds as emblems that symbolise agility and deftness around the field . 
 While the home colours of yellow and green remain to this day , the away colours have varied since introduction . For example , the away kit for the 2012 – 13 season was black shirts and shorts . 
 A simple canary badge was first adopted in 1922 . The current club badge consists of a canary resting on a football with a stylised version of the City of Norwich arms in the top left corner . For the club 's centenary celebrations in 2002 , a special crest was designed . It featured two canaries looking left and right , and a ribbon noting the centenary . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Norwich City F.C. played at Newmarket Road from 1902 to 1908 , with a record attendance of 10 @,@ 366 against Sheffield Wednesday in a second round FA Cup match in 1908 . Following a dispute over the conditions of renting the Newmarket Road ground , in 1908 , the club moved to a new home in a converted disused chalk pit in Rosary Road which became known as " The Nest " . By the 1930s , the ground capacity was proving insufficient for the growing crowds and in 1935 the club moved to its current home in Carrow Road . The original stadium , " the largest construction job in the city since the building of Norwich Castle ... was " miraculously " built in just 82 days ... it was referred to [ by club officials ] as ' The eighth wonder of the world ' " An aerial photograph from August 1935 shows three sides of open terracing and a covered stand , with a Colman 's Mustard advertisement painted on its roof , visible only from the air . Another photograph , taken on a match day that same season , shows that despite the era 's limited car ownership , a parking area was provided at the ground . 
 Floodlights were erected at the ground in 1956 whose £ 9 @,@ 000 costs nearly sent the club into bankruptcy but the success in the 1959 FA Cup secured the financial status of the club and allowed for a cover to be built over the South Stand , which was itself replaced in 2003 when a new 7 @,@ 000 seat South stand , subsequently renamed the Jarrold Stand , was built in its place . 
 1963 saw the record attendance for Carrow Road , with a crowd of 43 @,@ 984 for a 6th round FA Cup match against Leicester City , but in the wake of the Ibrox disaster in 1971 , safety licences were required by clubs which resulted in the capacity being drastically reduced to around 20 @,@ 000 . A two @-@ tier terrace was built at the River End and soon after seats began to replace the terraces . By 1979 the stadium had a capacity of 28 @,@ 392 with seats for 12 @,@ 675 . A fire in 1984 partially destroyed one of the stands which eventually led to its complete demolition and replacement by 1987 of a new City Stand , which chairman Robert Chase described as " Coming to a football match within the City Stand is very much like going to the theatre – the only difference being that our stage is covered with grass " . After the Hillsborough disaster in 1989 and the subsequent outcome of the Taylor Report in 1990 , the stadium was converted to all @-@ seater with the corners being filled . Today , Carrow Road is an all @-@ seater stadium , with a capacity of just over 27 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 While much of the support that the club enjoys is local , there are a number of exile fan clubs , notably in London and stretching from Scandinavia to countries further afield such as the United Arab Emirates , Hong Kong , Australia and the United States . 
 The fans ' song , On the Ball , City , is the oldest football song in the world still in use today ; the song is in fact older than the club itself having probably been penned for Norwich Teachers or Caley 's FC in the 1890s and adapted for Norwich City . Although the first use of the tune and song is disputed , it had been adopted by 1902 and it remains in use today in part if not the whole . The chorus is : 
 Locally , much is made of the informal title " Pride of Anglia " . Fans variously claim the title for either winning the East Anglian Derby , finishing highest in the league , having the better current league position , having the more successful club history or for reasons without any apparent logical basis . The club 's main local rival is Ipswich Town . When Norwich and Ipswich meet it is known as the ' East Anglian Derby ' , or , informally , as the ' Old Farm Derby ' – a comic reference to the ' Old Firm Derby ' played between Scottish teams Celtic and Rangers . Over the 134 matches played against Ipswich since 1902 , Ipswich has the better record , having won 45 % of the matches to Norwich 's 37 % . Another commonly employed measure for " Pride of Anglia " , and one that encompasses all of the East Anglian teams is to dub the side finishing as the highest placed East Anglian team in the Football League as the Pride of Anglia . 
 The club also maintains a healthy celebrity support with celebrity cook Delia Smith and comedian Stephen Fry both having moved from fans of the club to running it . Actor Hugh Jackman is also a fan of the club , having been taken to Carrow Road as a child by his English mother , though he turned down an opportunity to become an investor in the club in 2010 . BT Sport Presenter Jake Humphrey , who was born in Peterborough but moved to Norwich with his family at the age of nine , is another celebrity supporter . Also Sky Sports presenter Simon Thomas , who is Vice @-@ President of the Norwich City Supporters Trust , Norfolk @-@ born musician , model and media personality Myleene Klass , singer Sophie Ellis Bextor , and Labour ex @-@ politician Ed Balls . Journalist and broadcaster Sir David Frost OBE also declared his love for The Canaries during his lifetime . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 Norwich City FC is a public limited company that , in 2003 , comprised approximately 8 @,@ 000 individual shareholdings . Since purchasing their shares from Geoffrey Watling , Delia Smith and husband Michael Wynn @-@ Jones have been joint majority shareholders . 
 At the 2006 – 07 Norwich City FC Annual General Meeting ( on 18 January 2007 ) Smith and Wynn @-@ Jones announced that they would be open to offers to buy their majority stake @-@ holding in the club . However , they made clear that any prospective buyer would have to invest heavily in the squad , with regards to team improving . 
 On 8 May 2007 the football club announced that Andrew and Sharon Turner had bought out all 5 @,@ 000 shares belonging to former Board member , Barry Skipper and had given the club an interest @-@ free loan of £ 2m . Mr and Mrs Turner are owners and directors of personal finance company Central Trust . 
 During July 2008 Peter Cullum declared that he was interested in a takeover of the club , and pledged that he would invest £ 20m for enhancement of the playing squad . On 8 July the EDP reported that Delia Smith and the board had invited Peter Cullum for talks . Reports later stated that the talks had been terminated with immediate effect , and no deal was to be reached . 
 On 2 September 2008 , Andrew and Sharon Turner announced that they were leaving the football club 's board of directors . This left a £ 2 million hole in Norwich City 's budget . On 4 September 2008 , Delia Smith and Michael Wynn @-@ Jones announced that they would be injecting £ 2 million , avoiding financial problems for the club . 
 The 2011 Annual General Meeting , attended by over 500 shareholders , saw joint majority shareholder Delia Smith and Stephan Phillips re @-@ elected as directors and new director Stephen Fry formally re @-@ elected having joined the Board the previous August . 
 On 27 December 2015 , former Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls was appointed Chairman . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Kevin Keelan holds the record for Norwich appearances , having played 673 first @-@ team matches between 1963 and 1980 . Ralph Hunt holds the record for the most goals scored in a season , 31 in the 1955 – 56 season in Division Three ( South ) , with Johnny Gavin the top scorer over a career – 122 between 1948 and 1955 . Mark Bowen holds the club record for most international caps , with 35 for Wales . 
 The club 's widest victory margin in the league was their 10 – 2 win against Coventry City in the Division Three ( South ) in 1930 . Their heaviest defeat in the league was 10 – 2 against Swindon Town in 1908 in the Southern Football League . 
 Norwich 's record home attendance is 43 @,@ 984 for a sixth round FA Cup match against Leicester City on 30 March 1963 . With the introduction of regulations enforcing all @-@ seater stadiums , it is unlikely that this record will be beaten in the foreseeable future . 
 The highest transfer fee received for a Norwich player is £ 10 million , from Southampton for Nathan Redmond in June 2016 , while the most spent by the club on a player was the signing of Ricky van Wolfswinkel for £ 8 @.@ 5 million ( € 10 million ) from Sporting Lisbon . This transfer fee was then equaled by the transfer of Steven Naismith from Everton in January 2016 . 
 The club 's highest league finish was third in the FA Premier League in 1992 – 93 . The 2013 – 14 season was Norwich 's 24th in the top flight of English football . The club has won the League Cup twice ( most recently in 1985 ) and reached the FA Cup semi @-@ final three times , most recently in 1992 . Norwich have taken part in European competition just once , reaching the third round of the UEFA Cup in 1993 – 94 and are the only British side to beat Bayern Munich in the Olympic Stadium . 
 = = Club sponsors = = 
 Source : 
 Between 2006 and 2008 the club was sponsored by airline Flybe but on 26 April 2008 , it was announced that the company was stepping down as the main sponsor . On 29 April 2008 it was announced that Aviva which has offices in the city and is the parent company of the former Norwich Union , would be the new shirt sponsor , having signed a three @-@ year contract . In 2009 the deal was extended until the end of the 2011 – 12 season . It was further extended in 2012 by four more years to the end of the 2015 – 16 season . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First @-@ team squad = = = 
 As of 19 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = = Out on loan = = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Notable players = = = 
 Past ( and present ) players who are the subjects of Wikipedia articles can be found here 
 During the club 's centenary season , a " Hall of Fame " was created , honouring 100 former players chosen by fan vote . Further players have been inducted into the Norwich City Hall of Fame in 2003 , 2006 and 2012 . 
 = = = Greatest Ever Norwich City XI = = = 
 In 2008 , supporters cast votes to determine the greatest ever Norwich City team . 
 Kevin Keelan ( 1963 – 80 ) 
 Ian Culverhouse ( 1985 – 94 ) 
 Steve Bruce ( 1984 – 87 ) 
 Duncan Forbes ( 1968 – 81 ) 
 Mark Bowen ( 1987 – 96 ) 
 Darren Huckerby ( 2003 – 08 ) 
 Ian Crook ( 1986 – 97 ) 
 Martin Peters ( 1975 – 80 ) 
 Darren Eadie ( 1993 – 99 ) 
 Chris Sutton ( 1991 – 94 ) 
 Iwan Roberts ( 1997 – 2004 ) 
 = = = Players of the Year = = = 
 For a more detailed list of these winners of the Barry Butler trophy , see Norwich City Players of the Year . 
 = = = Captains = = = 
 For a list of Norwich City captains , see Norwich City captains 
 = = Club staff = = 
 = = Managers = = 
 As of 15 May 2016 . Not including caretaker managers . Only professional , competitive matches are counted . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Norwich City have won a number of honours , including the following : 
 = = = League = = = 
 Football League Second Division / First Division / Championship ( Level 2 ) 
 Winners ( 3 ) : 1971 – 72 , 1985 – 86 , 2003 – 04 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 2010 – 11 
 Football League First Division / Championship play @-@ offs 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2015 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 2002 
 Football League Third Division / One ( Level 3 ) 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1933 – 34 , 2009 – 10 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1959 – 60 
 = = = Cup = = = 
 League Cup 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1962 , 1985 
 Runners @-@ up ( 2 ) : 1973 , 1975 
 Friendship Trophy 
 Each time they meet , Norwich and Sunderland contest the Friendship Trophy , an honour dating back to the camaraderie forged between fans of the two clubs at the time of the 1985 League Cup final that they contested . Sunderland are the current holders having beaten Norwich 3 – 0 at Carrow Road on 16 April 2016 in the 2015 @-@ 16 Premier League . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In the 2001 film Mike Bassett : England Manager , the eponymous hero , played by Ricky Tomlinson , rises to prominence as a result of success as manager of Norwich City , having won the ' Mr Clutch Cup ' . The celebratory scenes of the open @-@ top bus ride around the city ( right ) were actually shot in St Albans , Hertfordshire , rather than Norwich . 
 In 1972 the Children 's Film Foundation released a movie called The Boy Who Turned Yellow , about a boy living in London who supports Norwich City . In the film , he and everyone and everything else on his tube train are turned yellow . That night he is visited by a yellow alien called Nick , short for electronic , who teaches him all about electricity . The link to the football club is used to explain why the boy already has so many yellow things in his bedroom . 
 = = Norwich City Ladies = = 
 Norwich City Ladies is the women 's football club affiliated to Norwich City . They are managed by Scott Emmerson and compete in the Women 's South East Combination League , in the third tier of English women 's football . According to Norwich City , " They are the official women 's team of Norwich City Football Club and are linked to the Girls ' Centre of Excellence programme " . Consequently , 95 % of the club 's players have progressed from the youth ranks . Norwich City LFC play their home games at Plantation Park , <unk> , Norwich . 
 = Voltage doubler = 
 A voltage doubler is an electronic circuit which charges capacitors from the input voltage and switches these charges in such a way that , in the ideal case , exactly twice the voltage is produced at the output as at its input . 
 The simplest of these circuits are a form of rectifier which take an AC voltage as input and outputs a doubled DC voltage . The switching elements are simple diodes and they are driven to switch state merely by the alternating voltage of the input . DC @-@ to @-@ DC voltage doublers cannot switch in this way and require a driving circuit to control the switching . They frequently also require a switching element that can be controlled directly , such as a transistor , rather than relying on the voltage across the switch as in the simple AC @-@ to @-@ DC case . 
 Voltage doublers are a variety of voltage multiplier circuit . Many , but not all , voltage doubler circuits can be viewed as a single stage of a higher order multiplier : cascading identical stages together achieves a greater voltage multiplication . 
 = = Voltage doubling rectifiers = = 
 = = = Villard circuit = = = 
 The Villard circuit , due to Paul Ulrich Villard , consists simply of a capacitor and a diode . While it has the great benefit of simplicity , its output has very poor ripple characteristics . Essentially , the circuit is a diode clamp circuit . The capacitor is charged on the negative half cycles to the peak AC voltage ( <unk> ) . The output is the superposition of the input AC waveform and the steady DC of the capacitor . The effect of the circuit is to shift the DC value of the waveform . The negative peaks of the AC waveform are " clamped " to 0 V ( actually − VF , the small forward bias voltage of the diode ) by the diode , therefore the positive peaks of the output waveform are <unk> . The peak @-@ to @-@ peak ripple is an enormous <unk> and cannot be smoothed unless the circuit is effectively turned into one of the more sophisticated forms . This is the circuit ( with diode reversed ) used to supply the negative high voltage for the magnetron in a microwave oven . 
 = = = Greinacher circuit = = = 
 The Greinacher voltage doubler is a significant improvement over the Villard circuit for a small cost in additional components . The ripple is much reduced , nominally zero under open @-@ circuit load conditions , but when current is being drawn depends on the resistance of the load and the value of the capacitors used . The circuit works by following a Villard cell stage with what is in essence a peak detector or envelope detector stage . The peak detector cell has the effect of removing most of the ripple while preserving the peak voltage at the output . The Greinacher circuit is also commonly known as the half @-@ wave voltage doubler . 
 This circuit was first invented by Heinrich Greinacher in 1913 ( published 1914 ) to provide the 200 – 300 V he needed for his newly invented <unk> , the 110 V AC supplied by the Zurich power stations of the time being insufficient . He later extended this idea into a cascade of multipliers in 1920 . This cascade of Greinacher cells is often inaccurately referred to as a Villard cascade . It is also called a Cockcroft – Walton multiplier after the particle accelerator machine built by John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton , who independently discovered the circuit in 1932 . The concept in this topology can be extended to a voltage <unk> circuit by using two Greinacher cells of opposite polarities driven from the same AC source . The output is taken across the two individual outputs . As with a bridge circuit , it is impossible to simultaneously ground the input and output of this circuit . 
 = = = Bridge circuit = = = 
 The Delon circuit uses a bridge topology for voltage doubling ; consequently it is also called a full @-@ wave voltage doubler . This form of circuit was , at one time , commonly found in cathode ray tube television sets where it was used to provide an <unk> voltage supply . Generating voltages in excess of 5 kV with a transformer has safety issues in terms of domestic equipment and in any case is uneconomical . However , black and white television sets required an <unk> of 10 kV and colour sets even more . Voltage doublers were used to either double the voltage on an <unk> winding on the mains transformer or were applied to the waveform on the line flyback coils . 
 The circuit consists of two half @-@ wave peak detectors , functioning in exactly the same way as the peak detector cell in the Greinacher circuit . Each of the two peak detector cells operates on opposite half @-@ cycles of the incoming waveform . Since their outputs are in series , the output is twice the peak input voltage . 
 = = Switched capacitor circuits = = 
 It is possible to use the simple diode @-@ capacitor circuits described above to double the voltage of a DC source by preceding the voltage doubler with a chopper circuit . In effect , this converts the DC to AC before application to the voltage doubler . More efficient circuits can be built by driving the switching devices from an external clock so that both functions , the chopping and multiplying , are achieved simultaneously . Such circuits are known as switched capacitor circuits . This approach is especially useful in low @-@ voltage battery @-@ powered applications where integrated circuits require a voltage supply greater than the battery can deliver . Frequently , a clock signal is readily available on board the integrated circuit and little or no additional circuitry is needed to generate it . 
 Conceptually , perhaps the simplest switched capacitor configuration is that shown schematically in figure 5 . Here two capacitors are simultaneously charged to the same voltage in parallel . The supply is then switched off and the capacitors are switched into series . The output is taken from across the two capacitors in series resulting in an output double the supply voltage . There are many different switching devices that could be used in such a circuit , but in integrated circuits MOSFET devices are frequently employed . 
 Another basic concept is the charge pump , a version of which is shown schematically in figure 6 . The charge pump capacitor , CP , is first charged to the input voltage . It is then switched to charging the output capacitor , CO , in series with the input voltage resulting in CO eventually being charged to twice the input voltage . It may take several cycles before the charge pump succeeds in fully charging CO but after steady state has been reached it is only necessary for CP to pump a small amount of charge equivalent to that being supplied to the load from CO . While CO is disconnected from the charge pump it partially discharges into the load resulting in ripple on the output voltage . This ripple is smaller for higher clock frequencies since the discharge time is shorter , and is also easier to filter . Alternatively , the capacitors can be made smaller for a given ripple specification . The practical maximum clock frequency in integrated circuits is typically in the hundreds of kilohertz . 
 = = = Dickson charge pump = = = 
 The Dickson charge pump , or Dickson multiplier , consists of a cascade of diode / capacitor cells with the bottom plate of each capacitor driven by a clock pulse train . The circuit is a modification of the Cockcroft @-@ Walton multiplier but takes a DC input with the clock trains providing the switching signal instead of the AC input . The Dickson multiplier normally requires that alternate cells are driven from clock pulses of opposite phase . However , since a voltage doubler , shown in figure 7 , requires only one stage of multiplication only one clock signal is required . 
 The Dickson multiplier is frequently employed in integrated circuits where the supply voltage ( from a battery for instance ) is lower than that required by the circuitry . It is advantageous in integrated circuit manufacture that all the semiconductor components are of basically the same type . MOSFETs are commonly the standard logic block in many integrated circuits . For this reason the diodes are often replaced by this type of transistor , but wired to function as a diode - an arrangement called a diode @-@ wired MOSFET . Figure 8 shows a Dickson voltage doubler using diode @-@ wired n @-@ channel enhancement type MOSFETs . 
 There are many variations and improvements to the basic Dickson charge pump . Many of these are concerned with reducing the effect of the transistor drain @-@ source voltage . This can be very significant if the input voltage is small , such as a low @-@ voltage battery . With ideal switching elements the output is an integral multiple of the input ( two for a doubler ) but with a single @-@ cell battery as the input source and MOSFET switches the output will be far less than this value since much of the voltage will be dropped across the transistors . For a circuit using discrete components the Schottky diode would be a better choice of switching element for its extremely low voltage drop in the on state . However , integrated circuit designers prefer to use the easily available MOSFET and compensate for its inadequacies with increased circuit complexity . 
 As an example , an alkaline battery cell has a nominal voltage of 1 @.@ 5 V. A voltage doubler using ideal switching elements with zero voltage drop will output double this , namely 3 @.@ 0 V. However , the drain @-@ source voltage drop of a diode @-@ wired MOSFET when it is in the on state must be at least the gate threshold voltage which might typically be 0 @.@ 9 V. This voltage " doubler " will only succeed in raising the output voltage by about 0 @.@ 6 V to 2 @.@ 1 V. If the drop across the final smoothing transistor is also taken into account the circuit may not be able to increase the voltage at all without using multiple stages . A typical Schottky diode , on the other hand , might have an on state voltage of 0 @.@ 3 V. A doubler using this Schottky diode will result in a voltage of 2 @.@ 7 V , or at the output after the smoothing diode , 2 @.@ 4 V. 
 = = = Cross @-@ coupled switched capacitors = = = 
 Cross @-@ coupled switched capacitor circuits come into their own for very low input voltages . Wireless battery driven equipment such as pagers , bluetooth devices and the like may require a single @-@ cell battery to continue to supply power when it has discharged to under a volt . 
 When clock <formula> is low transistor Q2 is turned off . At the same time clock <formula> is high turning on transistor Q1 resulting in capacitor C1 being charged to Vin . When <formula> goes high the top plate of C1 is pushed up to twice Vin . At the same time switch S1 closes so this voltage appears at the output . At the same time Q2 is turned on allowing C2 to charge . On the next half cycle the roles will be reversed : <formula> will be low , <formula> will be high , S1 will open and S2 will close . Thus , the output is supplied with <unk> alternately from each side of the circuit . 
 The loss is low in this circuit because there are no diode @-@ wired MOSFETs and their associated threshold voltage problems . The circuit also has the advantage that the ripple frequency is doubled because there are effectively two voltage doublers both supplying the output from out of phase clocks . The primary disadvantage of this circuit is that stray capacitances are much more significant than with the Dickson multiplier and account for the larger part of the losses in this circuit . 
 = Clifton Down railway station = 
 Clifton Down railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and serves the district of Clifton in Bristol , England . It is 3 @.@ 9 miles ( 6 @.@ 3 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is CFN . The station has two platforms , each serving trains in one direction only . As of 2015 it is managed by Great Western Railway , which is the third franchise to be responsible for the station since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly a train every forty minutes in each direction between Bristol Temple Meads and Avonmouth . 
 The station was opened in 1874 by the Great Western and Midland Railways as part of the Clifton Extension Railway , designed to connect the port of Avonmouth to the national rail network . The station had a large gothic revival building on the Bristol @-@ bound platform , with smaller passenger facilities on the opposite platform and a goods yard beyond . Between 1903 and 1930 the station employed an average of 22 staff . Excursion trains were a regular sight , bringing people to nearby Bristol Zoo . 
 The Severn Beach Line declined over the latter half of the twentieth century , with passenger numbers falling significantly . Goods services at Clifton Down ended in 1965 , and all staff were withdrawn in 1967 . The line was largely reduced to single track in 1970 , leaving Clifton Down as one of the few passing places . Services had decreased to ten per day each direction by 2005 , but have since increased to twenty @-@ four trains per day . 
 = = Description = = 
 Clifton Down railway station is on the Severn Beach Line , serving the district of Clifton in Bristol . The station is located on the busy shopping street Whiteladies Road , next door to a shopping centre . The wider area is largely residential . Bristol Zoo is under a mile away . The station is located 3 miles 72 chains ( 6 @.@ 3 km ) along the line from Bristol Temple Meads , and 9 miles 51 chains ( 15 @.@ 5 km ) from Severn Beach . It is the fifth station from Temple Meads . There are two running lines , roughly oriented east @-@ west , but curving towards the north at both ends . There are two 120 @-@ yard ( 110 m ) -long platforms to the north and south of the running lines , connected by a footbridge at the east end . The southern platform , Platform 1 , serves trains towards Avonmouth , the northern platform , Platform 2 , serves trains towards Temple Meads . The station is in an enclosed cutting , and runs under the road to the east . To the west is the Clifton Down Tunnel under Clifton Down , from which the station takes its name . The station is one of the few double track sections of the Severn Beach Line , and so is often used as a passing place . 
 Facilities at the station are minimal – shelters , benches and timetable information are provided . Customer help points give live train information . There is no ticket office , and no self @-@ service ticket machines which can be used to buy or collect tickets . The station car park is to the north of the platforms , with 40 spaces . There is step @-@ free access to the northern platform from the car park , and a set of steps from the footbridge . There is also stepped access to the footbridge from the south , and a ramp down to the southern platform . There is no taxi rank , but there are bus stops on Whiteladies Road . Cycle storage is available on the platform . 
 The disused station building 's bricked @-@ up windows and doors feature artwork of animals created by students at Redland Green School , and promote links with nearby Bristol Zoo . The building is accessible from the car park , and houses an Australian @-@ themed pub . It is a Grade II listed building . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Clifton Down are all operated by Great Western Railway , mainly using diesel Class 150 Sprinter units , occasionally supplemented by Class 153 Super Sprinter and Class 158 Express Sprinter units . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . Monday to Friday , three trains every two hours run from Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth , with one extended to St Andrew 's Road and Severn Beach , giving a service at Clifton Down of one train in each direction every 40 minutes . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service , but more trains continue to Severn Beach . Sunday sees a roughly hourly service to and from Bristol , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period , when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . 
 As Clifton Down is the Severn Beach Line 's main passing point , trains to Avonmouth usually arrive at the same time as trains to Bristol Temple Meads . Most trains call at all stations , but some services omit Lawrence Hill . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is roughly 20 minutes , and 14 minutes to Avonmouth . In 2012 , the single fare to Temple Meads was £ 1 @.@ 50 , and £ 3 return for the whole line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Joint railway era = = = 
 The Clifton Extension Railway was opened from Narroways Hill Junction to Clifton Down as a joint venture between the Great Western Railway and Midland Railway to connect their main lines to the Bristol Port Railway and Pier in the Avon Gorge . Clifton Down railway station opened on 1 October 1874 , when passenger services began , and was for a while the terminal station . It was the second station along the line from Narroways Hill Junction where the Extension Railway left the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway 's main line to Wales . It remained the second station until Redland was opened in 1897 . The line was built at 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) standard gauge . 
 The station was built by Messrs Baker & Son of Canon 's Marsh , Bristol . The buildings , constructed in a Gothic Revival style , cost £ 20 @,@ 000 , with the main buildings on the northern platform . There was a large booking hall with sizeable fireplaces at each end . Pointed ground floor doorways gave access to the hall , which was adjacent to the booking offices and waiting rooms . It is believed that the station master 's lodgings in this building were never used as such . A wide carriage drive led down to the northern platform , which was linked to the southern platform by a glass @-@ covered footbridge . There was originally no waiting room on the southern platform , but one was built in October 1898 . The platforms were mostly covered by " ridge and furrow " glass roofs , supported by iron columns . The station was flooded in August 1883 , which resulted in the installation of extra drainage . There was a large goods yard to the south of the platforms , accessed from the west , with a 28 @-@ lever signal box at the west end of the southern platform . 
 The initial service provided at Clifton Down by the Midland Railway was to Fishponds and Mangotsfield , where passengers could change for services to Bath , Birmingham and other Midland destinations . The Great Western provided services from Clifton Down to Bristol Temple Meads , the city 's major station , where passengers could change for trains to London , Exeter and Wales , among others . The Great Western also provided occasional through services to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . There were a total of 23 trains in each direction between the two companies Monday @-@ Saturday . On Sundays , there was no Midland service , but seven Great Western trains . The fare to Temple Meads was 6d first @-@ class and 3d third @-@ class . The Clifton Down Tunnel , the final link to the Bristol Port Railway and Pier , was opened in 1877 , initially allowing freight trains to reach Avonmouth Docks . It was not until 1885 that it was cleared for passenger use , which allowed services to Avonmouth via Sea Mills and Shirehampton . There was a trial Midland service between Bristol St Philip 's and Avonmouth in September 1885 , but this was ended after a month . In 1886 , the daily Great Western service was six trains each way between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , 24 trains from Clifton Down to Temple Meads and 26 the other direction . The Midland provided 12 services from Clifton Down to Fishponds , and 11 back . 
 Clifton Down had large numbers of excursion trains , both arriving and departing . There were regular trains during the summer season to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Clevedon , as well as to Weymouth , London and , more locally , football specials to Ashton Gate . There were also regular excursion trains , known as " Monkey Specials " for visitors to the nearby Bristol Zoo . In 1886 , the Bath and West Show being held on Durdham Down generated some 33 @,@ 000 extra passengers over five days , with direct services from Bath Green Park and an extra 16 services from Temple Meads . The Show was held on Durdham Down again in 1921 , temporarily increasing traffic from Temple Meads by 12 trains per day , although there was increased competition from local bus services . The station also received visits from King Edward VII in 1902 and 1908 ( the former as a prince ) , and from a delegation of British Empire Prime Ministers in 1907 . 
 The line had initially been managed by the Clifton Extension Railway Joint Committee , but in 1894 the line 's management was passed to the Great Western & Midland Railways Joint Committee . In 1909 , the station master at Redland was withdrawn , his duties incorporated into the job of Clifton Down station master . In 1910 , Clifton Down saw 17 Great Western services from Avonmouth to Temple Meads and 15 the other way , a further 20 trains each day operating between Clifton and Temple Meads , and 13 Midland trains each way between Clifton and Fishponds or Mangotsfield . Midland services were suspended from 1 January 1917 to 15 May 1919 due to the First World War . The Hotwells section of the Bristol Port Railway and Pier closed in 1922 , so to compensate , an additional six trains were provided from Clifton Down to Avonmouth , and four back . 
 In 1923 , grouping resulted in the Midland Railway being absorbed into the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) , and the line continued in a joint arrangement between the Great Western and the LMS . From 1924 , many trains to Avonmouth were extended to Severn Beach , a growing seaside resort , and some on to Pilning , then back to Temple Meads via Patchway . Between 1903 and 1930 the station employed an average of 22 staff , and in 1926 the station master assumed control over Montpelier as well . The platform canopies were partially removed in the 1930s , and bomb @-@ damage during the Bristol Blitz saw them cut back further . The war also saw the end of services to Fishponds and Mangotsfield , the last operating on 31 March 1941 . By 1947 , just before the start of the British Rail era , there were 33 services each direction between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , and 18 on Sundays . Some trains made circular trips to and from Temple Meads via Clifton Down and Henbury or Pilning . 
 = = = British Rail and privatisation = = = 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , services at Clifton Down came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways , and there remained a strong staff presence in 1958 , with a station master , chief booking clerk , four other clerks , six porters , a shunter , a checker and a weighbridge assistant . Passenger numbers however dropped sharply in 1961 as the result of a fare increase , and so in 1962 a new reduced timetable was enacted , which lost more passengers , and saw the withdrawal of a special schoolchildren 's service . A year later in 1963 , the Beeching report suggested that all services along the Severn Beach Line be withdrawn . Following meetings with staff , it was decided to keep the line open to Severn Beach , but to close the section to Pilning , and also end services via Henbury . These services duly ended , and in July 1965 the goods yard at Clifton Down also closed . The line however was still threatened , and on 10 February 1967 it was announced that all services between Stapleton Road and Severn Beach would be discontinued . An enquiry followed , and in June that year the decision was reversed , on the condition that tickets be issued on the trains . Thus , on 17 July 1967 , all stations along the line , including Clifton Down , had their staff withdrawn . The decrease of costs allowed a reduction of ticket prices , but the line was still under threat until in June 1969 it was decided that the line 's closure would result in significant hardship , and so a grant was allocated to ensure continued services . Service levels however still declined : though the " Monkey Specials " were still going strong into the 1960s , with 340 @,@ 000 excursion passengers arriving between 1958 and 1966 , the closure of many of the Welsh Valley Lines and the construction of the Severn Bridge led to their demise in the early 1970s . Most of the Severn Beach Line was reduced to single track in late 1970 , leaving Clifton Down as one of the few passing places . The glass platform canopies were completely removed in May 1971 , and the glass @-@ covered footbridge was also removed , leaving a set of steps from Whiteladies road as the only access to the southern platform . In the late 1970s and the early 1980s , the Clifton Down Shopping Centre was built over most of the goods yard , the rest covered by a housing development . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Clifton Down passed to Regional Railways . A programme of refurbishment was carried out in 1992 / 3 , including the installation of a new metal footbridge and ramp access to the southern platform . In December 1994 , the station building , which had been bricked up when staff were withdrawn , and was by then the Steam Tavern public house , was designated a grade II listed building , along with the screen walls . It is still in use as a pub , and has been called the Roo Bar since at least 2005 . At this time , all trains ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This changed in 1995 when an hourly timetable was introduced for peak times , but services were terminated at Avonmouth , allowing a single Sprinter unit to work the service . There was a better service on Saturdays as more rolling stock was available , but there was no Sunday service . Talk arose again of the line being closed completely . Local tourism expert Bernard Lane described the line 's state as 
 ... the line the railway wished was not there . It was the line that got bus substitution whenever they were short of trains or queues , when a rugby match in Cardiff needed a special . It has a problem in that the route is slow and not very direct ; for years it was invisible , short of marketing and lacking a regular interval timetable . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . Following action by Friends of Severn Beach Railway ( FOSBR ) and a string of protests , services had increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , rebranded in 2015 as Great Western Railway . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the line . In 2007 , the Council unanimously agreed to pay £ 450 @,@ 000 per annum to fund extra services from May 2008 for three years , which resulted in a 60 % increase in passenger numbers along the line , and a 110 % increase at Clifton Down . Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored in 2010 . 
 Passenger numbers at Clifton Down were further boosted by a marketing campaign by the Severnside Community Rail Partnership to attract more people , especially students , to use the station . The work won a Department for Transport Community Rail Marketing Award in 2007 . The Severnside CRP also formed a support group for the station , and improved the provision of timetabling information through the use of simplified departure timetable posters . In 2009 , they painted a large station sign on the road bridge over the line , and in 2010 they collaborated with Redland Green School to decorate the bricked @-@ up windows and doors of the station building with animal artwork to brighten up the station and promote Bristol Zoo . The work won a Community Rail Award . Customer help points with next train information screens were installed during 2008 / 09 , paid for by money from the Department for Transport 's " Access for All " fund and local councils . Ticket machines were installed in early 2011 , following complaints that passengers were unable to pay their fares . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Clifton Down are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the coming upgrade to the Great Western Main Line , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified by 2016 . However , the electrification will not extend beyond the main lines , so Clifton Down will continue to be served by diesel trains , with the current " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . Stephen Williams , MP for Bristol West , questioned whether electrification could continue to Clifton Down . Then @-@ Secretary of State for Transport Philip Hammond replied that it would have to be looked at in the future . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification of the entire Severn Beach Line . 
 Improved services at Clifton Down are called for as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area . There is an aspiration for half @-@ hourly services , with trains towards Bristol terminating alternately at Portishead and Bath Spa , however due to the large sections of the Severn Beach Line which are single @-@ track and to the congested main line from Temple Meads , such frequency is not currently feasible . The scheme was given the go @-@ ahead in July 2012 as part of the City Deal , whereby local councils would be given greater control over money by the government . There are also calls for the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line , which could allow a direct service from Clifton Down to Bristol Parkway via Avonmouth . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 = Lesbian = 
 A lesbian is a female homosexual : a female who experiences romantic love or sexual attraction to other females . The term lesbian is also used to express sexual identity or sexual behavior regardless of sexual orientation , or as an adjective to characterize or associate nouns with female homosexuality or same @-@ sex attraction . 
 The concept of " lesbian " , to differentiate women with a shared sexual orientation , is a 20th @-@ century construct . Throughout history , women have not had the same freedom or independence to pursue homosexual relationships as men , but neither have they met the same harsh punishment as homosexual men in some societies . Instead , lesbian relationships have often been regarded as harmless and incomparable to heterosexual ones unless the participants attempted to assert privileges traditionally enjoyed by men . As a result , little in history was documented to give an accurate description of how female homosexuality is expressed . When early sexologists in the late 19th century began to categorize and describe homosexual behavior , hampered by a lack of knowledge about homosexuality or women 's sexuality , they distinguished lesbians as women who did not adhere to female gender roles and incorrectly designated them mentally ill — a designation which has been reversed in the global scientific community . 
 Women in homosexual relationships responded to this designation either by hiding their personal lives or accepting the label of outcast and creating a subculture and identity that developed in Europe and the United States . Following World War II , during a period of social repression when governments actively persecuted homosexuals , women developed networks to socialize with and educate each other . Greater economic and social freedom allowed them gradually to be able to determine how they could form relationships and families . With second wave feminism and growth of scholarship in women 's history and sexuality in the 20th century , the definition of lesbian broadened , sparking a debate about sexual desire as the major component to define what a lesbian is . Some women who engage in same @-@ sex sexual activity may reject not only identifying as lesbians but as bisexual as well , while other women 's self @-@ identification as lesbian may not align with their sexual orientation or sexual behavior ; sexual identity is not necessarily the same as one 's sexual orientation or sexual behavior , due to various reasons , such as the fear of identifying their sexual orientation in a homophobic setting . 
 Portrayals of lesbians in the media suggest that society at large has been simultaneously intrigued and threatened by women who challenge feminine gender roles , and fascinated and appalled with women who are romantically involved with other women . Women who adopt a lesbian identity share experiences that form an outlook similar to an ethnic identity : as homosexuals , they are unified by the heterosexist discrimination and potential rejection they face from their families , friends , and others as a result of homophobia . As women , they face concerns separate from men . Lesbians may encounter distinct physical or mental health concerns arising from discrimination , prejudice , and minority stress . Political conditions and social attitudes also affect the formation of lesbian relationships and families in open . 
 = = Origin and transformation of the term = = 
 The word lesbian is derived from the name of the Greek island of Lesbos , home to the 6th @-@ century BCE poet Sappho . From various ancient writings , historians gathered that a group of young women were left in Sappho 's charge for their instruction or cultural edification . Little of Sappho 's poetry survives , but her remaining poetry reflects the topics she wrote about : women 's daily lives , their relationships , and rituals . She focused on the beauty of women and proclaimed her love for girls . Before the late 19th century , the word lesbian referred to any derivative or aspect of Lesbos , including a type of wine . 
 In Algernon Charles Swinburne 's 1866 poem <unk> the term " lesbian " appears twice but capitalized both times after twice mentioning the island of Lesbos , and so could be construed to mean ' from the island of Lesbos ' . In 1875 , George Saintsbury , in writing about Baudelaire 's poetry refers to his " Lesbian studies " in which he includes his poem about " the passion of Delphine " which is a poem simply about love between two women which does not mention the island of Lesbos , though the other poem alluded to , entitled " Lesbos " , does . Lesbianism , to describe erotic relationships between women , had been documented in 1870 . In 1890 , the term lesbian was used in a medical dictionary as an adjective to describe tribadism ( as " lesbian love " ) . The terms lesbian , invert and homosexual were interchangeable with <unk> and <unk> around the turn of the 20th century . The use of lesbian in medical literature became prominent ; by 1925 , the word was recorded as a noun to mean the female equivalent of a sodomite . 
 The development of medical knowledge was a significant factor in further connotations of the term lesbian . In the middle of the 19th century , medical writers attempted to establish ways to identify male homosexuality , which was considered a significant social problem in most Western societies . In categorizing behavior that indicated what was referred to as " inversion " by German sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld , researchers categorized what was normal sexual behavior for men and women , and therefore to what extent men and women varied from the " perfect male sexual type " and the " perfect female sexual type " . 
 Far less literature focused on female homosexual behavior than on male homosexuality , as medical professionals did not consider it a significant problem . In some cases , it was not acknowledged to exist . However , sexologists Richard von Krafft @-@ Ebing from Germany , and Britain 's Havelock Ellis wrote some of the earliest and more enduring categorizations of female same @-@ sex attraction , approaching it as a form of insanity . Krafft @-@ Ebing , who considered lesbianism ( what he termed " <unk> " ) a neurological disease , and Ellis , who was influenced by Krafft @-@ Ebing 's writings , disagreed about whether sexual inversion was generally a lifelong condition . Ellis believed that many women who professed love for other women changed their feelings about such relationships after they had experienced marriage and a " practical life " . 
 However , Ellis conceded that there were " true inverts " who would spend their lives pursuing erotic relationships with women . These were members of the " third sex " who rejected the roles of women to be subservient , feminine , and domestic . <unk> described the opposite gender roles , and also the related attraction to women instead of men ; since women in the Victorian period were considered unable to initiate sexual encounters , women who did so with other women were thought of as possessing masculine sexual desires . 
 The work of Krafft @-@ Ebing and Ellis was widely read , and helped to create public consciousness of female homosexuality . The sexologists ' claims that homosexuality was a congenital anomaly were generally well @-@ accepted by homosexual men ; it indicated that their behavior was not inspired by nor should be considered a criminal vice , as was widely acknowledged . In the absence of any other material to describe their emotions , homosexuals accepted the designation of different or perverted , and used their outlaw status to form social circles in Paris and Berlin . Lesbian began to describe elements of a subculture . 
 Lesbians in Western cultures in particular often classify themselves as having an identity that defines their individual sexuality , as well as their membership to a group that shares common traits . Women in many cultures throughout history have had sexual relations with other women , but they rarely were designated as part of a group of people based on who they had physical relations with . As women have generally been political minorities in Western cultures , the added medical designation of homosexuality has been cause for the development of a subcultural identity . 
 = = Female homosexuality without identity in Western culture = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 The varied meanings of lesbian since the early 20th century have prompted some historians to revisit historic relationships between women before the wide usage of the word was defined by erotic proclivities . Discussion from historians caused further questioning of what qualifies as a lesbian relationship . As lesbian @-@ feminists asserted , a sexual component was unnecessary in declaring oneself a lesbian if the primary and closest relationships were with women . When considering past relationships within appropriate historic context , there were times when love and sex were separate and unrelated notions . In 1989 , an academic cohort named the Lesbian History Group wrote : 
 Because of society 's reluctance to admit that lesbians exist , a high degree of certainty is expected before historians or biographers are allowed to use the label . Evidence that would suffice in any other situation is inadequate here ... A woman who never married , who lived with another woman , whose friends were mostly women , or who moved in known lesbian or mixed gay circles , may well have been a lesbian . ... But this sort of evidence is not ' proof ' . What our critics want is incontrovertible evidence of sexual activity between women . This is almost impossible to find . 
 Female sexuality is often not adequately represented in texts and documents . Until very recently , much of what has been documented about women 's sexuality has been written by men , in the context of male understanding , and relevant to women 's associations to men — as their wives , daughters , or mothers , for example . Often artistic representations of female sexuality suggest trends or ideas on broad scales , giving historians clues as to how widespread or accepted erotic relationships between women were . 
 = = = Ancient Greece and Rome = = = 
 History is often analyzed with contemporary ideologies ; Ancient Greece as a subject enjoyed popularity by the ruling class in Britain during the 19th century . Based on their social priorities , British scholars interpreted ancient Greece as a westernized , white , and masculine society , and essentially removed women from historical importance . Women in Greece were sequestered with each other , and men with men . In this homosocial environment , erotic and sexual relationships between males were common and recorded in literature , art , and philosophy . Hardly anything is recorded about homosexual activity between women . There is some speculation that similar relationships existed between women and girls . The poet <unk> used the term <unk> , as the feminine form of <unk> — which was the official term for the younger participant in a pederastic relationship . Aristophanes , in Plato 's Symposium , mentions women who love women , but uses the term <unk> ( to be focused on ) instead of eros , which was applied to other erotic relationships between men , and between men and women . 
 Historian Nancy Rabinowitz argues that ancient Greek red vase images portraying women with their arms around another woman 's waist , or leaning on a woman 's shoulders can be construed as expressions of romantic desire . Much of the daily lives of women in ancient Greece is unknown , specifically their expressions of sexuality . Although men participated in pederastic relationships outside of marriage , there is no clear evidence that women were allowed or encouraged to have same @-@ sex relationships before or during marriage as long as their marital obligations were met . Women who appear on Greek pottery are depicted with affection , and in instances where women appear only with other women , their images are eroticized : bathing , touching one another , with dildos placed in and around such scenes , and sometimes with imagery also seen in depictions of heterosexual marriage or pederastic seduction . Whether this eroticism is for the viewer or an accurate representation of life is unknown . 
 Women in Ancient Rome were similarly subject to men 's definitions of sexuality . Modern scholarship indicates that men viewed female homosexuality with hostility . They considered women who engaged in sexual relations with other women to be biological oddities that would attempt to penetrate women — and sometimes men — with " monstrously enlarged " clitorises . According to scholar James <unk> , lesbianism " challenged not only the Roman male 's view of himself as the exclusive giver of sexual pleasure but also the most basic foundations of Rome 's male @-@ dominated culture " . No historical documentation exists of women who had other women as sex partners . 
 = = = Early Modern Europe = = = 
 Female homosexuality has not received the same negative response from religious or criminal authorities as male homosexuality or adultery has throughout history . Whereas sodomy between men , men and women , and men and animals was punishable by death in Britain , acknowledgment of sexual contact between women was nonexistent in medical and legal texts . The earliest law against female homosexuality appeared in France in 1270 . In Spain , Italy , and the Holy Roman Empire , sodomy between women was included in acts considered unnatural and punishable by burning to death , although few instances are recorded of this taking place . 
 The earliest such execution occurred in Speier , Germany , in 1477 . Forty days ' penance was demanded of nuns who " rode " each other or were discovered to have touched each other 's breasts . An Italian nun named Sister Benedetta <unk> was documented to have seduced many of her sisters when possessed by a Divine spirit named " <unk> " ; to end her relationships with other women , she was placed in solitary confinement for the last 40 years of her life . Female homoeroticism , however , was so common in English literature and theater that historians suggest it was fashionable for a period during the Renaissance . 
 Ideas about women 's sexuality were linked to contemporary understanding of female physiology . The vagina was considered an inward version of the penis ; where nature 's perfection created a man , often nature was thought to be trying to right itself by <unk> the vagina to form a penis in some women . These sex changes were later thought to be cases of hermaphrodites , and hermaphroditism became synonymous with female same @-@ sex desire . Medical consideration of hermaphroditism depended upon measurements of the clitoris ; a longer , engorged clitoris was thought to be used by women to penetrate other women . Penetration was the focus of concern in all sexual acts , and a woman who was thought to have uncontrollable desires because of her engorged clitoris was called a " <unk> " ( literally , one who rubs ) . Not only was an abnormally engorged clitoris thought to create lusts in some women that led them to masturbate , but pamphlets warning women about masturbation leading to such oversized organs were written as cautionary tales . For a while , masturbation and lesbian sex carried the same meaning . 
 Class distinction , however , became linked as the fashion of female homoeroticism passed . <unk> were simultaneously considered members of the lower class trying to ruin virtuous women , and representatives of an aristocracy corrupt with debauchery . Satirical writers began to suggest that political rivals ( or more often , their wives ) engaged in tribadism in order to harm their reputations . Queen Anne was rumored to have a passionate relationship with Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough , her closest adviser and confidante . When Churchill was ousted as the queen 's favorite , she purportedly spread allegations of the queen having affairs with her <unk> . Marie Antoinette was also the subject of such speculation for some months between 1795 and 1796 . 
 = = = Female husbands = = = 
 <unk> appeared in medical literature enough to be considered common knowledge , although cases were rare . <unk> elements in literature were pervasive , specifically the masquerade of one gender for another to fool an unsuspecting woman into being seduced . Such plot devices were used in Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night ( 1601 ) , The Faerie Queene by Edmund Spenser in 1590 , and James Shirley 's The Bird in a Cage ( 1633 ) . Extraordinary cases during the Renaissance of women taking on male personae and going undetected for years or decades have been recorded . 
 If found , punishments ranged from death , to time in the pillory , to being ordered never to dress as a man again . Henry Fielding wrote a pamphlet titled The Female Husband in 1746 , based on the life of Mary Hamilton , who was arrested after marrying a woman while masquerading as a man , and was sentenced to public whipping and six months in jail . Similar examples were procured of Catharine Linck in Prussia in 1717 , executed in 1721 ; Swiss Anne <unk> married and relocated with her wife to Lyons , but was exposed by a woman with whom she had had a previous affair and sentenced to time in the stocks and prison . 
 Queen Christina of Sweden 's tendency to dress as a man was well known during her time , and excused because of her noble birth . She was brought up as a male and there was speculation at the time that she was a hermaphrodite . Even after Christina abdicated the throne in 1654 to avoid marriage , she was known to pursue romantic relationships with women . 
 Some historians view cases of cross @-@ dressing women to be manifestations of women seizing power they would naturally be unable to enjoy in feminine attire , or their way of making sense out of their desire for women . Lillian Faderman argues that Western society was threatened by women who rejected their feminine roles . Catharine Linck and other women who were accused of using dildos , such as two nuns in 16th century Spain executed for using " material instruments " , were punished more severely than those who did not . Two marriages between women were recorded in Cheshire , England , in 1707 ( between Hannah Wright and Anne Gaskill ) and 1708 ( between Ane Norton and Alice Pickford ) with no comment about both parties being female . Reports of clergymen with lax standards who performed weddings — and wrote their suspicions about one member of the wedding party — continued to appear for the next century . 
 Outside of Europe women were able to dress as men and go undetected . Deborah Sampson fought in the American Revolution as a man named Robert <unk> , and pursued relationships with women . Edward De Lacy Evans was born female in Ireland , but took a male name during the voyage to Australia and lived as a man for 23 years in Victoria , marrying three times . Percy Redwood created a scandal in New Zealand in 1909 when he was found to be Amy Bock , who had married a woman from Port Molyneaux ; newspapers argued whether it was a sign of insanity or an inherent character flaw . 
 = = = Re @-@ examining romantic friendships = = = 
 During the 17th through 19th centuries , a woman expressing passionate love for another woman was fashionable , accepted , and encouraged . These relationships were termed romantic friendships , Boston marriages , or " sentimental friends " , and were common in the U.S. , Europe , and especially in England . Documentation of these relationships is possible by a large volume of letters written between women . Whether the relationship included any genital component was not a matter for public discourse , but women could form strong and exclusive bonds with each other and still be considered virtuous , innocent , and chaste ; a similar relationship with a man would have destroyed a woman 's reputation . In fact , these relationships were promoted as alternatives to and practice for a woman 's marriage to a man . 
 One such relationship was between Lady Mary Wortley Montagu , who wrote to Anne Wortley in 1709 : " Nobody was so entirely , so faithfully yours ... I put in your lovers , for I don 't allow it possible for a man to be so sincere as I am . " Similarly , English poet Anna Seward had a devoted friendship to Honora Sneyd , who was the subject of many of Seward 's sonnets and poems . When Sneyd married despite Seward 's protest , Seward 's poems became angry . However , Seward continued to write about Sneyd long after her death , extolling Sneyd 's beauty and their affection and friendship . As a young woman , writer and philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft was attached to a woman named Fanny Blood . Writing to another woman by whom she had recently felt betrayed , Wollstonecraft declared , " The roses will bloom when there 's peace in the breast , and the prospect of living with my Fanny gladdens my heart : — You know not how I love her . " Wollstonecraft 's first novel Mary : A Fiction , in part , addressed her relationship with Fanny Blood . 
 Perhaps the most famous of these romantic friendships was between Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby , nicknamed the Ladies of Llangollen . Butler and Ponsonby eloped in 1778 , to the relief of Ponsonby 's family ( concerned about their reputation had she run away with a man ) to live together in Wales for 51 years and be thought of as eccentrics . Their story was considered " the epitome of virtuous romantic friendship " and inspired poetry by Anna Seward and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . Diarist Anne Lister , captivated by Butler and Ponsonby , recorded her affairs with women between 1817 and 1840 . Some of it was written in code , detailing her sexual relationships with Marianna <unk> and Maria Barlow . Both Lister and Eleanor Butler were considered masculine by contemporary news reports , and though there were suspicions that these relationships were <unk> in nature , they were nonetheless praised in literature . 
 Romantic friendships were also popular in the U.S. Enigmatic poet Emily Dickinson wrote over 300 letters and poems to Susan Gilbert , who later became her sister @-@ in @-@ law , and engaged in another romantic correspondence with Kate Scott Anthon . Anthon broke off their relationship the same month Dickinson entered self @-@ imposed lifelong seclusion . Nearby in Hartford , Connecticut , African American freeborn women Addie Brown and Rebecca Primus left evidence of their passion in letters : " No kisses is like <unk> " . In Georgia , Alice Baldy wrote to Josie Varner in 1870 , " Do you know that if you touch me , or speak to me there is not a nerve of fibre in my body that does not respond with a thrill of delight ? " 
 Around the turn of the 20th century , the development of higher education provided opportunities for women . In all @-@ female surroundings , a culture of romantic pursuit was fostered in women 's colleges . Older students mentored younger ones , called on them socially , took them to all @-@ women dances , and sent them flowers , cards , and poems that declared their undying love for each other . These were called " smashes " or " spoons " , and they were written about quite frankly in stories for girls aspiring to attend college in publications such as Ladies Home Journal , a children 's magazine titled St. Nicholas , and a collection called Smith College Stories , without negative views . Enduring loyalty , devotion , and love were major components to these stories , and sexual acts beyond kissing were consistently absent . 
 Women who had the option of a career instead of marriage labeled themselves New Women , and took their new opportunities very seriously . Faderman calls this period " the last breath of innocence " before 1920 when characterizations of female affection were connected to sexuality , marking lesbians as a unique and often unflattering group . Specifically , Faderman connects the growth of women 's independence and their beginning to reject strictly prescribed roles in the Victorian era to the scientific designation of lesbianism as a type of aberrant sexual behavior . 
 = = Identity and gender in historical Western culture = = 
