 = = = Construction of lesbian identity = = = 
 For some women , the realization that they participated in behavior or relationships that could be categorized as lesbian caused them to deny or conceal it , such as professor Jeannette Augustus Marks at Mount Holyoke College , who lived with the college president , Mary Woolley , for 36 years . Marks discouraged young women from " abnormal " friendships and insisted happiness could only be attained with a man . Other women , however , embraced the distinction and used their uniqueness to set themselves apart from heterosexual women and gay men . 
 From the 1890s to the 1930s , American heiress Natalie Clifford Barney held a weekly salon in Paris to which major artistic celebrities were invited and where lesbian topics were the focus . Combining Greek influences with contemporary French eroticism , she attempted to create an updated and idealized version of Lesbos in her salon . Her contemporaries included artist Romaine Brooks , who painted others in her circle ; writers Colette , Djuna Barnes , social host Gertrude Stein , and novelist Radclyffe Hall . 
 Berlin had a vibrant homosexual culture in the 1920s : about 50 clubs catering to lesbians existed , women had their own magazine titled Die <unk> ( The Girlfriend ) between 1924 and 1933 , and another titled <unk> specifically for male transvestites and lesbians . In 1928 a book titled The Lesbians of Berlin written by Ruth Margarite <unk> further popularized the German capital as a center of lesbian activity . Clubs varied between large establishments so popular that they were tourist attractions to small neighborhood cafes where only local women went to find other women . " Das Lila Lied " ( " The Lavender Song " ) served as an anthem to the lesbians of Berlin . Homosexuality was illegal in Germany , though sometimes tolerated , as some functions were allowed by the police who took the opportunity to register the names of homosexuals for future reference . Magnus Hirschfeld 's Scientific @-@ Humanitarian Committee , which promoted tolerance for homosexuals in Germany , welcomed lesbian participation , and a surge of lesbian @-@ themed writing and political activism in the German feminist movement became evident . 
 In 1928 , Radclyffe Hall published a novel titled The Well of Loneliness . Its plot centers around Stephen Gordon , a woman who identifies herself as an invert after reading Krafft @-@ Ebing 's Psychopathia Sexualis , and lives within the homosexual subculture of Paris . The novel included a foreword by Havelock Ellis and was intended to be a call for tolerance for inverts by publicizing their disadvantages and accidents of being born inverted . Hall subscribed to Ellis and Krafft @-@ Ebing 's theories and rejected Freud 's theory that same @-@ sex attraction was caused by childhood trauma and was curable . The publicity Hall received was due to unintended consequences ; the novel was tried for obscenity in London , a spectacularly scandalous event described as " the crystallizing moment in the construction of a visible modern English lesbian subculture " by professor Laura Doan . 
 Newspaper stories frankly divulged that the book 's content includes " sexual relations between Lesbian women " , and photographs of Hall often accompanied details about lesbians in most major print outlets within a span of six months . Hall reflected the appearance of a " mannish " woman in the 1920s : short cropped hair , tailored suits ( often with pants ) , and monocle that became widely recognized as a " uniform " . When British women participated in World War I , they became familiar with masculine clothing , and were considered patriotic for wearing uniforms and pants . However , postwar masculinization of women 's clothing became associated with lesbians . 
 In the United States , the 1920s was a decade of social experimentation , particularly with sex . This was heavily influenced by the writings of Sigmund Freud , who theorized that sexual desire would be sated unconsciously , despite an individual 's wish to ignore it . Freud 's theories were much more pervasive in the U.S. than in Europe . With the well @-@ publicized notion that sexual acts were a part of lesbianism and their relationships , sexual experimentation was widespread . Large cities that provided a nightlife were immensely popular , and women began to seek out sexual adventure . Bisexuality became chic , particularly in America 's first gay neighborhoods . 
 No location saw more visitors for its possibilities of homosexual nightlife than Harlem , the predominantly African American section of New York City . White " <unk> " enjoyed jazz , nightclubs , and anything else they wished . Blues singers Ma Rainey , Bessie Smith , Ethel Waters , and Gladys Bentley sang about affairs with women to visitors such as Tallulah Bankhead , Beatrice Lillie , and the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ named Joan Crawford . Homosexuals began to draw comparisons between their newly recognized minority status and that of African Americans . Among African American residents of Harlem , lesbian relationships were common and tolerated , though not overtly embraced . Some women staged lavish wedding ceremonies , even filing licenses using masculine names with New York City . Most women , however , were married to men and participated in affairs with women regularly ; bisexuality was more widely accepted than lesbianism . 
 Across town , Greenwich Village also saw a growing homosexual community ; both Harlem and Greenwich Village provided furnished rooms for single men and women , which was a major factor in their development as centers for homosexual communities . The tenor was different in Greenwich Village than Harlem , however . Bohemians — intellectuals who rejected Victorian ideals — gathered in the Village . Homosexuals were predominantly male , although figures such as poet Edna St. Vincent Millay and social host Mabel Dodge were known for their affairs with women and promotion of tolerance of homosexuality . Women in the U.S. who could not visit Harlem or live in Greenwich Village for the first time were able to visit saloons in the 1920s without being considered prostitutes . The existence of a public space for women to socialize in bars that were known to cater to lesbians " became the single most important public manifestation of the subculture for many decades " , according to historian Lillian Faderman . 
 = = = The Great Depression = = = 
 The primary component necessary to encourage lesbians to be public and seek other women was economic independence , which virtually disappeared in the 1930s with the Great Depression . Most women in the U.S. found it necessary to marry , to a " front " such as a gay man where both could pursue homosexual relationships with public discretion , or to a man who expected a traditional wife . Independent women in the 1930s were generally seen as holding jobs that men should have . 
 The social attitude made very small and close @-@ knit communities in large cities that centered around bars , while simultaneously isolating women in other locales . Speaking of homosexuality in any context was socially forbidden , and women rarely discussed lesbianism even amongst themselves ; they referred to openly gay people as " in the Life " . Freudian psychoanalytic theory was pervasive in influencing doctors to consider homosexuality as a neurosis afflicting immature women . Homosexual subculture disappeared in Germany with the rise of the Nazis in 1933 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The onset of World War II caused a massive upheaval in people 's lives as military mobilization engaged millions of men . Women were also accepted into the military in the U.S. Women 's Army Corps ( WACs ) and U.S. Navy 's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service ( WAVES ) . Unlike processes to screen out male homosexuals , which had been in place since the creation of the American military , there were no methods to identify or screen for lesbians ; they were put into place gradually during World War II . Despite common attitudes regarding women 's traditional roles in the 1930s , independent and masculine women were directly recruited by the military in the 1940s , and frailty discouraged . 
 Some women were able to arrive at the recruiting station in a man 's suit , deny ever having been in love with another woman , and be easily inducted . Sexual activity , however , was forbidden , and blue discharge was almost certain if one identified oneself as a lesbian . As women found each other , they formed into tight groups on base , socialized at service clubs , and began to use code words . Historian Allan <unk> documented that homosexuals in the armed forces either consciously or subconsciously refused to identify themselves as homosexual or lesbian , and also never spoke about others ' orientation . 
 The most masculine women were not necessarily common , though they were visible so they tended to attract women interested in finding other lesbians . Women had to broach the subject about their interest in other women carefully , sometimes taking days to develop a common understanding without asking or stating anything outright . Women who did not enter the military were aggressively called upon to take industrial jobs left by men , in order to continue national productivity . The increased mobility , sophistication , and independence of many women during and after the war made it possible for women to live without husbands , something that would not have been feasible under different economic and social circumstances , further shaping lesbian networks and environments . 
 = = = Postwar years = = = 
 Following World War II , a nationwide movement pressed to return to pre @-@ war society as quickly as possible in the U.S. When combined with the increasing national paranoia about communism and psychoanalytic theory that had become pervasive in medical knowledge , homosexuality became an undesired characteristic of employees working for the U.S. government in 1950 . Homosexuals were thought to be vulnerable targets to blackmail , and the government purged its employment ranks of open homosexuals , beginning a widespread effort to gather intelligence about employees ' private lives . State and local governments followed suit , arresting people for congregating in bars and parks , and enacting laws against cross @-@ dressing for men and women . 
 The U.S. military and government conducted many interrogations , asking if women had ever had sexual relations with another woman and essentially equating even a one @-@ time experience to a criminal identity , thereby severely delineating heterosexuals from homosexuals . In 1952 homosexuality was listed as a pathological emotional disturbance in the American Psychiatric Association 's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual . The view that homosexuality was a curable sickness was widely believed in the medical community , general population , and among many lesbians themselves . 
 Attitudes and practices to ferret out homosexuals in public service positions extended to Australia and Canada . A section to create an offence of " gross indecency " between females was added to a bill in the United Kingdom House of Commons and passed there in 1921 , but was rejected in the House of Lords , apparently because they were concerned any attention paid to sexual misconduct would also promote it . 
 = = = = Underground socializing = = = = 
 Very little information was available about homosexuality beyond medical and psychiatric texts . Community meeting places consisted of bars that were commonly raided by police once a month on average , with those arrested exposed in newspapers . In response , eight women in San Francisco met in their living rooms in 1955 to socialize and have a place to dance . When they decided to make it a regular meeting , they became the first organization for lesbians in the U.S. , titled the Daughters of Bilitis ( DOB ) . The DOB began publishing a magazine titled The Ladder in 1956 ; inside the front cover of every issue was their mission statement , the first of which stated was " Education of the variant " . It was intended to provide women with knowledge about homosexuality — specifically relating to women , and famous lesbians in history . However , by 1956 the term " lesbian " had such a negative meaning that the DOB refused to use it as a descriptor , choosing " variant " instead . 
 The DOB spread to Chicago , New York , and Los Angeles , and The Ladder was mailed to hundreds — eventually thousands — of DOB members discussing the nature of homosexuality , sometimes challenging the idea that it was a sickness , with readers offering their own reasons why they were lesbians , and suggesting ways to cope with the condition or society 's response to it . British lesbians followed with the publication of Arena Three beginning in 1964 , with a similar mission . 
 = = = = Butch and femme dichotomy = = = = 
 As a reflection of categories of sexuality so sharply defined by the government and society at large , lesbian subculture developed extremely rigid gender roles between women , particularly among the working class in the U.S. and Canada . Although many municipalities had enacted laws against cross @-@ dressing , some women would socialize in bars as <unk> : dressed in men 's clothing and mirroring traditional masculine behavior . Others wore traditionally feminine clothing and assumed a more diminutive role as femmes . Butch and femme modes of socialization were so integral within lesbian bars that women who refused to choose between the two would be ignored , or at least unable to date anyone , and butch women becoming romantically involved with other butch women or femmes with other femmes was unacceptable . 
 Butch women were not a novelty in the 1950s ; even in Harlem and Greenwich Village in the 1920s some women assumed these personae . In the 1950s and 1960s , however , the roles were pervasive and not limited to North America : from 1940 to 1970 , butch / femme bar culture flourished in Britain , though there were fewer class distinctions . They further identified members of a group that had been marginalized ; women who had been rejected by most of society had an inside view of an exclusive group of people that took a high amount of knowledge to function in . Butch and femme were considered coarse by American lesbians of higher social standing during this period . Many wealthier women married to satisfy their familial obligations , and others escaped to Europe to live as expatriates . 
 = = = = Lesbian themed fiction = = = = 
 Regardless of the lack of information about homosexuality in scholarly texts , another forum for learning about lesbianism was growing . A paperback book titled Women 's Barracks describing a woman 's experiences in the Free French Forces was published in 1950 . It told of a lesbian relationship the author had witnessed . After 4 @.@ 5 million copies were sold , it was consequently named in the House Select Committee on Current Pornographic Materials in 1952 . Its publisher , Gold Medal Books , followed with the novel Spring Fire in 1952 , which sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies . Gold Medal Books was overwhelmed with mail from women writing about the subject matter , and followed with more books , creating the genre of lesbian pulp fiction . 
 Between 1955 and 1969 over 2 @,@ 000 books were published using lesbianism as a topic , and they were sold in corner <unk> , train stations , bus stops , and newsstands all over the U.S. and Canada . Most were written by , and almost all were marketed to heterosexual men . Coded words and images were used on the covers . Instead of " lesbian " , terms such as " strange " , " twilight " , " queer " , and " third sex " , were used in the titles , and cover art was invariably salacious . A handful of lesbian pulp fiction authors were women writing for lesbians , including Ann Bannon , Valerie Taylor , Paula Christian , and Vin Packer / Ann Aldrich . Bannon , who also purchased lesbian pulp fiction , later stated that women identified the material iconically by the cover art . Many of the books used cultural references : naming places , terms , describing modes of dress and other codes to isolated women . As a result , pulp fiction helped to proliferate a lesbian identity simultaneously to lesbians and heterosexual readers . 
 = = = Second wave feminism = = = 
 The social rigidity of the 1950s and early 1960s encountered a backlash as social movements to improve the standing of African Americans , the poor , women , and gays all became prominent . Of the latter two , the gay rights movement and the feminist movement connected after a violent confrontation occurred in New York City in the 1969 Stonewall riots . What followed was a movement characterized by a surge of gay activism and feminist consciousness that further transformed the definition of lesbian . 
 The sexual revolution in the 1970s introduced the differentiation between identity and sexual behavior for women . Many women took advantage of their new social freedom to try new experiences . Women who previously identified as heterosexual tried sleeping with women , though many maintained their heterosexual identity . However , with the advent of second wave feminism , lesbian as a political identity grew to describe a social philosophy among women , often overshadowing sexual desire as a defining trait . A militant feminist organization named <unk> published a manifesto in 1970 entitled " The Woman @-@ Identified Woman " that declared " A lesbian is the rage of all women condensed to the point of explosion " . 
 Militant feminists expressed their disdain with an inherently sexist and patriarchal society , and concluded the most effective way to overcome sexism and attain the equality of women would be to deny men any power or pleasure from women . For women who subscribed to this philosophy — dubbing themselves lesbian @-@ feminists — lesbian was a term chosen by women to describe any woman who dedicated her approach to social interaction and political motivation to the welfare of women . Sexual desire was not the defining characteristic of a lesbian @-@ feminist , but rather her focus on politics . Independence from men as oppressors was a central tenet of lesbian @-@ feminism , and many believers strove to separate themselves physically and economically from traditional male @-@ centered culture . In the ideal society , named Lesbian Nation , " woman " and " lesbian " were interchangeable . 
 In 1980 , poet and essayist Adrienne Rich expanded upon the political meaning of lesbian by proposing a continuum of lesbian existence based on " woman @-@ identified experience " . All relationships between women , Rich proposed , have some lesbian element , regardless if they claim a lesbian identity : mothers and daughters , women who work together , and women who nurse each other , for example . Such a perception of women relating to each other connects them through time and across cultures , and Rich considered heterosexuality a condition forced upon women by men . Several years earlier , DOB founders Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon similarly relegated sexual acts as unnecessary in determining what a lesbian is , by providing their definition : " a woman whose primary erotic , psychological , emotional and social interest is in a member of her own sex , even though that interest may not be overtly expressed " . 
 Although lesbian @-@ feminism was a significant shift , not all lesbians agreed with it . Lesbian @-@ feminism was a youth @-@ oriented movement : its members were primarily college educated , with experience in New Left and radical causes , but they had not seen any success in persuading radical organizations to take up women 's issues . Many older lesbians who had acknowledged their sexuality in more conservative times felt maintaining their ways of coping in a homophobic world was more appropriate . The Daughters of Bilitis folded in 1970 over which direction to focus on : feminism or gay rights issues . 
 As equality was a priority for lesbian @-@ feminists , disparity of roles between men and women or butch and femme were viewed as patriarchal . Lesbian @-@ feminists eschewed gender role play that had been pervasive in bars , as well as the perceived chauvinism of gay men ; many lesbian @-@ feminists refused to work with gay men , or take up their causes . However , lesbians who held a more essentialist view that they had been born homosexual and used the descriptor " lesbian " to define sexual attraction , often considered the separatist , angry opinions of lesbian @-@ feminists to be detrimental to the cause of gay rights . 
 = = Outside of Western culture = = 
 = = = Middle East = = = 
 Female homosexual behavior may be present in every culture , although the concept of a lesbian as a woman who pairs exclusively with other women is not . Attitudes about female homosexual behavior are dependent upon women 's roles in each society , and each culture 's definition of sex . Women in the Middle East have been historically segregated from men . In the 7th and 8th centuries , some extraordinary women dressed in male attire when gender roles were less strict , but the sexual roles that accompanied European women were not associated with Islamic women . The Caliphal court in Baghdad featured women who dressed as men , including false facial hair , but they competed with other women for the attentions of men . 
 Highly intelligent women , according to the 12th century writings of Sharif al @-@ Idrisi , were more likely to be lesbians ; their intellectual prowess put them on a more even par with men . Relations between women who lived in harems , and fears of women being sexually intimate in Turkish baths were expressed in writings by men . Women , however , were mostly silent and men likewise rarely wrote about lesbian relationships . It is unclear to historians if the rare instances of lesbianism mentioned in literature are an accurate historical record or intended to serve as fantasies for men . A 1978 treatise about repression in Iran asserted that women were completely silenced : " In the whole of Iranian history , [ no woman ] has been allowed to speak out for such tendencies ... To attest to lesbian desires would be an unforgivable crime . " 
 Although the authors of Islamic <unk> argued this did not mean women could not engage in lesbian relationships , a lesbian anthropologist in 1991 visited Yemen and reported that women in the town she visited were unable to comprehend her romantic relationship to another woman . Women in Pakistan are expected to marry men ; those who do not are ostracized . Women , however , may have intimate relations with other women as long as their wifely duties are met , their private matters are kept quiet , and the woman with whom they are involved is somehow related by family or logical interest to her lover . 
 The United Nations estimate for the number of honor killings in the world is 5000 per year . Many women 's groups in the Middle East and Southwest Asia suspect that more than 20 @,@ 000 women are honor killed in the world each year . 
 = = = The Americas = = = 
 Indigenous people in North and South America conceptualized a third gender for men @-@ women and women @-@ men . These roles were recorded of the Coahuiltecan Indians in Texas , Timucuan in Florida , and Cueva in Panama . In Cree , the term for a man who took the role of a woman was <unk> ; the Zuni word for a woman who took the role of a man was <unk> ( boy @-@ girl ) , and the Mohave give women the term <unk> . The cross @-@ gender roles have less to do with sexuality than with spirituality and occupation . A " two @-@ spirit " woman who has a relationship with a non cross @-@ gender woman is thought to be a " hetero @-@ gender " relationship . 
 In Latin America , lesbian consciousness and associations appeared in the 1970s , increasing while several countries transitioned to or reformed democratic governments . Harassment and intimidation have been common even in places where homosexuality is legal , and laws against child corruption , morality , or " the good ways " ( <unk> a la moral o las <unk> <unk> ) , have been used to persecute homosexuals . From the Hispanic perspective , the conflict between the <unk> of feminists and the misogyny from gay men has created a difficult path for lesbians and associated groups . 
 Argentina was the first Latin American country with a gay rights group , Nuestro Mundo ( NM , or Our World ) , created in 1969 . Six mostly secret organizations concentrating on gay or lesbian issues were founded around this time , but persecution and harassment were continuous and grew worse with the dictatorship of Jorge Rafael Videla in 1976 , when all groups were dissolved in the Dirty War . Lesbian rights groups have gradually formed since 1986 to build a cohesive community that works to overcome philosophical differences with heterosexual women . 
 The Latin American lesbian movement has been the most active in Mexico , but has encountered similar problems in effectiveness and cohesion . While groups try to promote lesbian issues and concerns , they also face misogynistic attitudes from gay men and homophobic views from heterosexual women . In 1977 , Lesbos , the first lesbian organization for Mexicans , was formed . Several incarnations of political groups promoting lesbian issues have evolved ; 13 lesbian organizations were active in Mexico City in 1997 . Ultimately , however , lesbian associations have had little influence both on the homosexual and feminist movements . 
 In Chile , the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet forbade the creation of lesbian groups until 1984 , when <unk> ( " joy of being " in Mapuche ) was first founded , prompted by the very public beating death of a woman amid shouts of " Damned lesbian ! " from her attacker . The lesbian movement has been closely associated with the feminist movement in Chile , although the relationship has been sometimes strained . <unk> worked with the International Lesbian Information Service , the International Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual , Trans and Intersex Association , and the Chilean gay rights group Movimiento de <unk> y Liberación Homosexual ( Movement to <unk> and Liberate Homosexuals ) to remove the sodomy law still in force in Chile . 
 Lesbian consciousness began in Nicaragua in 1986 , when the Sandinista National Liberation Front expelled gay men and lesbians from its midst . State persecution prevented the formation of associations until AIDS became a concern , when educational efforts forced sexual minorities to band together . The first lesbian organization was <unk> , founded in 1989 . An effort to promote visibility from 1991 to 1992 provoked the government to declare homosexuality illegal in 1994 , effectively ending the movement , until 2004 , when Grupo <unk> – Grupo de Mujeres <unk> de Nicaragua was created , four years before homosexuality became legal again . 
 The meetings of feminist lesbians of Latin America and the Caribbean , sometimes shortened to " Lesbian meetings " , have been an important forum for the exchange of ideas for Latin American lesbians since the late 1980s . With rotating hosts and biannual gatherings , its main aims are the creation of communication networks , to change the situation of lesbians in Latin America ( both legally and socially ) , to increase solidarity between lesbians and to destroy the existing myths about them . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 Cross @-@ gender roles and marriage between women has also been recorded in over 30 African societies . Women may marry other women , raise their children , and be generally thought of as men in societies in Nigeria , Cameroon , and Kenya . The Hausa people of Sudan have a term equivalent to lesbian , <unk> , that may also be applied to males to mean " neither party insists on a particular sexual role " . 
 Near the Congo River a female who participates in strong emotional or sexual relationships with another female among the <unk> people is known as <unk> <unk> ( a woman who presses against another woman ) . Lesbian relationships are also known in matrilineal societies in Ghana among the Akan people . In Lesotho , females engage in what is commonly considered sexual behavior to the Western world : they kiss , sleep together , rub genitals , participate in cunnilingus , and maintain their relationships with other females vigilantly . Since the people of Lesotho believe sex requires a penis , however , they do not consider their behavior sexual , nor label themselves lesbians . 
 In South Africa , lesbians are raped by heterosexual men with a goal of punishment of " abnormal " behavior and reinforcement of societal norms . The crime was first identified in South Africa where it is sometimes supervised by members of the woman 's family or local community , and is a major contributor to HIV infection in South African lesbians . " Corrective rape " is not recognized by the South African legal system as a hate crime despite the fact that the South African Constitution states that no person shall be discriminated against based on their social status and identity , including sexual orientation . Legally , South Africa protects gay rights extensively , but the government does not do anything to prevent corrective rape , and women do not have much faith in the police and their investigations . 
 Corrective rape is on the rise in South Africa . More than 10 lesbians are raped or gang @-@ raped weekly , as estimated by <unk> Sizwe , a South African nonprofit . It is estimated that at least 500 lesbians become victims of corrective rape every year and that 86 % of black lesbians in the Western Cape live in fear of being sexually assaulted , as reported by the Triangle Project in 2008 . Yet , victims of corrective rape are less likely to report it because of the negative social view of homosexuality . 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 China before westernization was another society that segregated men from women . Historical Chinese culture has not recognized a concept of sexual orientation , or a framework to divide people based on their same @-@ sex or opposite @-@ sex attractions . Although there was a significant culture surrounding homosexual men , there was none for women . Outside of their duties to bear sons to their husbands , women were perceived as having no sexuality at all . 
 This did not mean that women could not pursue sexual relationships with other women , but that such associations could not impose upon women 's relationships to men . Rare references to lesbianism were written by Ying Shao , who identified same @-@ sex relationships between women in imperial courts who behaved as husband and wife as <unk> shi ( paired eating ) . " Golden Orchid Associations " in Southern China existed into the 20th century and promoted formal marriages between women , who were then allowed to adopt children . Westernization brought new ideas that all sexual behavior not resulting in reproduction was aberrant . 
 The liberty of being employed in silk factories starting in 1865 allowed some women to style themselves tzu @-@ shu <unk> ( never to marry ) and live in communes with other women . Other Chinese called them <unk> @-@ hei ( self @-@ <unk> ) for adopting hairstyles of married women . These communes passed because of the Great Depression and were subsequently discouraged by the communist government for being a relic of feudal China . In contemporary Chinese society , <unk> ( same goal or spirit ) is the term used to refer to homosexuals ; most Chinese are reluctant to divide this classification further to identify lesbians . 
 In Japan , the term <unk> , a Japanese pronunciation of " lesbian " , was used during the 1920s . Westernization brought more independence for women and allowed some Japanese women to wear pants . The cognate tomboy is used in the Philippines , and particularly in Manila , to denote women who are more masculine . Virtuous women in Korea prioritize motherhood , chastity , and virginity ; outside of this scope , very few women are free to express themselves through sexuality , although there is a growing organization for lesbians named <unk> . The term <unk> is used in Malaysia to refer to gay men , but since there is no historical context to reference lesbians , the term is used for female homosexuals as well . As in many Asian countries , open homosexuality is discouraged in many social levels , so many Malaysians lead double lives . 
 In India , a 14th @-@ century Indian text mentioning a lesbian couple who had a child as a result of their lovemaking is an exception to the general silence about female homosexuality . This invisibility disappeared with the release of a film titled Fire in 1996 , prompting some theaters in India to be attacked by extremists . Terms used to label homosexuals are often rejected by Indian activists for being the result of imperialist influence , but most discourse on homosexuality centers on men . Women 's rights groups in India continue to debate the legitimacy of including lesbian issues in their platforms , as lesbians and material focusing on female homosexuality are frequently suppressed . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = The Kinsey Report = = = 
 The most extensive early study of female homosexuality was provided by the Institute for Sex Research , who published an in @-@ depth report of the sexual experiences of American women in 1953 . More than 8 @,@ 000 women were interviewed by Alfred Kinsey and the staff of the Institute for Sex Research in a book titled Sexual Behavior in the Human Female , popularly known as part of the Kinsey Report . The Kinsey Report 's dispassionate discussion of homosexuality as a form of human sexual behavior was revolutionary . Up to this study , only physicians and psychiatrists studied sexual behavior , and almost always the results were interpreted with a moral view . 
 Kinsey and his staff reported that 28 % of women had been aroused by another female , and 19 % had a sexual contact with another female . Of women who had sexual contact with another female , half to two @-@ thirds of them had <unk> . Single women had the highest prevalence of homosexual activity , followed by women who were widowed , divorced , or separated . The lowest occurrence of sexual activity was among married women ; those with previous homosexual experience reported they got married to stop homosexual activity . 
 Most of the women who reported homosexual activity had not experienced it more than ten times . Fifty @-@ one percent of women reporting homosexual experience had only one partner . Women with post @-@ graduate education had a higher prevalence of homosexual experience , followed by women with a college education ; the smallest occurrence was among women with education no higher than eighth grade . However , Kinsey 's methodology was criticized . 
 Based on Kinsey 's scale where 0 represents a person with an exclusively heterosexual response and 6 represents a person with an exclusively homosexual one , and numbers in between represent a gradient of responses with both sexes , 6 % of those interviewed ranked as a 6 : exclusively homosexual . Apart from those who ranked 0 ( 71 % ) , the largest percentage in between 0 and 6 was 1 at approximately 15 % . However , the Kinsey Report remarked that the ranking described a period in a person 's life , and that a person 's orientation may change . Among the criticisms the Kinsey Report received , a particular one addressed the Institute for Sex Research 's tendency to use statistical sampling , which facilitated an over @-@ representation of same @-@ sex relationships by other researchers who did not adhere to Kinsey 's qualifications of data . 
 = = = The Hite Report = = = 
 Twenty @-@ three years later , in 1976 , sexologist Shere Hite published a report on the sexual encounters of 3 @,@ 019 women who had responded to questionnaires , under the title The Hite Report . Hite 's questions differed from Kinsey 's , focusing more on how women identified , or what they preferred rather than experience . Respondents to Hite 's questions indicated that 8 % preferred sex with women and 9 % answered that they identified as bisexual or had sexual experiences with men and women , though they refused to indicate preference . 
 Hite 's conclusions are more based on respondents ' comments than quantifiable data . She found it " striking " that many women who had no lesbian experiences indicated they were interested in sex with women , particularly because the question was not asked . Hite found the two most significant differences between respondents ' experience with men and women were the focus on clitoral stimulation , and more emotional involvement and orgasmic responses . Since Hite performed her study during the popularity of feminism in the 1970s , she also acknowledged that women may have chosen the political identity of a lesbian . 
 = = = Population estimates = = = 
 Lesbians in the U.S. are estimated to be about 2 @.@ 6 % of the population , according to a National Opinion Research Center survey of sexually active adults who had had same @-@ sex experiences within the past year , completed in 2000 . A survey of same @-@ sex couples in the United States showed that between 2000 and 2005 , the number of people claiming to be in same @-@ sex relationships increased by 30 % — five times the rate of population growth in the U.S. The study attributed the jump to people being more comfortable self @-@ identifying as homosexual to the federal government . 
 The government of the United Kingdom does not ask citizens to define their sexuality . However , a survey by the UK Office for National Statistics ( ONS ) in 2010 found that 1 @.@ 5 % of Britons identified themselves as gay or bisexual , and the ONS suggests that this is in line with other surveys showing the number between 0 @.@ 3 % and 3 % . Estimates of lesbians are sometimes not differentiated in studies of same @-@ sex households , such as those performed by the U.S. census , and estimates of total gay , lesbian , or bisexual population by the UK government . However , polls in Australia have recorded a range of self @-@ identified lesbian or bisexual women from 1 @.@ 3 % to 2 @.@ 2 % of the total population . 
 = = Health = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 In terms of medical issues , lesbians are referred to as women who have sex with women ( WSW ) because of the misconceptions and assumptions about women 's sexuality and some women 's hesitancy to disclose their accurate sexual histories even to a physician . Many self @-@ identified lesbians neglect to see a physician because they do not participate in heterosexual activity and require no birth control , which is the initiating factor for most women to seek consultation with a gynecologist when they become sexually active . As a result , many lesbians are not screened regularly with Pap smears . The U.S. government reports that some lesbians neglect seeking medical screening in the U.S. ; they lack health insurance because many employers do not offer health benefits to domestic partners . 
 The result of the lack of medical information on WSW is that medical professionals and some lesbians perceive lesbians as having lower risks of acquiring a sexually transmitted disease or types of cancer . When women do seek medical attention , medical professionals often fail to take a complete medical history . In a recent study of 2 @,@ 345 lesbian and bisexual women , only 9 @.@ 3 % had claimed they had ever been asked their sexual orientation by a physician . A third of the respondents believed disclosing their sexual history would result in a negative reaction , and 30 % had received a negative reaction from a medical professional after identifying themselves as lesbian or bisexual . A patient 's complete history helps medical professionals identify higher risk areas and corrects assumptions about the personal histories of women . In a similar survey of 6 @,@ 935 lesbians , 77 % had had sexual contact with one or more male partners , and 6 % had that contact within the previous year . 
 Heart disease is listed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as the number one cause of death for all women . Factors that add to risk of heart disease include obesity and smoking , both of which are more prevalent in lesbians . Studies show that lesbians have a higher body mass and are generally less concerned about weight issues than heterosexual women , and lesbians consider women with higher body masses to be more attractive than heterosexual women do . Lesbians are more likely to exercise regularly than heterosexual women , and lesbians do not generally exercise for aesthetic reasons , although heterosexual women do . Research is needed to determine specific causes of obesity in lesbians . 
 Lack of differentiation between homosexual and heterosexual women in medical studies that concentrate on health issues for women skews results for lesbians and non @-@ lesbian women . Reports are inconclusive about occurrence of breast cancer in lesbians . It has been determined , however , that the lower rate of lesbians tested by regular Pap smears makes it more difficult to detect cervical cancer at early stages in lesbians . The risk factors for developing ovarian cancer rates are higher in lesbians than heterosexual women , perhaps because many lesbians lack protective factors of pregnancy , abortion , contraceptives , breast feeding , and miscarriages . 
 Some sexually transmitted diseases are communicable between women , including human papillomavirus ( HPV ) — specifically genital warts — squamous intraepithelial lesions , trichomoniasis , syphilis , and herpes simplex virus ( HSV ) . Transmission of specific sexually transmitted diseases among women who have sex with women depends on the sexual practices women engage in . Any object that comes in contact with cervical secretions , vaginal mucosa , or menstrual blood , including fingers or penetrative objects may transmit sexually transmitted diseases . <unk> contact may indicate a higher risk of acquiring HSV , even among women who have had no prior sex with men . 
 Bacterial vaginosis ( BV ) occurs more often in lesbians , but it is unclear if BV is transmitted by sexual contact ; it occurs in celibate as well as sexually active women . BV often occurs in both partners in a lesbian relationship ; a recent study of women with BV found that 81 % had partners with BV . Lesbians are not included in a category of frequency of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) transmission , although transmission is possible through vaginal and cervical secretions . The highest rate of transmission of HIV to lesbians is among women who participate in intravenous drug use or have sexual intercourse with bisexual men . 
 = = = Mental = = = 
 Since medical literature began to describe homosexuality , it has often been approached from a view that sought to find an inherent psychopathology as the root cause , influenced by the theories of Sigmund Freud . Although he considered bisexuality inherent in all people , and said that most have phases of homosexual attraction or experimentation , exclusive same @-@ sex attraction he attributed to stunted development resulting from trauma or parental conflicts . Much literature on mental health and lesbians centered on their depression , substance abuse , and suicide . Although these issues exist among lesbians , discussion about their causes shifted after homosexuality was removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual in 1973 . Instead , social ostracism , legal discrimination , internalization of negative stereotypes , and limited support structures indicate factors homosexuals face in Western societies that often adversely affect their mental health . 
 Women who identify as lesbian report feeling significantly different and isolated during adolescence . These emotions have been cited as appearing on average at 15 years old in lesbians and 18 years old in women who identify as bisexual . On the whole , women tend to work through developing a self @-@ concept internally , or with other women with whom they are intimate . Women also limit who they divulge their sexual identities to , and more often see being lesbian as a choice , as opposed to gay men , who work more externally and see being gay as outside their control . 
 Anxiety disorders and depression are the most common mental health issues for women . Depression is reported among lesbians at a rate similar to heterosexual women , although generalized anxiety disorder is more likely to appear among lesbian and bisexual women than heterosexual women . Depression is a more significant problem among women who feel they must hide their sexual orientation from friends and family , or experience compounded ethnic or religious discrimination , or endure relationship difficulties with no support system . Men 's shaping of women 's sexuality has proven to have an effect on how lesbians see their own bodies . Studies have shown that heterosexual men and lesbians have different standards for what they consider attractive in women . Lesbians who view themselves with male standards of female beauty may experience lower self @-@ esteem , eating disorders , and higher incidence of depression . More than half the respondents to a 1994 survey of health issues in lesbians reported they had suicidal thoughts , and 18 % had attempted suicide . 
 A population @-@ based study completed by the National Alcohol Research Center found that women who identify as lesbian or bisexual are less likely to abstain from alcohol . Lesbians and bisexual women have a higher likelihood of reporting problems with alcohol , as well as not being satisfied with treatment for substance abuse programs . Many lesbian communities are centered in bars , and drinking is an activity that correlates to community participation for lesbians and bisexual women . 
 = = Media representation = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Lesbians portrayed in literature , film , and television often shape contemporary thought about women 's sexuality . The majority of media about lesbians is produced by men ; women 's publishing companies did not develop until the 1970s , films about lesbians made by women did not appear until the 1980s , and television shows portraying lesbians written by women only began to be created in the 21st century . As a result , homosexuality — particularly dealing with women — has been excluded because of symbolic annihilation . When depictions of lesbians began to surface , they were often one @-@ dimensional , simplified stereotypes . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 In addition to Sappho 's accomplishments , literary historian Jeannette Howard Foster includes the Book of Ruth , and ancient mythological tradition as examples of lesbianism in classical literature . Greek stories of the heavens often included a female figure whose virtue and virginity were unspoiled , who pursued more masculine interests , and who was followed by a dedicated group of maidens . Foster cites Camilla and Diana , Artemis and Callisto , and <unk> and Ianthe as examples of female mythological figures who showed remarkable devotion to each other , or defied gender expectations . The Greeks are also given credit with spreading the story of a mythological race of women warriors named Amazons . En @-@ <unk> @-@ ana , a priestess in Ancient Iraq who dedicated herself to the Sumerian goddess Inanna , has the distinction of signing the oldest @-@ surviving signed poetry in history . She characterized herself as Inanna 's spouse . 
 For ten centuries after the fall of the Roman Empire , lesbianism disappeared from literature . Foster points to the particularly strict view that Eve — representative of all women — caused the downfall of mankind ; original sin among women was a particular concern , especially because women were perceived as creating life . During this time , women were largely illiterate and not encouraged to engage in intellectual pursuit , so men were responsible for shaping ideas about sexuality . 
 In 15 – 16th @-@ century French and English depictions of relationships between women ( Lives of Gallant Ladies by Brantôme in 1665 , John Cleland 's 1749 erotica Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure , L <unk> Anglais by various authors in 1778 ) , writers ' attitudes spanned from amused tolerance to arousal , whereupon a male character would participate to complete the act . Physical relationships between women were often encouraged ; men felt no threat as they viewed sexual acts between women to be accepted when men were not available , and not comparable to fulfillment that could be achieved by sexual acts between men and women . At worst , if a woman became enamored of another woman , she became a tragic figure . Physical and therefore emotional satisfaction was considered impossible without a natural phallus . Male intervention into relationships between women was necessary only when women acted as men and demanded the same social privileges . 
 Lesbianism became almost exclusive to French literature in the 19th century , based on male fantasy and the desire to shock bourgeois moral values . Honoré de Balzac , in The Girl with the Golden Eyes ( 1835 ) , employed lesbianism in his story about three people living amongst the moral degeneration of Paris , and again in Cousin Bette and Séraphîta . His work influenced novelist Théophile Gautier 's Mademoiselle de Maupin , which provided the first description of a physical type that became associated with lesbians : tall , wide @-@ shouldered , slim @-@ hipped , and athletically inclined . Charles Baudelaire repeatedly used lesbianism as a theme in his poems " Lesbos " , " Femmes <unk> 1 " ( " Damned Women " ) , and " Femmes <unk> 2 " . 
 Reflecting French society , as well as employing stock character associations , many of the lesbian characters in 19th @-@ century French literature were prostitutes or courtesans : personifications of vice who died early , violent deaths in moral endings . Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's 1816 poem " Christabel " and the novella Carmilla ( 1872 ) by Sheridan Le Fanu both present lesbianism associated with vampirism . Portrayals of female homosexuality not only formed European consciousness about lesbianism , but Krafft @-@ Ebing cited the characters in Gustave Flaubert 's <unk> ( 1862 ) and Ernest <unk> 's Le Comte de <unk> ( 1867 ) as examples of lesbians because both novels feature female protagonists who do not adhere to social norms and express " contrary sexual feeling " , although neither participated in same @-@ sex desire or sexual behavior . Havelock Ellis used literary examples from Balzac and several French poets and writers to develop his framework to identify sexual inversion in women . 
 Gradually , women began to author their own thoughts and literary works about lesbian relationships . Until the publication of The Well of Loneliness , most major works involving lesbianism were penned by men . Foster suggests that women would have encountered suspicion about their own lives had they used same @-@ sex love as a topic , and that some writers including Louise <unk> , Charlotte <unk> , and Margaret Fuller either changed the pronouns in their literary works to male , or made them ambiguous . Author George Sand was portrayed as a character in several works in the 19th century ; writer Mario Praz credited the popularity of lesbianism as a theme to Sand 's appearance in Paris society in the 1830s . Charlotte Brontë 's Villette in 1853 initiated a genre of boarding school stories with homoerotic themes . 
 In the 20th century , Katherine Mansfield , Amy Lowell , Gertrude Stein , H.D. , Vita Sackville @-@ West , Virginia Woolf , and Gale Wilhelm wrote popular works that had same @-@ sex relationships or gender transformations as themes . Some women , such as Marguerite <unk> and Mary Renault , wrote or translated works of fiction that focused on homosexual men , like some of the writings of Carson McCullers . All three were involved in same @-@ sex relationships , but their primary friendships were with gay men . Foster further asserts 1928 was a " peak year " for lesbian @-@ themed literature ; in addition to The Well of Loneliness , three other novels with lesbian themes were published in England : Elizabeth Bowen 's The Hotel , Woolf 's Orlando , and Compton Mackenzie 's satirical novel Extraordinary Women . Unlike The Well of Loneliness , none of these novels were banned . 
 As the paperback book came into fashion , lesbian themes were relegated to pulp fiction . Many of the pulp novels typically presented very unhappy women , or relationships that ended tragically . Marijane Meaker later wrote that she was told to make the relationship end badly in Spring Fire because the publishers were concerned about the books being confiscated by the U.S. Postal Service . Patricia Highsmith , writing as Claire Morgan , wrote The Price of Salt in 1951 and refused to follow this directive , but instead used a pseudonym . 
 Following the Stonewall riots , lesbian themes in literature became much more diverse and complex , and shifted the focus of lesbianism from erotica for heterosexual men to works written by and for lesbians . Feminist magazines such as The Furies , and Sinister Wisdom replaced The Ladder . Serious writers who used lesbian characters and plots included Rita Mae Brown 's <unk> Jungle ( 1973 ) , which presents a feminist heroine who chooses to be a lesbian . Poet Audre Lorde confronts homophobia and racism in her works , and <unk> Moraga is credited with being primarily responsible for bringing Latina perspectives to lesbian literature . Further changing values are evident in the writings of Dorothy Allison , who focuses on child sexual abuse and deliberately provocative lesbian sadomasochism themes . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Lesbianism , or the suggestion of it , began early in filmmaking . The same constructs of how lesbians were portrayed — or for what reasons — as what had appeared in literature were placed on women in the films . Women challenging their feminine roles was a device more easily accepted than men challenging masculine ones . Actresses appeared as men in male roles because of plot devices as early as 1914 in A Florida Enchantment featuring Edith Storey . In Morocco ( 1930 ) Marlene Dietrich kisses another woman on the lips , and Katharine Hepburn plays a man in Christopher Strong in 1933 and again in Sylvia Scarlett ( 1936 ) . Hollywood films followed the same trend set by audiences who flocked to Harlem to see edgy shows that suggested bisexuality . 
 Overt female homosexuality was introduced in 1929 's Pandora 's Box between Louise Brooks and Alice Roberts . However , the development of the Hays Code in 1930 censored most references to homosexuality from film under the umbrella term " sex perversion " . German films depicted homosexuality and were distributed throughout Europe , but 1931 's Mädchen in Uniform was not distributed in the U.S. because of the depiction of an adolescent 's love for a female teacher in boarding school . 
 Because of the Hays Code , lesbianism after 1930 was absent from most films , even those adapted with overt lesbian characters or plot devices . Lillian Hellman 's play The Children 's Hour was converted into a heterosexual love triangle and retitled These Three . <unk> Queen Christina in 1933 , starring Greta Garbo , veiled most of the speculation about Christina of Sweden 's affairs with women . Homosexuality or lesbianism was never mentioned outright in the films while the Hays Code was enforced . The reason censors stated for removing a lesbian scene in 1954 's The Pit of Loneliness was that it was , " Immoral , would tend to corrupt morals " . The code was relaxed somewhat after 1961 , and the next year William Wyler remade The Children 's Hour with Audrey Hepburn and Shirley MacLaine . After MacLaine 's character admits her love for Hepburn 's , she hangs herself ; this set a precedent for miserable endings in films addressing homosexuality . 
 Gay characters also were often killed off at the end , such as the death of Sandy Dennis ' character at the end of The Fox in 1968 . If not victims , lesbians were depicted as villains or morally corrupt , such as portrayals of brothel <unk> by Barbara Stanwyck in Walk on the Wild Side from 1962 and Shelley Winters in The Balcony in 1963 . Lesbians as predators were presented in Rebecca ( 1940 ) , women 's prison films like Caged ( 1950 ) , or in the character Rosa Klebb in From Russia with Love ( 1963 ) . Lesbian vampire themes have reappeared in Dracula 's Daughter ( 1936 ) , Blood and Roses ( 1960 ) , <unk> Lesbos ( 1971 ) , and The Hunger ( 1983 ) . Basic Instinct ( 1992 ) featured a bisexual murderer played by Sharon Stone ; it was one of several films that set off a storm of protests about the depiction of gays as predators . 
 The first film to address lesbianism with significant depth was The Killing of Sister George in 1968 , which was filmed in The Gateways Club , a longstanding lesbian pub in London . It is the first to claim a film character who identifies as a lesbian , and film historian Vito Russo considers the film a complex treatment of a multifaceted character who is forced into silence about her openness by other lesbians . Personal Best in 1982 , and <unk> in 1983 treat the lesbian relationships more sympathetically and show lesbian sex scenes , though in neither film are the relationships happy ones . Personal Best was criticized for engaging in the cliched plot device of one woman returning to a relationship with a man , implying that lesbianism is a phase , as well as treating the lesbian relationship with " undisguised voyeurism " . More ambiguous portrayals of lesbian characters were seen in Silkwood ( 1983 ) , The Color Purple ( 1985 ) , and Fried Green Tomatoes ( 1991 ) , despite explicit lesbianism in the source material . 
 An era of independent filmmaking brought different stories , writers , and directors to films . Desert Hearts arrived in 1985 , to be one of the most successful . Directed by lesbian Donna Deitch , it is loosely based on Jane Rule 's novel Desert of the Heart . It received mixed critical commentary , but earned positive reviews from the gay press . The late 1980s and early 1990s ushered in a series of films treating gay and lesbian issues seriously , made by gays and lesbians , nicknamed New Queer Cinema . Films using lesbians as a subject included Rose <unk> 's avant garde romantic comedy Go Fish ( 1994 ) and the first film about African American lesbians , Cheryl <unk> 's The Watermelon Woman , in 1995 . 
 Realism in films depicting lesbians developed further to include romance stories such as The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love and When Night Is Falling , both in 1995 , Better Than Chocolate ( 1999 ) , and the social satire But I 'm A Cheerleader in 2001 . A twist on the lesbian @-@ as @-@ predator theme was the added complexity of motivations of some lesbian characters in Peter Jackson 's Heavenly Creatures ( 1994 ) , the Oscar @-@ winning biopic of Aileen <unk> , Monster ( 2003 ) , and the exploration of fluent sexuality and gender in Chasing Amy ( 1997 ) , Kissing Jessica Stein ( 2001 ) , and Boys Don 't Cry ( 1999 ) . The film V for Vendetta shows a dictatorship in future Britain that forces lesbians , homosexuals , and other " unwanted " people in society to be systematically slaughtered in Nazi concentration camps . In the film , a lesbian actress named Valerie , who was killed in such a manner , serves as inspiration for the masked rebel V and his ally Evey Hammond , who set out to overthrow the dictatorship . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Homosexuality addressed by television started much later than films . Local talk shows in the late 1950s first addressed homosexuality by inviting panels of experts ( usually not gay themselves ) to discuss the problems of gay men in society . Lesbianism was rarely included . The first time a lesbian was portrayed on network television was the NBC drama The Eleventh Hour in the early 1960s , in a teleplay about an actress who feels she is persecuted by her female director , and in distress , calls a psychiatrist who explains she is a latent lesbian who has deep @-@ rooted guilt about her feelings for women . When she realizes this , however , she is able to pursue healthy heterosexual relationships . 
 Invisibility for lesbians continued in the 1970s when homosexuality became the subject of dramatic portrayals , first with medical dramas ( The Bold Ones , Marcus Welby , M.D. , Medical Center ) featuring primarily male patients coming out to doctors , or staff members coming out to other staff members . These shows allowed homosexuality to be discussed clinically , with the main characters guiding troubled gay characters or correcting homophobic antagonists , while simultaneously comparing homosexuality to psychosis , criminal behavior , or drug use . 
 Another stock plot device in the 1970s was the gay character in a police drama . They served as victims of blackmail or anti @-@ gay violence , but more often as criminals . Beginning in the late 1960s with <unk> , Police Story , and Police Woman , the use of homosexuals in stories became much more prevalent , according to Vito Russo , as a response to their higher profiles in gay activism . Lesbians were included as villains , motivated to murder by their desires , internalized homophobia , or fear of being exposed as homosexual . One episode of Police Woman earned protests by the National Gay Task Force before it aired for portraying a trio of murderous lesbians who killed retirement home patients for their money . NBC edited the episode because of the protests , but a sit @-@ in was staged in the head of NBC 's offices . 
 In the middle of the 1970s , gays and lesbians began to appear as police officers or detectives , facing coming out issues . This did not extend to CBS ' groundbreaking show Cagney & Lacey in 1982 , starring two female police detectives . CBS production made conscious attempts to soften the characters so they would not appear to be lesbians . In 1991 , a bisexual lawyer portrayed by Amanda Donohoe on L.A. Law shared the first significant lesbian kiss on primetime television with Michele Greene , stirring a controversy despite being labeled " chaste " by The Hollywood Reporter . 
 Though television did not begin to use recurring homosexual characters until the late 1980s , some early situation comedies used a stock character that author Stephen Tropiano calls " gay @-@ straight " : supporting characters who were quirky , did not comply with gender norms , or had ambiguous personal lives , that " for all purposes should be gay " . These included Zelda from The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis , Miss Hathaway from The Beverly Hillbillies , and Jo from The Facts of Life . In the mid @-@ 1980s through the 1990s , sitcoms frequently employed a " coming out " episode , where a friend of one of the stars admits she is a lesbian , forcing the cast to deal with the issue . Designing Women , The Golden Girls , and Friends used this device with women in particular . 
 Recurring lesbian characters who came out were seen on Married With Children , Mad About You , and Roseanne , in which a highly publicized episode had ABC executives afraid a televised kiss between Roseanne and Mariel Hemingway would destroy ratings and ruin advertising . The episode was instead the week 's highest rated . By far the sitcom with the most significant impact to the image of lesbians was Ellen . Publicity surrounding Ellen 's coming out episode in 1997 was enormous ; Ellen DeGeneres appeared on the cover of Time magazine the week before the airing of " The Puppy Episode " with the headline " Yep , I 'm Gay " . Parties were held in many U.S. cities to watch the episode , and the opposition from conservative organizations was intense . WBMA @-@ LP , the ABC affiliate in Birmingham , Alabama , even refused to air the first run of the episode , citing conservative values of the local viewing audience , which earned the station some infamy and ire in the LGBT community . Even still , " The Puppy Episode " won an Emmy for writing , but as the show began to deal with Ellen Morgan 's sexuality each week , network executives grew uncomfortable with the direction the show took and canceled it . 
 Dramas following L.A. Law began incorporating homosexual themes , particularly with continuing storylines on Relativity , Picket Fences , ER , and Star Trek : The Next Generation and Deep Space Nine , both of which tested the boundaries of sexuality and gender . A show directed at adolescents that had a particularly strong cult following was Buffy the Vampire Slayer . In the fourth season of Buffy , Tara and Willow admit their love for each other without any special fanfare and the relationship is treated as are the other romantic relationships on the show . 
 What followed was a series devoted solely to gay characters from network television . Showtime 's American rendition of Queer as Folk ran for five years , from 2000 to 2005 ; two of the main characters were a lesbian couple . Showtime promoted the series as " No Limits " , and Queer as Folk addressed homosexuality graphically . The aggressive advertising paid off as the show became the network 's highest rated , doubling the numbers of other Showtime programs after the first season . In 2004 , Showtime introduced The L Word , a dramatic series devoted to a group of lesbian and bisexual women , running its final season in 2009 . 
 = = Current issues of lesbians = = 
 = = = Lesbian chic and popular culture = = = 
 The invisibility of lesbians has gradually eroded since the early 1980s . This is in part due to public figures who have caused speculation and comment in the press about their sexuality and lesbianism in general . The primary figure earning this attention was Martina Navratilova , who served as tabloid fodder for years as she denied being lesbian , admitted to being bisexual , had very public relationships with Rita Mae Brown and Judy Nelson , and acquired as much press about her sexuality as she did her athletic achievements . Navratilova spurred what scholar Diane Hamer termed " constant preoccupation " in the press with determining the root of same @-@ sex desire . 
 Other public figures acknowledged their homosexuality and bisexuality , notably musicians k.d. lang and Melissa Etheridge , and Madonna 's pushing of sexual boundaries in her performances and publications . In 1993 , lang and self @-@ professed heterosexual supermodel Cindy Crawford posed for the cover of Vanity Fair in a provocative arrangement that showed Crawford shaving lang 's face , as lang lounged in a barber 's chair wearing a pinstripe suit . The image " became an internationally recognized symbol of the phenomenon of lesbian chic " , according to Hamer . The year 1994 marked a rise in lesbian visibility , particularly appealing to women with feminine appearances . Between 1992 and 1994 , Mademoiselle , Vogue , Cosmopolitan , Glamour , Newsweek , and New York magazines featured stories about women who admitted sexual histories with other women . 
 One analyst reasoned the recurrence of lesbian chic was due to the often @-@ used homoerotic subtexts of gay male subculture being considered off limits because of AIDS in the late 1980s and 1990s , joined with the distant memory of lesbians as they appeared in the 1970s : unattractive and militant . In short , lesbians became more attractive to general audiences when they ceased having political convictions . All the attention on feminine and glamorous women created what culture analyst Rodger <unk> characterizes as an unrealistic image of lesbians packaged by heterosexual men ; the trend influenced an increase in the inclusion of lesbian material in pornography aimed at men . 
 A resurgence of lesbian visibility and sexual fluidity was noted in 2009 with celebrities such as Cynthia Nixon and Lindsay Lohan commenting openly on their relationships with women , and reality television addressing same @-@ sex relationships . Psychiatrists and feminist philosophers write that the rise in women acknowledging same @-@ sex relationships is due to growing social acceptance , but also concede that " only a certain kind of lesbian — slim and elegant or butch in just the right androgynous way — is acceptable to mainstream culture " . 
 = = = Sexuality and lesbian identity = = = 
 The presence of sexual activity between women as necessary to define a lesbian or a relationship continues to be debated . According to feminist writer Naomi McCormick , women 's sexuality is constructed by men , whose primary indicator of lesbian sexual orientation is sexual experience with other women . The same indicator is not necessary to identify a woman as heterosexual , however . McCormick states that emotional , mental , and ideological connections between women are as important or more so than the genital . Nonetheless , in the 1980s , a significant movement rejected the <unk> of lesbianism by cultural feminists , causing a heated controversy called the feminist sex wars . Butch and femme roles returned , although not as strictly followed as they were in the 1950s . They became a mode of chosen sexual self @-@ expression for some women in the 1990s . Once again , women felt safer claiming to be more sexually adventurous , and sexual flexibility became more accepted . 
 The focus of this debate often centers on a phenomenon named by sexologist Pepper Schwartz in 1983 . Schwartz found that long @-@ term lesbian couples report having less sexual contact than heterosexual or homosexual male couples , calling this lesbian bed death . However , lesbians dispute the study 's definition of sexual contact , and introduced other factors such as deeper connections existing between women that make frequent sexual relations redundant , greater sexual fluidity in women causing them to move from heterosexual to bisexual to lesbian numerous times through their lives — or reject the labels entirely . Further arguments attested that the study was flawed and misrepresented accurate sexual contact between women , or sexual contact between women has increased since 1983 as many lesbians find themselves freer to sexually express themselves . 
 More discussion on gender and sexual orientation identity has affected how many women label or view themselves . Most people in western culture are taught that heterosexuality is an innate quality in all people . When a woman realizes her romantic and sexual attraction to another woman , it may cause an " existential crisis " ; many who go through this adopt the identity of a lesbian , challenging what society has offered in stereotypes about homosexuals , to learn how to function within a homosexual subculture . Lesbians in Western cultures generally share an identity that parallels those built on ethnicity ; they have a shared history and subculture , and similar experiences with discrimination which has caused many lesbians to reject heterosexual principles . This identity is unique from gay men and heterosexual women , and often creates tension with bisexual women . 
 Researchers , including social scientists , state that often behavior and identity do not match : women may label themselves heterosexual but have sexual relations with women , self @-@ identified lesbians may have sex with men , or women may find that what they considered an immutable sexual identity has changed over time . A 2001 article on differentiating lesbians for medical studies and health research suggested identifying lesbians using the three characteristics of identity only , sexual behavior only , or both combined . The article declined to include desire or attraction as it rarely has bearing on measurable health or psychosocial issues . Researchers state that there is no standard definition of lesbian because " [ t ] he term has been used to describe women who have sex with women , either exclusively or in addition to sex with men ( i.e. , behavior ) ; women who self @-@ identify as lesbian ( i.e. , identity ) ; and women whose sexual preference is for women ( i.e. , desire or attraction ) " and that " [ t ] he lack of a standard definition of lesbian and of standard questions to assess who is lesbian has made it difficult to clearly define a population of lesbian women " . How and where study samples were obtained can also affect the definition . 
 = = = Families and politics = = = 
 Although homosexuality among females has taken place in many cultures in history , a recent phenomenon is the development of family among same @-@ sex partners . Before the 1970s , the idea that same @-@ sex adults formed long @-@ term committed relationships was unknown to many people . The majority of lesbians ( between 60 % and 80 % ) report being in a long @-@ term relationship . Sociologists credit the high number of paired women to gender role socialization : the inclination for women to commit to relationships doubles in a lesbian union . Unlike heterosexual relationships that tend to divide work based on sex roles , lesbian relationships divide chores evenly between both members . Studies have also reported that emotional bonds are closer in lesbian and gay relationships than heterosexual ones . 
 Family issues were significant concerns for lesbians when gay activism became more vocal in the 1960s and 1970s . Custody issues in particular were of interest since often courts would not award custody to mothers who were openly homosexual , even though the general procedure acknowledged children were awarded to the biological mother . Several studies performed as a result of custody disputes viewed how children grow up with same @-@ sex parents compared to single mothers who did not identify as lesbians . They found that children 's mental health , happiness , and overall adjustment is similar to children of divorced women who are not lesbians . Sexual orientation , gender identity , and sex roles of children who grow up with lesbian mothers are unaffected . Differences that were found include the fact that divorced lesbians tend to be living with a partner , fathers visit divorced lesbian mothers more often than divorced <unk> mothers , and lesbian mothers report a greater fear of losing their children through legal means . 
 Improving opportunities for growing families of same @-@ sex couples has shaped the political landscape within the past ten years . A push for same @-@ sex marriage or civil unions in western countries has replaced other political objectives . As of 2012 , ten countries and six U.S. states offer same @-@ sex marriage ; civil unions are offered as an option in some European countries , U.S. states and individual municipalities . The ability to adopt domestically or internationally children or provide a home as a foster parent is also a political and family priority for many lesbians , as is improving access to artificial insemination . 
 = Giant eland = 
 The giant eland ( Taurotragus derbianus ) , also known as the Lord Derby eland , is an open @-@ forest and savanna antelope . A species of the family Bovidae and genus Taurotragus , it was described in 1847 by John Edward Gray . The giant eland is the largest species of antelope , with a body length ranging from 220 – 290 cm ( 86 @.@ 5 – 114 in ) . There are two subspecies : T. d. derbianus and T. d. gigas . 
 The giant eland is an herbivore , eating grasses , foliage and branches . They usually form small herds consisting of 15 – 25 members , both males and females . Giant elands are not territorial , and have large home ranges . They are naturally alert and wary , which makes them difficult to approach and observe . They can run at up to 70 km / h ( 43 mph ) and use this speed as a defence against predators . Mating occurs throughout the year but peaks in the wet season . They mostly inhabit broad @-@ leafed savannas , woodlands and glades . 
 The giant eland is native to Cameroon , Central African Republic , Chad , Democratic Republic of the Congo , Guinea , Mali , Senegal , and South Sudan . It is no longer present in The Gambia , Ghana , Ivory Coast , and Togo . Its presence is uncertain in Nigeria , Guinea @-@ Bissau , and Uganda due to over hunting by European colonialists . The subspecies have been listed with different conservation statuses by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The scientific name of the giant eland is Taurotragus derbianus , derived from three words : tauros , tragos , and derbianus . <unk> is Greek for a bull or bullock . Tragos is Greek for a male goat , and refers to the tuft of hair that grows in the eland 's ear which resembles a goat 's beard . 
 The giant eland is also called " Lord Derby 's eland " in honour of Edward Smith @-@ Stanley , 13th Earl of Derby . It was due to his efforts that the giant eland was first introduced to England between 1835 and 1851 . Lord Derby sent botanist Joseph Burke to collect animals , either alive or dead , from South Africa for his museum and menagerie . The first elands introduced in England were a pair of common elands , and what would later be identified as a giant eland bull . The details were recorded in Smith @-@ Stanley 's privately printed work , <unk> from the Menagerie at Knowsley Hall . The Latin name indicates that it " belonged to " ( given by the suffix <unk> ) Derby , hence derbianus . 
 Although the giant eland is somewhat larger than the common eland , the epithet ' giant ' actually refers to its large horns . The name ' eland ' is Dutch for " elk " or " moose " . It has a Baltic source similar to the Lithuanian <unk> , which means " deer " . It was borrowed earlier as <unk> ( French ) in the 1610s or <unk> ( German ) . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The giant eland was first described in 1847 by John Edward Gray , a British zoologist , who called it Boselaphus derbianus . At that time , it was also called the ' black @-@ necked eland ' and <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Giant eland is placed in the genus Taurotragus of family Bovidae . Giant elands are sometimes considered part of the genus Tragelaphus on the basis of molecular phylogenetics , but are usually categorized as Taurotragus , along with the common eland ( T. oryx ) . Together with the bongo , Giant eland and common eland are the only antelopes in the tribe Tragelaphini to be given a generic name other than Tragelaphus . Although some authors , like Theodor Haltenorth , regarded the giant eland as conspecific with the common eland , they are usually considered two distinct species . 
 Two subspecies of giant eland have been recognized : 
 T. d. derbianus J. E. Gray , 1847 – western giant eland , found in western Africa , particularly Senegal to Mali 
 T. d. gigas Heuglin , 1863 – eastern giant eland , found in central to eastern Africa , particularly Cameroon to South Sudan 
 = = Description = = 
 The giant elands are spiral @-@ horned antelopes . Despite its common name , this species broadly overlaps in size with the common eland ( Taurotragus oryx ) . However , the giant eland is somewhat larger on average than the common eland and is thus the largest species of antelope in the world . They are typically between 220 and 290 cm ( 7 @.@ 2 and 9 @.@ 5 ft ) in head @-@ and @-@ body length and stand approximately 130 to 180 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 9 ft ) at the shoulder . Giant elands exhibit sexual dimorphism , as males are larger than females . The males weigh 400 to 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 880 to 2 @,@ 200 lb ) and females weigh 300 to 600 kg ( 660 to 1 @,@ 320 lb ) . The tail is long , having a dark tuft of hair , and averages 90 cm ( 35 in ) in length . The life expectancy of giant elands is up to 25 years in the wild , and about 20 years in captivity . 
 The smooth coat is reddish @-@ brown to chestnut , usually darker in males than females , with 8 – 12 well @-@ defined vertical white stripes on the torso . The colour of the male 's coat darkens with age . According to zoologist Jakob Bro @-@ Jørgensen , the colour of the male 's coat can reflect the levels of androgen , a male hormone , which is highest during rutting . Comparing the subspecies , T. d. derbianus is characterised by 15 body stripes , smaller size , and a rufous colour , while T. d. gigas is larger , a sandy colour , and has 12 body stripes . 
 A crest of short black hair extends down the neck to the middle of the back , and is particularly prominent on the shoulders . The slender legs are slightly lighter on their inner surfaces , with black and white markings just above the hooves . There are large black spots on the upper forelegs . The bridge of the nose is charcoal black , and there is a thin , indistinct tan @-@ coloured line , which is the chevron , between the eyes . The lips are white , as are several dots along the jawline . A pendulous dewlap , larger in males than females , originates from between the jowls and hangs to the upper chest when they reach sexual maturity , with a fringe of hair on its edge . The large ears of the giant eland serve as signaling devices . Giant elands have comparatively longer legs than the common eland , as well as much brighter black and white markings on the legs and pasterns . 
 Both sexes have tightly spiraled , ' V ' -shaped horns . They can be up to 123 cm ( 4 @.@ 04 ft ) long on males and 66 cm ( 2 @.@ 17 ft ) on females . Males have horns that are thicker at the ends , longer , and more divergent than those of females . These features of the horns suggest that the giant eland evolved from an ancestor with true display horns . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 Fecal studies of the western giant eland revealed the presence of a newly found species Eimeria <unk> , of genus Eimeria , which consists of <unk> parasites . The sporulation lasted for two days at a temperature of 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . The species has been differentiated from E. canna and E. <unk> , which parasitize the common eland ( T. oryx ) . The giant eland is also parasitised by <unk> <unk> ( a trematode species ) , Taenia <unk> and T. <unk> ( two tapeworm species ) . 
 = = Genetics and evolution = = 
 The giant eland has 31 male chromosomes and 32 female chromosomes . In a 2008 <unk> study of spiral @-@ horned antelopes , chromosomal similarities were observed between cattle ( Bos taurus ) and eight species of spiral @-@ horned antelopes , namely : nyala ( Tragelaphus angasii ) , lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) , bongo ( T. eurycerus ) , bushbuck ( T. scriptus ) , greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) , sitatunga ( T. spekei ) , giant eland and common eland ( T. oryx ) . It was found that chromosomes involved in centric fusions in these species used a complete set of cattle painting probes generated by laser <unk> . The study confirmed the presence of the chromosome translocation known as Robertsonian translocation ( 1 ; 29 ) , a widespread evolutionary marker common to all known <unk> species . 
 An accidental mating between a male giant eland and a female kudu produced a male offspring , but it was <unk> . Analysis showed that it completely lacked germ cells , which produce gametes . Still , the hybrid had a strong male scent and exhibited male behaviour . Chromosomal examination showed that chromosomes 1 , 3 , 5 , 9 , and 11 differed from the parental karyotypes . Notable mixed inherited traits were pointed ears like the eland 's , but a bit widened like kudu 's . The tail was half the length of that of an eland with a tuft of hair at the end as in kudu . 
 Previous genetic studies of African savanna ungulates revealed the presence of a long @-@ standing Pleistocene refugium in eastern and southern Africa , which also includes the giant eland . The common eland and giant eland have been estimated to have diverged about 1 @.@ 6 million years ago . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Giant elands live in the broad @-@ leafed savanna , woodlands , and glades of central and western Africa , which correspond to the two subspecies . They also live in forests as well as on the fringes of deserts . The giant elands can also live in deserts , as they produce very dry dung . They are found in South Sudan and Central African Republic into northern Cameroon and southern Chad . 
 They inhabit places near hilly or rocky landscapes and those with water sources nearby . Science author Jonathan Kingdon had thought the giant elands lived only in woodlands of <unk> <unk> , an African hardwood tree . The giant eland is adapted to these broad @-@ leafed , deciduous <unk> woodlands . Recent studies proved that they also inhabit woodlands with trees of the genera Terminalia , Combretum , and Afzelia . 
 In the past , giant elands occurred throughout the relatively narrow belt of savanna woodland that extends across West and Central Africa from Senegal to the Nile . Today they are conserved in national parks and reserves , and occur mostly in Senegal . The western giant eland is largely restricted to Niokolo @-@ Koba National Park in Senegal . The eastern giant eland is found in several reserves , for example in Bénoué National Park , Faro National Park and Bouba Njida National Park in Cameroon and in Manovo @-@ Gounda St. Floris National Park in the Central African Republic . They are also kept in captivity . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Primarily nocturnal , giant elands have large home ranges and seasonal migration patterns . They form separate groups of males and of females and juveniles . Adult males mainly remain alone , and often spend time with females for an hour to a week . A gregarious species , giant eland herds usually consist of 15 – 25 animals ( sometimes even more ) and do not disband during the wet season , suggesting that social rather than ecological factors are responsible for herding . During the day , herds often rest in sheltered areas . As many other animals do , giant elands scrape mineral lick sites with the help of horns to loosen soil . 
 Giant elands are alert and wary , making them difficult to approach and observe or to hunt . If a bull senses danger , he will give deep @-@ throated barks while leaving the herd , repeating the process until the whole herd is aware of the danger . Giant elands can move quickly , running at over 70 km / h ( 43 mph ) , and despite their size are exceptional jumpers , easily clearing heights of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . Their primary predators are the lion and spotted hyena , while young , sickly and a rare adult may be vulnerable to leopards and African wild dogs . Due to their large size , they prove a good meal for the predators . However , they are not easily taken by any predator , especially the heavier and larger horned bulls which can be a dangerous adversary even for a lion pride . 
 = = Diet = = 
 Primarily a herbivore , the giant eland eats grasses and foliage , as well as other parts of a plant . In the rainy season , they browse in herds and feed on grasses . They can eat coarse , dry grass and weeds if nothing else is available . They eat fruits too , such as plums . A study in South Africa showed that an eland 's diet consists of 75 % shrubs and 25 % grasses , with highly varying proportions . They often use their long horns to break off branches . 
 As they need a regular intake of water in their diet , they prefer living in places with a nearby water source . However , some adaptations they possess help them to survive even in the lack of water by maintaining a sufficient quantity of it in their body . They produce very dry dung compared to domestic cattle . In deserts , they can get their required water from the moisture of succulent plants . Another way in which they conserve water is by resting in the day and feeding at night , so that they minimize the water quantity required to cool themselves . 
 Several studies have investigated the eland 's diet . A study of giant elands in the Bandia Natural reserve in Senegal revealed that the most important and most preferred plants were various species of Acacia , Terminalia and Combretum , along with Azadirachta indica , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> senegalensis , Prosopis africana , <unk> <unk> , Saba senegalensis and pods of <unk> <unk> . Another study in Sudan showed that western giant elands preferred Cassia tora , which was the most abundant legume in the region . 
 In 2010 , histological analysis of the feces of South African western giant elands was done in the Niokolo @-@ Koba National Park and in the Bandia National Reserve . In both studies leaves , shoots of woody plants , and fruits were found to be the three major components . The other components that appeared in minor proportions were forbs and grasses , generally below five percent of the mean fecal volume . They were seen eating most foliage from <unk> <unk> , Grewia bicolor , Hymenocardia acida , and Ziziphus <unk> , and the fruits of Acacia and Strychnos spinosa . In the Bandia Reserve , differences in diet were marked among age classes . The conclusions were that in the dry season the eland was a pure browser , consuming grasses in small amounts . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Mating occurs throughout the year , but peaks in the wet season . Females reach sexual maturity at about two years , and males at four to five years . A female can remain in estrus for three days , and the estrous cycle is 21 – 26 days long . As in all antelopes , mating occurs at a time of food abundance . In some areas distinct breeding seasons exist . In southern Africa , females have been seen giving birth from August to October , and are joined by the males from late October to January . In Zambia calves are born in July and August . 
 Fights occur for dominance , in which the bulls lock horns and try to twist the necks of their opponents . As an act during rut , the males rub their foreheads in fresh urine or mud . They also use their horns to thresh and throw loose earth on themselves . The horns of older males get worn out due to rubbing them on tree barks . Expressions of anger are not typically observed . Dominant males may mate with multiple females . The courtship is brief , consisting of a penetration and one ejaculatory thrust . 
 After the courtship , the gestational period begins , which is of nine months duration . The delivery usually takes place in the night , after which the mother ingests the afterbirth . Generally one calf is delivered , and it remains with its mother for six months . Lactation can last for four to five months . After the first six months the young eland might join a group of other juveniles . 
 A Senegalese study focused on the suckling behaviour of giant eland and common eland calves about one to five months old determined that suckling bouts increased with the age of the calves . No other change occurred in the farmed common eland calves , but in the giant eland calves , the males were found to suckle more than female ones and shorter suckling bouts were marked in <unk> mothers than multiparous ones . The results suggest that Derby elands that lived in their natural habitat adjusted their maternal behaviour so as to be able to readily maintain a vigilant lookout for predators and other similar risks . In contrast , the farmed common elands behaved as in the conditions of captivity , without predators . 
 = = Populations = = 
 The eastern giant eland ranged from Nigeria , through Cameroon , Chad , the Central African Republic , and the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( formerly Zaire ) to Sudan and Uganda in 1980 . But the rinderpest outbreak ( 1983 – 1984 ) caused a devastating 60 – 80 % decline in the populations . The eastern giant eland is still found in extensive areas and is listed as ' Least Concern ' by the IUCN . It has many uninhabited habitats that are not expected to be occupied for human settlement , particularly in northern and eastern Central African Republic and south @-@ western Sudan , where their population has notably increased . According to Rod East , 15 @,@ 000 eastern giant elands existed as of 1999 , of which 12 @,@ 500 are in Central African Republic . The remaining areas are often disturbed by wars and conflicts — activities that can lead to a rapid decline in the eastern giant eland 's numbers if not controlled . 
 The western giant eland is in a more dangerous situation , being listed as ' Critically Endangered ' by the IUCN . Today they mostly occur in Senegal . In 1990 , populations were about 1000 , of which 700 to 800 were found in the Niokolo @-@ Koba National Park and the rest in the region around the <unk> River . As of 2008 , a population of less than 200 individuals occur there , and only a few elands exist in neighboring countries . 
 A study of the long @-@ term conservation strategy of the western giant eland was done in the Bandia and <unk> reserves , using demographic and pedigree data based on continuous monitoring of reproduction during 2000 to 2009 . In 2009 , the semi @-@ captive population was 54 individuals ( 26 males , 28 females ) . The female breeding probability was 84 % , and the annual population growth was 1 @.@ 36 . With more population , the elands were divided into five groups for observation . Although the mean interbreeding level became 0 @.@ 119 , a potential gene diversity ( GD ) of 92 % was retained . The authors concluded that with the introduction of new founders , the GD could be greatly improved in the next 100 years , and suggested that with proper management of the semi @-@ captive population , the numbers of the western giant eland could be increased . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The major threats to the western giant eland population are overhunting for its rich meat and habitat destruction caused by the expansion of human and livestock populations . The eastern giant eland is also depleting for similar reasons , and natural causes like continued droughts and competition from domestic animals are contributing to the reduction in numbers . Populations of the eastern giant eland had already gone down due to the rinderpest attacks . The situation was worse during World War II and other civil wars and political conflicts that harmed their natural habitats . 
 The giant eland is already extirpated in The Gambia , Ghana , Ivory Coast , and Togo . The western giant eland was once reported in Togo , but is believed to have been confused with the bongo ( <unk> eurycerus ) . In 1970 , it was reported eliminated in Uganda , during military operations . Its presence is uncertain in Guinea @-@ Bissau and Nigeria . 
 Today the western giant eland is conserved in the Niokolo @-@ Koba National Park and the <unk> Hunting Zone in Senegal . Field studies have proved that the Niokolo @-@ Koba National Park is ecologically suitable for the giant eland . As observed in the 2000 census of the park , the number of deaths in a decade were only 90 to 150 . 
 The eastern giant eland is conserved in the Faro National Park , Bénoué National Park , Bouba Njida National Park , <unk> @-@ <unk> National Park and Manovo @-@ Gounda @-@ St Floris National Park . They are bred in captivity in the Bandia Reserve and <unk> Reserve in Senegal , and at White Oak Conservation in Yulee , Florida , United States . Eland born at White Oak have been sent to other countries , including Costa Rica and South Africa , to initiate breeding programs . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Giant elands give large quantities of tender meat and high @-@ quality hides even if fed a low @-@ quality diet . These are game animals and are also hunted for trophies . Their milk is comparatively richer in proteins and <unk> than dairy cows , which may be an explanation for the quick growth of eland calves . Eland 's milk has about triple the fat content and twice the protein of a dairy cow 's milk . Its docility and profitable characteristics have made it a target of domestication in Africa and Russia and has also resulted in hunting . 
 Many people prefer to domesticate eland rather than cattle due to their numerous benefits . Elands can survive on scarce water , which is a great advantage over domestic cattle . They can also eat coarse grasses , and can even manage to ingest some poisonous plants that can prove fatal for cattle . They are also immune to some diseases to which cattle may succumb . 
 = Lisa Marie Varon = 
 Lisa Marie Varon ( née Sole ; born February 10 , 1971 ) is an American professional wrestler , fitness competitor , and former bodybuilder . She is best known for her time with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) under the ring name Victoria , where she is a former two- time WWE Women 's Champion , and in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) under the ring name Tara , where she is a former five @-@ time TNA Knockouts Champion . 
 Varon began competing in fitness competitions and won ESPN2 's Fitness America Series in 1997 . In 1999 , she placed second at a fitness event in New York to earn her International Federation of <unk> ( IFBB ) Professional Fitness Card . 
 Through a chance meeting , Varon met World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) performer Chyna , who encouraged her to become a professional wrestler . She trained in the WWF 's developmental territories for three years before being moved to the main roster to compete full @-@ time under the ring name Victoria . Her first television appearance came at WrestleMania 2000 , where she portrayed one of The Godfather 's " hos " . She debuted in June 2002 , and four months later she was pushed to win the WWE Women 's Championship , a title she would go on to hold twice in her wrestling career . After leaving WWE in 2009 , Varon debuted in TNA later that year as Tara . In TNA , she became a five @-@ time TNA Knockouts Champion , making her a seven @-@ time Women 's Champion overall . She was also a one @-@ time TNA Knockouts Tag Team Champion , with Brooke Tessmacher , collectively known as TnT . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Varon was born in San Bernardino , California , to a Puerto Rican father ( who is a Vietnam veteran ) and a Turkish mother who worked as a singer in Japan . She grew up with three older brothers , all of whom became amateur wrestlers , with her oldest brother , Bobby , winning a gold medal at the 1983 Pan American Games . Varon attended Eisenhower High School in Rialto , California . During high school , she was active in cheerleading , a sport in which she competed since the sixth grade . 
 During her senior year in high school , she was nationally recognized by the National Cheerleading Association , earning an All @-@ American award and being chosen to cheer at half @-@ time of the NFL 1989 Pro Bowl , alongside 70 other women . She participated in track and field events in the ninth grade . After graduating , she studied biology at the University of California , Los Angeles and medicine at Loma Linda University , with the intent on becoming a physician . She worked as a human tissue coordinator at the Inland Eye and Tissue Bank in Redlands , California , where she was involved in the process of organ donation . 
 = = Bodybuilding and fitness career = = 
 While working at the eye and tissue bank , Varon became a personal trainer and taught aerobics . While training at a gym , she was offered an opportunity to compete in a bodybuilding competition , a contest she won as a middleweight . She competed in fitness competitions , such as ESPN2 's Fitness America Series in 1997 and 1998 , winning the former , and the Miss Galaxy Competition in 1998 , where she met and befriended Torrie Wilson . After Wilson moved to Los Angeles , California and signed with the professional wrestling promotion World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) , she invited Varon to one of the shows . While backstage , an agent asked her to appear in a segment with Scott Hall . Through Wilson , Varon unsuccessfully attempted to obtain a contract with WCW . She later moved to Los Angeles to find work in televised news fitness segments . In 1999 , she earned her International Federation of <unk> ( IFBB ) Professional Fitness Card after placing second at the National Physique Committee ( NPC ) Team Universe show in New York . It was during her time working in fitness competitions that Varon also first met Trish Stratus . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Training and debut ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 After moving to Los Angeles , Varon worked as a trainer at the gym Crunch Fitness , where she met World Wrestling Federation wrestler Chyna , who complimented Varon on her appearance and encouraged her to become a wrestler . Varon would then put together a biography package and sent it to the WWF . She heard from Kevin Kelly two days later , who invited her to an interview in a month 's time . With no previous wrestling experience , she looked up professional wrestling schools , and eventually began training at Ultimate Pro Wrestling ( UPW ) in Southern California in June 2000 . She wrestled under the ring name Head Bitch In Charge ( <unk> ) , and appeared in a cheerleading outfit , with a snooty gimmick , similar to WCW Nitro Girl Miss Hancock . She impressed WWF talent scout Bruce Pritchard during her first UPW show . 
 Varon made her on @-@ screen debut in the WWF portraying one of The Godfather 's " hos " . She was referred to as the " head ho " , and led the " Save the Hos " campaign . On the August 7 episode of Raw , Varon took a bump by being powerbombed through a table by The Godfather 's next persona , The <unk> . After this , she was given the name Victoria . She was removed from television in November , and sent to WWF 's then @-@ developmental territory Memphis Championship Wrestling ( MCW ) for extensive training . Victoria briefly acted as the commissioner for MCW , and was involved in storyline feuds with Stacy Carter and Ivory . She also managed Steve Bradley before MCW closed in 2001 . Varon later relocated to Louisville , Kentucky to train in Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , using the ring name Queen Victoria . She was placed as the manager of the tag team the Basham Brothers , and managed one of the team members , Doug Basham , to win the OVW Heavyweight Championship on July 25 , 2001 . 
 = = = = Women 's Championship reigns ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 Varon returned to the renamed World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) as Victoria on the July 7 , 2002 episode of Sunday Night Heat , in an angle with Trish Stratus , who Victoria claimed had betrayed her when they worked together as fitness models . The storyline had her character become a demented , sadistic villain , as she and Stratus feuded for months . Her first pay @-@ per @-@ view match came at No Mercy , where she was defeated by Stratus . The following month at Survivor Series , Victoria defeated Stratus in a hardcore match , to win the WWE Women 's Championship for the first time . Victoria would go on to successfully retain her championship against Stacy Keibler , with the debut of her finishing move , the Widows Peak . The following night on Raw , Victoria was attacked in the ring by Stratus . Steven Richards came to her aid , establishing an on @-@ screen relationship between Victoria and Richards . 
 Victoria continued to feud with Trish Stratus into 2003 , competing against her in successful title defenses and mixed tag team matches , during which Victoria teamed with Richards . At WrestleMania XIX , Victoria dropped the Women 's Championship back to Stratus during a Triple Threat match that also involved Jazz . Throughout the rest of the year , Victoria was involved in matches against other Divas , such as participating in a Fatal Four @-@ Way match for the Women 's Championship at Judgment Day , and defeating Lita in the first women 's steel cage match in WWE history on November 24 . Victoria also defeated Ivory in a number one contender 's match for the Women 's Championship on the last episode of Sunday Night Heat of 2003 . After the match , Women 's Champion Molly Holly struck Victoria in the head with the title belt . 
 The next week on Raw , Victoria became a fan favorite , when she attacked Holly after the two women were placed in a team , along with Miss Jackie , for a six @-@ woman Happy Holidays tag team match . During her face run , she abandoned her sadistic and unstable gimmick , and began wearing hippie shorts and performed a gyrating moonsault . On January 5 , 2004 , Victoria was set for a title match with Molly Holly , however she was attacked by Test before the match . 
 The angle with Molly Holly continued into the next year , with Victoria defeating Holly in tag team matches . On February 23 , 2004 , Victoria defeated Holly , Lita and Jazz in a fatal four – way elimination match , to win her second Women 's Championship . After defeating Holly in a tag team match the next week , Victoria was challenged by Holly to a rematch for the title at WrestleMania XX , which later became a hair vs title match . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view , Victoria won the match , and shaved Holly 's head bald . She held the Women 's Championship until June 13 , when she dropped the title to the villainous Trish Stratus during a Fatal Four @-@ Way match at Bad Blood , that also included Lita and Gail Kim , and was unsuccessful in regaining it in a rematch a week later . After defeating Molly Holly at Vengeance to become the number one contender , Victoria lost to Stratus at Unforgiven for the championship . Prior to Unforgiven , several of Victoria 's matches were interrupted by a mysterious person in drag , who was later revealed to be Steven Richards , with whom she was previously allied . After the match with Stratus , the storyline culminated when Richards challenged Stratus ' ally Tyson Tomko to a match , which Richards lost . 
 = = = = Vince 's Devils ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 On the May 30 , 2005 episode of Raw , Victoria participated in a swimsuit contest , losing to Christy Hemme . Following the loss , the storyline had Victoria become a villainess by attacking the other contestants , as well as host Jerry Lawler , claiming that she had enough of the attention Hemme was receiving . The two engaged in a short feud which culminated in a match at Vengeance , which Victoria won . During her heel run in 2005 , Victoria adopted the gimmick of a bully @-@ like enforcer , when she was placed in an angle alongside Torrie Wilson and Candice Michelle ( collectively known as the Ladies in Pink , and later Vince 's Devils ) on August 29 , portraying the role of the group 's enforcer , as the three women joined forces against the 2005 Diva Search winner Ashley Massaro . Massaro was assisted in the storyline feud by Trish Stratus , and at Unforgiven , Victoria and Wilson were defeated by Stratus and Massaro . The angle continued into WWE Homecoming , where the Ladies in Pink lost a Handicap Bra and Panties match to Stratus and Massaro . The three of them competed in the first ever Bra and Panties gauntlet match , where Ashley was declared the winner by last eliminating Victoria . At the 2006 Royal Rumble , they appeared flirting with Vince McMahon . 
 On the March 6 , 2006 episode of Raw , Victoria and Candice turned on Wilson during Candice 's Playboy cover unveiling , starting an angle between the former teammates . A scheduled match was set to take place at WWE Saturday Night 's Main Event on the March 18 episode with Victoria and Candice against Wilson and Stratus . As part of the storyline , however , on the episode of Raw prior to the event , Wilson was found unconscious , with the implication being that Victoria and Candice had attacked her . The match eventually took place on March 27 , with Victoria and Candice being defeated . The alliance of Victoria and Candice fell apart during a tag team match on July 17 , in which Victoria and Mickie James were defeated by Wilson and Trish Stratus , with Candice as the special guest referee . 
 = = = = SmackDown and departure ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 Victoria was given a push on November 27 , after she won a number one contender 's battle royal . Varon gained notoriety from the match when it was reported that her kick to Candice Michelle 's face had resulted in a legitimate broken nose that required surgery . Following the victory , the angle had her carry a checklist to the ring which contained the names of other Divas . Each week , she checked a name off the list after defeating them in matches . She also defeated WWE Women 's Champion Mickie James in a non @-@ title match . Victoria lost the championship match against James at New Year 's Revolution , and a rematch on January 15 , 2007 . 
 On June 17 , Victoria was moved to the SmackDown brand as part of the WWE Supplemental Draft . Victoria became involved in an on @-@ screen relationship with Kenny Dykstra , and the duo was placed in feuds against Torrie Wilson and Jimmy Wang Yang , as well as Michelle McCool and Chuck Palumbo . While on a tour of Europe with WWE in December 2007 , Varon claimed to have legitimately broken McCool 's nose . 
 Victoria later allied herself with the debuting Natalya in April . At the Backlash pay @-@ per @-@ view on April 28 , Victoria teamed up with Natalya , Beth Phoenix , Jillian Hall , Layla and Melina to defeat Mickie James , Maria Kanellis , Ashley , Michelle McCool , Cherry and Kelly Kelly . On the May 2 episode of SmackDown ! , Victoria and Natalya defeated McCool and Cherry . In October , Victoria lost to the debuting Brie Bella , when Brie disappeared under the ring during the match , emerged appearing refreshed , and won . On the September 26 episode of SmackDown , Victoria and Natalya lost to Maria and Brie . On the October 31 episode of SmackDown , Victoria teamed up with Natalya and Maryse in losing effort to Michelle McCool , Maria and Brie . On the November 7 episode of SmackDown ! , Victoria was accompanied by Natalya , where she was once again defeated by Brie . After the match , it was revealed that Brie had been switching places under the ring with her twin sister , Nikki Bella , and the twins proceeded to attack Victoria and Natalya . On the November 21 episode of SmackDown , Victoria teamed up with Natalya in losing effort to The Bella Twins ( Nikki and Brie Bella ) . On the November 28 episode of SmackDown , Victoria teamed up with Natalya and Maryse to defeat the Bella Twins and Michelle McCool . Following a loss in a singles match to a McCool which aired on the January 16 , 2009 episode of SmackDown , Victoria announced that she would be retiring from WWE . She then thanked the fans , and gave farewell to staff at ringside . 
 After leaving WWE , Varon began training for a career in mixed martial arts , and practiced Jiu Jitsu . She returned to WWE for one night only in April 2009 , when she was part of the 25 Divas battle royal at WrestleMania XXV , outlasting the five other former WWE Divas . She eliminated Maria , but was eliminated by The Bella Twins . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling = = = 
 = = = = Debut and Knockouts Champion ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 On May 24 , 2009 , Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) confirmed that Varon had signed a contract with the company . She debuted on the May 28 , 2009 episode of TNA Impact ! , under the ring name Tara , later revealed to be short for " Tarantula " . She made her intentions known by attacking The Beautiful People ( Angelina Love , Velvet Sky , and Madison Rayne ) after Love 's match with Sojournor Bolt , establishing herself as a fan favorite . On the June 11 episode of Impact ! , Tara won her debut match against Madison Rayne . On the July 1 episode of Impact ! , Tara began bringing her pet tarantula , named Poison , with her to the ring . After winning a tag team match against The Beautiful People , she put the spider on the unconscious body of Velvet Sky . On the July 9 episode of Impact ! , after Tara threatened to put her spider on Sky once again , Angelina Love agreed to put her TNA Knockouts Championship on the line , which Tara ultimately won , only to lose the title back to Love two weeks later at Victory Road . 
 On the September 24 episode of Impact ! , Tara teamed with the new Knockouts Champion ODB to challenge Sarita and Taylor Wilde for the TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship , but they lost after Awesome Kong interrupted and distracted her during the bout . During the following two weeks of Impact ! , Tara and Kong both received one @-@ on @-@ one Knockouts Championship matches from ODB , but both of them ended up losing after the other interfered in the match . At Bound for Glory , ODB defeated both Tara and Kong in a three @-@ way match to retain the title . During the match , Tara was confronted by mixed martial artist Kim Couture to set up an MMA fight between the two , which , however , never came to fruition . At Turning Point , Tara defeated Kong in a Six Sides of Steel match . On November 26 , Tara won a ten @-@ woman battle royal to earn a shot at the Knockouts Championship at Final Resolution . At the event , she defeated ODB to win the Knockouts Championship for the second time . On the January 4 , 2010 episode of Impact ! , Tara lost the title back to ODB . Two weeks later at Genesis , Tara defeated ODB in a two out of three falls match to regain the title , making her a three @-@ time champion . 
 On the February 18 , 2010 episode of Impact ! , Tara defeated Daffney by disqualification , after she hit Tara with a toolbox . At Destination X , Tara successfully defended her title against Daffney , who stole Poison the tarantula from her after the match . On the March 29 episode of Impact ! , Tara retained her title against Daffney for a second time , this time in the first ever women 's First Blood match in TNA . On the April 5 episode of Impact ! , Tara was one of the four winners in an eight @-@ Knockout <unk> match . The box she opened contained her pet tarantula , Poison . At the same time , however , Tara lost the Knockouts Championship to Angelina Love . After losing the title , Tara began turning villainous due to her friction with Love heading into their match against The Beautiful People ( Madison Rayne and Velvet Sky ) . At Lockdown , Tara cemented her heel turn by attacking Love after losing a tag team steel cage match against Rayne and Sky . 
 = = = = Alliance with Madison Rayne ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 On April 28 , 2010 , Varon announced on her MySpace blog that she would be leaving TNA the following month , after refusing to re @-@ sign with the company , due to not receiving a pay increase . On the May 3 episode of Impact ! , Tara challenged Madison Rayne to a match at Sacrifice , where she would put her career on the line against Rayne 's Knockouts Championship . At Sacrifice on May 16 , Tara failed to win the match , and as a result her TNA career came to an end . After her TNA career came to a halt , she continued to discuss a new contract with Dixie Carter . 
 She returned to the company on July 11 at Victory Road as a villainess , disguising herself by wearing a motorcycle helmet and attacking Angelina Love during her match for the Knockouts Championship . In the following weeks , she aligned herself with Madison Rayne against Love and Velvet Sky . Tara was ultimately unmasked on the September 2 episode of Impact ! , when she and Rayne defeated Love and Sky in a tag team match , after hitting Sky with the motorcycle helmet . On the September 30 episode of Impact ! , Rayne signed a waiver to allow Tara to return to in @-@ ring competition . At Bound for Glory , Tara defeated Angelina Love , Velvet Sky , and Madison Rayne in a Four Corners match to win the Knockout Championship for the fourth time , much to the dismay of Rayne , who thought Tara 's intention was to help her regain the title . On the following episode of Impact ! , Tara laid down for Rayne and allowed her to pin her to regain the Knockouts Championship , giving Tara the shortest reign in the title 's history . The following week , Tara attacked Mickie James after her victory over Sarita . At Turning Point , Tara wrestled James to a double disqualification , after James pushed the referee , and they began brawling . On the December 2 Impact ! , Tara attacked James while she was singing her single " Hardcore Country " , which later led to James attacking her . At Final Resolution , Tara defeated James in a Falls Count Anywhere match , following interference from Madison Rayne . On the following episode of Impact ! , James defeated Tara in a steel cage match . During the match , Tara legitimately tore a ligament in her elbow , but the injury did not require surgery . On the December 16 episode of Impact ! , Tara and Rayne defeated James and Ms. Tessmacher to advance the finals of a tournament for the vacant TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship . The following week , they were defeated in the finals by Angelina Love and Winter . 
 In 2011 , Madison Rayne would start a rivalry with Mickie James over the Knockouts Championship , and would successfully defend the title against her at Genesis and Against All Odds , after Tara interfered in both matches . During the feud , Tara began claiming that Rayne had gone too far in her brutality towards Mickie James , but was forced to follow her orders due to being under exclusive contract with her , and not TNA . After Rayne lost the Knockouts Championship to James at Lockdown , James agreed to give her a rematch on the condition that if she is unable to regain the title , Tara would be released from her contract with Rayne . On May 15 at Sacrifice , Tara became a fan favorite after knocking out Rayne during her match with James , costing her the Knockouts Championship and guaranteeing herself a release from her contract with Rayne . 
 = = = = TnT and relationship with Jesse ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 Tara and Madison Rayne had their first match against each other since the break – up of their partnership on the May 19 episode of Impact Wrestling , where Tara teamed with Mickie James and Ms. Tessmacher against Rayne , Sarita and Rosita . Tara won the match for her team by pinning Rosita , after Rayne , who avoided her former partner throughout the match , sacrificed her in order to get away from the ring . Tara and Rayne faced each other again on the July 14 episode of Impact Wrestling , where Tara was victorious after distracting Rayne with her tarantula . On the July 21 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara and Ms. Tessmacher , later named TnT , defeated Mexican America ( Rosita and Sarita ) to win the TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship . Tessmacher and Tara made their first title defense on August 7 at Hardcore Justice , defeating Mexican America in a rematch . On the September 29 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara was defeated by her former partner Madison Rayne in a match to determine the third and final challenger for the TNA Knockouts Championship at Bound for Glory . On the November 3 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara and Tessmacher lost the Knockouts Tag Team Championship to Gail Kim and Madison Rayne . On the January 26 , 2012 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara defeated Mickie James and Velvet Sky in a three @-@ way match to earn a match for the Knockouts Championship . On February 12 at Against All Odds , Tara was unsuccessful in her title challenge against Gail Kim . 
 On the August 23 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara defeated the new Knockouts Champion and TnT partner Miss Tessmacher in a non @-@ title match , and was subsequently named number one contender for her title . On September 9 at the No Surrender , Tara challenged Tessmacher for the Knockouts Championship , but failed to capture the title . On the following episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara congratulated Tessmacher on her victory , only to attack Tessmacher shortly afterwards , turning Tara into a villainess and effectively disbanding TnT . On the September 27 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara defeated ODB in a number one contender 's match to earn another shot at Miss Tessmacher 's Knockouts Championship . On October 14 at Bound for Glory , Tara defeated Tessmacher to win the TNA Knockouts Championship for a record @-@ tying fifth time . Afterwards , Tara introduced her " Hollywood boyfriend " , the debuting Jesse . Tara made her first successful title defense on the October 25 episode of Impact Wrestling , defeating Tessmacher in a rematch following interference from Jesse . On November 11 at Turning Point , Tara and Jesse were defeated by ODB and Eric Young . On December 9 at Final Resolution , Tara successfully defended her Knockouts Championship against Mickie James after a distraction from Jesse . On the December 20 episode of Impact Wrestling , Tara defeated James again to retain her title . Tara went on to have another successful title defense on the January 25 , 2013 , episode of Impact Wrestling , defeating Velvet Sky . On the February 21 episode of Impact Wrestling taped in London , England , Tara lost the championship to Sky in a fatal four – way elimination match , also involving Gail Kim and Miss Tessmacher , ending her reign at 104 days . Tara received her rematch on the February 28 episode of Impact Wrestling , but was again defeated by Sky . The following months , Tara would make increasingly fewer appearances , and would be rarely used competing in matches . On the July 14 episode of TNA Xplosion , Tara would wrestler her final match in TNA losing to ODB . Two days later on July 16 , Tara was released from her TNA contract . 
 Varon later stated in an interview that she was close to leaving TNA prior to her release , and that she would never return to TNA . She also stated that her tenure in TNA was great , but different from WWE and made her " appreciate WWE a lot " . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 Tara took part of Family Wrestling Entertainment 's FWE : Fallout pay @-@ per @-@ view on November 15 , 2011 , defeating Madison Rayne with Christy Hemme as the special guest referee . Tara returned to the promotion on February 25 , 2012 , taking part of a tournament to determinate the inaugural FWE Women 's Champion at FWE : No Limits , losing to Maria Kanellis . Tara then helped Maria defeat Winter to win the championship alongside her partner Ms. Tessmacher . On November 9 , 2013 , Varon debuted at House of Hardcore 3 , where she and Stevie Richards were defeated by Carlito and Rosita . On June 19 , 2015 , Varon returned to the independent circuit at the Maryland Championship Wrestling event Ladies Night , where she served as the special guest referee for the MCW Women 's Championship main event match between Mickie James and Amber Rodriguez . Varon attacked heel enforcer Melina during the match , after Melina interfered and attacked James . 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2013 ) = = = 
 Varon debuted for Ring of Honor on October 26 , 2013 , under her real name . She made an FAQ before Glory by Honor XII . At the event , she attacked Maria Kanellis with a Widow 's Peak . 
 = = Business ventures = = 
 Varon owned a restaurant in Louisville , Kentucky named Fat Tony 's Pizzeria , but sold it in May 2007 . In May 2008 , she and her husband opened a custom car shop , Black Widow Customs , in Louisville . The shop was destroyed on December 16 , 2010 , in a fire , which the authorities deemed suspicious . This occurred the day after a local TV show 's " Consumer Watch " segment . <unk> Glenn , a football player at the University of Kentucky , wanted a refund after claiming his car was left un @-@ drivable following Black Widow Customs ' work on it . He contacted <unk> and the story was profiled on the show . 
 In March 2013 , Varon opened a wrestling themed restaurant in Chicago , Illinois named The Squared Circle . In January 2015 , Varon announced that she would be moving back to California , leaving the restaurant under her husband and a friend . Despite this , Varon continues to make regular visits to the restaurant . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Varon has made guest appearances on television shows V.I.P. and Nikki , as well as participated in two fitness competitions for the Univision program Sábado Gigante . In November 2010 , she was a contestant on an all @-@ TNA week of Family Feud , teaming with Angelina Love , Christy Hemme , Lacey Von Erich and Velvet Sky against Jay Lethal , Matt Morgan , Mick Foley , Mr. Anderson and Rob Van Dam . On November 10 , 2012 , Varon , along with several other TNA employees , were featured in an episode of MTV 's Made . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Varon has been married to Lee Varon since 1994 . They have no children . 
 Varon has a tattoo of a heart on her ankle , which she got in high school and hid from her parents . She is a fan of motorcycles and owns a Suzuki Hayabusa . 
 In an interview for the South Florida Sun @-@ Sentinel , Varon was quoted as saying she was legitimately jealous of the 2004 WWE Diva Search winner Christy Hemme . She retracted the statement on her website , claiming the reporter had misquoted her when she mentioned that she was jealous of Hemme 's paycheck , as it was a lot higher than what Varon received in her rookie year . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Black Widow ( Sitout inverted front powerslam ) – 2002 – 2004 
 Tara Bomb ( Chokebomb ) - TNA ; 2011 
 Widow 's Peak ( Gory neckbreaker ) 
 Signature moves 
 A @-@ rack @-@ <unk> ( Backbreaker rack drop ) – 2008 
 Back body drop 
 Bearhug 
 Boston crab , sometimes transitioned from and elevated position or done in a modified way 
 Bridging reverse chinlock 
 Gorilla press slam 
 Gorilla press gutbuster 
 Hair @-@ pull Gory special 
 Headbutt 
 Hip drop , to an opponent 's midsection 
 Japanese arm drag , sometimes done repeatedly in succession 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Low drop , to a kneeling opponent 
 Roundhouse 
 Super , sometimes to an oncoming opponent 
 Multiple moonsault variations 
 Springboard 
 Victoria 's Secret ( Standing , with theatrics ) 
 Multiple pinning variations 
 Backslide 
 Jackknife 
 Roll @-@ up 
 Schoolgirl Face Sit Pin 
 Small package 
 One @-@ handed cartwheel followed into a hammerlock 
 Plancha 
 Pendulum backbreaker 
 Slingshot somersault leg drop 
 Scoop powerslam 
 Snap suplex 
 Surfboard stretch 
 Slingshot belly @-@ to @-@ back backbreaker 
 Spider 's Web ( Fireman 's carry spun out into a sidewalk slam ) 
 Managers 
 Candice Michelle 
 Torrie Wilson 
 Brooke Tessmacher 
 Jesse 
 Wrestlers managed 
 <unk> 
 Doug Basham 
 Stevie Richards 
 Candice Michelle 
 Torrie Wilson 
 Cody Runnels 
 Seth Skyfire 
 Kenny Dykstra 
 Natalya 
 Christy Hemme 
 Madison Rayne 
 Brooke Tessmacher 
 Lauren Williams 
 Jesse 
 Alex Chamberlain 
 Nicknames 
 " The Vicious Vixen " 
 Entrance themes 
 " All the Things She Said " by t.A.T.u. ( WWE ; December 15 , 2002 – May 10 , 2004 ) 
 " Don 't Mess With " by The Hood $ tars ( WWE ; May 10 , 2004 – May 30 , 2005 ) 
 " Don 't Mess With ( V2 ) " by The Hood $ tars ( WWE ; June 26 , 2005 – January 16 , 2009 ) 
 " Broken " by Goldy Locks ( TNA ; May 28 , 2009 – July 16 , 2013 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 = = = Cheerleading = = = 
 National Cheerleading Association 
 NCA All @-@ American Award 
 = = = Fitness and figure competition = = = 
 Debbie <unk> Fitness Classic 
 1st ( Tall Class ; 1999 ) 
 ESPN2 Fitness America Series 
 1st place ( 1997 ) 
 2nd place ( 1998 ) 
 <unk> Triple Crown 
 Top 20 ( 1997 ) 
 National Physique Committee 
 NPC Inland Empire – 1st ( MW ; 1995 ) 
 NPC Team Universe – 2nd ( Tall Class ; 1999 ) 
 Women 's Tri @-@ Fitness 
 <unk> Tri @-@ Fitness – 4th ( 1998 ) 
 Tri @-@ Fitness Hall of Fame ( 2012 ) 
 = = = Professional wrestling = = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI Woman of the Year ( 2004 ) 
 PWI ranked her # 5 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2009 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA Women 's Knockout Championship ( 5 times ) 
 TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Brooke Tessmacher 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 = = = = Luchas de Apuestas = = = = 
 = Dwarf Fortress = 
 Dwarf Fortress ( officially called Slaves to Armok : God of Blood Chapter II : Dwarf Fortress ) is a part construction and management simulation , part roguelike , indie video game created by Tarn and Zach Adams . Freeware and in development since 2002 , its first alpha version was released in 2006 and it received attention for being a two @-@ member project surviving solely on donations . The primary game mode is set in a procedurally generated fantasy world in which the player indirectly controls a group of dwarves , and attempts to construct a successful and wealthy underground fortress . Critics praised its complex , emergent gameplay but had mixed reactions to its difficulty . The game influenced Minecraft and was selected among other games to be featured in the Museum of Modern Art to show the history of video gaming in 2012 . 
 The game has text @-@ based graphics and is open @-@ ended with no main objectives . Before being played , the player has to generate worlds with continents , oceans and histories documenting civilizations . The main game mode , Fortress Mode , consists of selecting a suitable site from the generated @-@ world , establishing a successful colony or fortress , combating threats like goblin invasions , generating wealth and taking care of the dwarves . Each dwarf is modeled down to its individual personality , has likes or dislikes and specific trainable skills in various labors . The second main game mode , Adventure Mode , is a turn @-@ based , open @-@ ended roguelike where the player starts off as an adventurer in the world and is free to explore , complete quests , or even visit old abandoned fortresses . The combat system is anatomically detailed with combat logs describing organs getting pierced , fat getting bruised and limbs getting severed . 
 Prior to Dwarf Fortress , Tarn Adams was working on a project called Slaves to Armok : God of Blood which was a role @-@ playing game . By 2004 , Adams decided to shift from the original Armok to Dwarf Fortress after the former became difficult to maintain . Adams calls it his life 's work and said in 2011 , that version 1 @.@ 0 will not be ready for at least another 20 years , and even after that he would continue to work on it . The game has a cult following and an active online community . As there is no way to win , every fortress , no matter how successful , is usually destroyed somehow . This prompts the unofficial community motto : " Losing is Fun ! " 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Overview and game modes = = = 
 Dwarf Fortress has three primary game modes which take place in worlds created by the player , where most of the elements are randomly generated . Fortress Mode is a construction and management simulation of a colony of dwarves . There are no objectives , with the player being free to decide how to go about managing the colony and making them interact with the environment , thus making it an open @-@ ended and sandbox @-@ style game . Since there is no way to win , it only ends when the entire colony is defeated by the various possible threats or the player decides to abandon the fortress . The visuals are text @-@ based using code page 437 characters in various colors as graphics . Thus , it is fully of letters , numbers and symbols ; dwarves are represented by different colored smiling faces , a cat and dog are a white " c " and brown " d " , while a giant spider is a grey " S " . 
 Adventure Mode is a turn @-@ based , open @-@ ended roguelike where the player starts off as an adventurer . In Legends Mode , players can view maps , histories of each civilization and any figure who has lived or died in the generated world . Any noticeable achievement made by the player in any of the two game modes is recorded in the Legends . A testing arena is present , where players can simulate battles between selected units in various conditions . 
 = = = World generation = = = 
 The first step in Dwarf Fortress is generating a playable world ; only one game can be played per world at a time . The player can adjust certain parameters governing size , savagery , mineral occurrences and the length of history . The map shows symbols representing roads , hills , towns and cities of the various civilizations , and it changes as the generation progresses . A midpoint displacement algorithm generates the world . 
 The process involves procedurally @-@ generated basic elements like elevation , rainfall , mineral distribution , drainage and temperature , using fractals ( which give it an overall natural look ) . For example , a high @-@ rainfall and low @-@ drainage area would make a swamp . Areas are thus categorized into biomes , which have two variables : savagery and alignment . They have their own specific type of plant and animal populations . The next phase is erosion — which the drainage tries to simulate . Rivers are created by tracing their paths from the mountains ( which get eroded ) to its end which is usually an ocean ; some form into lakes . The salinity field defines oceans , mangroves or alluvial plains . Names are generated for the biomes and rivers . The names depend on the area 's good / evil variable ( the alignment ) and though in English , they are originally in one of the four in @-@ game languages of dwarves , elves , humans and goblins ; these are the four main races in any generated world . 
 After a few minutes the world is populated and its history develops for the amount of in @-@ game years selected in the history parameter . Civilizations , races and religions spread and wars occur , with the " population " and " deaths " counters increasing . The ticker stops at the designated " years " value , at which point the world can be saved for use in any game mode . Should the player choose to retire a fortress or gets defeated , this world will persist and will become available for further games . 
 = = = Fortress mode = = = 
 = = = = Basics = = = = 
 When Fortress mode is selected , the player is given the option to choose the embark location in the world . The player can consider the environment , elevations , biome , soil types and mineral concentrations which can pose significant challenges to the development or survival of the fortress . <unk> the colony 's supplies , domestic animals and skills are available , but each dwarves ' mental and physical attributes are randomly generated . The game describes in detail each dwarf 's physical appearance , like hair and facial features . The mental abilities , individual preferences and desires are also randomly generated . Each dwarf 's relationships with others and the deities they worship can be viewed . 
 The player embarks with the expedition team ( seven dwarves , their livestock and supplies ) , and does not have direct control over them . In order to construct and operate the fortress , the player has to designate specific tasks to be performed and the dwarves will go about it . They can be assigned any labors , but their work still depends on their relative skill with it , which can increase . Some task categories are stone @-@ working , woodworking , metalworking , farming @-@ related and crafts @-@ making ; there are further combat @-@ related skills . They are categorized further , such as are leatherworking , butchery , <unk> , gem @-@ related , glassmaking , and clay @-@ related industries . Activities take place in workshops which need to be constructed ; for example , stills for brewing alcohol . The metal industry has a very important role because it produces weapons and armor for the military , trap components for defense , and high @-@ value furniture and decorations . 
 = = = = Functional mechanics = = = = 
 The player initially can see a top @-@ down view of the surface @-@ level of the fortress site ; each layer of a z @-@ axis level can be viewed when the player changes it . An entire underground level would be seen as its entire section of terrain while a mountain at the surface level would have only its section visible with the remaining surface landscape . Thus , for digging , the player can designate , for every z @-@ level starting from the surface , staircases to be carved and at the final designated level , ending the staircase by making it dug into a room . 
 The geology in Dwarf Fortress is fairly accurate . Rocks like olivine or gabbro can be dug up . The topmost layer usually consists of sand , clay or plain soil — this can be used for underground farming . Deeper levels will be layers of rock ; minerals appear in layers or clusters around the right depth . Gems like <unk> appear in rare clusters . Water is simulated like falling sand , every space can contain up to seven levels of it . A tile having " one " level of water is the lowest while a tile with " seven " is full . There is a system for simulating temperature and heat . Fires can spread and burn dwarves and furniture . There are four basic seasons in an in @-@ game year : spring , summer , autumn and winter . 
 Mineral ores can be mined just like normal stone and the raw ore can be smelted to produce their corresponding metal bars . Different ores or metal bars can be alloyed together for higher quality materials . For steel production , flux stones are used to make pig iron bars and smelt it with regular iron and coal ( or charcoal ) . Specific metal items can be melted back to their respective bars . Without steel , the alloy bronze or regular iron are the next best suitable metals to use . Bronze requires two ores or bars of tin and copper . The metal adamantine , found deep below , is extremely light but very strong , making it excellent for sharp weapons and armor . Raw adamantine can be extracted into strands and can further be either woven in cloth or smelted into wafers . 
 = = = = Fortress management and growth = = = = 
 Underground farming has customized crops like " Plump Helmet " mushrooms , which can be brewed to make mushroom wine . As the fortress prospers , migrants come in larger numbers from the <unk> ( the colony 's home civilization ) and will need further accommodation . Trading caravans , which can be from the various neighboring civilizations including the home civilization , visit the fortress on a yearly basis and are useful for getting supplies not available in the player 's fortress area . The role of bookkeeper , manager and broker can be assigned to any dwarf during early game . The bookkeeper maintains records of every item present in the fort , the manager auto @-@ assigns jobs and the broker deals with trading caravans . The production of crafts from any material are useful for trading . The caravans come from civilizations of elves and humans but depending on the embark region and history , they may be absent or sometimes even hostile . 
 Dwarves need to be provided with food and drink ( mostly in the form of alcohol ) . A dwarf will get negative thoughts for drinking plain water and even for drinking the same type of alcohol , making it necessary to grow different crops for producing different drinks . Things like not having a separate bedroom can upset a dwarf . They may make friends and sometimes marry ; females give birth . Dwarves can get upset by sustaining injuries , having poor clothing , losing their pets , friends or relatives ; interacting with or seeing their corpses can aggravate this . A frustrated dwarf may break furniture or attack others . Continuous stress will cause them to throw tantrums and eventually go insane , whether going berserk and attacking their comrades in a homicidal rage , becoming suicidally depressed and jumping off a cliff , or simply going " stark raving mad " and stumbling around randomly until their untimely death . Their quality of life can be improved by giving them luxurious personal bedrooms and a well @-@ decorated dining room , medical care , and providing them with a variety of drinks and well @-@ cooked meals . A chain reaction where a single dwarf 's unhappiness causes the entire fortress 's population to start throwing tantrums can begin when one dwarf throws a tantrum , attacks and kills another one with many friends , which drastically affects the happiness of many more . 
 As the fortress expands and develops , new noble positions become available . While regular dwarves will be happy with simple rooms provided to them , dwarves appointed or elected to noble positions will need more luxurious accommodation . Nobles will even make demands and mandates , getting negative thoughts if they are not fulfilled . A justice system is present to punish criminals , for example , dwarves who injure or kill another dwarf or destroy furniture . Occasionally , a vampire dwarf , with a fake background history , may arrive with a migrant wave and start killing and feeding on the other citizens without being noticed . 
 Inspired or stressed dwarves will occasionally get into a " Strange Mood " . They will take over a workshop and go searching for the required materials to begin construction of an artifact . If they cannot find the materials , the dwarf will wait at the workshop , demanding it till it is available . After a few in @-@ game weeks , the work results in a legendary artifact , an item so masterfully crafted that it is usually worth more than a beginning fortress ' total wealth put together . These artifacts will be added to the world 's records and its exact description can be viewed . Through this entire period of being in a strange mood , a dwarf will not eat , drink or sleep and will eventually go insane if prolonged due to any reason . 
 = = = = Threats , defense and dwelling deeper = = = = 
 The first in @-@ game year will usually consist of kobold thieves and goblin snatchers trying to infiltrate the fortress . Thieves try to steal valuables while snatchers try to kidnap dwarven children to raise them as future soldiers . Goblin and kobold civilizations near the fortress will always be hostile and a source of frequent attacks . Wildlife is usually harmless , but depending on the fortress location , more fierce elephants , bears , unicorns , giant spiders and wolves may be a threat . Wealthier and more populated fortresses will get ambushes and sieges from neighboring goblin ( or other enemy ) civilization . A thriving fortress will attract certain mega @-@ beasts like hydras , titans or dragons , and randomly generated creatures called " Forgotten Beasts " . These unique creatures have randomized physical qualities and abilities , thus making them have the potential to be very powerful . Undead attack mainly in evil biomes or if the player embarks with a Necromancer Tower being near the site . Undead are harder to kill , and often reanimate once they are defeated with their body parts being separate units to fight . 
 Military squads can be assigned to a barracks to train in and a uniform ( armor and a weapon ) can be chosen . Squads can be directly commanded to attack enemies . Crossbows can be made for ranged attacks and a range with targets can be constructed for training . Walls can be carved into fortifications and be used by ranged @-@ units during attacks . Kennels can be made to train war animals like dogs . Players can use traps and engineering in addition to training an army . Traps can be made by constructing mechanisms and using metal or wood to construct large weapons like spikes , ax blades or cages . More complex lever @-@ operated and pressure plate @-@ triggering trap components are available . 
 The combat system in Dwarf Fortress is anatomically detailed . Combat is displayed by viewing the log which describes each weapon striking a specific part of the character 's body . Internal organs can get punctured , combatants can fall to the ground , vomit and lose body parts . Each dwarf has individually detailed limbs , each with <unk> bone , fat , muscle and skin . Fat can be bruised without breaking bones and vice versa . Injuries sometimes can be permanent . There is a medical system where a hospital can be set up containing crutches for disabled dwarves , traction benches , plasters and cloth for casts and bandages , thread for suturing , and splints . 
 Digging deeper is usually done for finding magma , which as a fuel source , removes the player 's dependence on coal or wood . Another reason to dig deeper is for searching for specific raw materials , ores or gems . Magma pools or even bigger magma seas are found while digging into warm rock . Near magma seas , raw adamantine strata can be found . They are shaped like columns , which pass down through the entire magma sea . These columns are hollow and can be broken , revealing an entire shaft leading deeper into the underworld or hell . Underworld creatures are countless and can bring entire fortresses to ruin . 
 = = = Adventure mode = = = 
 Adventure mode is a roguelike played in the generated world and unlike Fortress mode , it is turn @-@ based . In this mode , there is character creation similar to other role @-@ playing games . Players can choose a name , gender and spend points on the specific combat and physical skills , where the amount depends on whether the player chooses a peasant , hero or demigod . The player 's character starts off in a random town depending on their race and can interact with the various non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) . NPCs can give quests ( usually to slay an outlaw or <unk> ) , speak about the surrounding areas or offer to follow and help the player . Players can choose to explore any part of the generated world using quick @-@ travel mode . A player can find the area of their previously @-@ slain character , visit old abandoned fortresses , seek out the treasures and wield previously @-@ made artifacts . Instead of quitting , the character can be retired , and depending on the player 's achievements , their life events will be documented in the Legends Mode among the historical figures . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early development ( 2002 – 2006 ) = = = 
 One of Tarn and Zach Adams ' early works was a text based adventure game called dragslay , written in the BASIC language and influenced by Dungeons and Dragons . This was the brothers ' first fantasy project . In high school , Tarn Adams taught himself the C programming language and developed it <unk> dragslay would later have an important influence on Dwarf Fortress . Adams explained his interest in fantasy games , that he had grown up " surrounded by that sort of thing ... along with generic sci @-@ fi , generic fantasy is part of our heritage . " Years later , before entering graduate school in mathematics , Adams began working on a project he called Slaves to Armok : God of Blood . It was named after a deity in dragslay , originally named for a variable " arm _ ok " — which counted the limbs the player still had attached . This new project was a two @-@ dimensional ( would later have 3D graphics ) isometric fantasy role @-@ playing game in which the player encountered and fought goblins . 
 Tarn took some time off Armok to work on small side @-@ projects , and another one which would inspire Dwarf Fortress was Mutant Miner . It was turn @-@ based loosely inspired by a game called Miner VGA . Mutant Miner involved the player digging underneath buildings , searching for ores and fighting monsters , and carrying radioactive " goo " back to the surface for application in growing extra limbs and gaining other abilities . Adams was dissatisfied with only having a single miner , and the game began to lag because it was turn @-@ based . Adams said : 
 [ I ] nstead of rewriting the game , I thought , well maybe it should be dwarves instead . And it should be real @-@ time to combat the [ lag ] problem . Now , you 'd be digging out minerals in a mountain , combating threats inside , and making little workshops . Then I thought , well , how should the high score list work ? We really like to keep records of plays . Not just high score lists , but expansive logs . So we 'll often try to think of ways to play with the idea . This time , the idea was to let your adventurer come into the fortress after you lose and find the goblets you 've made , and journals it generates . 
 = = = First release ( 2006 ) = = = 
 Adams began working on Dwarf Fortress in October 2002 , estimating that the project would take two months , but suspended development soon after , in order to finish his previous work , Armok . He explained that it began like the 1982 arcade game Dig Dug . The Adams brothers started the Bay 12 Games company , launching its website and releasing their games online . By 2004 , Adams announced on his website that he would be switching his main project to Dwarf Fortress after he struggled to continue working on Armok , after all its added features became harder to maintain . Adams explained that it would be a dwarf simulation game but he kept Adventure mode as a surprise feature , which was revealed during its release . At that time , his fan base consisted of a few dozen people and more came in when he made this announcement . He put up a PayPal button after a request from a fan ; similarly , a subscriber system was added later . In the next five months , they made around $ 300 , which brought in only enough to cover the site 's $ 20 hosting cost . He dubbed the game as Slaves to Armok , God of Blood II : Dwarf Fortress ; Adams explained that it was a sequel because it continued to work on much of Armok 's code but said its cumbersome name was mostly " for kicks . " 
 Adams decided to focus on the game 's development full @-@ time during his first year of his math post @-@ doctorate at Texas A & M in 2006 . He quit it after a year and decided to use up his $ 15 @,@ 000 savings . The university offered him $ 50 @,@ 000 if he would stay another year . Adams agreed and commented on this , " I woke up the morning after I gave notice , like , I can actually make this work . " Adams expected he would have to get a job in order to support himself and use his savings because the game had not been released yet . Development continued till 8 August 2006 , when the first alpha version ( version <unk> ) was released . Donations reached $ 800 – $ 1000 in the following months , this average increased gradually until they were financially stable . He then decided to solely rely on donations . 
 = = = Development ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 Adams did not use the 3D graphics which Armok had since its development was hampered because of it . He cited the ease in development of features like fluid simulation , copyright issues with the art and more unhindered possibilities as further reasons for not using it . Being used to the text @-@ based graphics in roguelikes , he did not want graphical tilesets . The story @-@ generation originated first from Armok , although present to some extent in dragslay . Tarn and Zach would write different chapters of events they would like to see , mix it together and try to implement it . Most of this story writing is managed by Zach , who has a role in the game 's development . He graduated in ancient history and books like The Twelve Caesars and the writings of Assyrian kings influenced the game . 
 Tarn Adams was influenced by roguelike games like 1985 Hack because of its randomly generated levels and detailed mechanics . The body part and wound system was inspired by 1990 role @-@ playing game Cyberpunk 2020 . Adams cited Ultima series as the inspiration for his generated worlds . He prefers modeling on individual elements , rather than entire systems , for better simulations with the outcomes being under his control . During world generation , he made an algorithm to simulate rain shadows which occur in areas at the side of mountain deserts . For the distinct personalities of each unit , he took it from NEO PI @-@ R test of which he admitted knowing little about . The feature of carps eating dwarves was unexpected when the game was released . He had written them having the same size and carps were designed to be carnivorous . Adams composed the game 's flamenco @-@ inspired music . 
 A z @-@ axis was introduced in the 2008 release because he felt the limitations with a single plane increasing ; the feature of making various constructions like walls was also added at this time . In the earlier version , players could dig only into a mountainside and not underground because of having only one " z @-@ level " , thus it was considered " 2D " . This was significantly easier to maintain due to the limited playable area . Adams commented that this major change was further difficult to implement because of considering details like fluid mechanics and cave @-@ ins . In 2012 , more traps , abilities , syndromes , detailed cities and tombs were added in addition to vampiric and lycanthropic infections , <unk> and undead . 
 On his reliance on PayPal donations , Adams says he is content since he feels that people really like his work or they would not pay . Ever since its release , donations kept increasing and remaining stable except having a sudden increase during a new version update . He got $ 50 @,@ 000 in 2010 following a major update after a long gap . Their expenses being low , he has maintained that he is happy as long as the game is self @-@ sustaining and will not charge for it . In 2011 , Adams refused a job offer from an unspecified major game developer and a $ 300 @,@ 000 deal to license the name Dwarf Fortress from another company . Adams felt that this amount would not equate to the long @-@ term donations he would receive . Adams said that he prefers working on his own and not being part of the gaming industry . In 2013 , his average income was $ 4000 a month and Adams said , " Barely in the black one month , a little in the red another month . ... It 's a risk I 'm willing to take , and really I couldn 't have it any other way . " He has spent no money on advertising and was happy when bloggers , reviewers like former game journalist Kieron Gillen from PC Gamer and Games for Windows , wrote about his game . In 2015 , Bay 12 Games set up a <unk> account to help fund Dwarf Fortress . 
 On 11 June 2016 an event called <unk> was held at <unk> Boarding House in Bellevue , Washington to celebrate the ten @-@ year anniversary of the game . It was organised by video game developer and fan <unk> Stephens and attended by the Adams brothers . 
 = = = Further updates = = = 
 As of July 2016 , the latest update was version 0 @.@ 43 @.@ 05 , with it completing fourteen years in development despite being in alpha version . Adams says he has been able to maintain focus by shifting his attention to different aspects of the game , given its numerous varied features . While regular game development aim to perfect their work for release , he considers this a drawback since he continues exploring and learning while adding new features . Wired and Rock , Paper , Shotgun noted its sometimes funny but unintentional bug fixes , with PC Gamer saying it makes an entertaining RSS feed to subscribe to . Adams has two favorite bugs . One is about a farmer dwarf planting their own bed . The other involves a dwarven executioner , with broken arms unable to use his hammer , delivering punishments by biting his victims and tearing off their limbs , keeping one in his mouth for years . 
 Tarn Adams considers Dwarf Fortress his life 's work , and has stated in 2011 that he does not expect version 1 @.@ 0 to be released for at least another twenty years , and even after that , he would still continue to update it . Adams calls his game an open @-@ ended " story generator " . The game 's code base is proprietary , and Adams has stated he has no plans to release it into the open source domain , citing the risk of them going into financial trouble . He acknowledged the role of the community in supporting its development and has endorsed third @-@ party tools , <unk> and interface code . He explained he would consider releasing its source if he could not maintain it anymore , seeing different game developers taking it up . He says that he does not mind any modifications as long as he is not put into risk . 
 Adams describes version 1 @.@ 0 having an Adventure mode that would be a regular role @-@ playing game , with changing plots and ordering subordinates to perform various tasks . Fortress mode would have a closer relationship with the outside generated world through war , trade and diplomacy . The world being bigger ; he envisions the game to have many more features like magic , a tutorial , and a better interface . According to him , a tutorial is a burden because of the additional need of updating it . He said of version 1 @.@ 0 , " sitting down with a fresh DF world would be like sitting down to read a middling fantasy author you haven 't read before , but with all the extras that being a video game provides , including the ability to write your own sequels . " Modern in @-@ game technologies and 3D graphics were fan requests Adams said he would never implement , yet showing ambivalence about the latter if the task was easy enough . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received attention mainly because of its emergent gameplay , text @-@ based graphics , complexity , poor interface and difficulty , with some reviewers describing playing the game from start as a steep learning curve — with the meaning of a difficult learning process . It has been compared to other simulations games like SimCity and The Sims , Dungeon Keeper and roguelike games like NetHack . The game has not had much influence on the gaming industry because of its non @-@ commercial nature . It being a two @-@ man self @-@ sustaining project , and Adams ' independence and capability to follow his own ideas were highlighted . Gamasutra said , " There have been few indie gaming success stories as big as Dwarf Fortress " and Wired magazine , following one of its updates , described it as an " obtuse , wildly ambitious work @-@ in @-@ progress mashes the brutal dungeon crawling of roguelikes with the detail @-@ oriented creativity of city @-@ building sims . " 
 The depth and complexity were praised . Jonah Weiner from The New York Times stated , " Many simulation games offer players a bag of building blocks , but few dangle a bag as deep , or blocks as small and intricately interlocking , as Dwarf Fortress . " PC Gamer 's Steve Hogarty commented , " Dwarf Fortress 's reluctance to expend even a joule of energy in <unk> itself results in astonishing hidden complexity . " Regarding the open @-@ ended nature and emergent gameplay , Rock , Paper , Shotgun 's Graham Smith concluded that its procedurally generated world combined with the every character simulated " down to the most minute detail " , the results are " often hilarious , occasionally tragic , and always surprising . " Mike Rose from Gamasutra said , " ... to an outsider looking in on this game so many years into development , with such a wide scope of features and potential play styles , it 's fair to say that getting into Dwarf Fortress is perhaps one of the most daunting tasks the video game industry as a whole can provide . " 
 The lack of graphics , poor interface and controls were seen as the reasons for the game 's difficulty . However , the reviewers also noted most of it having a role in gameplay and the argument that the text @-@ based graphics forces players to use their own imagination , making it more engaging . Weiner wrote , " [ the game ] may not look real , but once you 're hooked , it feels vast , enveloping , alive . A micro @-@ manager 's dream , the game gleefully blurs the distinction between painstaking labor and creative thrill . " Quintin Smith from Rock , Paper , Shotgun said , " The interface has a tough job to do , bless it , but getting it to do what you want is like teaching a beetle to cook . " Ars Technica 's Casey Johnston highlighted the difficulty in performing basic actions and felt that tinkering or experimenting ended up being unproductive ; she compared it to " trying to build a skyscraper by banging two rocks together " . She pointed out the lack of in @-@ game tutorial and said how players can learn by themselves in other games , which are also open @-@ ended or have intuitive mechanics , but in Dwarf Fortress , there is no autonomy " even after hours " of gameplay . 
 = = Community = = 
 Dwarf Fortress has attracted a significant cult following . Web communities on the game came up on Something Awful forums besides on Bay 12 Games . The game 's difficulty , with most fortresses eventually succumbing to various forms of defeat , and to encourage further experimentation through it led to its unofficial slogan " Losing is fun ! " Adams said that it was originally from the manual and there as a consolation for players to get a grip on the issue of permadeath . The game 's official podcast is called " Dwarf Fortress Talk " , where the brothers answer questions from players . They send out crayon drawings or short stories to the donors , customized to their requests and feature the highest donors on their website . Besides donations , Adams said some fans have given computers while others have directly helped him with the game development . A community member ported it to Mac and Linux for free and other volunteers handle the bug tracking system . 
 Players and members of the community have often written creative interpretations of game events . Fans have made diaries , short videos , comics and audio depicting their stories whether it involved success or defeat . Besides testing the game , sharing it with others and supporting it through donations , they make suggestions , help newcomers , share stories , and information in the Bay 12 Games forums . They maintain the dedicated wiki ; there are also fan @-@ organized podcasts and meet @-@ ups . Adams commented about some fans who donated but have not played the game — just there for reading the stories . In 2006 , a saga called " <unk> " where fans passed around a single fortress and each played the game and saved it before sending it to another , was portrayed in detail from the start to its destructive end . This spread around gaming sites and boosted the game 's popularity . 
 On the game 's community , Tarn Adams said , " They are the reason I 've been able to make the step from hobbyist to full @-@ time developer . I 'm lucky to be able to run with whatever ideas we have and try new things . " On players sending him forum posts or emails detailing their stories or events that happened during the game , Adams said , " It 's really gratifying , because it 's one of the things we set out to do is to get people to write these narratives about their game . " Adams has admitted that some feats of the community surprised even him . Adams stated that the most impressive thing he had ever seen done with the game was when a player managed to create a Turing @-@ complete 8 @-@ bit calculator powered by dwarves . 
 There have been tutorials on YouTube with one being a 15 @-@ part series , and another 12 @-@ part written series called " The Complete and Utter Newby Tutorial for Dwarf Fortress " . There are third @-@ party utilities for the game like " Dwarf Therapist " which helps the player in managing toggling labors and skills . Another one called " <unk> " with the help of " <unk> " , a library , can render the game in a 3D isometric view . A " DF to Minecraft " utility was developed where players could load their in @-@ game works to be able to view it while playing Minecraft . An illustrated guide to the game , called Getting Started with Dwarf Fortress : Learn to play the most complex video game ever made was released by technology publisher O 'Reilly Media in 2012 written by Peter Tyson . Containing 240 pages , it has a foreword from Adams and is updated along with the game 's development . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The game influenced Minecraft , which reviewers considered a more user @-@ friendly version of Dwarf Fortress . Adams says he is thankful for the Minecraft developers citing his game because that drew more players . There have been other games inspired by the game but they have largely failed to replicate its visual style and depth . Homages to the game appear in the World of Warcraft . In July 2014 , the game won a poll conducted by Turtle Beach as the community 's most " Beautiful Game " ; games were nominated by fans posting videos , images or text , and a list was compiled by the community which also contained The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker , Far Cry 3 and The Last of Us . Justin Ma , one of the developers of FTL : Faster Than Light , commented on its use of text @-@ based graphics , " Part of the reason Dwarf Fortress can include a breadth of mechanics unseen in other games is because complex mechanics are expressed in the most simple of visual forms . " <unk> Games cited it as one their main influences for the game Clockwork Empires . 
 In March 2013 , the Museum of Modern Art in New York City exhibited Dwarf Fortress among other games selected to depict the history of video gaming . As new updates are made available , the Museum of Modern Art instantly downloads them and archives them in their secure server . Curator of the exhibition , Paola Antonelli , said she was amazed by the combination of " beautiful aesthetics " and " mind @-@ boggling " complexity in the game . 
 Game designer Craig Ellsworth commended Dwarf Fortress for having a uniquely long " staying power " . According to Ellsworth , it will not be replaced by any other more advanced game of its genre , partly because of it being the pioneer of its own and since it is on PC ; console games get replaced faster . He wrote , " There is simply no such thing as a flashier Dwarf Fortress , and there can 't be , by definition . " Other reasons , according to him , were it being free and its long development period with its design to be " never @-@ ending " . He predicted the game will be most popular at its final release , with its legacy being more than just historic value . He pointed out that people like the game in its present condition ; they will continue playing it more ardently , as long as it keeps developing , especially with new additions and features . He compared it to the board game Monopoly and the card game Magic : The Gathering . Ellsworth finally said that the game is either a " one @-@ time fluke " or will inspire " a rise of ultra @-@ small indies " with similar financial setups . 
 = Shakugan no Shana = 
 Shakugan no Shana ( <unk> , lit . Burning @-@ Eyed Shana ) , also known simply as Shana ( <unk> ) , is a Japanese light novel series written by Yashichiro Takahashi with illustrations by Noizi Ito . ASCII Media Works published 26 novels from November 2002 to November 2012 under their Dengeki Bunko imprint . The story focuses on Yuji Sakai , a high school boy who inadvertently becomes involved in an age @-@ old conflict between forces of balance and imbalance in existence . In the process , he befriends a fighter for the balancing force and names her " Shana " . The series incorporates fantasy and slice of life elements into its tale . 
 Two manga adaptations were published by ASCII Media Works in Dengeki Daioh and Dengeki Maoh . Between 2005 and 2012 , the series was adapted by J.C.Staff into three 24 @-@ episode anime television series , a four @-@ episode original video animation ( OVA ) series , an animated film and an additional stand alone OVA episode . A PlayStation 2 video game was released in March 2006 , and it was ported to the Nintendo DS in March 2007 . Viz Media licensed the novels and the first manga series for release in North America , but stopped publishing both prematurely . Geneon originally licensed the first television series for release in North America , but the license later transferred to Funimation , who also licensed the remaining anime properties . Critics praised the series for its execution of typical story elements and how it continuously becomes better over time . However , the series is described as having issues with pacing . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 Shakugan no Shana details an age @-@ old conflict between those who inhabit the Crimson Realm ( <unk> , Guze ) , a parallel universe to the human world . The Crimson Realm is populated by Crimson Denizens ( <unk> , Guze no <unk> ) who are able to manipulate the Power of Existence ( <unk> , <unk> no Chikara ) , a fundamental power within any biological entity and functions as " fuel " for one 's existence . Denizens whose power stands out among their peers are known as Lords of the Crimson Realm ( <unk> , Guze no Ō ) , and Lords that are even more powerful are known as Gods ( 神 , Kami ) . Denizens who do not care about the balance between the Crimson Realm and the human world collect Power of Existence from humans to use for their own purposes . Some Lords contract with humans to become a Flame Haze ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , whose duty is to maintain the two worlds ' balance by destroying any Denizens disrupting it . Denizens and Flame Haze fight with the use of powerful magic spells called Powers of <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , which are also known as Unrestricted Spells or Unrestricted Methods . One such spell is the Seal ( <unk> , <unk> ) , which creates a space where the Crimson Realm and the human world intermingle and all sorts of <unk> , including time , are stopped for ordinary living beings . 
 The story largely takes place in Misaki City in Japan and begins when high school student Yuji Sakai is thrown into the middle of this conflict and encounters a Flame Haze girl with flaming red eyes and hair dressed in all black wielding a katana . The girl informs him that he died some time ago , and that he is a Torch ( <unk> , Tōchi ) , a human with greatly diminished Power of Existence , and whose remaining Power of Existence will slowly run out . In addition , Yuji is a <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a special kind of Torch who contains a Treasure Tool ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a magical object created by Denizens that can provide special abilities or even Powers of <unk> ; additionally , <unk> can move within Seals . Unfazed by his apparent death , Yuji befriends the girl and names her " Shana " after her sword . They later discover that the Treasure Tool within Yuji is the Reiji Maigo ( <unk> , Midnight Lost Child ) , which restores his Power of Existence every night at midnight . 
 As time goes on , Shana and Yuji encounter several more Flame Haze , such as Margery Daw and Wilhelmina Carmel , and Denizens in Misaki City . An organization of Denizens called Bal Masqué discovers that Yuji possesses the Reiji Maigo and attempt to use the Treasure Tool on two separate occasions . Bal Masqué is led by three Lords called the Trinity : Hecate , <unk> , and Bel <unk> . They serve under a Crimson God known as the Snake of the Festival ( <unk> , <unk> no Hebi ) , who resides within the Reiji Maigo . When the Snake of the Festival emerges , it merges its consciousness with Yuji 's , assuming command over Bal Masqué , and together they formulate an elaborate plan to create a parallel world called Xanadu , which will serve as a paradise for Denizens with unlimited Power of Existence . Shana , and all of the other Flame Haze around the world , oppose the creation of Xanadu , which would eventually cause a large @-@ scale disruption in the human world , the Crimson Realm and Xanadu itself . 
 Shana formulates a countermeasure and is ultimately successful in adding a single law to Xanadu where the Denizens are not allowed to eat humans anymore . With Xanadu created , the Denizens depart to the new world , soon followed by hundreds of Flame Haze determined to help enforce order on it . Yuji intends to go to Xanadu alone and make sure humans and Denizens can eventually learn to coexist , but Shana refuses to be left behind . In the end , Yuji accepts Shana 's feelings and the two kiss , which activates a spell left to Yuji by Crimson Lord Lamia that restores his existence , so Yuji is no longer a Torch . With the help of another spell from Lamia , Yuji successfully restores all humans in Misaki City whose existence was absorbed by the Denizens before he and Shana depart for Xanadu together . 
 = = Production = = 
 In an early draft of what would later become Shakugan no Shana , Yashichiro Takahashi set the story in a different dimension and described the main character as having the initial personality of Shana , but the appearance of an older woman similar to Margery Daw . However , after talking with an editor , Takahashi rewrote the character to have the appearance of a young girl . In doing so , he used Shana 's small build to symbolize a story of growth and to emphasize the physical conflict between her and her opponents . Noizi Ito was contacted in early August 2002 to be the illustrator for the series , and she was very excited to work on the project after she read the manuscript for the first novel ; this was the first time Ito drew illustrations for a book . 
 Shortly before writing Shakugan no Shana , Takahashi made his debut as an author with A / B Extreme , which was awarded an honorable mention in the eighth Dengeki Novel Prize by MediaWorks ( now ASCII Media Works ) in 2001 . By his own admission , A / B Extreme was too difficult for readers to understand , so for his next work , he set out to write something easier to grasp . As such , the initial premise of Shakugan no Shana was to write a boy meets girl story in a school setting , though initially love was not one of the themes included . He was given the freedom to write as he pleased based on this premise after showing it to his editor . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Light novels and books = = = 
 Shakugan no Shana began as a light novel series written by Yashichiro Takahashi , with illustrations drawn by Noizi Ito . ASCII Media Works published 26 volumes between November 9 , 2002 and November 10 , 2012 under their Dengeki Bunko imprint ; 22 comprise the main story , while the other four are side story collections . Viz Media licensed the novels for English distribution in North America . The first volume was released on April 17 , 2007 , followed by volume two on October 16 , 2007 . Viz did not publish any further volumes . The novels are also licensed in South Korea by Daewon C.I. , and in Taiwan and Hong Kong by Kadokawa Media . 
 A 160 @-@ page guide book titled Shakugan no Shana no Subete ( <unk> , All About Shakugan no Shana ) was published on December 10 , 2005 by ASCII Media Works . Two more guide books were published by ASCII Media Works for the anime adaptations : Anime Shakugan no Shana no Subete ( アニメ 『 <unk> 』 <unk> ) on October 27 , 2006 with 176 pages , and Anime Shakugan no Shana II no Subete ( アニメ 『 <unk> 』 <unk> ) on October 19 , 2009 with 168 pages . Four 128 @-@ page Noizi Ito art books were published by ASCII Media Works : Guren ( <unk> ) on February 25 , 2005 , <unk> ( <unk> ) on August 9 , 2007 , Sōen ( <unk> ) on August 10 , 2009 , and Shana ( <unk> ) on August 9 , 2013 . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A manga adaptation , illustrated by Ayato Sasakura , was serialized in ASCII Media Works ' manga magazine Dengeki Daioh between the April 2005 and October 2011 issues . The individual chapters were collected and published in ten tankōbon volumes from October 27 , 2005 and October 27 , 2011 . A special limited edition version of volume two was bundled with a booklet titled Grimoire including contributions from guest artists and writers for various illustrations , manga , and short stories . Viz Media licensed the manga for English distribution in North America . Viz released six volumes between April 17 , 2007 and September 21 , 2010 , but then cancelled the release of the final four volumes . The manga is also licensed in South Korea by Daewon C.I. , in Taiwan and Hong Kong by Kadokawa Media , and in Germany by Egmont . 
 A second manga illustrated by Shii Kiya , titled Shakugan no Shana X Eternal song : Harukanaru Uta ( <unk> Eternal song <unk> ) , is based on the events of the tenth novel and began serialization in ASCII Media Works ' manga magazine Dengeki Black Maoh on September 19 , 2007 . The manga was later transferred to Dengeki Maoh and ran in that magazine between the December 2009 and September 2012 issues . Five volumes were released between January 27 , 2009 and September 27 , 2012 . The manga is licensed in South Korea by Daewon C.I. , and in Taiwan and Hong Kong by Kadokawa Media . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A 24 @-@ episode anime TV series adaptation of Shakugan no Shana aired in Japan between October 6 , 2005 and March 23 , 2006 on TV Kanagawa . Produced by J.C.Staff and directed by Takashi Watanabe , the screenplay was written by Yasuko Kobayashi , and chief animator Mai Otsuka based the character design used in the anime on Noizi Ito 's original designs . The sound director is Jin <unk> , and the soundtrack is composed by Kow Otani . The series was later released by Geneon to eight DVD compilation volumes from January to August 2006 . Later , an original video animation ( OVA ) episode titled Shakugan no Shana SP , which takes place after the events of episode 13 , was released on December 8 , 2006 . 
 An anime film based on the first novel that was released in Japanese theaters on April 21 , 2007 as one of three films released at Dengeki Bunko 's Movie Festival . The staff who produced the anime series returned to produce the film . The version shown in theaters was 65 minutes in length . Those who saw the film in theaters could buy a short book titled Shakugan no Shana M containing two short stories written by Yashichiro Takahashi published by ASCII Media Works under the imprint Dengeki Gekijō Bunko . The film was released on DVD in Japan on September 21 , 2007 in regular and special editions , which featured the full length 90 @-@ minute director 's cut version . It was later released on Blu @-@ ray Disc ( BD ) in Japan on July 27 , 2011 . 
 Shana 's production staff would again return to produce two additional TV series and an OVA series . The 24 @-@ episode second season , titled Shakugan no Shana Second ( <unk> ) , aired between October 5 , 2007 and March 28 , 2008 on MBS . The series was later released by Geneon to eight DVD compilation volumes from January to August 2008 . A four @-@ episode OVA series titled Shakugan no Shana S was released on BD / DVD from October 23 , 2009 to September 29 , 2010 . The 24 @-@ episode third season , titled Shakugan no Shana Final ( <unk> <unk> ) , aired between October 8 , 2011 and March 24 , 2012 on Tokyo MX . The series was released by Geneon on eight BD / DVD compilation volumes from December 2011 to July 2012 . 
 Geneon licensed the first TV series for North American distribution , but after Geneon withdrew from the North American market , Funimation Entertainment took up the manufacturing , marketing , sales and distribution rights , though Geneon still retained the license . A DVD box set was released by Funimation in September 2008 , and was re @-@ released in September 2009 under Funimation 's " Viridian Collection " . Funimation later re @-@ licensed the first series and re @-@ released it in a BD / DVD combo pack on August 21 , 2012 . The series made its North American television debut on September 10 , 2012 on the Funimation Channel . The first season and its accompanying OVA were also licensed by Madman Entertainment in Australia and New Zealand , and by MVM Films in the United Kingdom . Funimation later licensed the film , the second and third TV series , and the OVA series for release in North America with a different English dub cast compared to the first anime season . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 For the first Shakugan no Shana anime series , four theme song singles were released for two opening and two ending themes . The first opening theme " Hishoku no Sora " ( <unk> , The Crimson Sky ) by Mami Kawada was released in November 2005 , and the second opening theme " Being " by Kotoko was released in March 2006 . The first ending theme " <unk> <unk> Shōjo " ( <unk> , The Girl Born at Dawn ) by Yoko Takahashi was released in October 2005 , and the second ending theme " Aka no <unk> " ( <unk> , Crimson Silence ) by Yoko Ishida was released in February 2006 . The original soundtrack for the first anime series was released in January 2006 . For the Shakugan no Shana film , two theme song singes were released : the ending theme " Tenjō o Kakeru <unk> " ( <unk> , Those Who Scale Heaven and Earth ) by Love Planet Five — made up of Kotoko , Kawada , Eiko Shimamiya , Mell , and Kaori <unk> — was released in April 2007 ; the insert song " Akai Namida " ( <unk> , Red Tears ) by Kawada was released in May 2007 . The film 's original soundtrack was released in September 2007 . 
 For Shakugan no Shana Second , two theme song singles were released for two opening and two ending themes . The first opening theme " Joint " by Kawada was released in October 2007 , and the second opening theme " Blaze " by Kotoko was released in March 2008 . The first ending theme is " Triangle " by Kawada and was released on the single for " Joint " , and the second ending theme " <unk> " by Kotoko was released on the single for " Blaze " . The song " Sense " by Kawada was used as the final ending theme for episode 24 , and was released on Kawada 's album Savia in March 2008 . The original soundtrack for Shakugan no Shana Second was released in January 2008 . For Shakugan no Shana S , the single for the opening theme " Prophecy " by Kawada was released in November 2009 , and the ending theme " All in Good Time " by Kawada was released on her album Linkage in March 2010 . The song " <unk> " by Kawada was used as an insert song in episode 4 , and was released on Savia . 
 For Shakugan no Shana Final , four theme song singles were released for two opening and two ending themes . The first opening theme " Light My Fire " by Kotoko was released in November 2011 , and the second opening theme " Serment " by Kawada was released in February 2012 . The first ending theme " I 'll Believe " by Altima was released in December 2011 , and the second ending theme " One " by Altima was released in February 2012 . The song " Kōbō " ( <unk> , Beam of Light ) by Kawada was used as the final ending theme for episode 24 . Three insert songs by Kawada were also used in Shakugan no Shana Final : " u / n " in episode 15 released on the single for " Serment " , " Akai Namida " in episode 19 , and " Hishoku no Sora " in episode 24 . 
 Three volumes of albums titled Shakugan no Shana Assorted Shana containing image songs , audio dramas and background music tracks were released between February and April 2006 . Three volumes of albums titled Shakugan no Shana II <unk> Shana containing images songs and audio dramas were released between February and May 2008 . Three volumes of albums titled Shakugan no Shana F Superiority Shana containing audio dramas , background music tracks , and short versions of theme songs from Shakugan no Shana Final were released between February and July 2012 . The third Superiority Shana album also included the song " Kōbō " . 
 A weekly radio drama of Shakugan no Shana aired four episodes between November 29 and December 20 , 2003 on Dengeki Taishō . The scenario was an original side @-@ story written by Yashichiro Takahashi , and takes place between the first and second light novel volumes . The cast for the radio drama was different from the anime adaptations . A CD compilation of the radio drama titled Shakugan no Shana Drama Disc , including an additional audio drama , was eligible for mail orders up to March 31 , 2004 . Another drama CD was released with the April 2008 issue of Tokuma Shoten 's Animage magazine ; the cast is the same as with the anime versions . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 An action RPG visual novel titled Shakugan no Shana , developed by Vridge and published by MediaWorks , was released on March 23 , 2006 for the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) . A 36 @-@ page A4 @-@ sized art book titled <unk> ( <unk> ) featuring illustrations by Ito was available to those who pre @-@ ordered the game . The game was re @-@ released as a " Best " version on February 7 , 2008 . The story was written by Yashichiro Takahashi , and features character designs by Noizi Ito . The opening theme song is " Exist " by Rie Kugimiya , which was released on volume one of the Assorted Shana albums . The player assumes the role of Yuji Sakai during the visual novel aspect , where much of the game 's duration is spent on reading the text that appears on the screen , which represents the story 's narrative and dialogue . 
 The game follows a branching plot line through eight chapters with five possible endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . Every so often , the player will come to a point where he or she is given the chance to choose from multiple options . Text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . Sometimes during text progression , an " active countdown " minigame appears , which requires the player to press the game buttons in a specific order in a set time limit . Success or failure in these minigames influence which endings are viewed . During the turn @-@ based battle sequences , the player assumes the role of Shana . The player uses a combination of fire , powers of <unk> , and treasure tools to battle Crimson Denizens ; and Shana is also able to use a special attack and defend . 
 A Nintendo DS port of the game titled Shakugan no Shana DS , developed by Vridge and published by MediaWorks , was released on March 29 , 2007 . Those who pre @-@ ordered the game received a calendar spanning April 2007 to March 2008 , and an art book of rough sketches by Ito titled Tōka ( <unk> ) was available for a limited time with the purchase of the game . A new story for the DS version was written by Takahashi . The game also contains an image gallery that allows the player to see what Shana and Yoshida Kazumi look like in different clothes , and a battle mode that lets the player fight against the computer with a character other than Shana . 
 Shana appears as a playable character in the crossover RPG Dengeki Gakuen RPG : Cross of Venus for Nintendo DS , and other characters from Shakugan no Shana also appear in the game . Shana appears in the 2014 fighting game Dengeki Bunko : Fighting Climax , which features various Dengeki Bunko characters . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In October 2014 , the novels were reported to have sold over 8 @.@ 6 million copies . As reported on the obi strip on volume 4 of the Shakugan no Shana manga released in January 2008 , 1 @.@ 2 million copies of the manga had been sold . Theron Martin from Anime News Network reviewed the manga and called it " inferior " to the anime , and notes the anime develops characters better than the manga . Martin also critiques the art , saying the background art has little detail , and while the action scenes are handled well enough , they are still sub @-@ par compared to the same scenes in the anime . Martin concludes the review by warning the readers that " [ if ] this is your first exposure to the franchise , look to the anime version to see it done right . " 
 When reviewing the anime , Martin thought the first Shakugan no Shana always manages to slightly exceed expectations , and while its story elements may be typical , its execution is not . Martin noted that Shana 's Flame Haze transformation is a visual highlight of the series , and other details are shown equal care . Reviewer Chris Beveridge of Mania.com felt uncomfortable about the morbid nature of the series . While Beveridge did not think the series is " groundbreaking " , it proves to be a " solid title " that continuously gets better . The pacing in the middle of the first season was criticized for quickly ending an arc before " going into a storyline that feels out of character for the show . " Martin 's review of Shakugan no Shana Final was less positive ; he described Yuji as having been made into a different character ( though his complexity was praised ) , criticized the addition of a large number of prominent characters without sufficient development , and described some things as not making sense , although he praised Shana 's development over the course of the third series . 
 = The Source Awards ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " The Source Awards " is the sixteenth episode of the first season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by Robert Carlock and Daisy Gardner , and directed by one of the season 's supervising producers , Don Scardino . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on March 1 , 2007 . " The Source Awards " featured appearances by Wayne Brady , Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Ghostface Killah , LL Cool J , and Jason Sudeikis . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) enlists a rap producer , Ridikolous ( LL Cool J ) , to unload his line of inferior champagne while Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) reluctantly hosts the Source Awards . At the same time , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) tries to sever ties with a black man ( Brady ) she dislikes without looking racist . 
 " The Source Awards " received mixed reception from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) has a date with Steven Black ( Wayne Brady ) , Tracy Jordan 's ( Tracy Morgan ) new business manager , whom she met in one of Tracy 's after @-@ parties . Many people around Liz make an issue of Steven being black , but Liz does not care about his race . On her date with Steven , Liz is surprised to find out certain things about him , and does not have a good time . Steven believes that Liz doesn 't like him because he is black , when really she does not like him as a person . She does not want to be thought of as racist , so she continues on the date . Later , Liz tries to break up with Steven and explain to him that she just does not like him as a person , not because of his race . To prove they are incompatible , she brings him as a guest to the Source Awards the following night . 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , meanwhile , is producing his own wine , called Donaghy Estate Sparkling Wine . He and Liz taste it , and realize that it is practically undrinkable . This leaves Jack with the problem of disposing with the wine . He decides to market it to hip @-@ hop producer Ridikolous ( LL Cool J ) , and at the same time patch up things between Tracy and Ridikolous , who was not allowed into one of Tracy 's parties . Jack and Ridikolous have a meeting , resulting in the wine becoming the corporate sponsor of the Source Awards , which is being produced by Ridikolous . To further amend things with Tracy , Jack proposes to let Tracy host the award show . This backfires when Tracy refuses to host it in fear that he will get shot , but Jack still sees it as the only way to work things out with Ridikolous . 
 At the Source Awards , Tracy still does not want to host . Jack rhetorically asks him what Oprah would do , but Tracy misunderstands and starts acting like her . Backstage , Tracy shows Liz his gun , which she takes away from him . She fires it by accident and ends up shooting Steven in the buttocks . He thinks she shot him because he was going through her purse and calls her a racist . Following this , Ridikolous comes in and says that Jack has made a mockery of the award , adding : " Wait until I tell Tupac about this ! " . This leads to a short awkward moment , but Jack insists he did not hear anything . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Source Awards " was written by executive producer Robert Carlock and Daisy Gardner , and directed by one of the season 's supervising producers Don Scardino . This was Carlock 's third writing credit , and was Gardner 's first written episode . This episode was Scardino 's fourth directed episode of 30 Rock . " The Source Awards " originally aired on March 1 , 2007 on NBC as the sixteenth episode of the show 's first season and overall of the series . 
 Rapper Ghostface Killah made his second appearance as himself on the show , having appeared in the episode " Jack @-@ Tor " , in which he and Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) perform the song " Muffin Top " . In one scene of " The Source Awards " , Ghostface Killah is drinking Donaghy Estate Sparkling Wine as a music video is shooting , but cannot stand drinking the wine , which makes him sick . This episode featured guest appearances from actors LL Cool J and Wayne Brady . Actor Jason Sudeikis had a brief appearance , in which Liz tells Jenna she ran into him , though not knowing his name yet refers to him as " Flower Guy " . This was Sudeikis ' second appearance , having first appeared in the February 8 , 2007 , episode " Up All Night " . Sudeikis has appeared in the main cast of Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , a weekly sketch comedy series which airs on NBC in the United States . Series ' creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 . Various other cast members of SNL have appeared on 30 Rock , including : Rachel Dratch , Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Chris Parnell and Molly Shannon . Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of SNL . Alec Baldwin , who plays Jack , has also hosted SNL sixteen times as of the end of the variety show 's 37th season , the highest amount of episodes of any host of the series . 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode in 2006 where Tracy is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) , and dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four recent Halloweens as revealed in " The Source Awards " . Star Wars is also referenced when Tracy takes on the identity of the character Chewbacca . Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to Carlock , whom she described as " the resident expert " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Source Awards " was watched by 5 @.@ 7 million viewers , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , meaning that 2 @.@ 7 percent of all people in that group , and 7 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . Compared to the previous week , this episode was up 13 percent in the 18 – 49 demographic and 25 percent in overall viewers . The previous episode , " Hard Ball " , was watched by 4 @.@ 6 million American viewers . 
 Julia Ward AOL 's TV Squad said that while the episode " delivered plenty of funny " it " seemed a bit off @-@ kilter . It had fewer laughs @-@ per @-@ minute than the past few episodes , and structurally , I think the writers couldn 't decide which story to foreground . " She complimented the series for having " an interesting take " on the hip @-@ hop satire that was featured in " The Source Awards " . " From where I sit , it 's got to be in the top five , if not three " , said TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich in regards to this episode . Mitovich noted , " ... I can only bow with great reverence to the effort that goes into 30 Rock , where in an episode like this week 's , every other line is funny and / or fantastically absurd . " IGN contributor Robert Canning opined than an episode like this one , with its guest stars and taking on the issue of race , got " some decent laughs " , though it " failed to produce a solid half hour . " Canning disliked LL Cool J 's guest spot , observing that it was " nothing more than a generic caricature put in the role of a sub @-@ par straight man " , but enjoyed Wayne Brady 's , as he was " a successful part of the episode 's best storyline . " Canning said that Tracy as Oprah was " more weird than funny , unfortunately " , but liked that Jason Sudeikis made a brief appearance as " Flower Guy " in the episode . In conclusion , Canning gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating . <unk> Madden Toby for The Detroit News found the episode a " side @-@ splitter " . 
 = United Kingdom corporation tax = 
 Throughout this article , the unqualified term " pound " and the £ symbol refer to the Pound sterling . 
 Corporation tax is a corporate tax levied in the United Kingdom on the profits made by companies and on the profits of permanent establishments of non @-@ UK resident companies and associations that trade in the European Union . Prior to the tax 's enactment on 1 April 1965 , companies and individuals paid the same income tax , with an additional profits tax levied on companies . The Finance Act 1965 replaced this structure for companies and associations with a single corporate tax , which borrowed its basic structure and rules from the income tax system . Since 1997 , the UK 's Tax Law Rewrite Project has been modernising the UK 's tax legislation , starting with income tax , while the legislation imposing corporation tax has itself been amended ; the rules governing income tax and corporation tax have thus diverged . Corporation tax is governed by the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 ( as amended ) . 
 Originally introduced as a classical tax system , in which companies were subject to tax on their profits and companies ' shareholders were also liable to income tax on the dividends that they received , the first major amendment to corporation tax saw it move to an imputation system in 1973 , under which an individual receiving a dividend became entitled to an income tax credit representing the corporation tax already paid by the company paying the dividend . The classical system was reintroduced in 1999 , with the abolition of advance corporation tax and of <unk> dividend tax credits . Another change saw the single main rate of tax split into three . Tax competition between jurisdictions reduced the main rate from 28 % in 2008 @-@ 2010 , down to a flat rate of 20 % as of April 2015 . 
 The UK government faced problems with its corporate tax structure , including European Court of Justice judgements that aspects of it are incompatible with EU treaties . Tax avoidance schemes marketed by the financial sector have also proven an irritant , and been countered by complicated anti @-@ avoidance legislation . 
 The complexity of the corporation tax system is a recognised issue . The Labour government , supported by the Opposition parties , carried through wide @-@ scale reform from the Tax Law Rewrite project , resulting in the Corporation Tax Act 2010 . The tax has slowly been integrating generally accepted accounting practice , with the corporation tax system in various specific areas based directly on the accounting treatment . 
 Total net Corporation Tax receipts in 2014 @-@ 15 were £ 43 @.@ 0 billion , which is an increase of 7 per cent from £ 40 @.@ 3 billion in 2013 @-@ 14 . 
 = = History = = 
 Before 1965 , companies were subject to income tax on their profits , at the same rate as was levied on individuals . An imputation system existed , whereby the income tax paid by a company was offset against the income tax liability of a shareholder who received dividends from the company . With the standard rate of income tax in 1949 at 50 % , a company making £ 1 @,@ 000 in profits would pay £ 500 in tax . If the company then chose to pay a £ 100 dividend , the recipient would be treated as if he had earned £ 200 and had paid £ 100 in income tax on it – the tax paid by the company fully covered the tax due from the individual on the dividend paid . If , however , the individual was subject to tax at a higher rate ( known as " surtax " ) , he ( not the company ) would be liable to pay the additional tax . 
 In addition to income tax , companies were also subject to a profits tax , introduced by Labour Chancellor Sir Stafford Cripps , which was deducted from company profits when determining the income tax liability . It was a differential tax , with a higher tax rate on dividends ( profits distributed to shareholders ) than on profits retained within the company . By penalising the distribution of profits , it was hoped companies would retain profits for investment , which was considered a priority after the Second World War . The tax did not have the desired effect , so the distributed profits tax was increased by 20 % by the post @-@ war Labour government , in an attempt to coerce companies into retaining more of their profits . At the time of Hugh Gaitskell 's 1951 budget , the profits tax was 50 % for distributed profits and 10 % for undistributed profits . 
 A series of reductions in the profits tax were brought in from 1951 onwards by the new Conservative government . The tax rates fell to 22 @.@ 5 % on distributed profits and 2 @.@ 5 % on undistributed profits by 1957 , but the profits tax was no longer income tax @-@ deductible . Derick Heathcoat @-@ Amory 's Budget of March 1958 replaced the differential profits tax with a single profits tax measure , applicable to both retained and distributed profits . This gradual decrease , and final abolition , of taxes on capital distributions reflected ideological differences between the Conservative and Labour parties : the Conservative approach was to distribute profits to capital holders for investment elsewhere , while Labour sought to force companies to retain profits for reinvestment in the company in the hope this would benefit the company 's workforce . 
 = = = Finance Act 1965 = = = 
 Under the Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer James Callaghan , the Finance Act 1965 replaced the system of income tax and profits tax from 1 April 1965 with a single measure , the Corporation Tax , which re @-@ introduced aspects of the old system . Corporation Tax was charged at a uniform rate on all profits , but additional tax was then payable if profits were distributed as a dividend to shareholders . In effect , dividends suffered double taxation . This method of corporation tax is known as the classical system and is similar to that used in the United States . The effect of the tax was to revert to the distribution tax in operation from 1949 to 1959 : dividend payments were subject to higher tax than profits retained within the company . 
 The Finance Act 1965 also introduced capital gains tax , at a rate of 30 % . This was a tax charged on the gains arising on the disposal of capital assets by individuals . While companies were exempted from capital gains tax , they were liable to corporation tax on their " chargeable gains " , which were calculated in the same way as individuals ' capital gains . The tax applied to company shares as well as other assets . Before 1965 , capital gains were not taxed , and it was advantageous for taxpayers to argue that a receipt was non @-@ taxable " capital " rather than taxable " revenue " . 
 = = = Advance Corporation Tax = = = 
 The basic structure of the tax , where company profits were taxed as profits , and dividend payments were then taxed as income , remained unchanged until 1973 , when a partial imputation system was introduced for dividend payments . Unlike the previous imputation system , the tax credit to the shareholder was less than the corporation tax paid ( corporation tax was higher than the standard rate of income tax , but the imputation , or set @-@ off , was only of standard rate tax ) . When companies made distributions , they also paid advance corporation tax ( known as ACT ) , which could be set off against the main corporation tax charge , subject to certain limits ( the full amount of ACT paid could not be recovered if significantly large amounts of profits were distributed ) . Individuals and companies who received a dividend from a UK company received a tax credit representing the ACT paid . Individuals could set off the tax credit against their income tax liability . 
 On introduction , ACT was set at 30 % of the gross dividend ( the actual amount paid plus the tax credit ) . If a company made a £ 70 dividend payment to an individual , the company would pay £ 30 of advance corporation tax . The shareholder would receive the £ 70 cash payment , plus a tax credit of £ 30 ; thus , the individual would be deemed to have earned £ 100 , and to have already paid tax of £ 30 on it . The ACT paid by the company would be deductible against its final " mainstream " corporation tax bill . To the extent that the individual 's tax on the dividend was less than the tax credit – for example , if his income was too low to pay tax ( below £ 595 in 1973 – 1974 ) – he would be able to reclaim some or all of the £ 30 tax paid by the company . The set @-@ off was only partial , since the company would pay 52 % tax ( small companies had lower rates , but still higher than the ACT rate ) , and thus the £ 70 received by the individual actually represented pre @-@ tax profits of £ 145 @.@ 83 . Accordingly , only part of the double taxation was relieved . 
 ACT was not payable on dividends from one UK company to another ( unless the payor company elected to pay it ) . Also , the recipient company was not taxed on that dividend receipt , except for dealers in shares and life assurance companies in respect of some of their profits . As the payor company would have suffered tax on the payments it made , the company that received the dividend also received a credit that it could use to reduce the amount of ACT it itself paid , or , in certain cases , apply to have the tax credit repaid to them . 
 The level of ACT was linked to the basic rate of income tax between 1973 and 1993 . The March 1993 Budget of Norman Lamont cut the ACT rate and tax credit to 22 @.@ 5 % from April 1993 , and 20 % from April 1994 . These changes were accompanied with a cut of income tax on dividends to 20 % , while the basic rate of income tax remained at 25 % . Persons liable for tax were lightly affected by the change , because income tax liability was still balanced by the tax credit received , although higher rate tax payers paid an additional 25 % tax on the amount of the dividend actually received ( net ) , as against 20 % before the change . 
 The change had bigger effects on pensions and non @-@ taxpayers . A pension fund receiving a £ 1 @.@ 2 m dividend income prior to the change would have been able to reclaim £ 400 @,@ 000 in tax , giving a total income of £ 1 @.@ 6 m . After the change , only £ 300 @,@ 000 was reclaimable , reducing income to £ 1 @.@ 5 m , a fall of 6 @.@ 25 % . 
 Gordon Brown 's summer Budget of 1997 ended the ability of pension funds and other tax @-@ exempt companies to reclaim tax credits with immediate effect , and for individuals from April 1999 . This tax change has been blamed for the poor state of British pension provision , while usually ignoring the more significant effect of the dot @-@ com <unk> crash of 2000 onwards when the FTSE @-@ 100 lost half its value to fall from 6930 at the beginning of 2000 to just <unk> by March 2003 . Despite this , critics such as Member of Parliament Frank Field described it as a " hammer blow " and the Sunday Times described it as a swindle , with the hypothetical £ 1 @.@ 5 m income described above falling to £ 1 @.@ 2 m , a fall in income of 20 % , because no tax would be reclaimable . 
 = = = = Abolition of Advance Corporation Tax = = = = 
 From 6 April 1999 ACT was abolished , and the tax credit on dividends was reduced to 10 % . There was a matching reduction in the basic income tax rate on dividends to 10 % , while a new higher @-@ rate of 32 @.@ 5 % was introduced which led to an overall effective 25 % tax rate for higher rate taxpayers on dividends ( after setting this " notional " tax credit against the tax liability ) . From 6 April 2010 , the top rate of income tax on dividends will be 42 @.@ 5 % ( effective rate 36 @.@ 11 % ) . While non @-@ taxpayers were no longer able to claim this amount from the treasury ( as opposed to taxpayers who could deduct it from their tax bill ) , the 20 % ACT ( which would have previously been deducted from the dividend before payment ) was no longer levied . 
 ACT that had been incurred prior to 1999 could still be set off against a company 's tax liability , provided it would have been able to set it off under the old imputation system . In order to keep the stream of payments associated with advance corporation tax payment , ' large ' companies ( comprising the majority of corporation tax receipts ) were subjected to a quarterly instalments scheme for tax payment . 
 = = = Rates = = = 
 On its introduction in 1965 , corporation tax was charged at 40 % , rising to 45 % in the 1969 Budget . The rate then fell to 42 @.@ 5 % in the second Budget of 1970 and 40 % in 1971 . In 1973 , alongside the introduction of advance corporation tax ( ACT ) , Conservative chancellor Anthony Barber created a main rate of 52 % , together with a smaller companies ' rate of 42 % . This apparent increase was negated by the fact that under the ACT scheme , dividends were no longer subject to income tax . 
 The 1979 Conservative Budget of Geoffrey Howe cut the small companies ' rate to 40 % , followed by a further cut in the 1982 Budget to 38 % . The Budgets of 1983 – 1988 saw sharp cuts in both main and small companies ' rates , falling to 35 % and 25 % respectively . Budgets between 1988 and 2001 brought further falls to a 30 % main rate and 19 % small companies ' rates . From April 1983 to March 1997 the small companies ' rate was pegged to the basic rate of income tax . During the 1980s there was briefly a higher rate of tax imposed for capital profits . 
 Chancellor Gordon Brown 's 1999 Budget introduced a 10 % starting rate for profits from £ 0 to £ 10 @,@ 000 , effective from April 2000 . Marginal relief applied meaning companies with profits of between £ 10 @,@ 000 and £ 50 @,@ 000 paid a rate between the starting rate and the small companies ' rate ( 19 % in 2000 ) . 
 The 2002 Budget cut the starting rate to zero , with marginal relief applying in the same way . This caused a vast surge in incorporations , as businesses that had operated as self @-@ employed , paying income tax on profits from just over £ 5000 , were attracted to the corporation tax rate of 0 % on income up to £ 10 @,@ 000 . Previously self @-@ employed individuals could now distribute profits as dividend payments rather than salaries . For companies with profits under £ 50 @,@ 000 the corporation tax rate varied between 0 % and 19 % . Because dividend payments come with a basic rate tax credit , provided the recipient did not earn more than the basic rate allowance , no further tax would be paid . The number of new companies being formed in 2002 – 2003 reached 325 @,@ 900 , an increase of 45 % on 2001 – 2002 . 
 The fact that individuals operating in this manner could potentially pay no tax at all was felt by the government to be unfair tax avoidance , and the 2004 Budget introduced a Non @-@ Corporate Distribution Rate . This ensured that where a company paid below the small companies ' rate ( 19 % in 2004 ) , dividend payments made to non @-@ corporates ( for example , individuals , trusts and personal representatives of deceased persons ) would be subject to additional corporation tax , bringing the corporation tax paid up to 19 % . For example , a company making £ 10 @,@ 000 profit , and making a £ 6 @,@ 000 dividend distribution to an individual and £ 4 @,@ 000 to another company would pay 19 % corporation tax on the £ 6 @,@ 000 . Although this measure substantially reduced the number of small businesses incorporating , the Chancellor in the 2006 Budget said tax avoidance by small businesses through incorporation was still a major issue , and scrapped the starting rate entirely . 
 = = = Taxable profits and accounting profits = = = 
 The starting point for computing taxable profits is profits before tax ( except for a life assurance company ) . The rules for calculating corporation tax generally ran in parallel with income tax until 1993 , when the first statutory rule to move profit reporting into line with generally accepted accounting practice was introduced , although the courts were already moving towards requiring trading profits to be computed using general accountancy rules . 
 The Finance Act 1993 introduced rules to make tax on exchange gains and losses mimic their treatment in a company 's financial statements in most instances . The Finance Act 1994 saw similar rules for financial instruments , and in the Finance Act 1996 the treatment of most loan relationships was also brought into line with the accounting treatment . The Finance Act 1997 saw something similar with rental premiums . A year later , the Finance Act 1998 went even further , making it clear that taxable trading profits ( apart from those accruing to a Lloyd 's corporate name or to a life assurance company ) and profits from a rental business are equal to profits calculated under generally accepted accounting practice ( " GAAP " ) unless there is a specific statutory or case law rule to the contrary . This was followed up by the Finance Act 2004 , which ruled that where a company with investment business could make deductions for management expenses , they were calculated by reference to figures in the financial statements . 
 = = = = International Financial Reporting Standards = = = = 
 From 2005 , all European Union listed companies have to prepare their financial statements using the " International Financial Reporting Standards " ( " IFRS " ) , as modified by the EU . Other UK companies may choose to adopt IFRS . Corporation tax law is changing so that , in the future , IFRS accounting profits are largely respected . The exception is for certain financial instruments and certain other measures to prevent tax arbitrage between companies applying IFRS and companies applying UK GAAP . 
 = = = Avoidance = = = 
 Tax avoidance is the legitimate reduction of tax through tax planning and / or usage of legal provisions . Unlike most other countries , most UK tax professionals are accountants rather than lawyers by training . 
 Until 2013 , the UK had no general anti @-@ avoidance rule ( " <unk> " ) for corporation tax . However , it inherited an anti @-@ avoidance rule from income tax relating to transactions in securities , and since then has had various " mini @-@ <unk> " added to it . The best known " mini @-@ <unk> " prevents a deduction for interest paid when the loan to which it relates is made for an " unallowable purpose " . In 2013 , the Cameron government introduced a General Anti @-@ Avoidance Rule to manage the risk of tax avoidance . 
 The Finance Act 2004 introduced disclosure rules requiring promoters of certain tax avoidance schemes that are <unk> or employment @-@ related to disclose the scheme . Taxpayers who use these schemes must also disclose their use when they submit their tax returns . This is the first provision of its kind in the UK , and the Finance Act 2005 has shown a number of tax avoidance schemes being blocked earlier than would have been expected prior to the disclosure rules . 
 = = = Need for greater revenues = = = 
 In the early twenty @-@ first century the Government sought to raise more revenues from corporation tax . In 2002 it introduced a separate 10 % supplementary charge on profits from oil and gas extraction businesses , and the Finance Act 2005 contained measures to accelerate when oil and gas extraction business have to pay tax . Instead of paying their tax in four equal instalments in the seventh , tenth , thirteenth and sixteenth month after the accounting period starts , they will be required to consolidate their third and fourth payments and pay them in the thirteenth month , creating a cash flow advantage for the Government . The Finance ( No.2 ) Act 2005 continued measures specifically relating to life assurance companies . When originally announced ( as the Finance ( No.3 ) Bill 2005 ) Legal & General told the Stock Exchange that £ 300 m had been wiped off their value , and Aviva ( Norwich Union ) announced that the tax changes would cost its policy holders £ 150 m . 
 = = Method of charge = = 
 Corporation tax must be passed annually by Parliament , otherwise there is no authority to collect it . The charge for the financial year ( beginning 5 April each year ) was imposed by the Finance Act passed in that calendar year . The Finance Act 1998 changed this , imposing the charge for the 1998 and 1999 financial years , with the Finance Act 1999 then imposing the charge for the 2000 financial year , and so on . The tax is charged in respect of the company 's accounting period , which is normally the 12 @-@ month period for which the company prepares its accounts . Corporation tax is administered by Her Majesty 's Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) , which was formed from a merger of the Inland Revenue ( which previously administered corporation tax ) and Her Majesty 's Customs and Excise on 18 April 2005 . 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 Corporation tax is levied on the net profits of a company . Except for certain life assurance companies , it is borne by the company as a direct tax . 
 Up until 1999 no corporation tax was due unless HM Revenue & Customs ( HMRC ) raised an assessment on a company . Companies were , however , obliged to report certain details to HMRC so that the right amount could be assessed . This changed for accounting periods ending on or after 1 July 1999 , when self @-@ assessment was introduced . Self @-@ assessment means that companies are required to assess themselves and take full responsibility for that assessment . If the self @-@ assessment is wrong through negligence or recklessness , the company can be liable to penalties . The self @-@ assessment tax return needs to be delivered to HMRC 12 months after the end of the period of account in which the accounting period falls ( although the tax must be paid before this date ) . If a company fails to submit a return by then , it is liable to penalties . HMRC may then issue a determination of the tax payable , which cannot be appealed – however , in practice they wait until a further six months have elapsed . Also , the most common claims and elections that may be made by a company have to be part of its tax return , with a time limit of two years after the end of the accounting period . This means that a company submitting its return more than one year late suffers not only from the late filing penalties , but also from the inability to make these claims and elections . 
 From 2004 there has been a requirement for new companies to notify HM Revenue & Customs of their formation , although HMRC receives notifications of new company registrations from Companies House . Companies will then receive an annual notice <unk> , approximately 1 – 2 months after the end of the company 's financial period , notifying it to complete an annual return . This must also include the company 's annual accounts , and possibly other documents , such as auditors ' reports , that are required for certain companies . 
 = = = Schedular system = = = 
 In the United Kingdom the source rule applies . This means that something is taxed only if there is a specific provision bringing it within the charge to tax . Accordingly , profits are only charged to corporation tax if they fall within one of the following , and are not otherwise exempted by an explicit provision of the Taxes Acts : 
 Notes : 
 In practice companies do not get taxed under Schedule F. Most companies are exempted from Schedule F and there is a provision for those companies which are taxed on UK dividends ( i.e. dealers in shares ( stock ) ) that removes the charge from Schedule F to Schedule D. 
 A Controlled Foreign Company ( " CFC " ) is a company controlled by a UK resident that is not itself UK resident and is subject to a lower rate of tax in the territory in which it is resident . Under certain circumstances , UK resident companies that control a CFC pay corporation tax on what the UK tax profits of that CFC would have been . However , because of a wide range of exemptions , very few companies suffer a CFC charge . 
 Schedules B , C and E used to , but no longer , exist . 
 Authorised unit trusts and <unk> are not liable to tax on their chargeable gains . 
 Schedule D is itself divided into a number of cases : 
 Notes : 
 Cases II and IV only apply to income tax and not corporation tax . 
 Strictly speaking , the Corporation Tax Act 2010 replaces the historic terminology " Schedule A " , " Schedule D Case I " etc. with more descriptive terms but this does not affect the substantive application of the <unk> system so that , for example , different rules apply for utilising tax losses depending upon the nature of the income under which the losses arises . 
 = = = = Relief for expenses = = = = 
 Most direct expenses are deductible when calculating taxable income and chargeable gains . Notable exceptions include any costs of entertaining clients . Companies with investment business may deduct certain indirect expenses known as " expenses of management " when calculating their taxable profits . A similar relief is available for expenses of a life assurance company taxed on the I minus E basis which relate to the company 's basic life assurance and general annuity business . Donations made to charities are also normally deducted in calculating taxable income . 
 = = = Rates and payment = = = 
 The 2007 Budget announced a main rate cut from 30 % to 28 % , effective from April 2008 . At the same time , the small companies ' rate was increased from 19 % to 20 % from April 2007 , 21 % in April 2008 , to stop " individuals artificially incorporating as small companies to avoid paying their due share of tax , a practise if left unaddressed would cost the rest of the <unk> population billions of pounds " . 
 The rate of corporation tax is determined by the financial year , which runs from 1 April to the following 31 March . Financial year <unk> started on 1 April 2005 and ended on 31 March 2006 . Where a company 's accounting period straddles a financial year in which the corporation tax rate has changed , the company 's profits for that period are split . For example , a company paying small companies ' rate with its accounting period running from 1 January to 31 December , and making £ 100 @,@ 000 of profit in 2007 , would be deemed to have made 90 / 365 * £ 100 @,@ 000 = £ 24 @,@ 657 @.@ 53 in <unk> ( there are 90 days between 1 January and 31 March ) , and 275 / 365 * £ 100 @,@ 000 = £ 75 @,@ 34 @.@ 47 in FY07 , and would pay 19 % on the <unk> portion , and 20 % on the FY07 portion . 
 From 1 April 2010 HM Revenue & Customs updated their terminology and the former Small Companies ' Rate is now called Small Profits Rate . 
 Notes : 
 The bands shown on the right hand side are divided by one plus the number of associates ( usually the only associates a company has are fellow group companies , but the term is more widely defined ) 
 The reduced rates do not apply to close investment holding companies ( companies controlled by fewer than 5 people ( plus associates ) or by their directors / managers , whose main activity is the holding of investments ) . Nor do they apply to companies in liquidation after the first 12 months . 
 Authorised unit trusts and open @-@ ended investment companies are taxed at the basic rate of income tax which is 20 % as of 2010 
 Life assurance companies are taxed using the above rates on shareholder profits and 20 % on policy holder profits 
 Companies active in the oil and gas extraction industry in the UK or on the UK Continental Shelf are subject to an additional 10 % charge on their profits from those activities 
 Most companies are required to pay tax nine months and a day after the end of an accounting period . Larger companies are required to pay quarterly instalments , in the seventh , tenth , thirteenth and sixteenth months after a full accounting period starts . These times are modified where an accounting period lasts for less than twelve months . From 2005 onwards , for tax payable on oil and gas extraction profits , the third and fourth quarterly instalments are merged , including the supplementary 10 % charge . 
 In the financial year 2004 – 2005 , approximately 39 @,@ 000 companies paid corporation tax at the main rate . These 4 @.@ 7 % of active companies are responsible for 75 % of all corporation tax receipts . Around 224 @,@ 000 companies paid the small companies rate , with 34 @,@ 000 benefiting from marginal relief . 264 @,@ 000 were in the starting rate , with 269 @,@ 000 benefiting from the lower band of marginal relief . The total revenue was £ <unk> from 831 @,@ 885 companies . Only <unk> companies had a liability in excess of £ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = HM Revenue and Customs audit = = = 
 HM Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) has one year from the normal filing date , which is itself one year after the end of the period of account , to open an enquiry into the return . This period is extended if the return is filed late . The enquiry continues until all issues that HMRC wish to enquire about a return are dealt with . However , a company can appeal to the Commissioners of Income Tax to close an enquiry if they feel there is undue delay . 
 If either side disputes the amount of tax that is payable , they may appeal to either the General or Special Commissioners of Income Tax . Appeals on points of law may be made to the High Court ( Court of Session in Scotland ) , then the Court of Appeal , and finally , with leave , to the House of Lords . However , decisions of fact are binding and can only be appealed if no reasonable Commissioner could have made that decision . 
 Once an enquiry is closed , or the time for opening an enquiry has passed , HMRC can only re @-@ open a prior year if they become aware of an issue which they could not reasonably have known about at the time , or in instances of fraud or negligence . In fraud or negligence cases , they can re @-@ open cases from up to 20 years ago . 
 After an HMRC enquiry closes , or after final determination of an issue by the courts , the taxpayer has 30 days to amend their return , and make additional claims and elections , if appropriate , before the assessment becomes final and conclusive . If there is no enquiry , the assessment becomes final and conclusive once the period in which the Revenue may open an enquiry passes . 
 = = Relief from double taxation = = 
 There is a risk of double taxation whenever a company receives income that has already been taxed . This could be dividend income , which will have been paid out of the post @-@ tax profits of another company and which may have suffered withholding tax . Or it could be because the company itself has suffered foreign tax , perhaps because it conducts part of its trade through an overseas permanent establishment , or because it receives other types of foreign income . 
 Double taxation is avoided for UK dividends by exempting them from tax for most companies : only dealers in shares suffer tax on them . Where double taxation arises because of overseas tax suffered , relief is available either in the form of expense or credit relief . Expense relief allows the overseas tax to be treated as a deductible expense in the tax computation . Credit relief is given as a deduction from the UK tax liability , but is restricted to the amount of UK tax suffered on the foreign income . There is a system of onshore pooling , so that overseas tax suffered in high tax territories may be set off against taxable income arising from low tax territories . From 1 July 2009 , new rules were introduced to exempt most non @-@ UK dividends from corporation tax so these double taxation rules in respect of non @-@ UK dividends will be of less common application in practice after that date . 
 = = Loss relief = = 
 Detailed and separate rules apply to how all the different types of losses may be set off within a company . A detailed explanation of these can be found in : United Kingdom corporation tax loss relief . 
 = = = Group relief = = = 
 The UK does not permit tax consolidation , where companies in a group are treated as though they are a single entity for tax purposes . One of the main benefits of tax consolidation is that tax losses in one entity in a group are automatically <unk> against the tax profits of another . Instead , the UK permits a form of loss relief called " group relief " . 
 Where a company has losses arising in an accounting period ( other than capital losses , or losses arising under Case V or VI of Schedule D ) in excess of its other taxable profits for the period , it may surrender these losses to a group member with sufficient taxable profits in the same accounting period . The company receiving the losses may offset them against their own taxable profits . Exceptions include that a company in the oil and gas extraction industry may not accept group relief against the profits arising on its oil and gas extraction business , and a life assurance company may only accept group relief against its profits chargeable to tax at the standard shareholder rate applicable to that company . Separate rules apply for dual resident companies . 
 Full group relief is permitted between companies subject to UK corporation tax that are in the same 75 % group , where companies have a common ultimate parent , and at least 75 % of the shares in each company ( other than the ultimate parent ) are owned by other companies in the group . The companies making up a 75 % group do not all need to be UK @-@ resident or subject to UK corporation tax relief . An open @-@ ended investment company cannot form part of a group . 
 Consortium relief is permitted where a company subject to UK corporation tax is owned by a consortium of companies that each own at least 5 % of the shares and together own at least 75 % of the shares . A consortium company can only surrender or accept losses in proportion to how much of that company is owned by each consortium group . 
 = = Example computation = = 
 This is an example computation involving a company that has one associate from which it receives £ 50 @,@ 000 group relief . 
 Notes : 
 1 UK trading losses brought forward from previous accounting periods must be relieved as fully as possible against any trading profits in the current accounting period . They cannot be relieved against non @-@ trading profits . 
 ² Brought forward non @-@ trading <unk> can be utilised against non @-@ trading profits ; they cannot reduce the trading profits 
 ³ The management expense deduction is in relation to expenses incurred on managing the company 's investments . 
 4 The marginal relief computation is as follows : 
 Marginal relief fraction x ( Upper limit / ( Number of associates plus one ) – Profit ) 
 1 / 40 x ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 / 2 – 580 @,@ 000 ) 
 5 The £ 30 @,@ 000 overseas tax has been included in the taxable Schedule D Case V figure . Double tax relief is available on the lower of overseas tax suffered and UK corporation tax suffered on the overseas income . 
 = = Interaction with European law = = 
 Although there are no European Union directives dealing with direct taxes , UK laws must comply with European legislation . In particular , legislation should not be discriminatory under the EC treaty . 
 A number of cases where UK tax laws are believed to be discriminatory have been brought to the European Court of Justice , usually with respect to freedom of establishment and freedom of movement of capital . Key cases which have been decided include : 
 Hoechst — where the Court found that the way the partial imputation system operated prior to its abolition in 1999 was discriminatory ; 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> — a German case which implied that the UK 's transfer pricing and thin capitalisation legislation may have been contrary to EU legislation ( the 2004 Finance Act made changes to counter this threat ) ; 
 Marks and Spencer — where it was claimed that UK parents should be able to relieve the losses of overseas subsidiaries against the tax profits of their UK subgroup ( On 7 April 2005 , the Advocate @-@ General gave an opinion supporting the claim of a UK parent to offset losses of its EU subsidiaries , where no effective loss relief was available in the EU Member States the subsidiaries were resident in ) . However , in the final judgment , a compromise agreement was reached in which the national interest to prevent excessive loss of tax was held to outweigh in most circumstances the restriction on the freedom of movement of capital . Accordingly , although no specific new legislation has been introduced , relief for overseas losses will only be available where they may not be utilised in the overseas jurisdiction ; 
 Cadbury Schweppes — where it was ruled that CFC rules are only acceptable if they relate to wholly artificial arrangements intended to escape the UK tax normally payable . 
 Also , the case of ICI v Colmer led to the UK amending its definition of a group , for group relief purposes . Previously , the definition required that all companies and intermediate parent companies in a group to be UK resident . 
 There are also a number of other cases making their way , slowly , up to the European Court . In particular : 
 A Group Litigation Order arguing that dividends received from overseas companies should be exempt from tax in the same way as dividends received from UK companies are exempted from tax ; 
 Claims that the UK CFC legislation is contrary to EU law ( notably Vodafone ) . 
 = = Recent developments = = 
 = = = Corporation tax reform = = = 
 There have been a number of proposals for corporation tax reform , although only a few have been enacted . In March 2001 , the Government published a technical note A Review of Small Business Taxation , which considered simplification of corporation tax for small companies through the closer alignment of their profits for tax purposes with those reported in their accounts . In July of that year , the Government also published a consultation document , Large Business Taxation : the Government 's strategy and corporate tax reforms . It set out the strategy for modernising corporate taxes and proposals for relief for capital gains on substantial shareholdings held by companies . 
 In August 2002 , Reform of corporation tax – A consultation document was published , outlining initial proposals for the abolition of the Schedular system . This was followed up in August 2003 by Corporation tax reform – A consultation document , which further discussed the possible abolition of the Schedular system , and also whether the capital allowances ( tax depreciation ) system should be abolished . It also made proposals that were ultimately enacted in the Finance Act 2004 . ( The first two of these listed below were in response to threats to the UK tax base arising from recent European Court of Justice judgments . ) The changes were to : 
 Introduction of transfer pricing rules for UK @-@ to @-@ UK transactions . Transfer pricing rules require certain transactions to be deemed to have taken place at arm 's length prices for tax purposes when they did not in fact take place as such . 
 Merging thin capitalisation rules with the transfer pricing rules . Thin capitalisation rules limit the amount a company can claim as a tax deduction on interest when it receives loans at non @-@ commercial rates ( from connected parties , for example ) . 
 Extension of the deduction for management expenses to all companies with an investment business . Previously a company had to be wholly or mainly engaged in an investment business to qualify . 
 In December 2004 , Corporation tax reform – a technical note was published . It outlined the Government decision to abolish the Schedular system , replacing the numerous schedules and cases with two pools : a trading and letting pool ; and an " everything else " pool . The Government had decided that capital allowances would remain , though there would be some reforms , mostly affecting the leasing industry . 
 = = = Other enactments = = = 
 Other main reforms enacted , include : 
 Relief from tax on chargeable gains on disposals of substantial shareholdings in trading companies and groups ( enacted by the Finance Act 2002 ) . 
 Introduction of UK to UK transfer pricing rules , coupled with the merging of the thin capitalisation rules with the transfer pricing rules ( enacted by the Finance Act 2004 ) . 
 Extension of management expenses rules so that companies do not need to be investment companies to receive them , coupled with a specific rule preventing capital items being deductible as management expenses ( enacted by the Finance Act 2004 ) . 
 = Home ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Home " is the second episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , which originally aired on the Fox Broadcasting Company network on October 11 , 1996 . Directed by Kim Manners , it was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong . " Home " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story — a stand @-@ alone plot unconnected to the overarching mythology of The X @-@ Files . Watched by 18 @.@ 85 million viewers , the initial broadcast had a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 . " Home " was the first episode of The X @-@ Files to receive a viewer discretion warning for graphic content and the only to have carried a TV @-@ MA rating upon broadcast . Critics were generally complimentary , and praised the disturbing nature of the plot ; several made comparisons to the work of director David Lynch . Some reviewers nevertheless felt that the violent subject matter was excessive . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called " X @-@ Files " . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal ; the skeptical Scully was initially assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate the death of an infant with severe birth defects . Traveling to the small isolated town of Home , Pennsylvania , the pair meet the Peacocks , a family of deformed farmers who have not left their house in a decade . Initially , Mulder suspects that the brothers kidnapped and raped a woman to father the child , but the investigation uncovers a long history of incest involving the Peacocks ' own mother . 
 " Home " marks the return of writers Morgan and Wong , who left the show following its second season . The duo attempted to make their first episode upon return as ambitious and shocking as possible . They were inspired by real @-@ life events , including a story from Charlie Chaplin 's autobiography about an encounter in an English tenement home . The graphic content of the script attracted controversy from early in the production process . Commentators have identified themes within the episode that satirize the American dream , address the concept of globalization , and explore the nature of motherhood . It has been cited as a seminal episode of The X @-@ Files by critics and crew members . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the small town of Home , Pennsylvania , a woman gives birth to a deformed baby . Three similarly @-@ deformed men bury it near their dilapidated house during a rainstorm . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are sent to investigate after the corpse is found by children during a sandlot ball game . While talking to Home 's sheriff Andy Taylor ( Tucker Smallwood ) , Mulder asks whether the Peacock brothers — the inhabitants of the house nearest to the crime scene — have been questioned about the baby . Taylor informs him that the house dates back to the American Civil War and is without electricity , running water , or heat . He also insinuates that the family has been inbreeding since the war . The three Peacock brothers watch the agents from their front porch . 
 During an autopsy , the agents discover that the baby suffocated by inhaling dirt — meaning it was buried alive . Scully suggests that the baby 's defects could have been caused by inbreeding . Mulder insists this would be impossible , since the Peacocks seem to live in an all @-@ male household . Suspecting that the Peacocks have kidnapped and raped a woman , Mulder and Scully investigate their now @-@ abandoned residence and discover blood , scissors , and a shovel on a table . Arrest warrants are issued for the three brothers . In retaliation , the Peacocks break into Sheriff Taylor 's house during the night and murder him and his wife . 
 Laboratory tests indicate the baby 's parents were members of the Peacock family . When forensic evidence links the Peacocks to the Taylor murders , the agents and Deputy Barney Paster ( Sebastian Spence ) go to arrest the brothers . When Paster breaks down the front door of their residence , he is decapitated by a booby trap . Mulder and Scully release the Peacocks ' pigs to lure them out of the house before searching it . The agents find a quadruple amputee hidden under a bed . She is revealed to be Mrs. Peacock , the mother of the boys , who has been breeding with them for years . The brothers realize Mulder and Scully are inside their house and attack . The two youngest sons withstand several gunshots before dying , one of them impaled on another booby trap . Afterwards , the agents discover that Mrs. Peacock and her eldest son have escaped in their car , planning to start a new family elsewhere . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 " Home " marked the return of writers Glen Morgan and James Wong , who had left production of The X @-@ Files after the second season to work on other television projects . Before their departure , Morgan and Wong had written many episodes of the series and were instrumental in the success of its first season . The two developed Space : Above and Beyond , a science fiction television series canceled after one season . Subsequently , the two rejoined the staff of The X @-@ Files and became writers for the fourth season . To make an impact for their return , they decided to write an ambitious story and attempted to produce a script shocking enough to push the boundaries of television . Space : Above and Beyond co @-@ star Kristen Cloke advised them to study books about nature and evolution in preparation for their return in order to write about subjects like survivalism . 
 Many actors from Space : Above and Beyond appeared in the fourth season ; the first was Tucker Smallwood , who portrays Sheriff Andy Taylor in " Home " . When Morgan first pitched the episode to Chris Carter , he specifically described three actors from the show — James Morrison , Rodney Rowland and Morgan Weisser — as the trio of " big freak brothers " . The episode contained references to popular television , such as the use of the names Andy Taylor and Barney , and referring to Mayberry , which are references to characters and fictional town from The Andy Griffith Show . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Sources consulted by the writers included Brother 's Keeper ( 1992 ) , a documentary film depicting the story of the Wards , four " barely literate " brothers who lived on a farm that had been passed on through their family for generations . The brothers drew international attention following the alleged murder of William Ward by his brother Delbert . With an estimated IQ of 68 , Delbert escaped prosecution by claiming that the police had tricked him during interrogation . Wong chose to base the Peacock family on the Wards , incorporating their lifestyles into the script . The name " Peacock " came from the former neighbors of Morgan 's parents . 
 A further inspiration came from a story in Charlie Chaplin 's autobiography ; while touring with a British musical theatre , he stayed at a tenement home . After dinner , the family took him upstairs to meet their son , pulling him out from under a bed . The son was a quadruple amputee who " <unk> [ ed ] around " while they sang and danced . Morgan used this incident within the screenplay , although at Wong 's suggestion they changed the character to the boy 's mother . It took some time for the concepts to come together into a story ; elements first appeared in the second season episode " Humbug " , written by Morgan 's brother Darin and featuring a cast of circus sideshow performers . The episode incorporated several themes that had an influence on " Home " , including the use of a " benign soul trapped in the body of a monster " . 
 When director Kim Manners read the script for " Home " , he called it " as classic a horror script [ as ] I 'm ever going to see . " The producers , on the other hand , felt the show had gone too far , and called it " tasteless " . William B. Davis , the actor who portrayed the series ' main antagonist The Smoking Man , argued that the screenplay read like Morgan and Wong deliberately wanted to go back to the stylistic origins of the series . 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 Like the rest of the fourth season , " Home " was filmed in British Columbia . Most of the scenes depicting buildings were shot in the town of Surrey , British Columbia . As the town 's architecture comprised both old and new styles , careful reverse angles were employed to preserve the impression of " small @-@ town America " . The building used as the Peacock house had been previously utilized in the season two episode " Aubrey " . At that time , the producers noted that the house had been " untouched for years " and was " so good " that they had to return to film it again . The car that served as the Peacock family 's vehicle was found on a farm outside Vancouver . It was rented and restored for use in the episode . Cadillac later sent the producers a letter thanking them for including one of their cars in the show . 
 After the episode aired , Tucker Smallwood recalled that the filming was an unpleasant experience . He entered production of the episode with little knowledge of the nature of The X @-@ Files , and was surprised when he received the screenplay . During his first day on set , he asked other cast members if the series was always so violent . An unidentified crew member said , " this is awful even for us " , and commented that it was probably the most gruesome episode of the series run . During the sheriff 's death scene Smallwood insisted on performing his own stunts , until he hit his head attempting a dive . Another uncomfortable moment for the actor involved lying face down in a pool of fake blood for more than 90 minutes . 
 The episode incorporates the song " Wonderful ! Wonderful ! " by musician Johnny Mathis . Having read the screenplay Mathis refused to allow his version to be used , owing to the episode 's graphic content , and a cover version had to be created . Producer David Nutter , who had a background as a singer , intended to record the vocals but at the last minute another singer , who sounded more like Mathis , was used . Manners explained that he wanted to use the song because " certain songs have a creepy , icky quality that none of us have really openly acknowledged " . 
 " Home " was first submitted to the censors featuring audio of the baby screaming while being buried alive . Ten Thirteen Productions was asked by Fox executives to alter the audio so that the baby would sound sick ; they noted that the audio change was needed to show the child was diseased and that the Peacocks were not simply killing an innocent child . Manners called the shot , shown from the child 's perspective , of the baby 's burial as " the most awful shot of my career " . He said that he approached filming as seriously as he could because he felt the script was a classic . When production was finished , he said that he loved the episode and called it one of his favorites . Duchovny agreed with Manners , saying , " I really like that one . Although it didn 't scare me . " He explained that it " touched " him with its themes concerning the desire to " live and to propagate . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 " Home " presents a satirical view of traditional family values , showcasing the conflict between classic American values and more modern culture . It contains parallels to Sam Shepard 's play Buried Child , opening the narrative with the image of a child 's corpse being discovered in the family 's backyard . Writer Sarah Stegall viewed the opening as a commentary on the ideology of the American dream , using the death of a child to " speak to us of buried hopes and fears , and the dark secrets that can hold a family together . " 
 The town of Home encompasses the traditional values of the nuclear family — only for it to be victimized by the Peacock family — who represent the darker side of paradise . The town depicted in " Home " showcases the positive qualities of a world without globalization , but the Peacock family exhibit the negative aspects . The episode 's closing scene has been described as " quintessentially American " , featuring the final Peacock brother driving away in a white Cadillac with his mother " safely stowed in the trunk " , ready to explore a brand new life . M. Keith Booker , in Blue @-@ Collar Pop Culture , compared the brothers to the cannibalistic Leatherface family from The Texas Chain Saw Massacre ( 1974 ) . Booker also identified similarities between the brothers and the family from The Hills Have Eyes ( 1977 ) , expressing the view that the brothers represented " pure evil " . 
 The concept of motherhood is also explored in the episode . According to Elyce Rae Helford , in her book Fantasy Girls : Gender in the New Universe of Science Fiction and Fantasy Television , Mrs. Peacock functions as a being who has been reduced " to all female functions " by her sons . She is " the grotesquely willing mother who has lost any sense of individual purpose " other than to do anything for her children . Sonia Saraiya of The A.V. Club writes that " Scully ’ s sympathy for a mother that she imagines to be persecuted is turned violently on its head , to reveal a monster whose priorities are not quite so straightforward . " The episode is also one of the first to explore Scully 's desire to become a mother . Booker states that the episode presents the dual nature of Scully 's " modern desire for motherhood " , as opposed to Mrs. Peacock 's " perverted notion of family " . Helford writes that the entry predicts " Scully 's fate as the mother of ' immaculately ' ( technologically ) conceived and monstrous progeny " . In the fifth season , Scully indeed learns that she is a mother , albeit accidentally , after her ova was harvested following her abduction in second season , and an alien / human hybrid named Emily is the result . With the revelation that Scully is pregnant at the end of the seventh season finale , " Requiem " , the concept revolving around Scully as a mother took center stage in seasons eight and nine with the birth of baby William . 
 The use of the up @-@ tempo " Wonderful ! Wonderful ! " during a violent murder sequence attracted attention for its ironic presentation . Jan Delasara in X @-@ Files Confidential called the murder of Sheriff Taylor and his wife the most " chilling moment in the series run " , highlighted by the use of a bouncy , classic pop song . It further establishes the episode 's subversion of nostalgia , by using a well @-@ known pop song during a death scene . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Initial ratings and reception = = = 
 " Home " originally aired on the Fox network on October 11 , 1996 . It had a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 , with a 21 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 21 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was watched by approximately 18 @.@ 85 million viewers . " Home " was the first X @-@ Files episode to have a viewer discretion warning for graphic content and the only one to have carried a TV @-@ MA rating upon broadcast , with the opening scene being cited in particular due to its gruesomeness and its similarity to " stock horror film conventions " . The only other instance of an episode of The X @-@ Files earning a viewer discretion warning was in the season eight episode , " Via Negativa " . Owing to that content , the network would not repeat the episode , the only time in the history of the series that this happened . In 1997 , when the channel FX ran an all @-@ day marathon of the most popular X @-@ Files episodes , " Home " was the number one choice . 
 Upon its first broadcast , " Home " received several positive reviews from critics , although some were critical of its violence . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode an " A " , describing it as " one of TV 's most disturbing hours " and as " a cinematic feast for the eyes , packed with audacious wit " . Sarah Stegall awarded the episode three stars out of five , comparing it positively to the more gruesome work of directors David Lynch and Tobe Hooper . Stegall praised the atmosphere and commented that Morgan and Wong 's " long @-@ awaited return " to the series was " definitely disturbing , thought @-@ provoking , and nasty . " 
 Among less favorable reviews , author Phil Farrand called " Home " his least @-@ favorite episode of the first four seasons of the show in his book The Nitpicker 's Guide to the X @-@ Files , writing that he " just [ did not ] get this episode " because " Mulder and Scully seem reckless " and the Peacock brothers " are better suited for comic books " . Paul Cornell , Keith Topping , and Martin Day , in their book X @-@ Treme Possibilities , were critical of the violent content of the episode . Topping called the episode " sick " , Cornell felt that Mulder and Scully 's wisecracks made them come off as cruel , and Day felt that the violence went overboard . Day , however , offered a few complimentary observations , noting that " Home " did , indeed , have merit , and that the juxtaposition of " Wonderful ! Wonderful ! " with the violent antics of the Peacocks was something " David Lynch would be proud of " . 
 = = = Later reception = = = 
 " Home " has continued to receive positive reviews . In a 2011 review , Todd VanDerWerff from The A.V. Club gave the episode an " A " rating and wrote that , like many episodes of The X @-@ Files , the episode was a statement of its time and likely could not be produced in a post @-@ 9 / 11 climate . He praised the depiction of urban sensibilities and the frightening Peacock family , observing that it represented a " sad farewell to a weird America that was rapidly smoothing itself out . " Author Dean A. Kowalski , in The Philosophy of The X @-@ Files , cited " Home " , " Squeeze " , and " The Host " as the most notable " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episodes . 
 " Home " has often been cited as one of the best X @-@ Files episodes . VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club placed it among the 10 best chapters of the series and called it one of the scariest hours of television he had seen . In 2009 , The Vancouver Sun named " Home " one of the best stand @-@ alone episodes of the series and wrote that , because of its horrific theme of incest , the episode " doesn 't pull any punches " . Den of Geek writer Nina Sordi placed the entry as the fourth best of the series in 2009 , viewing its bleak humor and " thought @-@ provoking moments " of dialogue as the factors that made it one of the most popular episodes . In 2008 , Starpulse gave the installment an honorable mention as one of the 10 best X @-@ Files episodes . In 2009 , Connie Ogle from PopMatters rated the Peacock family among the greatest monsters of the series and stated that it was a miracle that the program " slipped past " the censors . 
 Critics have also named " Home " one of the scariest installments of the series . Novelist Scott Heim in The Book of Lists : Horror rated it as the tenth most frightening television broadcast . Heim wrote that several aspects of the episode were creepy , including the gothic house and the family itself . Tom Kessenich , in his 2002 book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , listed the program as the fifth best of the series . Kessenich reported that it was the pinnacle of the horror episodes featured on The X @-@ Files . William B. Davis said that " Home " was both well written and directed , but was so gruesome that it led to some fans questioning whether or not they wanted to continue watching the series . He argued that modern horror films were far more violent than anything depicted in " Home " but , at the time , " it was quite disturbing . " 
 = <unk> = 
 The bluebuck ( Afrikaans : <unk> pronounced / <unk> <unk> ˌbäk / ) or blue antelope ( Hippotragus leucophaeus ) is an extinct species of antelope that lived in South Africa until around 1800 . It is congeneric with the roan antelope and sable antelope , but was smaller than either . It was sometimes considered a subspecies of the roan , but a genetic study has confirmed it as a distinct species . 
 The largest mounted bluebuck specimen is 119 centimetres ( 47 in ) tall at the withers . Its horns measure 56 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 22 @.@ 2 in ) along the curve . The coat was a uniform bluish @-@ grey , with a pale whitish belly and similar flanks . The forehead was brown , darker than the face . Its mane was not as developed as in the roan and sable antelopes , and its ears were shorter and blunter , not tipped with black , and it had a darker tail tuft and smaller teeth . It also lacked the contrasting black and white patterns seen on the heads of its relatives . The bluebuck was a grazer , and may have calved where rainfall , and thus the availability of grasses , would peak . The bluebuck was confined to the southwestern Cape when encountered by Europeans , but fossil evidence and rock paintings show that it originally had a larger distribution . 
 Europeans encountered the bluebuck in the seventeenth century , but it was already uncommon by then , perhaps due to its preferred grassland habitat having been reduced to a 4 @,@ 300 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 700 sq mi ) range , mainly along the southern coast of South Africa . The first published mention of the bluebuck is from 1681 , and few descriptions of the animal were written while it existed . The few eighteenth @-@ century illustrations appear to have been based on stuffed specimens . Hunted by European settlers , the bluebuck became extinct around 1800 ; it was the first large African mammal to face extinction in historical times , followed by the quagga in 1883 . Only four mounted specimens remain , in museums in Leiden , Stockholm , Vienna , and Paris , along with skulls and horns in various museums . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 In 1776 the German zoologist Peter Simon Pallas formally described the bluebuck as Antilope leucophaeus . British zoologists Philip Sclater and Oldfield Thomas pointed out that the blackbuck ( A. <unk> ) was the type species of the genus Antilope , and instead moved the bluebuck and its closest relatives to the genus Hippotragus in their Book of Antelopes from 1899 . The type specimen is an adult male collected in Swellendam , now in the Naturalis Biodiversity Center in Leiden ( formerly Rijksmuseum van Natuurlijke Historie ) . 
 According to the German zoologist Erna Mohr 's 1967 book about the bluebuck , the 1719 account of the Cape of Good Hope published by the traveller Peter Kolbe appears to be the first publication containing mention of the species . Kolbe also included an illustration , which Mohr believed was based on memory and notes . In 1975 A. M. Husson and L. B. Holthuis examined the original Dutch version of Kolbe 's book and concluded that the illustration did not depict a bluebuck but rather a greater kudu ( Tragelaphus strepsiceros ) , and that the error was due to a mistranslation into German . The first published illustration of the bluebuck is therefore instead a depiction of a horn from 1764 . It has also been pointed out that the name was already published on a list of South African mammals in 1681 . 
 The Welsh naturalist Thomas Pennant made the next published illustration , and included an account of the antelope , calling it " blue goat " , in his 1771 Synopsis of Quadrupeds , based on a skin from the Cape of Good Hope , purchased from Amsterdam . In 1778 a drawing by the Swiss @-@ Dutch natural philosopher Jean @-@ Nicolas @-@ Sébastien Allamand was included in Comte de Buffon 's Histoire Naturelle ; however , he called the antelope <unk> , the Siberian name for the <unk> gazelle ( Gazella <unk> ) . The illustration is widely believed to be based on the specimen in Leiden . This drawing is the first published illustration that shows the entire animal . Another record of the bluebuck appears in the travel memoirs of French explorer François Levaillant , published in the 1780s , describing his quest to discover the land to the east of the Cape of Good Hope , " <unk> Holland " . The German zoologist Martin Lichtenstein wrote about the bluebuck in 1812 , but the species was mentioned less frequently in subsequent literature . 
 After its extinction , some 19th @-@ century naturalists began to doubt its validity as a species , with some believing the museum specimens to be small or immature roan antelopes ( H. equinus ) , and both species were lumped together under the name H. leucophaeus by the English zoologist George Robert Gray . The Austrian zoologist Franz Friedrich Kohl pointed out the distinct features of the bluebuck in 1866 , followed by Sclater and Thomas , who rejected the synonymy in 1899 . 
 Today , four mounted skins of the bluebuck are in existence : the adult male in Leiden , a young female at the Zoological Museum of Stockholm , an adult female in the Vienna Museum of Natural History , and an adult male in the Museum of Natural History in Paris . In addition , a mounted skin was housed in the Zoological Museum in Uppsala until the 19th century , but now only the horns remain . There are also records of a skin in Haarlem , but its current whereabouts are unknown . Several of these skins have been identified in various 18th century illustrations . A female skull is part of the collection at each of the Hunterian Museum and the Zoological Museum of Amsterdam , though it has been suggested that the Hunterian 's belongs to a sable antelope ( H. niger ) . A pair of horns is present at each of the Natural History Museum , London , and the South African Museum . In addition , skeletal remains have been found in both archaeological and palaeontological contexts . 
 The common name " bluebuck " or " blue antelope " is English for the original Afrikaans name " <unk> " ( pronounced / <unk> <unk> ˌbäk / ) . The name is the compound of <unk> ( " blue " , from the Middle Dutch <unk> ) and bok ( " male antelope " or " male goat " , from the Middle Dutch boc ) . Variants of this name include " <unk> " and " <unk> " . The generic name Hippotragus is Greek for " he @-@ goat " , while the specific name leucophaeus is a fusion of two Greek words : leukos ( " white " ) and phaios ( " dusky " ) . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Based on studies of morphology , the bluebuck has historically been classified as either a distinct species or as a subspecies of the roan antelope . In 1974 <unk> Richard G. Klein showed that the bluebuck and roan antelope occurred sympatrically on the coastal plain of the southwestern Cape from Oakhurst to Uniondale during the early Holocene , supporting their status as separate species . In 1996 an analysis of mitochondrial DNA extracted from the bluebuck specimen in Vienna showed that it is outside the clade containing the roan and sable antelopes . The study therefore concluded that the bluebuck is a distinct species , and not merely a subspecies of the roan antelope as was supposed . The cladogram below shows the position of the bluebuck among its relatives , following the 1996 analysis : 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult male bluebuck in Leiden is 119 centimetres ( 47 in ) tall at the withers , and is possibly the largest known specimen . According to Sclater and Thomas , the tallest specimen is the one in Paris , a male that stands 110 centimetres ( 45 in ) at the shoulder ; the specimen in Vienna , on the other hand , is the shortest , a 100 centimetres ( 40 in ) tall female . The bluebuck was notably smaller than the roan and sable antelopes , and therefore the smallest member of its genus . 
 The coat was a uniform bluish @-@ grey , with a pale whitish belly and similar flanks . Its limbs had a faint dark line own their front side . The forehead was brown , darker than the face , and its upper lip and patch in front of the eyes were lighter than the body . Its neck @-@ mane was directed forwards and not as developed as in the roan and sable antelopes , and the throat @-@ mane was almost absent . Other differences between the bluebuck and its extant relatives include its shorter and blunter ears not tipped with black , a darker tail tuft ( though little darker than its general colour ) , and smaller teeth . It also lacked the contrasting black and white patterns seen on the heads of its relatives . 
 Pennant observed that the eyes had white patches below them and the underbelly was white ; the coat was a " fine blue " in living specimens , while it changed to " bluish grey , with a mixture of white " in dead animals . He also suggested that the length of the bluebuck 's hair and the morphology of its horns formed a link between antelopes and goat . He went on to describe the ears as pointed and over 23 centimetres ( 9 in ) long and the tail as 18 centimetres ( 7 in ) long , terminating in a 6 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long tuft . 
 Its horns were significantly shorter and thinner than those of the roan antelope , but perhaps proportionally longer . The horns of the Leiden specimen measure 56 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 22 @.@ 2 in ) along the curve . The horns at Hunterian Museum are spaced 9 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 85 in ) apart and are nearly 51 centimetres ( 20 in ) long with a basal circumference of nearly 15 centimetres ( 6 in ) . Pennant gave the horn length as 51 centimetres ( 20 in ) . He added that the horns , sharp and curving backward , consist of twenty rings . This description agrees with the horns at the Hunterian Museum . The skull at the Hunterian Museum measures 39 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 15 @.@ 6 in ) in length . The horns of the bluebuck appear to have hollow pedicels ( bony structures from which the horns emerge ) . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The bluebuck , as Klein puts it , became extinct before " qualified scientists could make observations on live specimens " . According to historical accounts , the bluebuck formed groups of up to 20 individuals . Similarities to the roan and the sable antelopes in terms of dental morphology make it highly probable that the bluebuck was predominantly a selective grazer , and fed mainly on grasses . The row of premolars was longer than in others of the genus , implying the presence of dicots in the diet . A 2013 study noted the scarcity of morphological evidence to show that the bluebuck could have survived the summers in the western margin of the Cape Floristic Region ( CFR ) , when the grasses are neither palatable nor nutritious . This might have induced a west @-@ to @-@ east migration , because the eastern margin receives rainfall throughout the year while rainfall in the western margin is limited to winter . 
 An 18th century account suggests that females might have left their newborn calves in isolation and returned regularly to suckle them till the calves were old enough to join herds , which is similar to the behaviour of roan and sable antelopes . Akin to other grazing antelopes , the bluebuck may have calved mainly where rainfall , and thus the availability of grasses , peaked . Such locations could be the western margin of the CFR during winter and the western margin of the CFR during summer . The aforementioned 2013 study revealed that the occurrence of juveniles in bluebuck fossils decreases linearly from the west to the east , indicating that most births took place in the western CFR ; due to the preference for rainfall , it may be further assumed that most births occurred during winter , when the western CFR receives most of its rainfall . The annual west @-@ to @-@ east migration would have followed in summer , consistent with the greater number of adult juveniles in the east that would have joined herds . Juvenile fossils also occur in other places across the range , but appear to be concentrated in the western CFR . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Endemic to South Africa , the bluebuck was confined to the southwestern Cape . A 2003 study estimated the expanse of the historic range of the bluebuck at 4 @,@ 300 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 700 sq mi ) , mainly along the southern coast of South Africa ; fossils , however , have been discovered in a broader area that includes the southern and western CFR and even the highlands of Lesotho . Historical records give a rough estimate of its range . On 20 January 1774 , Swedish naturalist Carl Peter Thunberg recorded a sighting in <unk> , Mpumalanga . In March or April 1783 , <unk> claimed to have witnessed two specimens in <unk> , Western Cape . Based on these notes , a 2009 study estimated the range of the bluebuck to be limited within a triangular area in the Western Cape , bounded by Caledon to the west , Swellendam to the northeast and Bredasdorp to the south . Rock paintings in the Caledon river valley of the Free State province in eastern South Africa have been identified as <unk> , which also confirms the once wider distribution of the species . 
 In 1974 Klein studied the fossils of Hippotragus species in South Africa . Most of these were found to represent the bluebuck and the roan antelope . The fossil record suggested that the bluebuck occurred in large numbers during the last glacial period ( nearly 0 @.@ 1 million years ago ) , and was more common than sympatric antelopes . The bluebuck could adapt to more open habitats than could the roan antelope , a notable point of difference between these species . Fossils of the bluebuck have been found in the <unk> River and the Nelson Bay Caves ( near Plettenberg Bay ) and <unk> ( to the west of the <unk> Holland mountains ) . The aforementioned 2013 study noted that the western and southern CFR were separated by biogeographical barriers , such as the Cape Fold Belt and <unk> forests . A 2011 study suggested that low sea levels facilitated migrations for large mammals ; therefore the rise in sea levels with the beginning of the Holocene would have led to fragmented bluebuck populations and distanced many populations from the western coast ( fossils dating to this period are scarce in the western coast but have been recorded from the southern coast ) . Thus , a mass extinction could have taken place , leaving behind mainly the populations that remained in the resource @-@ rich western CFR . The causes of the drastic decline in bluebuck populations just before the 15th and 16th centuries have not been investigated ; competition with livestock and habitat deterioration could have been major factors in its depletion . 
 The 2013 study further suggested that the bluebuck , being a grazer , probably favoured grassland habitats . This hypothesis is supported by fossil evidence – bluebuck fossils appear in significant numbers along with those of grassland antelopes . The aforementioned 2009 study suggested that the bluebuck frequented grasslands and shunned wooded areas and thickets . In a 1976 study of fossils in the Southern Cape , Klein observed that the blue antelope showed similar habitat preferences as the Cape buffalo ( Syncerus caffer ) and the reedbuck ( Redunca ) . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Due to the small range of the bluebuck at the time of European settlement of the Cape region compared to the much wider area evidenced by fossil remains , it is thought the species was already in decline before this time . The bluebuck was the sole species of Hippotragus in the region until 70 @,@ 000 – 35 @,@ 000 years ago , but the roan antelope appears to have become predominant about 11 @,@ 000 years ago . This may have coincided with grasslands being replaced by , for example , brush and forest , thereby reducing what is presumed to be the preferred habitat of the bluebuck , the grasslands . 
 According to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) , the bluebuck was hunted to extinction by European settlers ; the last bluebuck specimen was shot around 1800 . The bluebuck is the first historically recorded large African mammal to become extinct , followed by the quagga ( Equus quagga quagga ) , which died out in 1883 . The bluebuck population had already declined significantly and its range had contracted when Europeans settling in the Cape Colony in the 17th and 18th centuries first came across this antelope . Around the time of its extinction , the bluebuck occurred in what would be known as the Overberg region ( Western Cape ) , probably concentrated in Swellendam . In 1774 Thunberg noted that the bluebuck was becoming increasingly rare ; Lichtenstein claimed the last bluebuck had been shot in 1799 . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 A South African fable , The Story of the Hare , mentions a bluebuck ( referred to as <unk> ) that , among other animals , is appointed to guard a kraal . The bluebuck is also mentioned in French novelist Jules Verne 's Five Weeks in a Balloon ( 1863 ) ; the animal is described as a " superb animal of a pale @-@ bluish color shading upon the gray , but with the belly and the insides of the legs as white as the driven snow " , after the hunter shot it and they debated what to do with the fine carcass as it would be too heavy for the balloon . 
 The bluebuck rock paintings from the Caledon river valley have been attributed to Bushmen . They show six antelopes faced by a man , and were supposedly inspired by shamanic trance ; they may depict a Bushman visiting the spirit @-@ world through a tunnel . As with other animals in their environment , the Bushmen may have believed the bluebuck had a supernatural potency . The animals in the paintings are similar in proportion to the reedbuck , but the large ears , horns , and the lack of a mane rules out species other than the bluebuck . 
 = Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = 
 The Compilation of Final Fantasy VII is a metaseries produced by Square Enix . A subseries stemming from the main Final Fantasy series , it is a collection of video games , animated features and short stories based in the world and continuity of Final Fantasy VII . Officially announced in 2003 with the reveal of Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , the series ' core products are three video games and one movie release . Alongside these are tie @-@ in products and spin @-@ offs including books , mobile games and an original video animation . Advent Children and the mobile title Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII are sequel and prequel to VII , respectively focusing on Cloud Strife , the original game 's main protagonist , and covert operatives known as the Turks . Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII follows the story of Zack Fair , an important minor character in VII , while Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , which acts as a sequel to Advent Children follows Vincent Valentine , one of the original 's optional characters . 
 The series was conceived by Yoshinori Kitase , the original game 's director , and Tetsuya Nomura , the main character designer . Nomura would become the main designer for each entry in the Compilation . Other returning staff include writer Kazushige Nojima , art director Yusuke Naora , and composer Nobuo Uematsu . The video games belong to different genres , with none of them being traditional role @-@ playing games due to production pressures related to the genre . While the first title revealed was Advent Children , it ran into delays during post @-@ production , so the first Compilation title to be released was the mobile game Before Crisis . 
 Of the core titles , Before Crisis is the only one still unreleased in the west due to issues with overseas platform compatibility and staff changes . Reception of titles in the Compilation has been mixed , with Advent Children being praised for its visuals and criticized for its confusing nature . Before Crisis and Crisis Core have received praise , while Dirge of Cerberus garnered a mixed response . The presentation of the Compilation as a whole has met with a mixed response . The series inspired the creation of Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy , a similar subseries of linked video games . 
 = = Titles = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII is an action role @-@ playing video game split into 24 episodes , with episode delivery working via a monthly subscription @-@ based distribution system . After going through beta testing in 2004 , it was released on September 24 , 2004 for NTT DoCoMo 's FOMA iMode , and on January 30 and April 5 , 2007 for SoftBank Mobile and EZweb respectively . The game was never released to western markets , despite plans to do so . 
 Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII is an action game featuring both first and third @-@ person shooter elements . There was originally a multiplayer mode , but this was removed in the western version . It was released on January 26 , August 15 , and November 17 , 2006 in Japan , North America and Europe respectively . The localized version received an overhaul before release , as the developers were not pleased with the Japanese version of the game . An International version , featuring the improvements made to the localized version , was released in Japan on September 11 , 2008 as part of Square Enix 's Ultimate Hits lineup . A mobile spin @-@ off taking place during the events of the game , Dirge of Cerberus Lost Episode : Final Fantasy VII , was released on August 22 , 2006 in North America and July 26 , 2007 in Japan . 
 Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII is an action role @-@ playing game . Crisis Core has the player controlling Zack Fair in a real @-@ time combat system enabling the player to move Zack around , activate abilities and attack or block attacks from enemies . It was released on September 13 , 2007 in Japan , and on March 24 and June 20 , 2008 in North America and Europe respectively . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , the first title conceived for the Compilation , the second to be released , and a direct @-@ to @-@ DVD sequel to VII . It was released in Japan on September 14 , 2005 , and on April 24 and 25 , 2006 for Europe and North America respectively . It received a single special western cinema screening on April 3 , 2006 , at the Arclight Theatre in Los Angeles . A director 's cut of the film , Advent Children Complete , was also produced , featuring graphical <unk> , extra footage and rerecorded voice work for the English and Japanese versions . A Blu @-@ ray exclusive , Advent Children Complete was released on June 2 , 2009 in North America , on July 27 , 2009 in Europe , and on October 7 , 2009 in Australia . A demo for Final Fantasy XIII was included in the package . 
 Last Order : Final Fantasy VII , an original video animation detailing the destruction of the town of Nibelheim , a key event in VII . Last Order was packaged with a limited edition of Advent Children called Advent Pieces , released on September 14 , 2005 in Japan and February 6 , 2007 in North America . Advent Pieces was limited to a quantity of 77 @,@ 777 copies . The OAV is no longer available to purchase . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 Multiple pieces of tie @-@ in media have been created for the Compilation , nearly all relating to Advent Children . To promote Advent Children Complete , a series of short stories were written by Kazushige Nojima under the umbrella title On a Way to Smile . The stories were later collected into a single paperback volume and released on April 16 , 2009 . An animated adaptation of one story , " Case of Denzel " , was included in all copies of Advent Children Complete . Nojima also wrote Final Fantasy VII Lateral Biography : Turks ~ The Kids Are Alright ~ , a novel set a short time before Advent Children . The novel was illustrated by Shou Tojima . 
 A mobile racing game based on a mini game from VII , Final Fantasy VII G @-@ Bike , was released on October 30 , 2014 , for iOS and Android . A western release for the title was planned . It was developed by Japan @-@ based developer CyberConnect2 as part of a planned subseries of mobile games based on VII 's mini games . While related to VII and the Compilation due to its nature , the developers confirmed that it was not related to nor affected the Compilation itself . Due to difficulties delivering continual satisfactory service , G @-@ Bike was shut down in 2015 without seeing a Western release . 
 = = Setting = = 
 The setting of Final Fantasy VII is a world that has been described as an industrial or post @-@ industrial science fiction milieu . It is referred to as " the Planet " by the series characters , and was retroactively named " Gaia " in some Square Enix promotional material and by game staff . The planet 's lifeforce is called the Lifestream , a flow of spiritual energy that gives life to everything on the Planet . Its processed form is known as " Mako " . During VII and its prequels , the Lifestream is being used by the megacorporation Shinra as an energy source . This is in turn causing the Planet to dangerously weaken , threatening the existence of everything and everyone on the planet . The main narrative of VII focuses on an eco @-@ terrorist group known as AVALANCHE , chronicling their conflict with Shinra president Rufus Shinra and his subordinates , including the covert Turks , and SOLDIER , an elite fighting force created by giving humans raw Mako . Eventually , all come under threat from Sephiroth , a member of SOLDIER created through Shinra experimentation and driven mad when he learns the truth about his origins , and Jenova , an alien lifeform which seeks to destroy all life on the Planet . Among the main characters are Cloud Strife , a mercenary and self @-@ proclaimed ex @-@ SOLDIER , Aerith Gainsborough , a flower seller and last member of an ancient tribe known as the Cetra , Tifa Lockhart , Cloud 's childhood friend , and Vincent Valentine , a former Turk who was made immortal by Shinra experimentation . During the conflict , Sephiroth summons a destructive spell called Meteor to mortally wound the Planet . When Aerith attempts to summon Holy , a defense mechanism that can stop Meteor , she is killed by Sephiroth . Eventually , the party are successful in defeating Sephiroth , and the Lifestream reinforces Holy , successfully stopping Meteor . 
 The Compilation titles act as continuations and expansions on the core narrative , with them focusing on various characters . Advent Children begins two years after VII , when people across the world are succumbing to a disease called Geostigma and Cloud , suffering from guilt , is forced to confront Kadaj , Loz and Yazoo , avatars of Sephiroth 's will . Before Crisis begins six years prior to the events of VII , and follows the confrontations between the Turks and the original incarnation of AVALANCHE . Crisis Core takes place in a similar time period , but follows events from the point of view of Zack , a SOLDIER who befriended Cloud and was killed by Shinra troops after turning against the company . Among the characters who interact with Zack is Genesis Rhapsodos , a member of SOLDIER who successfully rebels and eventually decides to protect the Planet . Dirge of Cerberus is set a year after Advent Children , and focuses on Vincent 's conflict against Deepground , a sect of SOLDIER that was trapped beneath Midgar during Meteor 's descent . Last Order takes place during the events at Nibelheim , where Jenova was originally stored and Sephiroth first found out about himself . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The Compilation of Final Fantasy VII was created by Yoshinori Kitase and Tetsuya Nomura , the respective director and character designer for Final Fantasy VII . It was at one point defined by Square Enix as their first step towards " polymorphic content " , a marketing and sales strategy to " [ provide ] well @-@ known properties on several platforms , allowing exposure of the products to as wide an audience as possible . " Speaking on why VII had been chosen for such a project , Kitase explained that the ending left far more development opportunities open for characters and setting than other games in the series . The first title to be conceived was Advent Children , original envisioned as a short film presentation created by Visual Works , the animation studio behind CGI cutscenes for the company 's games . Early in pre @-@ production , plans to make Advent Children a video game rather than a film were considered , but due to several factors including Visual Works ' lack of experience with actual game production , it remained a film . One of the main conditions for the project 's launch was to reunite the original staff members of Final Fantasy VII : Nojima , art director Yusuke Naora , composer Nobuo Uematsu . After Advent Children began development , it was decided by the team that one title was not enough to fully explore the VII universe . In response , Before Crisis , Dirge of Cerberus and Crisis Core were conceived so as to embrace more aspects of the world and characters . Nomura himself was surprised at the creation of the games , having originally assumed that the film would be the sole product of the project . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Each title had a different impetus fueling its creation and development : Before Crisis was thought up by Hajime Tabata , a new employee at Square Enix 's mobile division , when asked by Nomura to create a video game featuring the Turks . Dirge of Cerberus was inspired by Vincent 's choice of weapon , Kitase 's love of first @-@ person shooters , and the challenge it would provide developers . Prior to the series solidification and the release of Advent Children and Before Crisis , the team had considered other gun @-@ wielding Final Fantasy protagonists for such a game . Crisis Core originated simply as a Final Fantasy spin @-@ off for the PlayStation Portable , and after talks with Kitase and Nomura , it was decided to make it another title in the Compilation , although it was originally going to be a remake of Before Crisis . The creation of Before Crisis after Advent Children began a lettering formula for the series later used by the staff as common abbreviations : ' AC ' stood for Advent Children , ' BC ' for Before Crisis , ' CC ' for Crisis Core and ' DC ' for Dirge of Cerberus . The sequence was nearly disrupted when Crisis Core 's title was considered as Before Crisis Core , but the " Before " part of the title was soon dropped , coincidentally creating the sequence . 
 Before Crisis began development in 2002 . The Compilation was first unveiled in 2003 with the announcement of Advent Children . None of the video game titles in the series are traditional role @-@ playing games like the original . The explanation for this was that traditional RPGs took long production periods and a large staff , which would have made the project stand out a bit too much . One of the other considerations for the team was not to make the titles lightweight as X @-@ 2 had been , due to backlash from parts of the fanbase . Conversely , making X @-@ 2 reminded the team that they did not need to stick to completely serious traditional RPGs , enabling the original creation of the Compilation . While Advent Children was the first Compilation title to begin production , it ran into problems during post @-@ production , resulting in the first released title being Before Crisis , despite it being the second title to begin development . Before Crisis was also originally planned for release in North America , but the mobile phones available in North America at the time were not able to handle the game . In addition , the producer Kosei Ito left Square Enix in 2008 and Tabata moved on to other projects , leaving its localization unlikely . Japanese animation studio Madhouse created a commercial to promote Before Crisis . Due to its success and staff feelings that important scenes from VII represented in Advent Children had been needlessly disjointed , the studio was chosen to produce an animated film : this eventually became Last Order . Yoichi Wada , then the president of Square Enix , has stated that the Compilation could remain an active franchise until 2017 , the twentieth anniversary of Final Fantasy VII 's release . After finishing work on Advent Children Complete , the team decided to take a break from the series , although they stated that they still have various ideas for future titles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Compared to the original VII , which received near @-@ universal critical acclaim and later cult status as a classic game , the entries in the Compilation have often garnered a mixed reception , and the Compilation as a whole has been critiqued by some . In July 2007 , Edge magazine stated that the titles " could be of a high quality , but there is also a perversion of the original . " RPG Site 's Alex Donaldson , during a review for Crisis Core , said that the Compilation was " too far detached from the lore of Final Fantasy VII . " While critiquing Advent Children and Dirge of Cerberus , and faulting Before Crisis 's lack of the original game 's characters , he felt that Crisis Core was the Compilation 's " first classic [ Final Fantasy VII ] spinoff . " RPGFan 's Stephen Meyerink said that the Compilation titles prior to Crisis Core had " expanded , extended , and retconned [ the story ] into what some would call an unrecognizable mess . " Alexa Ray Corriea , writing for Polygon , was highly critical , saying that few of the Compilation titles were good , and only served to " cheapen the 1997 [ PlayStation ] original . " 
 Reviews for Advent Children have been mixed to positive : while critics have praised the presentation , graphics and fan appeal , all reviews agree that the story 's context and delivery were confusing for people new to the series . While western critics were positive about Last Order , the OAV received heavy fan criticism in Japan due to its retconning of key events , which prompted the team to ensure that the event was faithfully recreated in Crisis Core . Before Crisis , due to remaining in Japan , has received limited attention in the west , but previews have been highly positive , with many praising the gameplay and graphics as being impressive for a mobile game . Opinions for Dirge of Cerberus were decidedly mixed . While many praised the story and characters , especially the focus on Vincent 's character and development , critics were mixed to negative about the graphics and gameplay . Japanese magazine Famitsu notably gave the game a delayed and highly critical review . Crisis Core was generally praised , with many enjoying the story 's intimate presentation of the characters and action @-@ oriented gameplay , despite some criticism for it being aimed at fans of VII . Critics of the Compilation have generally cited Crisis Core as the best title of the series . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Many of the titles have received strong sales . Through 2006 , Advent Children met with high sales , with 1 million units sold in Japan , 1 @.@ 3 million in North America , and 100 @,@ 000 in Europe , making a total of 2 @.@ 4 million copies sold worldwide . The original version went on to sell four million copies worldwide by 2009 . Advent Children Complete also met with strong sales , selling 100 @,@ 000 copies on its first day of release in Japan . Advent Children Complete was cited as a reason for the increase in sales of the PlayStation 3 console . Before Crisis registered 200 @,@ 000 users on launch day , making it the best @-@ selling mobile game up until that time , and was accessed 1 @.@ 6 million times by June 2006 . Dirge of Cerberus shipped 392 @,@ 000 units in its first week , and went on to sell 460 @,@ 000 units in North America and 270 @,@ 000 units in Europe . Crisis Core sold 350 @,@ 000 copies in Japan on its release date , while it sold 301 @,@ 600 copies in its first month of release in the United States . It went on to sell 3 @.@ 1 million units worldwide . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The process of thought behind the Compilation would later inspire the creation of Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy , a subseries of games linked by a common mythos , and would use lessons learned from the Compilation production process . On an individual level , Before Crisis 's popularity would inspire the creation of another mobile title within the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries : originally titled Final Fantasy Agito XIII , it would later change platforms and be renamed Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 . The battle sequences in Advent Children also served as inspiration for Motomu Toriyama when creating the battle system for Final Fantasy XIII . 
 = Science Fantasy ( magazine ) = 
 Science Fantasy , which also appeared under the titles Impulse and SF Impulse , was a British fantasy and science fiction magazine , launched in 1950 by Nova Publications as a companion to Nova 's New Worlds . Walter Gillings was editor for the first two issues , and was then replaced by John Carnell , the editor of New Worlds , as a cost @-@ saving measure . Carnell edited both magazines until Nova went out of business in early 1964 . The titles were acquired by Roberts & Vinter , who hired Kyril Bonfiglioli to edit Science Fantasy ; Bonfiglioli changed the title to Impulse in early 1966 , but the new title led to confusion with the distributors and sales fell , though the magazine remained profitable . The title was changed again to SF Impulse for the last few issues . Science Fantasy ceased publication the following year , when Roberts & Vinter came under financial pressure after their printer went bankrupt . 
 Gillings had an inventory of material that he had acquired while editing Fantasy , and he drew on this for Science Fantasy , as well as incorporating his own fanzine , Science Fantasy Review , into the new magazine . Once Carnell took over , Science Fantasy typically ran a long lead novelette along with several shorter stories ; prominent contributors in the 1950s included John Brunner , Ken Bulmer , and Brian Aldiss , whose first novel Nonstop appeared ( in an early version ) in the February 1956 issue . Fantasy stories began to appear more frequently during the latter half of the 1950s , and in the early 1960s Carnell began to publish Thomas Burnett Swann 's well @-@ received historical fantasies . Carnell felt that the literary quality of Science Fantasy was always higher than that of New Worlds , and in the early 1960s his efforts were rewarded with three consecutive Hugo nominations for best magazine . Under Bonfiglioli more new writers appeared , including Keith Roberts , Brian Stableford and Josephine Saxton . In the opinion of science fiction historian Mike Ashley , the final year of Impulse , as it was titled by that time , included some of the best material ever published in a British science fiction magazine . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Gillings and Carnell = = = 
 In early 1946 , British fan John Carnell launched a new science fiction magazine titled New Worlds , published by Pendulum Publications . The first issue appeared in July 1946 and failed to sell well . The second issue , in October of that year , sold better , but Pendulum went out of business before the end of 1947 with only one more issue released . A group of sf fans , including Carnell and Frank Cooper , decided to restart the magazine under their own control , and formed Nova Publications Ltd . The fourth issue appeared in April 1949 . 
 At the same time that the first issue of New Worlds appeared , a separate British magazine called Fantasy was launched by Walter Gillings , a science fiction fan and a reporter by profession . Fantasy lasted for only three issues before dying in 1947 , but Gillings had accumulated a substantial inventory of stories — enough to fill nine issues . Gillings followed the demise of Fantasy by publishing a fanzine , titled Fantasy Review , beginning in March 1947 . 
 In 1950 , with New Worlds on a stable quarterly schedule , Nova Publications decided to launch a companion , Science Fantasy . They chose Gillings as the editor , and his fanzine , which had been retitled Science Fantasy Review in 1949 , was incorporated in the new magazine as a department . The first issue was dated Summer 1950 , but printing disputes meant that the second issue was delayed until winter . Paper rationing delayed the third issue to Winter 1951 , but before it appeared , Nova decided that it could no longer afford to have separate editors for New Worlds and Science Fantasy , and Gillings was let go . According to Carnell , there were also " fundamental differences of opinion " that led to the decision to replace him . 
 After the Spring 1953 issue Nova Publications decided to switch printers , in order to cut costs and bring the cover price down from 2 / - ( 10 p ) to 1 / 6 ( 7 @.@ 5 p ) . The new printers , The Carlton Press , failed to keep to the agreed printing schedule , and produced poor quality work ; there were also printers ' strikes , and this disruption caused extended delays in the appearance of the seventh issue . While the dispute with the printers was going on , Carnell and Maurice Goldsmith , a journalist acquaintance of Carnell 's , put together a small conference of well @-@ known science fiction authors , including Arthur C. Clarke and John Wyndham . Goldsmith covered the conference for Illustrated , a weekly magazine , and the article caught the attention of Maclaren & Sons Ltd , a technical trade publisher interested in launching a new sf magazine . Carnell turned down the offer because of his loyalty to Nova Publications , but subsequent discussions ultimately led to Maclaren taking control of Nova Publications , with a commitment to produce New Worlds on a monthly basis and Science Fantasy on a bimonthly schedule . Maclaren 's legal department was helpful in resolving the dispute with The Carlton Press , and the seventh issue of Science Fantasy finally appeared with a cover date of March 1954 . 
 In 1958 , Nova decided to launch a British reprint of the American magazine Science Fiction Adventures , under the same title . The British Science Fiction Adventures lasted until May 1963 , when it was felled by declining sales . New Worlds , Nova 's flagship title , and Science Fantasy were also suffering from poor sales , with circulation estimated at about 5 @,@ 000 , though a switch from bimonthly to a monthly schedule was also considered that year for Science Fantasy . In September Nova decided to close down both remaining titles , and in preparation for the change Carnell signed a contract in December 1963 to edit an original anthology series , New Writings in SF , for publisher Dennis Dobson . Readers ' responses to news of the planned demise of the magazines included a letter from Michael Moorcock , published in the April 1964 New Worlds , asking how the British market would now be able to train writers to sell to the higher @-@ paying U.S. magazines . 
 = = = Roberts & Vinter = = = 
 In early 1964 , David Warburton of Roberts & Vinter , an established publisher , heard from the printer of Science Fantasy and New Worlds that the magazines were going to fold shortly . Warburton decided that having a respectable magazine would help him in getting good distribution for Roberts & Vinter 's books : Science Fantasy and New Worlds both had distribution arrangements with the two main British newsagents of the time , John Menzies and W.H. Smith . Carnell did not want to continue to edit the magazines in addition to New Writings in SF , and recommended Moorcock to Warburton ; Kyril Bonfiglioli , an Oxford art dealer who was a friend of Brian Aldiss , also expressed an interest . Warburton gave Moorcock the choice of which magazine to edit ; Moorcock chose New Worlds , and Bonfiglioli became the new editor of Science Fantasy . Roberts & Vinter changed the format from digest to paperback , and the first issue under Bonfiglioli 's control was number 65 , dated June – July 1964 . The schedule was initially somewhat irregular , with each issue dated with two months even when two issues were only a month apart — for example , June – July 1964 was followed by July – August 1964 . From March 1965 a regular monthly schedule was begun . 
