 Bonfiglioli often bought material from writers without an established reputation ; he did not make any special effort to acquire stories from well @-@ known names . He was known for writing long and helpful rejection letters to newcomers , but he also had a reputation for laziness , and much of the day @-@ to @-@ day editorial work was done by assistants — first James Parkhill @-@ Rathbone , and then Keith Roberts . 
 Bonfiglioli disliked the title of the magazine , feeling that it " promised the worst of both worlds " ; he proposed Caliban as the new title , but the publisher dissuaded him . He settled on Impulse instead , and the magazine appeared under the new title starting with the March 1966 issue . The paperback format was unchanged , but the volume numeration was restarted at volume 1 number 1 , to " sever all connections with Science Fantasy " , in the words of sf historian Mike Ashley . The name change proved to be disastrous ; there was already a magazine called Impulse , and this caused distribution problems . In addition , treating Impulse as a new magazine meant a fresh distribution contract was needed . Bonfiglioli attempted to repair the damage by changing the name to SF Impulse starting in August 1966 , but the result was a dramatic drop in circulation . 
 By late 1966 Bonfiglioli had made enough money from his antiques dealing to be able to retire to Jersey . J.G. Ballard was briefly involved with the magazine in an editorial role , but his aims for the magazine were too far from the publisher 's goals and he was quickly replaced by Harry Harrison . Harrison almost immediately had to leave England and handed over much of the day @-@ to @-@ day management of the magazine to Keith Roberts . Despite the setback from Bonfiglioli 's title change , the magazine was still profitable , but in July 1966 Roberts & Vinter 's distributor , Thorpe & Porter , went bankrupt while owing Roberts & Vinter a substantial sum . The resulting financial pressure led Roberts & Vinter to decide to focus on their more profitable magazines , and the February 1967 issue of SF Impulse was the last , though New Worlds , the sister magazine , survived via an Arts Council grant obtained by Brian Aldiss 's efforts . The title was merged with New Worlds with effect from the March 1967 issue , though nothing of SF Impulse 's content was retained . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 In the first issue , Gillings declared that he was interested in science fantasy " in all its forms : with its significant ideas , its surprising prophecies , its sheer fictions , its evolution as a fascinating literature " . Stories in the first issue , drawn from Gillings ' inventory of material acquired for Fantasy , included " The Belt " , by J.M. Walsh ; " Time 's Arrow " , by Arthur C. Clarke ; and " Monster " , by John Christopher , writing as Christopher <unk> . Gillings also included several non @-@ fiction features , such as his fanzine , Science Fantasy Review , incorporated into Science Fantasy as a department , and condensed to a few pages . In the first issue Gillings reviewed an article about science fiction by Jacob Bronowski which had appeared in the Continental Daily Mail . There were also three book review columns : two by Gillings , writing under pseudonyms , and one by John Aiken , the son of poet Conrad Aiken . 
 When Carnell took over , he planned to distinguish Science Fantasy from its sister magazine , New Worlds , by adding more fantasy , while printing nothing but sf in New Worlds , though it took some time for the two magazines to develop separate personalities . Carnell also dropped the non @-@ fiction features , though he did start a series of guest editorials , starting with Gillings in the third issue and H.J. Campbell in the fourth issue . The acquisition of Nova Publications by Maclaren gave Carnell access to the publishing facilities of a well @-@ established company , and to established distribution channels , which freed him to focus on his editorial duties . Carnell tended to put longer stories in Science Fantasy than in New Worlds , and Science Fantasy typically ran a long lead novelette with several short stories . Stories that would not have suited New Worlds began to appear , such as William F. Temple 's " Eternity " ( February 1955 ) , in which aliens mysteriously provide haloes to thousands of people , and Dal <unk> 's " Free Will " , which featured robot ghosts . Stories in the whimsical fantasy tradition that had been started by Unknown , however , did not often appear in Science Fantasy . 
 Many of the lead novelettes in the 1950s were provided by John Brunner and Ken Bulmer . Brunner 's first appearance was in September 1955 with " The Talisman " ; over the next few years he wrote both science fiction and fantasy for Science Fantasy , including " A Time to Read " ( December 1956 ) , an alternate @-@ world fantasy , and " Lungfish " ( December 1957 ) , a generation starship story . Bulmer 's first appearance in Science Fantasy was in June 1955 , with " Psi No More " ; he contributed regularly thereafter . A short version of Brian Aldiss 's first novel , Nonstop , appeared in the February 1956 issue , and Aldiss subsequently contributed some experimental stories . From 1956 onwards the magazine contained substantially more fantasy than sf . 
 In Carnell 's opinion , the literary quality of Science Fantasy was " far higher " than that of New Worlds , but New Worlds was always the better @-@ selling of the two magazines . Carnell 's determination to keep the quality high led him to delay publishing issue 20 for two months because of a " lack of suitable material " . His efforts were rewarded by frequent appearances of stories from Science Fantasy in the annual Year 's Greatest SF anthology series edited by Judith Merril . Carnell occasionally used reprints , often selecting stories in line with the magazine 's focus on offbeat fantasy , such as Fritz Leiber 's " Space @-@ Time for Springers " , and Theodore Sturgeon 's " The Graveyard Reader " . Towards the end of the 1950s Carnell began to reintroduce non @-@ fiction , and starting in 1959 he printed a series of articles by Sam Moskowitz on key figures in the early history of science fiction , such as Edgar Allan Poe ; these articles , which had first appeared in American magazines such as Satellite Science Fiction , were later collected as Explorers of the Infinite . The artwork was of variable quality , in the opinion of critic Brian Stableford ; among the better covers Stableford cites the work of Brian Lewis , who supplied almost all Science Fantasy 's cover art from 1958 through 1961 . Historian David Kyle commented on the " remarkable " cover by R.M. Bull for the third issue , which he regarded as " strikingly reminiscent of the work of Margaret Brundage for Weird Tales in the thirties . " 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In the early 1960s , Thomas Burnett Swann became strongly associated with Science Fantasy . He had published a couple of genre short stories before beginning to sell to Carnell with " The Dryad @-@ Tree " in the August 1960 issue . Swann 's speciality was historical fantasy , and Where Is the Bird of Fire ? , his retelling of the Romulus and Remus myth , which was serialised in Science Fantasy in 1962 , " received more praise than any other [ novelette ] in recent years " , according to Carnell . Swann was one of the three mainstays of Science Fantasy in the early 1960s : the others were Michael Moorcock and J.G. Ballard . Ballard 's first story in Science Fantasy was " Prima <unk> " , which appeared in the December 1956 issue ; his work over the next few years was ideally suited to Science Fantasy and he became a regular contributor . He published some conventional stories in the British magazines , but over the next few years Ballard 's more traditional science fiction material appeared mostly in the American market , with Science Fantasy and New Worlds reserved for more experimental material that was a harbinger of New Wave science fiction . Moorcock 's Elric of <unk> series , about a sword and sorcery anti @-@ hero , began with " The Dreaming City " in the June 1961 Science Fantasy , and Moorcock appeared frequently thereafter : he had either a story or an essay ( and sometimes both ) in all but four of the remaining issues edited by Carnell . Terry Pratchett 's first story , " The Hades Business " , appeared in the August 1963 issue . Ashley regards the early 1960s as one of the high points of the magazine ; it was nominated for the Hugo Award for each of the last three years in which Carnell edited it , from 1962 to 1964 , but it never won . 
 When Kyril Bonfiglioli took over in 1964 , he complained in his first editorial that he had " just read through a quarter of a million words of ms [ manuscript ] and half of it was so bad it made me blush " . He asked Brian Aldiss to help ; the only unsold stories Aldiss had were from his early days , " written before I got the hang of things " , but Bonfiglioli told Aldiss , " They can 't possibly be worse than the rubbish that 's being submitted " . Aldiss provided four stories for the first two issues , under his own name and two pseudonyms , " <unk> <unk> " and " John Runciman " . Bonfiglioli 's third issue included Keith Roberts ' first two stories : " Escapism " , a time travel tale , and " Anita " , the first in a series about a witch ; Roberts became a frequent contributor both under his own name and as " Alistair Bevan " , and also provided the artwork for several covers . The Day of the Minotaur , another historical fantasy by Thomas Burnett Swann , began serialisation in the same issue under the title The Blue Monkeys . Swann 's novel The <unk> was also serialised in the magazine , with no change of title . Other new writers that began to appear under Bonfiglioli 's editorship included Josephine Saxton and Brian Stableford . Bonfiglioli 's focus on stories that he liked personally , rather than on a specific editorial policy , led author Christopher Priest to describe Science Fantasy under Bonfiglioli 's editorship as " a literate and charmingly eccentric magazine , with an atmosphere all its own " . 
 At the World Science Fiction Convention in 1965 , held in London , Bonfiglioli persuaded several well @-@ known writers to appear in an " all @-@ star issue ... with specially written stories round the theme of ' sacrifice ' " . The issue in question was the first one under the new title of Impulse , in March 1966 ; it included fiction by James Blish , Brian Aldiss , Harry Harrison , J.G. Ballard , Poul Anderson , Jack Vance , and Keith Roberts , who contributed " The <unk> " , the first story in his Pavane sequence . The second issue was also high quality , with another Pavane story and a short story by John Brunner from his " Traveller in Black " series . Subsequent issues did not sustain this high level , but overall , in Ashley 's opinion , the twelve issues of Impulse contained " some of the best SF and fantasy ever published in British magazines " . Christopher Priest 's first story , " The Run " , appeared in the May 1966 issue , and Chris Boyce 's second story , " George " , was published in June 1966 . Two novels were serialised in Impulse , both well @-@ received : Harry Harrison 's Make Room ! Make Room ! ( later made into the movie Soylent Green ) , and Moorcock 's The Ice Schooner . Other notable stories listed by Ashley include Thomas Disch 's " The Roaches " and " The Number You Have Just Reached " , and Aldiss 's " The Eyes of the Blind King " . Stableford also praises the covers for the last few issues , which were mostly done by Keith Roberts in a semi @-@ abstract style unlike conventional genre art . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The editorial succession at Science Fantasy was as follows : 
 Walter Gillings : Summer 1950 – Winter 1950 . 
 John Carnell : Winter 1951 – 1952 – April 1964 . 
 Kyril Bonfiglioli : June – July 1964 – September 1966 . 
 Harry Harrison and Keith Roberts : October 1966 – February 1967 . 
 The publisher was Nova Publications until April 1964 , and Roberts & Vinter Ltd thereafter . 
 Science Fantasy was digest @-@ sized for its first two issues . The size increased to a large digest for the next four issues , but with issue seven it returned to a small digest again , and remained in that format until the June – July 1964 issue , which was issued in paperback format . The remaining issues , including all those under the Impulse title , were published as paperbacks . It initially was priced at 2 / - ; the price was cut to 1 / 6 for the third issue , but returned to 2 / - with the seventh issue . With issue 11 ( December 1954 ) the price returned to 2 / - , and it rose to 2 / 6 with issue 46 and to 3 / - with issue 61 . When the format changed to paperback with issue 65 the price dropped again to 2 / 6 , and remained there until the title change to Impulse . All the twelve Impulse issues were priced at 3 / 6 . The page count began at 96 , and rose to 128 with issue 7 . Issues 36 through 63 were 112 pages , and the final digest @-@ sized issue was 124 pages . The paperback issues were 128 pages under the Science Fantasy title , and 160 pages for the Impulse issues . Volume numbering began with two volumes of three issues , but the second volume began with volume 2 , number 4 instead of restarting the issue number at 1 as would usually be done . From issue 7 the volume number was dropped completely . 
 The schedule was initially quite irregular , with the first two issues , in Summer and Winter 1950 , followed almost a year later by a Winter 1951 – 52 issue . Spring and Autumn 1952 were followed by Spring 1953 and then another long delay to the seventh issue which was dated 1954 , without a month or season given . The schedule became more regular thereafter , with May 1954 inaugurating a bimonthly schedule that lasted till November 1955 , except that September 1954 was followed by a December issue , and June 1955 was followed by September . After February , May and August 1955 , the December 1956 issue began a regular bimonthly sequence that was marred only by the appearance of a November 1959 issue between the August and December issues . After the switch to paperback , the sequence ran as follows : June – July 1964 , July – August 1964 , September – October 1964 , December 1964 – January 1965 , January – February 1965 , and then monthly from March 1965 to the end . 
 There have been no anthologies drawn solely from the pages of Science Fantasy , but Weird Shadows From Beyond , edited by John Carnell , and published by Corgi Books in 1965 , drew eight of its ten stories from the magazine . 
 In 2013 , a 371 @-@ page volume written by John Boston and curated by Damien Broderick , titled Strange Highways : Reading Science Fantasy , 1950 @-@ 1967 was published by Borgo / Wildside in the US . It discusses , sometimes in detail , every issue , story , writer , cover , and even advertisement of the magazine . 
 = Horizon ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Horizon " is the twentieth episode of the second season of the science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , and originally aired on April 16 , 2003 on UPN . The episode was written by André Bormanis , and directed by James A. Contner . The episodes guest stars included Nicole Forester , who had previously appeared in Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , Joan Pringle and Corey Mendell Parker . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . When the ship detours to observe volcanic activity on a planet , Ensign Mayweather ( Anthony Montgomery ) takes the opportunity to visit his family on board the <unk> Horizon . 
 Montgomery had previously suggested the appearance of Mayweather 's parents at the end of season one , and was pleased to see them introduced . Several sets to create the Horizon were created on a soundstage , with the related scenes filmed in the second half of the episode 's shoot after the main cast were dismissed , with the exception of Montgomery . Critical response was mixed , and the episode received the lowest ratings for a first @-@ run episode of the series so far , viewed by 3 @.@ 36 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the direction of Starfleet , Enterprise makes a detour to a planet passing between two gas giants , in order to <unk> the gravitational forces and subsequent volcanic activity . Their new course takes the ship close to that of <unk> Horizon , the cargo vessel where Ensign Mayweather grew up . He then requests permission for a further detour to re @-@ join his family on Horizon as his father is ill and he hasn 't been able to visit him in four years . Captain Archer readily agrees , but bad news arrives when Mayweather learns that his father died some six weeks earlier . 
 As planned , Mayweather boards Horizon and receives a warm welcome from most of the crew , including his mother <unk> . He also finds out that his brother , Paul , has been named acting captain , but he doesn 't seem to be coping well with his new responsibilities . Mayweather offers to make a few repairs and upgrades to systems on the ship , but Paul tells him to stop , making him feel uneasy and out of place . Soon afterwards , the ship suddenly comes under attack , and a homing device is placed on the hull . Mayweather then recommends a boost in the ship 's fighting capability , but Paul insists that the safest course is to flee to the nearest port and yield the cargo as needed . 
 Back on Enterprise , Commander Tucker arranges a movie night for the crew featuring the Frankenstein film trilogy , and invites Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol . She eventually consents , and finally finds in the film an insightful view into historical Human @-@ Vulcan relations . Meanwhile , Mayweather makes his intended modifications without permission , resulting in a confrontation when Paul finds out . The ship comes under further attack from an alien vessel , and Paul offers up the cargo as planned . The aliens refuse and demand the vessel as well . Left without any other option , Paul tells Mayweather to re @-@ initiate the modifications , and to detach the command module from the cargo section . They soon disable the alien ship . The brothers reconcile , and Mayweather leaves , promising to visit again soon . 
 = = Production = = 
 In an interview conducted towards the end of the first season of Enterprise , Anthony Montgomery suggested that it would be good to see Travis Mayweather 's parents make an appearance in the show . Montgomery was pleased when this came true in " Horizon " , saying " It was really a touching episode for me , you get a feel of how hard it was for Travis to leave the family and join Starfleet . " 
 Production began on January 28 , 2003 and lasted for seven days . The first three days of filming took place on the Enterprise standing sets . The second day in particular took place mostly on the set for the gravity neutral " sweet spot " first seen in the Enterprise pilot , " Broken Bow " . The main cast , with the exception of Montgomery were only required for the first three days . Montgomery meanwhile , filmed his scenes over the course of all seven days alongside the guest cast . Several sets were created on a soundstage to appear as the Horizon . These included the bridge of the cargo ship , a cargo hold , Mayweather 's old quarters , a mess hall and a variety of corridors . The Horizon itself were rendered using computer @-@ generated imagery and was to appear as a similar type of cargo vessel as seen in season one 's " Fortunate Son " . 
 Nicole Forester appeared in " Horizon " as Nora , having previously played a Dabo girl on Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Corey Mendell Parker and Joan Pringle both made their Star Trek debuts in this episode . The episode was written by André Bormanis , who had previously written episodes of Star Trek : Voyager and was the story editor for Enterprise during the first and second seasons . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Horizon " originally aired on UPN on April 16 , 2003 . In overnight figures the episode was thought to have received a 3 @.@ 5 / 5 % share among adults , beating The WB 's Dawson 's Creek in its timeslot . With those figures , while it would have continued a decrease in recent weeks , it would have still been more than the all @-@ time low of " Vanishing Point " , which recorded a share of 3 @.@ 4 % . However , the adjusted ratings showed that " Horizon " received 3 @.@ 36 million viewers , fewer than " Vanishing Point " and setting the lowest rating record for a first @-@ run episode of Enterprise at the time . It was also revealed that Dawson 's Creek actually beat Enterprise with higher ratings , but a lower number of viewers overall . 
 Michelle Erica Green , writing on the website " TrekNation " , enjoyed the performance of Anthony Montgomery after wondering why he hadn 't been featured that much so far in Enterprise . She said that the sub plot was " witty " but didn 't feel that the Mayweather family were well characterized . She found the episode frustrating because it seemed " to have all the elements in place to be a good episode " . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " was neutral about the episode , saying that it was " Not bad , but not particularly good or conclusive , either . Just simply ' there . ' " . He gave the episode a score of two and a half out of four . In scores given by readers of the website " <unk> " for the second season of Enterprise , " Horizon " was ranked 21st out of 26 episodes by average score . Based on the number of ten out of ten votes , it was placed last overall . 
 The episode was released on DVD as part of the season two box set on November 1 , 2005 in the United States . A release on Blu @-@ ray Disc for season two occurred on August 20 , 2013 . 
 = Tobacco smoke enema = 
 The tobacco smoke enema , an insufflation of tobacco smoke into the rectum by enema , was a medical treatment employed by European physicians for a range of ailments . 
 Tobacco was recognised as a medicine soon after it was first imported from the New World , and tobacco smoke was used by western medical practitioners as a tool against cold and drowsiness , but applying it by enema was a technique adapted from the North American Indians . The procedure was used to treat gut pain , and attempts were often made to resuscitate victims of near drowning . Liquid tobacco enemas were often given to ease the symptoms of a hernia . 
 During the early 19th century the practice fell into decline , when it was discovered that the principal active agent in tobacco smoke , nicotine , is poisonous . 
 = = Tobacco in medicine = = 
 Until its discovery and importation from the New World , tobacco was unknown to western medicine . Europeans were not ignorant of the effects of smoke ; incense has been used since antiquity , and the psychoactive effects of burning hemp seed was well known by the Scythians and Thracians . The ancient Greek physician Hippocrates recommended the inhalation of smoke for " female diseases " as did Pliny the Elder , as a cure for coughs . The Native Americans from whom the first western explorers learnt about tobacco used the leaf for a variety of purposes , including religious worship , but Europeans soon became aware that the Americans also used tobacco for medicinal purposes . The French diplomat Jean Nicot used a tobacco poultice as an analgesic , and Nicolás Monardes advocated tobacco as a treatment for a long list of diseases , such as cancer , headaches , respiratory problems , stomach cramps , gout , intestinal worms and female diseases . Contemporaneous medical science placed much weight on humorism , and for a short period tobacco became a panacea . Its use was mentioned in pharmacopoeia as a tool against cold and somnolence brought on by particular medical afflictions , its effectiveness explained by its ability to soak up moisture , to warm parts of the body , and to therefore maintain the equilibrium so important to a healthy person . In an attempt to discourage disease tobacco was also used to fumigate buildings . 
 The stimulation of respiration through the introduction of tobacco smoke by a rectal tube was first practiced by the North American Indians . An early example of the use of this procedure was described in 1686 by Thomas Sydenham , who to cure iliac passion prescribed first bleeding , followed by a tobacco smoke enema : 
 Here , therefore , I conceive it most proper to bleed first in the arm , and an hour or two afterwards to throw up a strong purging <unk> ; and I know of none so strong and effectual as the smoke of tobacco , forced up through a large bladder into the bowels by an inverted pipe , which may be repeated after a short interval , if the former , by giving a stool , does not open a passage downwards . 
 Tobacco smoke enemas were also reportedly used by 19th @-@ century Danish farmers , for horses that needed laxatives , and the US anthropologist Frank Speck reported that contemporary Catawba Native Americans also treated their horses using the technique . 
 = = Medical opinion = = 
 To physicians of the time , the appropriate treatment for " apparent death " was warmth and stimulation . Anne Greene , a woman sentenced to death and hanged in 1650 for the supposed murder of her stillborn child , was found by anatomists to be still alive . They revived her by pouring hot cordial down her throat , rubbing her limbs and extremities , bleeding her , applying heating plasters and a " heating odoriferous <unk> to be cast up in her body , to give heat and warmth to her bowels . " After placing her in a warm bed with another woman , to keep her warm , she recovered fully and was pardoned . Artificial respiration and the blowing of smoke into the lungs or the rectum were thought to be interchangeably useful , but the smoke enema was considered the most potent method , due to its supposed warming and stimulating properties . The Dutch experimented with methods of inflating the lungs , as a treatment for those who had fallen into their canals and apparently drowned . Patients were also given rectal infusions of tobacco smoke , as a respiratory stimulant . Richard Mead was among the first Western scholars to recommend tobacco smoke enemas to resuscitate victims of drowning , when in 1745 he recommended tobacco <unk> to treat iatrogenic drowning caused by immersion therapy . His name was cited in one of the earliest documented cases of resuscitation by rectally applied tobacco smoke , from 1746 , when a seemingly drowned woman was treated . On the advice of a passing sailor , the woman 's husband inserted the stem of the sailor 's pipe into her rectum , covered the bowl with a piece of perforated paper , and " blew hard " . The woman was apparently revived . In the 1780s the Royal Humane Society installed resuscitation kits , including smoke enemas , at various points along the River Thames , and by the turn of the 19th century , tobacco smoke enemas had become an established practice in Western medicine , considered by Humane Societies to be as important as artificial respiration . 
 " Tobacco <unk> , breath and bleed . 
 Keep warm and rub till you succeed . 
 And spare no pains for what you do ; 
 May one day be repaid to you . " 
 By 1805 , the use of rectally applied tobacco smoke was so established as a way to treat obstinate constrictions of the alimentary canal that doctors began experimenting with other delivery mechanisms . In one experiment , a decoction of half a drachm of tobacco in four ounces of water was used as an enema in a patient suffering from general convulsion where there was no expected recovery . The decoction worked as a powerful agent to penetrate and " roused the sensibility " of the patient to end the convulsions , although the decoction resulted in excited sickness , vomiting , and profuse perspiration . Such enemas were often used to treat hernias . A middle @-@ aged man was reported in 1843 to have died following an application , performed to treat a strangulated hernia , and in a similar case in 1847 a woman was given a liquid tobacco enema , supplemented with a chicken broth enema , and pills of opium and calomel ( taken orally ) . The woman later recovered . 
 In 1811 , a medical writer noted that " [ t ] he powers of the Tobacco Enema are so remarkable , that they have arrested the attention of practitioners in a remarkable manner . Of the effects and the method of exhibiting the smoke of Tobacco per <unk> , much has been written " , providing a list of European publications on the subject . Smoke enemas were also used to treat various other afflictions . An 1827 report in a medical journal tells of a woman treated for constipation with repeated smoke enemas , with little apparent success . According to a report of 1835 , tobacco enemas were used successfully to treat cholera " in the stage of collapse " . 
 I may observe , that before I was called to this case , <unk> vomiting had decidedly set in . My object in ordering the tobacco infusion and smoke <unk> was to favour the reduction of any obscure hernia or muscular spasm of the bowel which might exist . I also directed that the attendants of the girl should , after she had taken the crude mercury , frequently raise her up in bed , ( she was too feeble to raise herself , ) to alter her position from one side to the other , from the back to the belly , and vice versa , with the view of favouring the gravitation of the mercury to the lower bowels . 
 = = Decline = = 
 Attacks on the theories surrounding the ability of tobacco to cure diseases had begun early in the 17th century . King James I was scathing of its effectiveness , writing " [ it ] will not <unk> to cure <unk> any other than cleanly and gentlemanly diseases . " Others claimed that smoking dried out the humours , that snuff made the brain sooty , and that old people should not smoke as they were naturally dried up anyway . 
 While certain beliefs regarding the effectiveness of tobacco smoke to protect against disease persisted until well into the 20th century , the use of smoke enemas in Western medicine declined after 1811 , when through animal experimentation Benjamin Brodie demonstrated that nicotine — the principal active agent in tobacco smoke — is a cardiac poison that can stop the circulation of blood . 
 = Alfonsina Orsini = 
 Alfonsina Orsini ( 1472 – 1520 ) was a Regent of Florence . She governed the Republic of Florence during the absences of her son in the period of 1515 – 1519 . Her rule was feared as a sign of the end of republican government there . She was born from a noble family and raised in the royal court of Naples . She was the spouse of Piero di Lorenzo de ' Medici from 1488 and the mother of Lorenzo II de ' Medici . She helped restore the Medicis to power after they had been exiled . She worked to secure a French royal marriage for her son , and was also influential at the court of Pope Leo X , her brother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Throughout her life , she used her wealth , position , and connections to help the poor and underrepresented . She also used them to further her family 's power and wealth . She was a patron of the arts and architecture , both in Florence and in Rome . This included renovation of religious buildings as well as construction of palaces for the family . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Born in 1472 , she was the daughter of Catherine Sanseverino and Roberto Orsini , Count of Tagliacozzo and Alba . She was raised in the court of Ferdinand I of Naples . In 1486 , Orsini 's marriage to Piero di Lorenzo de ' Medici was arranged by his uncle , Bernardo Rucellai who stood in as proxy . In February 1488 , she brought a dowry of 12000 ducats when she joined her husband at a wedding in Rome attended by Ferdinand and his wife Joanna of Aragon . She finally arrived in Florence in May 1488 . 
 Like previous wives of the Medicis , she was frequently petitioned by the religious and the poor to aid their requests for aid from her husband , and later , her son . She was asked to help ease tax burdens , provide jobs , and release impounded property . Orsini , her mother , and Clarice Orsini ( her mother @-@ in @-@ law and a distant cousin ) supported a major renovation of the Santa Lucia convent in Florence . The renovation included expanding dormitories for the Dominican sisters , rebuilding the church , and adding other rooms and chapels . A few of the rooms were made available for women in the Medici family whenever they were needed . 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 Orsini and her husband had the following children : 
 Lorenzo de ' Medici , Duke of Urbino ( 1492 – 1519 ) 
 Clarice de ' Medici ( 1493 – 1528 ) married Filippo Strozzi 
 = = Political life = = 
 Her husband and other men in the Medici family were exiled in November of 1494 when Piero 's negotiations with the invading Charles VIII of France did not meet with the people 's expectations . On 9 November 1494 , a mob plundered the Medici palace and drove Alfonsina and her mother out , stripping them of their jewelry . They then stayed at the convent they had rebuilt . Under Florentine law , women and children were not included with their husbands or fathers in exile , though their funds and ability to travel were limited . The law also allowed women whose husbands were exiled to use their dowry as their primary source of funds , but Alfonsina 's dowry was included in the state seizure of Medici assets . Alfonsina and her mother negotiated with Charles to end the exile , but he only removed their status as rebels , and could not lift the exile . In May 1495 , Alfonsina asked permission to travel to Rome and rejoin her husband there , but she was denied . That September , she left without permission and joined Piero and his brother Giuliano in Siena . Her mother was exiled from Florence in March 1497 . 
 Piero died in exile in 1503 . Alfonsina returned briefly to Florence in 1507 to attempt to claim her dowry and to seek a husband for her daughter , Clarice . She was well received by many people there and worked to build support for a Medici return . Thanks to negotiations by Lucrezia de ' Medici , Clarice was engaged to Filippo Strozzi in Rome in December 1508 , bringing the Strozzi into the Medici camp . Alfonsina provided Clarice a dowry of 4000 ducats . In 1507 , the leader of Florence , Piero <unk> , asked his brother , Cardinal Francesco <unk> to help resolve Alfonsina 's claim on her dowry , but progress was slow . In 1508 , she asked Pope Julius II to claim the Cardinal 's funds until he could get her the money , but that did not help . She did not receive her dowry funds until late in 1510 . The Medici exile lasted until September 1512 , though Alfonsina remained in Rome . 
 When her brother @-@ in @-@ law was elected as Pope Leo X , she took advantage of the situation to increase her income and provide additional funds to her son . By 1514 , she noted that the Pope was running low on funds , but continued to act in her family 's interest . She spent a year lobbying for her son @-@ in @-@ law to get the position of <unk> @-@ General of the Vatican , giving her family direct access to Vatican treasuries . The Medicis began to have public disputes about which of the family members and clients should get the most powerful and influential positions . Alfonsina was working so that her son would have sole authority in Florence , while others , led by Lucrezia , wanted a more distributed government . Alfonsina even encouraged Lorenzo to interfere in elections in Florence , to get the right people elected . She regularly reminded him to reward families that had been loyal to the Medicis and <unk> for a long time . About this time , she also began negotiating for a royal bride for Lorenzo , considering marriage with a Spanish princess . Eventually , her aspirations were met with his marriage to Madeleine de La Tour d 'Auvergne . 
 = = Regency = = 
 In June 1515 , she moved back to the Medici palace in Florence . Though the Republic of Florence was still a republic in name , Lorenzo ruled with his mother 's help . The Medici palace became the location where government decisions were made . When Lorenzo took the Florentine army in the summer of 1515 to support Pope Leo and the Spanish in the war against Francis I of France , Alfonsina took up the rule in his name . Though she could not hold an official office , she directed the decisions of the governing councils and edited the letters Lorenzo sent to the councils . The councils noted in their records that decisions had been made " by order of Magnificent Lady Alfonsina . " She had her chancellor , Bernardo <unk> , appointed as the secretary of the office which created new laws . She also provided orders on who should be ' elected ' to the councils throughout the rest of her son 's life . She was also involved in the strategy regarding the war . When the Swiss mercenaries left the Spanish army , she began sending treaty proposals to Francis . Pope Leo asked her to provide the ambassadors to negotiate the treaty with Francis . The treaty included a provision allowing the Medici to continue their rule . She had the responsibility of planning the official visit of Pope Leo to Florence in November 1515 as he was traveling to sign the peace treaty . 
 She was a driving force behind her son receiving the Duchy of Urbino in 1516 , and helped to fund his side of the War of Urbino . While he was away again starting that fall , she ruled remotely from Rome , providing direction to Goro <unk> who worked in Florence for her through 1517 . Even when Lorenzo provided direction to <unk> , he confirmed the decision with Alfonsina before acting on the orders . She took responsibility for appointing governors to lands ruled by Florence , including Reggio and Urbino , who followed her orders . 
 Her rule was not popular , and even during Pope Leo 's visit in 1515 , posters went up protesting her greed and naming her an enemy of liberty . Many citizens of Florence feared the impending end of the republic , and a conversion to a monarchy . By the spring of 1519 , her health was so poor she could no longer walk . She died in Rome on 7 February 1520 . When she died , rumors of her greed were spread indicating that she left behind a fabulous fortune , more than 70000 ducats . While she did not leave behind as much as that , she left about 10000 ducats to Pope Leo , trusting him to use the funds to care for her daughter and granddaughter . She is buried in the Basilica of Santa Maria del Popolo . 
 = = Influence on art and architecture = = 
 Until her husband 's exile , she sponsored the work of Mariotto <unk> , sending his paintings to her extended family throughout Italy . In 1504 , Alfonsina inherited a castle near Tivoli from her mother . In 1514 , her son @-@ in @-@ law Filippo wrote a description of her collection of ancient statues , noting they were among the best in Rome . From 1515 to 1519 , she was involved with her son Lorenzo in several major construction projects , continuing construction of a villa at Poggio a Caiano , work on a lake house at Fucecchio , and rebuilding gardens in Florence . During that period , she also independently managed the construction of the Medici @-@ Lante Palace in Rome . She employed the architect Nanni di <unk> <unk> to work on each of these projects . 
 = Jay Bouwmeester = 
 Jay Daniel Bouwmeester ( born September 27 , 1983 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman playing for the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was a first round selection , third overall , of the Florida Panthers at the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . He was named to the NHL All @-@ Rookie Team in 2003 and played seven seasons in the Panthers organization before being traded to the Calgary Flames in 2009 , with whom he played four seasons . He held one of the longest iron man streaks in NHL history as he appeared in 737 consecutive regular season games between 2004 and 2014 . Bouwmeester played in the 2007 and 2009 NHL All @-@ Star Games . 
 Internationally , Bouwmeester has represented Canada numerous times . He appeared in three consecutive World Junior Championships between 2000 and 2002 , winning a silver and two bronze medals . He made his debut with the senior national team in 2003 , winning the first of two consecutive World Championship titles . Bouwmeester was a member of the 2004 World Cup of Hockey championship team and won a gold medal with Team Canada at the 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bouwmeester was born September 27 , 1983 in Edmonton , Alberta . He is the son of Dan and Gena Bouwmeester , and has an elder sister , Jill . His father is a school teacher and coach in Edmonton , and played defence himself for the University of Alberta Golden Bears hockey team . Bouwmeester was a naturally gifted player ; his father said he could handle a hockey stick at an early age , and learned to skate shortly after he learned to walk . An all @-@ around athlete , Bouwmeester also played baseball and soccer competitively , and ran track , played volleyball and basketball at school . He had natural talent for hockey , however , and learned to play both on a backyard rink his father maintained and in the basement of the family home . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Bouwmeester played bantam and midget hockey with the Edmonton South Side Athletic Club , winning the Alberta midget championship in 1997 – 98 . He was selected by the Medicine Hat Tigers first overall at the Western Hockey League 's ( WHL ) 1998 Bantam Draft , and appeared in eight games with the Tigers in the 1998 – 99 WHL season . 
 He joined the Tigers full @-@ time in 1999 – 2000 , scoring 34 points in 64 games as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old . His offensive totals improved in his two following WHL seasons : 53 in 2000 – 01 and 61 in 2001 – 02 . He was named to the WHL 's East All @-@ Star team , and was considered a candidate to be selected first overall at the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . Instead , he was taken third overall by the Florida Panthers , behind Rick Nash and Kari Lehtonen . 
 = = = Florida Panthers = = = 
 Bouwmeester made his NHL debut with the Panthers at the start of the 2002 – 03 Season , and appeared in all 82 games for Florida , a franchise rookie record . He scored his first NHL goal on November 11 , 2002 , against the Chicago Blackhawks , and finished the season with four goals and sixteen points . He was named to the 2003 NHL All @-@ Rookie Team on defence . 
 He improved to 20 points in 61 games in 2003 – 04 though he missed 18 games with a foot injury . The 2004 – 05 NHL lockout forced him to play in the American Hockey League ( AHL ) that season . He joined the Panthers ' AHL affiliate , the San Antonio Rampage , but experienced difficulties adapting to playing in the minor leagues . Despite struggling to generate offence , Bouwmeester participated in the AHL All @-@ Star game , and was loaned to the Chicago Wolves when it became evident the Rampage would not qualify for the playoffs . Bouwmeester and the Wolves reached the Calder Cup Finals , though they lost to the Philadelphia Phantoms . 
 Bouwmeester experienced a breakout season after the NHL resumed play in 2005 – 06 , scoring 5 goals , 41 assists and 46 points in 82 games , all career highs , and was invited to join Team Canada at the 2006 Winter Olympics in the place of injured defenceman Scott Niedermayer . He made news that off @-@ season in his hometown of Edmonton when he was arrested for driving under the influence , a charge he pleaded guilty to the following summer . 
 He again appeared in all 82 games for the Panthers in 2006 – 07 and set a new career high with 12 goals . Bouwmeester appeared in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game , representing the Panthers in the game held at Dallas . 
 He improved again to 15 goals in 2007 – 08 while again playing in every game for the Panthers and led the NHL in average ice time at 27 minutes , 28 seconds per game . He signed a new one @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 875 million contract as a restricted free agent following the season , turning down the Panthers ' long @-@ term offers in the hopes of becoming an unrestricted free agent at the expiry of his new contract . 
 Another 15 @-@ goal season followed in 2008 – 09 . He played in all 82 games and succeeded Andrew Brunette as the league 's ironman when the latter player was forced out of the Colorado Avalanche lineup with injury . He appeared in his second All @-@ Star Game and scored a goal . As the season approached its end , the Panthers were fighting for the final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference , but were unable to convince Bouwmeester to sign a contract extension . Despite numerous offers from other teams for his services , Florida general manager Jacques Martin chose not to trade Bouwmeester . He and the Panthers struggled to end the season , and failed to qualify for the post @-@ season . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Unable to come to terms with Bouwmeester , the Panthers traded his negotiating rights to the Calgary Flames in exchange for the negotiating rights to defenceman Jordan Leopold and a third round draft pick ( Josh <unk> ) in the 2009 NHL Entry Draft . The deal gave the Flames four days with which they had exclusive rights to negotiate with Bouwmeester before he became an unrestricted free agent and gained the ability to negotiate with any team . Hours before that deadline expired , Bouwmeester and the Flames agreed to a five @-@ year , $ 33 million contract . 
 The Flames struggled to score for much of the 2009 – 10 NHL season , and Bouwmeester was no exception . He finished the year with just three goals and rarely served as an offensive catalyst for Calgary . He did not miss a game for the Flames , and while his consecutive games played streak sat at 424 following the season , Bouwmeester also held the active record for most games played without reaching the Stanley Cup Playoffs at 553 . Bouwmeester continued to score at a rate below his time in Florida , recording 24 points in 2010 – 11 and 29 in 2011 – 12 . He led the team in ice time both years , averaging nearly 26 minutes per game . Bouwmeester broke the NHL record for consecutive games played by a defenceman on March 15 , 2011 when he appeared in his <unk> consecutive game , surpassing Kārlis Skrastiņš . 
 = = = St. Louis Blues = = = 
 Calgary failed to reach the playoffs in both seasons , and while Bouwmeester 's offensive production increased in the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 – 13 season – he had 6 goals and 15 points in 33 games for Calgary and again led the team in ice time – he also reached 750 career games without appearing in the playoffs . With the Flames entering a rebuilding phase , Bouwmeester agreed to waive his no @-@ trade clause and accepted a trade on April 1 , 2013 . He was dealt to the St. Louis Blues in exchange for prospects Mark <unk> , <unk> Berra , and a first round draft pick in the 2013 NHL Entry Draft . Bouwmeester described leaving Calgary as " bittersweet " , calling the city a great place to play , but expressed hope that he would finally reach the post @-@ season with the Blues . He achieved this goal after the Blues clinched a playoff spot in their third @-@ to @-@ last game of the season , and the 762nd of Bouwmeester 's career . In doing so , he avoided breaking Olli Jokinen 's NHL record of 799 career games before making his playoff debut . 
 The Blues and Bouwmeester agreed to a five @-@ year , $ 27 million contract extension prior to the 2013 – 14 season . He recorded 37 points for the Blues during the season , his highest total since 2008 – 09 with the Panthers . Bouwmeester 's iron man streak ended early in the 2014 – 15 season as he missed the Blues ' November 23 , 2014 , contest against the Winnipeg Jets . He suffered a " lower body injury " after skating into a rut in the ice in the previous game against the Ottawa Senators . The streak ended at 737 consecutive games , the fifth longest in NHL history . 
 = = International play = = 
 Bouwmeester played in three World Junior Championships with the Canadian junior team . He became the youngest player to ever represent Canada at the tournament when he won a bronze medal at the 2000 tournament at the age of 16 years , 3 months . He recorded two assists in 2001 as Canada won another bronze medal . In 2002 , Bouwmeester and the Canadian team won the silver medal , losing the championship game to Russia , 5 @-@ 4 . 
 His first appearance with the senior team came at the 2003 World Championships . Bouwmeester finished second in scoring amongst defencemen with seven points , and was named the tournament 's best defenceman , and an all @-@ star as he helped Canada win the gold medal . 
 Bouwmeester won a second gold medal at the 2004 World Championship , contributing three points in nine games . He scored the championship winning goal in a 5 – 3 victory over Sweden . He was a late addition to Canada 's entry at the 2004 World Cup of Hockey , invited to replace the injured Chris Pronger . He appeared in four games as Canada won the tournament . 
 He again joined the team as an injury replacement at the 2006 Winter Olympics after Scott Niedermayer was forced out of the tournament . He appeared in six games , scoring no points , as Canada lost in the quarter @-@ finals . Bouwmeester 's appeared again with the national team at the 2008 World Championship . He played in all nine games , settling for the silver medal after Russia defeated Team Canada in the final . Bouwmeester participated in Canada 's summer camp in advance of the 2010 Winter Olympics , but his struggles in the weeks leading up the team being announced resulted in his being left off the final roster . However , he was selected as a reserve by Team Canada for the 2010 Winter Olympics should an injury occur during the tournament . 
 Bouwmeester played in all six of Canada 's games at the 2014 Winter Olympics , contributing one assist and winning the gold medal . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Bouwmeester is best known for his skating ability . His coach in Medicine Hat , Rick Carriere , said his ability to move the puck up the ice and score meant Bouwmeester could have played in the NHL at the age of 15 . He is a capable offensive player from his defensive position and frequently joined offensive rushes while with Florida , but failed to do so as often in his first season in Calgary , resulting in much lower offensive output . The primary criticism of his game is that he lacks a physical presence on the ice . The Hockey News commentator Ken Campbell argued that it has prevented him from becoming one of the game 's elite defencemen . He is frequently among the league leaders in ice time per game and one of the most durable . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Maggie Grace = 
 Maggie Grace ( born Margaret Grace Denig ; September 21 , 1983 ) is an American actress , best known for her roles in Lost and the Taken trilogy . Originally from Worthington , Ohio , she dropped out of high school to move to Los Angeles with her mother after her parents ' divorce . While struggling financially , she landed her first role as the title character in the web @-@ based video series Rachel 's Room in 2001 . She went on to earn a Young Artist Award nomination in 2002 with her portrayal of 15 @-@ year @-@ old murder victim Martha Moxley in the television movie Murder in Greenwich . In 2004 , Grace was cast as Shannon Rutherford in the television series Lost , on which she was a main cast member for the first two seasons , winning a Screen Actors Guild Award shared with the ensemble cast . Leaving the series , Grace was keen to work more prominently in film , having starred opposite Tom Welling in The Fog in 2005 . She appeared in Suburban Girl , The Jane Austen Book Club ( both 2007 ) , and opposite Liam Neeson as Kim Mills in Taken in 2008 . She reprised the role in Taken 2 ( 2012 ) and Taken 3 ( 2014 ) . 
 She played the lead role , Alice , in Malice in Wonderland , a modern take on Lewis Carroll 's novel Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . Grace reprised the role of Shannon in two more episodes of Lost , including the series finale . In 2013 , she appears in the sixth season of Californication . She portrays Faith , a groupie and a muse to the stars , who captures the eye of Hank Moody played by David Duchovny . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Grace was born Margaret Grace Denig in Worthington , Ohio , one of three children of parents <unk> ( née Everett ) and Rick Denig , who ran a family jewelry business . Her family lived in a 200 @-@ year @-@ old house , the first saltbox house in central Ohio . She attended Worthington Christian Schools from kindergarten through ninth grade and briefly attended Thomas Worthington High School , where she began acting in school plays and community theater , including a 2000 Gallery Players production of The Crucible , at a local Jewish Community Center ( though she is not Jewish ) . As a kid Grace was a big reader and a self described " Shakespeare nerd " telling the LA Times that at age 13 , she " was really into Jane Austen , kind of like how some kids are into Star Trek . Her parents divorced " amicably " when she was 16 years old , and her mother sought a " fresh start " . Grace dropped out of high school to move to Los Angeles , California with her mother , while her younger siblings Ian Denig and Marissa <unk> ( married to Nick <unk> ) continued to live with their father . In Los Angeles , Grace and her mother moved around often as they struggled financially , taking out short @-@ term rents rather than paying for permanent residence while eating a basic diet , as it was all they could afford . 
 = = Career = = 
 Grace acquired an agent within a week of relocating to Los Angeles and enrolled in acting classes . She landed her first role in Rachel 's Room , a 2001 web @-@ based video series about the affairs inside a teenage girl 's bedroom that was created by Dawson 's Creek executive producer Paul <unk> . Her next role was on the 2002 television series <unk> , which was cancelled before the first episode had aired . Her breakout role was on 2002 's television movie Murder in Greenwich , based on the true story of 15 @-@ year @-@ old Martha Moxley 's murder . She was nominated for a Young Artist Award for her portrayal of Moxley in the Best Performance in a TV Movie , Miniseries or Special – Leading Young Actress category , but lost to Clara Bryant for Tru Confessions . She went on to feature in minor roles on the television series CSI : Miami , The Lyon 's Den , Miracles , Like Family , Cold Case and Law & Order : Special Victims Unit , and the films Twelve Mile Road and Creature Unknown . 
 In mid @-@ 2004 , Grace 's agent sent her the script for the pilot episode of Lost ; she was given the role of Shannon Rutherford after a successful audition . She was nominated in 2005 for a Teen Choice Award for Choice TV Breakout Performance – Female for her role on Lost , but lost to Desperate Housewives ' Eva Longoria . She lived in Hawaii during the filming of the show 's first season , and signed on to star opposite Tom Welling in The Fog , a 2005 remake of the 1980 horror film of the same name , as a character originally played by Jamie Lee Curtis . Though the filming of Lost was supposed to have ended before The Fog began , the productions coincided due to Lost 's extended season finale and Grace flew between the two sets , on the Hawaiian island of Oahu and on Bowen Island in British Columbia , Canada . After ranking at # 27 on Maxim 's Hot 100 list of 2005 , she returned for Lost 's second season . Her character was killed in the season 's eighth episode , " Collision " , when the series ' writers began to feel that the character 's " story avenues [ were ] limited " . Executive producer Carlton Cuse said that Grace 's departure from the show was " sort of a win @-@ win " as she was eager to enter a full @-@ time career in film . After leaving the series , she nevertheless joined the other principal Lost cast members of season 2 onstage at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards where Lost won the award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series . 
 Variety reported in May 2005 that Grace was in negotiations to play X @-@ Men character Kitty Pryde in the 2006 film X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , but in July , auditions were reportedly being held for her replacement . The role ultimately went to Ellen Page , and Grace later revealed that she had never been contacted about the role and was surprised to read that she was up for the part in question . Grace 's next role was in the 2007 independent film Suburban Girl , alongside Sarah Michelle Gellar and Alec Baldwin . In 2007 , she starred in The Jane Austen Book Club , based on Karen Joy Fowler 's novel of the same name . She is a fan of Jane Austen and had read Fowler 's novel when it was released in 2004 . When she was given the film 's script , she met with the director Robin <unk> , with whom she says she " <unk> out " , and was given the role of Allegra , an openly lesbian 20 @-@ year @-@ old . After the filming of The Jane Austen Book Club was completed , Grace briefly returned to Hawaii to shoot a guest spot on the Lost season 3 episode " Exposé " . She starred in the 2008 thriller film Taken with Liam Neeson , who was at the top of a list of male actors Grace wished to work with that she had written just two months before she was cast . She played the lead in Simon Fellows ' 2009 Malice in Wonderland , a modern adaptation of Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland . In 2010 , Grace starred in the drama Flying Lessons , and appeared opposite Tom Cruise and Cameron Diaz in James Mangold 's film Knight and Day , as well as in Faster , with Dwayne Johnson . Grace 's busy schedule prevented her from returning as Shannon in " LA X " , the season premiere for Lost 's sixth and final season , but she eventually returned for the series finale " The End " . On September 2010 , it was revealed that Grace was chosen to play Irina in The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn Part 1 and 2 . 
 In December 2012 , it was announced Grace would be making her Broadway debut in Picnic . The play opened for previews on December 14 , running at the American Airlines Theatre . Sebastian Stan co @-@ stars with Grace in the Pulitzer Prize winning play . 
 In February 2015 , it was announced that the actress would be leading a new CBS series titled Code Black , but later exited the show for creative reasons . 
 She also made her first appearance as a guest star in the Showtime Series Californication in January 2013 where she plays a groupie and muse to the rock and roll world as well as the personal interest of Hank Moody , starring David Duchovny . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Grace lived in Honolulu , Hawaii while working on Lost , saying " I love it here , but it 's not a place you can really pursue acting . " She claimed that , while living in Hawaii , her Lost co @-@ stars would introduce her to men and that some " would probably have me with a different guy every night . " She said that her male co @-@ stars were " mostly very protective " and " very opinionated " when deciding whether she should date certain men ; actor Josh Holloway once offered to help her select dates from a portfolio of male models with whom he previously worked . Grace and Ian Somerhalder , her onscreen stepbrother , dated in April 2006 after both had left Lost . When asked about Somerhalder in August , she stated , " Ian 's great , I adore him , although I 'm only 22 – far too young to even think about having a serious relationship . " While still working on Lost , Grace and Somerhalder adopted a feral cat named Roo which they found " literally dying " in the jungle on the set . She said that the cat is now her " travel buddy . " From 2008 to 2009 , she dated Blake <unk> , a contestant on the second season of The Amazing Race and founder of <unk> Shoes . On February 18 , 2015 , Grace announced her engagement to Matthew Cooke via Instagram . In February 2016 , Grace announced that they had split up . 
 Grace often credits her mother as her source of inspiration . When asked about her closest friend , she said that she and her mother were more like sisters and that she is " lucky to have an exceptionally cool mum . " She is a self @-@ proclaimed Anglophile , having written to a pen pal in the Lake District from the age of eight , having first visited England at 13 years old , and admiring a number of English poets as well as William Shakespeare . She calls herself very clumsy , claiming to " trip over my legs all the time , " and was jokingly nicknamed " Maggie <unk> " by one of her former castmates . She plays in a Los Angeles kickball league with her friends . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Call of Duty 2 = 
 Call of Duty 2 is a 2005 first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Infinity Ward and published by Konami in Japan and Activision in the rest of the world . It is the second installment of the Call of Duty series . The game was released on October 25 , 2005 for Microsoft Windows and on November 22 , 2005 as a launch game for the Xbox 360 in Europe , Australia and South America , and later in Japan . Other versions were released on other platforms , including mobile phones as well as Pocket PCs . 
 The game is set during World War II and the campaign mode is experienced through the perspectives of four soldiers : one in the Red Army , one in the United States Army , and two in the British Army . It contains four individual campaigns , split into three stories , with a total of twenty @-@ seven missions . Activision officially announced the game on April 7 , 2005 in a press release . Many features were added and changed from the original Call of Duty . The most notable change is the regenerating health . Additions include an icon that indicates a nearby grenade about to explode . 
 The game was met with positive reception . Critics praised the game particularly for the graphics , sound and the regenerating health system . As a launch game , the Xbox 360 version sold over 250 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , and had sold 2 million copies by January 2008 . By November 2013 , the game had sold 5 @.@ 9 million copies . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Call of Duty 2 is a first @-@ person shooter that has a single @-@ player story mode and a multiplayer mode . The player takes on the roles of several Allied protagonists in specific missions during World War II . The player can crouch and lie prone , and is able to scale low walls and other obstacles . Two firearms can be carried , which can be swapped with those left on the battlefield , and both fragmentation and smoke grenades can also be carried . A gun 's iron sights can be used to aim more accurately . A compass on the heads @-@ up display ( HUD ) shows both allies and enemies , and objective markers to indicate locations the player must reach , areas to defend , or enemy cannons or tanks that the player must plant explosives on to disable . <unk> weapons such as machine guns and flak cannons are available in some locations to take out enemy troops . In addition , some missions place the player in control of a tank . 
 The player has a set of binoculars . While it is generally ignored during infantry @-@ limited gameplay , it is vital to the long @-@ range use of the Crusader tanks and one of the missions in which the player must direct artillery fire to defend a town . It is also important for scouting , though most of the game takes place in personal , close combat situations reducing the importance of this tactic . 
 Should the player take severe damage , the screen will turn red and the sound of the character 's heartbeat will increase in volume ; this indicates the player 's health is low . The player must find a way to stay out of fire to recover before entering battle again or else will die and restart from the last checkpoint . Health is only restored through automatic recharging when the player is not taking fire . Some attacks , such as explosions from grenades or shells , will kill the player instantly if the player is too close . 
 In April 2006 , Infinity Ward released the Call of Duty 2 Radiant , which allows a player to create their own multiplayer or single @-@ player maps . Along with Radiant , the mapmaker includes Maya plug @-@ in support , an effects editor , and an asset manager which allows custom models to be made and imported into the game , as well as custom effects . 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 Call of Duty 2 contains four individual campaigns , split into three stories , with a total of twenty @-@ seven missions . Each story concerns a World War II soldier overcoming the odds in the war . The game also has four difficulty levels : Easy , Regular , Hardened , and Veteran . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Call of Duty 2 features several game types : Deathmatch , Team Deathmatch , Search & Destroy , Capture the Flag and Headquarters . The maps include Normandy , Africa , and Russia . Each team can choose a variety of weapons , depending on the map . Players can choose between American soldiers , Soviet soldiers , and British soldiers for the Allied forces , while the Axis forces must play as German soldiers . 
 Each PC multiplayer server can hold a maximum of sixty @-@ four players , while the limit is eight players on Xbox . In the Xbox 360 version , players can play on Xbox Live and get new map packs . There are a total of thirteen official maps , and three of these are remakes from the original Call of Duty . There are also three extra map packs named Bonus Pack , Skirmish Pack , and Invasion Pack , adding a total of eight maps . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Soviet campaign = = = 
 The player controls Private Vasili Koslov of the 13th Guards Rifle Division , initially involved in the defense of Moscow from the advancing German forces . The next level involves the destruction of a German stronghold in Stalingrad during September 1942 . The next objective involves battling for strongholds throughout Stalingrad throughout December 1942 , including re @-@ connecting cut telephone wires and re @-@ capturing the rail @-@ yard and train @-@ station . The final mission takes place during the final Soviet offensive in Stalingrad in January 1943 , which involves the re @-@ capture and defense of city blocks and Stalingrad city hall . 
 = = = British campaign = = = 
 The player takes control as a British soldier , Sergeant John Davis of the 7th Armoured Division in North Africa , led by Captain Price . The first level has the player taking part in a sneak attack on German Afrika Korps troops , ending with the destruction of a German supply station . The next level has the player defending a town from overwhelming numbers of Germans sending counter attacks from North , West , South and East ; finally achieving victory by destroying much of the German tank force using artillery . This is followed by the Second Battle of El Alamein , during which the player has to fight through several trenches , machine gun nests , 88 millimeter guns and finally taking the German field headquarters . The assault on El <unk> to intercept the remaining Germans in Egypt and destroy several 88 millimeter guns soon follows , ending the first British campaign . An addendum to the second set of missions has the player taking on the role of a British tank commander , David Welsh , while engaging enemies in Libya . The first mission of the third campaign in <unk> , Tunisia , has the player immediately under fire , holding a house until they break out and rendezvous with the second squad . They then retake <unk> with reinforcements the next day all before assaulting Matmata . The final British campaign takes place during the Battle for Caen as part of Operation Overlord . 
 = = = American campaign = = = 
 As Corporal Bill Taylor of the 2nd Ranger Battalion , the player starts off by playing a part in D @-@ Day , at the assault of Pointe du Hoc , to destroy a German artillery battery , and hold it against a massive German counter @-@ offensive in the following mission . Soon after , the player captures a nearby town and serves as a sniper against mortar crews until reinforcements arrive . The second objective is focused on Hill 400 , involving the capture of Bergstein , a disastrous charge at Hill 400 's bunkers and the defense against the German counterattack , with the player again performing sniper work against German mortar teams , destroying enemy armor , and generally holding the hill against the counter @-@ offensive , all the while burdened by artillery and overwhelming numbers of German soldiers . The final mission is set amongst the Americans in the Rhine River crossing into Germany . It begins as one of the few missions with the player immediately under fire , providing cover fire against the Germans until reaching the river banks and then fighting through most of the town . The final fight has the player defeat two German Tiger I 's . 
 = = = Ending = = = 
 The end credits depict the dramatic rescue of Captain Price from the Germans by a group of American soldiers . After the credits end , the words " No cows were harmed in the making of this game " appear , as in the original Call of Duty . This is a reference to the dead cattle visible in the Normandy missions . 
 = = Development = = 
 On April 7 , 2005 , Activision announced that Infinity Ward was developing Call of Duty 2 , set for release in Fall 2005 for PC . It had been speculated that Infinity Ward was developing the sequel at the same time as Gray Matter Interactive developed Call of Duty : United Offensive . Infinity Ward president Grant Collier said : 
 " Our team at Infinity Ward is committed to thrusting gamers into the heat of battle like no other , taking players on a thrill @-@ ride of adrenaline that leaves everyone gasping for air . In Call of Duty 2 , we are creating the most intense and realistic action game imaginable with a stunning visual atmosphere and an advanced technology that delivers an unprecedented level of authenticity " . 
 The press release said players would engage enemies in a less linear battlefield , tackle the major battles chronologically , and use squad tactics not available in previous Call of Duty games . Infinity Ward also confirmed making a " Battle <unk> System " , similar to Medal of Honor : Pacific Assault , where squad members converse to create situational awareness . 
 The game engine — proprietary IW engine 2 @.@ 0 — is a modified version of id Tech 3 , which was used in the first Call of Duty game . With the new game engine , Infinity Ward expanded the scope of combat to deliver a realistic battlefield experience and improved the visuals . The developers were able to cloud visibility with smoke from smoke grenades and create weather effects like dusty sandstorms and whiteout blizzard . 
 The game was known to " let players experience four individual soldier stories as they overcome insurmountable odds in multiple campaigns . Players have the freedom to follow each of the four storylines through for the ultimate character @-@ driven experience , or they can engage in the historic battles chronologically for quick hitting action . Squads now have the freedom to take on a variety of mission objectives , on expansive battlefields that allow for multiple paths and the ability to utilize actual combat tactics like outflanking and fire and maneuver capabilities " . 
 Call of Duty 2 was going to be more immersive than the original Call of Duty . Vince Zampella , creative director of Infinity Ward , said , " We didn 't want to take any of the parts out that made Call of Duty so good . But there were a couple of things that we admit could have been done better " . A demo of the game showed a more open gameplay style and a better AI for the enemies , who would actively go after the player . There are a set number of enemies set on the map that will begin reacting to the player 's presence once the first shot has been fired . Groups of enemies farther away send units up to see what is happening and add to the combat while enemies directly in front of the player will join in and take cover quickly . 
 Infinity Ward spent a lot of time on WWII battlefields , which led them to scrap whole levels for parts of the game that took place in France , since they found the location a lot different than what they imagined . 
 One of the details the team added are post @-@ war effects that continue on the battlefield throughout the game , where dust and smoke continue to roll through the streets , clouding up vision , and junk and debris scattered everywhere . The game has sound attenuation , with a 5 @.@ 1 surround sound system , and context sensitive dialog , with a total of twenty @-@ thousand lines of dialog . Each of the soldiers fighting alongside the player will call out the position of enemy soldiers , warn of flank attacks , and help out in ways that were not possible in the first game of the series . Zampella said , " We really wanted realistic battle chatter going that 's not only entertaining , but actually adds to the gaming experience . So now you 'll hear your guys telling you that there 's [ sic ] two guys hiding behind that rusty car in the street or that there are people on the second floor of a building " . 
 A small <unk> @-@ out grenade icon appears in the center of the screen when the player is near a grenade , with an arrow pointing in the direction of the grenade . Enemies can sometimes seem to be dead when they are not , where the enemy can still wield his side arm and fire at the player . 
 The game was showcased in E3 in 2005 and was announced as a launch title for the upcoming Xbox 360 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Call of Duty 2 was generally received well by reviewers . The graphics and sound were widely praised and the reactions to the regenerating health system were mostly positive , with reviewers from GameSpot and GamePro calling it an improvement over the previous health bar system . 
 For the Xbox 360 version , IGN 's Douglass C. Perry described the presentation as " classy and well @-@ produced " , and said the graphics were some of the best on the Xbox 360 at its launch . He called the sound effects " unbelievable " , whilst the gameplay was described as containing an " enormous amount of action " . GameSpot reviewer Bob Colayco summarized his review by stating that Call of Duty 2 has " smooth , detailed graphics and great sound " , as well as praising the artificial intelligence , realism , and variety in the campaign . GamePro called the game " breathtaking " , and commended the game for its " strikingly realistic detail on weapons and walls , emphasized by normal mapping , exceptional shading and lighting , specular highlights , and some absolutely phenomenal particle effects " . GameSpy editor Will Tuttle called it " One of the finest <unk> ever created . Thanks to a combination of sharp visuals , teeth @-@ rattling sound effects , and tricky enemy AI , you 'll be on the edge of your seat from the moment you 're dropped into combat until your dying breath " . 
 For the PC version , IGN editor Tom McNamara was impressed with the presentation and graphics , describing them as " Excellent " and " smooth " respectively . He also said the graphics did not suffer " from also being developed for the 360 " . McNamara also praised the sound , describing it as " sad music , encompassing battle noise , and excellent voice work " . Bob Colayco of GameSpot also reviewed the PC version of the game , as he did its Xbox 360 counterpart . Colayco again commended the sound , calling the presentation of the game " excellent " , as well as praising the aggression of the artificial intelligence . Unlike in his review of the Xbox 360 version , Colayco felt the multiplayer aspect was " fun " . His main critique was for performance , stating " performance can chug at times " . GameSpy 's Sal Accardo noted " Instead of feeling like a stale retread [ of the original Call of Duty ] or losing steam halfway through , it manages to be a blast from start to finish " . GamesRadar Joshua <unk> called the single @-@ player campaign " stunning " and cited that the multiplayer was even better . 
 Despite this praise , McNamara of IGN commented that he finds implementing regenerating health to be " a little troublesome " , and that it allows players to " experience a kind of combat only a mythical super @-@ soldier could withstand " which , therefore , " propels the game from gritty authenticity to John Woo fantasy " . GameSpot 's Colayco was critical of the game 's pricing , stating it had a " higher <unk> than its PC counterpart " . He also complained that the multiplayer aspect could only support eight players . For the PC version , his main critique was for performance , stating " performance can chug at times " . The PC version multiplayer was criticized as being a step back from that of Call of Duty : United Offensive . 
 Call of Duty 2 was the most popular launch title on the Xbox 360 , with 200 @,@ 000 units sold in its first week of availability . 77 % of people who purchased an Xbox 360 also purchased the game , which contributed to its high sales . As of July 2006 , 1 @.@ 4 million copies of the game had been sold on the Xbox 360 . By January 2008 , the game had sold 2 million copies . By November 2013 , the game had sold 5 @.@ 9 million copies . 
 = = Advertisement controversy = = 
 A television advertisement for Call of Duty 2 was the subject of some controversy in 2006 . The commercial , created by a Los Angeles animation studio Rhythm and Hues Studios , depicted a first @-@ person view of events that were supposed to transpire during the game , rather than scenes from the game itself . Some consumers felt that the advertisements were misleading , and in February 2006 the United Kingdom 's Advertising Standards Authority ( ASA ) demanded that networks remove the advertisements after three consumers filed complaints of false advertising . According to ASA spokesperson Donna Mitchell , " Viewers felt that the ad was misleading because the quality of graphics was superior to that of the game 's " . Activision denies that the scenes were meant to give an impression of gameplay , stating in a press release shortly after the ASA banning that " The footage was intended purely to communicate the subject matter of the game rather than to represent actual gameplay " . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 A collector 's edition of the game was released for Windows on October 25 , 2005 and for the Xbox 360 labeled as the " Special Edition " . It features the game and a bonus disc , which includes interviews , a making of the movie and two mission walkthroughs . On May 17 , 2006 , Activision announced a Game of the Year Edition for the Xbox 360 , which includes material from the Special Edition , plus a token to download the Skirmish Map Pack . In January 2006 , <unk> ( now Hands @-@ On Mobile ) released Call of Duty 2 for mobile phones . The mobile version is a 2D top @-@ down shooter . It received a favorable review from IGN , praising its length and storytelling . 
 = California Diamond Jubilee half dollar = 
 The California Diamond Jubilee half dollar was a United States commemorative fifty cent piece struck at the San Francisco Mint in 1925 . It was issued to celebrate the 75th anniversary of California statehood . 
 The San Francisco Citizens ' Committee wished to issue a commemorative coin as a fundraiser for a celebration of the statehood diamond jubilee . A California congressman attached authorization for it to another coinage bill , which was approved in early 1925 . Designs by sculptor Jo Mora met a hostile reception at the Commission of Fine Arts , but the Citizens ' Committee would not change them , and they were approved . The coin has been widely praised for its beauty in the years since . 
 The coins were struck in August 1925 in San Francisco , and were sold the following month . They did not sell as well as hoped : only some 150 @,@ 000 of the authorized mintage of 300 @,@ 000 were ever struck , and of that , nearly half went unsold and were melted . The coin is catalogued at between $ 200 and $ 1 @,@ 300 , though exceptional specimens have sold for more . 
 = = Background = = 
 The land that is now the state of California was first visited by Europeans when Spanish explorer Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo visited there in 1542 . His report to the Spanish crown garnered little interest , and it was not until the English seaman Sir Francis Drake touched there in 1579 that the Spanish were moved to colonize the area . Nevertheless , over the next 275 years , California saw few settlers , mostly around the chain of missions that were founded there , both under the Spanish , and subsequently under Mexican rule . 
 According to numismatic author Arnie Slabaugh , " the coming of American settlers brought two changes to California that continue to this day : immigrants ( both foreign and American ) and activity " . In 1846 , American settlers revolted against Mexican rule , founding the Bear Flag Republic ; its flag featured a grizzly bear . The republic proved short @-@ lived ; the Mexican @-@ American War had begun , and California was occupied by U.S. forces . A week before the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed in January 1848 , gold was discovered at Sutter 's Mill by James W. Marshall . The California Gold Rush followed , as did statehood for California in 1850 . 
 = = Inception = = 
 The California Diamond Jubilee half dollar originated with the desire of the San Francisco Citizens ' Committee ( Angelo J. Rossi , chairman ) , to have a commemorative half dollar to sell as a fundraiser for a local celebration in commemoration of the 75th anniversary of California statehood . On January 9 , 1925 , a bill was introduced in the Senate for a silver half dollar and gold dollar commemorating the Battle of Bennington and the American Revolutionary War @-@ period independence of Vermont . The bill passed the Senate after an amendment removed the gold dollar . When the bill was debated in the House of Representatives on February 16 , 1925 , California Congressman John E. Raker offered an amendment to add a coin for the 75th anniversary of California statehood . This was strongly opposed by Representative Albert Vestal , chairman of the House Committee on Coinage , Weights , and Measures , who stated that the Bureau of the Mint opposed making " these special coins " . He added that because of this , Washington Representative Albert Johnson had agreed to withdraw his bill for a commemorative honoring Fort Vancouver , in Washington state . Raker nevertheless persisted , and his amendment passed . Representative Johnson then offered an amendment to add a Fort Vancouver coin to the bill , and to Vestal 's chagrin , this also was adopted . The bill passed the House of Representatives , and the Senate agreed to the House amendments without debate on February 17 . 
 Treasury Secretary Andrew W. Mellon urged President Calvin Coolidge to veto the bill , writing : 
 The Federal Government is permitting its coinage system to be commercialized for the profit of any celebration , whether national in its scope or not ... I feel that even for an anniversary of national significance the Treasury should not be asked to debauch its currency system ... Each case is precedent for the next case , and we must draw some limit to the diversion of our currency from its legitimate purpose as a means of payment by the general public for its business transactions , to a means of profit to particular bodies . 
 Nevertheless , Coolidge signed the bill , which became the Act of February 24 , 1925 , authorizing all three coins . This was the first time commemorative coin legislation covered more than one issue . A total of 300 @,@ 000 for the California piece was authorized , with the coins to be drawn at face value on behalf of the Citizens ' Committee by the San Francisco Clearing House Association or the Los Angeles Clearing House Association . The latter group of banks had in 1923 distributed the Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 On May 4 , 1925 , Rossi sent a letter to Mint Director Robert J. Grant . Rossi noted that there had been some delay in the preparation of the design for the new half dollar , and that California Senator Samuel M. Shortridge had urged Rossi 's committee to move forward without delay . Rossi enclosed sketches by California sculptor Joseph ( Jo ) Mora , with the promise that a finished design , and a model , would follow . Citizens ' Committee members had selected Mora unanimously , feeling he was the one artist who could capture the spirit of what was being commemorated . 
 On receipt , the sketches and letter were forwarded to the Commission of Fine Arts , charged since 1921 with making recommendations on coinage design , and then to its sculptor member , James Earle Fraser , designer of the Buffalo nickel . Fraser wrote to Rossi on May 18 , deprecating the designs , " the bear is entirely too short , and the whole thing inexperienced and amateurish . " He recommended that Chester Beach ( credited with the design of the Monroe Doctrine coin ) or Robert I. Aitken ( who had created the Panama @-@ Pacific $ 50 pieces ) be hired , as both were from California and might create " something which would be far more interesting and with a bigger sense of what California really is " . 
 Despite Fraser 's recommendations , the Citizens ' Committee stayed with Mora , who quickly turned out the finished sketches . Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen , in their volume on U.S. commemorative coins , suggested that the Citizens ' Committee did not hire Beach or Aitken due to lack of time and an unwillingness to pay their large fees . The finished models were sent to the Philadelphia Mint on June 17 , and were forwarded to the Commission . By this time , Fraser was no longer a member of the Commission and they were sent to Lorado Taft , along with a note that the Citizens ' Committee had not hired Aitken due to the expense and that the new designs were little better than the old . However , both Taft and another member , Louis Ayres , recommended acceptance . Ayres did suggest " that ' In God We Trust ' be placed in some position where it does not seem as if the ' 49ers were frying it in oil " . Numismatic historian Don Taxay averred that this advice was not followed due to the lack of an alternative position in which to place the motto . 
 With the designs accepted , the Mint created working dies based on the plaster model in July 1925 . These were sent from Philadelphia to the San Francisco Mint , where 150 @,@ 000 coins were struck in August , plus 200 reserved for inspection and testing at the 1926 meeting of the United States Assay Commission . 
 = = Design = = 
 In creating the half dollar , Mora used motifs evoking California at the time of statehood in 1850 . The obverse depicts a Gold Rush @-@ era prospector , kneeling . He washes material with his pan , seeking bits of placer gold . The reverse adapts the Flag of California , known as the Bear Flag , showing a grizzly bear . Mora left the fields , or background , of the coin unpolished , giving the piece a textured look . 
 The California Diamond Jubilee half dollar has been widely admired . Swiatek deemed the coin " one of my favorite numismatic works of art " . According to coin dealer and author Q. David Bowers , " the Citizens ' Committee ... wisely ignored Fraser 's criticism " . Eric Brothers , in his 2014 article on the coin , wrote that it " embodied the quintessential imagery of California in the 1850s " . David M. <unk> , who studied commemorative coins on behalf of the American Numismatic Association in the 1930s , regarded it as " a very virile and well executed half dollar , in which obverse and reverse are definitely related to each other " . His contemporary , B. Max Mehl , wrote in 1937 that it was a " beautiful coin ... [ the ] obverse is a very fine piece of art " . Nevertheless , he mistook the animal on the reverse for a polar bear , and expressed puzzlement : " I have traveled and toured California from one end to the other and have never yet seen a bear " . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his volume on American coinage , deemed the California piece " one of America 's greatest works of numismatic coinage . " He considered the design bold and effective , and especially admired the animal , stating that the " muscles , bones , and tufts of fur express the massive determination of the bear . " He felt the lettering particularly successful , as two different sizes are used , and although all three phrases customary on American coinage are present ( " Liberty " , " In God We Trust " , and " E Pluribus Unum " ) , the " placing is so skillfully handled that it seems hard to realize all three ... inscriptions are used " . 
 = = Distribution and collecting = = 
 The first California Diamond Jubilee half dollar struck was given to the Memorial Museum in Golden Gate Park , San Francisco . The die used for the initial strikings was specially treated to produce a frosted or cameo effect , which wore down after the first approximately 75 strikings , according to Swiatek in his later volume on commemoratives . Numismatist Kevin Flynn suggests that the first 100 pieces exhibit these special surfaces , and that this was done at Rossi 's request for presentation to VIPs . One piece is known without a mint mark ; this was most likely a trial piece , prepared and owned by Mint Chief Engraver John R. Sinnock and later sold from his estate . 
 At least one half dollar must have left the San Francisco Mint by August 26 , 1925 as one was shown at a meeting of the Pacific Coast Numismatic Society on that day . Children born on the 75th anniversary of California statehood ( September 9 , 1925 ) in that state were given one of the half dollars , a total of 494 . A few pieces were mounted in badges used by officials . Many were sold at a celebration in San Francisco from September 6 to 12 in commemoration of that jubilee . Although thousands were purchased by coin collectors and dealers , the bulk are believed to have gone to non @-@ collectors . According to Bowers , " distribution efforts were not particularly well coordinated " and 63 @,@ 606 pieces were returned to the Mint for melting , leaving a total of 86 @,@ 594 pieces distributed to the public , including the assay coins . 
 The half dollar has gradually risen in price over the years , with the only setbacks being the price declines following the commemorative coin booms of 1936 and 1980 . The 2015 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins lists it at between $ 200 and $ 1 @,@ 300 , depending on condition . One , in exceptional MS @-@ 68 condition , brought $ 17 @,@ 250 at auction in 2009 . 
 = The Autobiography of Malcolm X = 
 The Autobiography of Malcolm X was published in 1965 , the result of a collaboration between human rights activist Malcolm X and journalist Alex Haley . Haley coauthored the autobiography based on a series of in @-@ depth interviews he conducted between 1963 and Malcolm X 's 1965 assassination . The Autobiography is a spiritual conversion narrative that outlines Malcolm X 's philosophy of black pride , black nationalism , and pan @-@ Africanism . After the leader was killed , Haley wrote the book 's epilogue . He described their collaborative process and the events at the end of Malcolm X 's life . 
 While Malcolm X and scholars contemporary to the book 's publication regarded Haley as the book 's ghostwriter , modern scholars tend to regard him as an essential collaborator . They say he intentionally muted his authorial voice to create the effect of Malcolm X speaking directly to readers . Haley influenced some of Malcolm X 's literary choices . For example , Malcolm X left the Nation of Islam during the period when he was working on the book with Haley . Rather than rewriting earlier chapters as a polemic against the Nation which Malcolm X had rejected , Haley persuaded him to favor a style of " suspense and drama . " According to Manning Marable , " Haley was particularly worried about what he viewed as Malcolm X 's anti @-@ Semitism " and he rewrote material to eliminate it . 
 When the Autobiography was published , the New York Times reviewer described it as a " brilliant , painful , important book " . In 1967 , historian John William Ward wrote that it would become a classic American autobiography . In 1998 , Time named The Autobiography of Malcolm X as one of ten " required reading " nonfiction books . James Baldwin and Arnold Perl adapted the book as a film ; their screenplay provided the source material for Spike Lee 's 1992 film Malcolm X. 
 = = Summary = = 
 Published posthumously , The Autobiography of Malcolm X is an account of the life of Malcolm X , born Malcolm Little ( 1925 – 1965 ) , who became a human rights activist . Beginning with his mother 's pregnancy , the book describes Malcolm 's childhood in Michigan , the death of his father under questionable circumstances , and his mother 's deteriorating mental health that resulted in her commitment to a psychiatric hospital . Little 's young adulthood in Boston and New York City is covered , as well as his involvement in organized crime . This led to his arrest and subsequent eight- to ten @-@ year prison sentence , of which he served six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years ( 1946 – 1952 ) . The book addresses his ministry with Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam ( 1952 – 1963 ) and his emergence as the organization 's national spokesman . It documents his disillusionment with and departure from the Nation of Islam in March 1964 , his pilgrimage to Mecca , which catalyzed his conversion to orthodox Sunni Islam , and his travels in Africa . Malcolm X was assassinated in New York 's Audubon Ballroom in February 1965 , before they finished the book . His co @-@ author , journalist Alex Haley , summarizes the last days of Malcolm X 's life , and describes in detail their working agreement , including Haley 's personal views on his subject , in the Autobiography 's epilogue . 
 = = Genre = = 
 The Autobiography is a spiritual conversion narrative that outlines Malcolm X 's philosophy of black pride , black nationalism , and pan @-@ Africanism . Literary critic Arnold Rampersad and Malcolm X biographer Michael Eric Dyson agree that the narrative of the Autobiography resembles the Augustinian approach to confessional narrative . Augustine 's Confessions and The Autobiography of Malcolm X both relate the early hedonistic lives of their subjects , document deep philosophical change for spiritual reasons , and describe later disillusionment with religious groups their subjects had once revered . Haley and autobiographical scholar Albert E. Stone compare the narrative to the Icarus myth . Author Paul John Eakin and writer Alex Gillespie suggest that part of the Autobiography 's rhetorical power comes from " the vision of a man whose swiftly unfolding career had outstripped the possibilities of the traditional autobiography he had meant to write " , thus destroying " the illusion of the finished and unified personality " . 
 In addition to functioning as a spiritual conversion narrative , The Autobiography of Malcolm X also reflects generic elements from other distinctly American literary forms , from the Puritan conversion narrative of Jonathan Edwards and the secular self @-@ analyses of Benjamin Franklin , to the African American slave narratives . This aesthetic decision on the part of Malcolm X and Haley also has profound implications for the thematic content of the work , as the progressive movement between forms that is evidenced in the text reflects the personal progression of its subject . Considering this , the editors of the Norton Anthology of African American Literature assert that , " Malcolm 's Autobiography takes pains to interrogate the very models through which his persona achieves gradual self @-@ understanding ... his story 's inner logic defines his life as a quest for an authentic mode of being , a quest that demands a constant openness to new ideas requiring fresh kinds of expression . " 
 = = Construction = = 
 Haley coauthored The Autobiography of Malcolm X , and also performed the basic functions of a ghostwriter and biographical amanuensis , writing , compiling , and editing the Autobiography based on more than 50 in @-@ depth interviews he conducted with Malcolm X between 1963 and his subject 's 1965 assassination . The two first met in 1959 , when Haley wrote an article about the Nation of Islam for Reader 's Digest , and again when Haley interviewed Malcolm X for Playboy in 1962 . 
 In 1963 the Doubleday publishing company asked Haley to write a book about the life of Malcolm X. American writer and literary critic Harold Bloom writes , " When Haley approached Malcolm with the idea , Malcolm gave him a startled look ... " Haley recalls , " It was one of the few times I have ever seen him uncertain . " After Malcolm X was granted permission from Elijah Muhammad , he and Haley commenced work on the Autobiography , a process which began as two @-@ and three @-@ hour interview sessions at Haley 's studio in Greenwich Village . Bloom writes , " Malcolm was critical of Haley 's middle @-@ class status , as well as his Christian beliefs and twenty years of service in the U.S. Military . " 
 When work on the Autobiography began in early 1963 , Haley grew frustrated with Malcolm X 's tendency to speak only about Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam . Haley reminded him that the book was supposed to be about Malcolm X , not Muhammad or the Nation of Islam , a comment which angered Malcolm X. Haley eventually shifted the focus of the interviews toward the life of his subject when he asked Malcolm X about his mother : 
 I said , ' Mr. Malcolm , could you tell me something about your mother ? ' And I will never , ever forget how he stopped almost as if he was suspended like a marionette . And he said , ' I remember the kind of dresses she used to wear . They were old and faded and gray . ' And then he walked some more . And he said , ' I remember how she was always bent over the stove , trying to stretch what little we had . ' And that was the beginning , that night , of his walk . And he walked that floor until just about daybreak . 
 Though Haley is ostensibly a ghostwriter on the Autobiography , modern scholars tend to treat him as an essential and core collaborator who acted as an invisible figure in the composition of the work . He minimized his own voice , and signed a contract to limit his authorial discretion in favor of producing what looked like verbatim copy . However , Malcolm X biographer Manning Marable considers this view of Haley as simply a ghostwriter as a deliberate narrative construction of black scholars of the day who wanted to see the book as a singular creation of a dynamic leader and martyr . Marable argues that a critical analysis of the Autobiography , or the full relationship between Malcolm X and Haley , does not support this view ; he describes it instead as a collaboration . 
 Haley 's contribution to the work is notable , and several scholars discuss how it should be characterized . In a view shared by Eakin , Stone and Dyson , <unk> writer Eugene Victor Wolfenstein writes that Haley performed the duties of a quasi @-@ psychoanalytic Freudian psychiatrist and spiritual confessor . Gillespie suggests , and Wolfenstein agrees , that the act of self @-@ narration was itself a transformative process that spurred significant introspection and personal change in the life of its subject . 
 Haley exercised discretion over content , guided Malcolm X in critical stylistic and rhetorical choices , and compiled the work . In the epilogue to the Autobiography , Haley describes an agreement he made with Malcolm X , who demanded that : " Nothing can be in this book 's manuscript that I didn 't say and nothing can be left out that I want in it . " As such , Haley wrote an addendum to the contract specifically referring to the book as an " as told to " account . In the agreement , Haley gained an " important concession " : " I asked for — and he gave — his permission that at the end of the book I could write comments of my own about him which would not be subject to his review . " These comments became the epilogue to the Autobiography , which Haley wrote after the death of his subject . 
 = = = Narrative presentation = = = 
 In " Malcolm X : The Art of Autobiography " , writer and professor John Edgar Wideman examines in detail the narrative landscapes found in biography . Wideman suggests that as a writer , Haley was attempting to satisfy " multiple allegiances " : to his subject , to his publisher , to his " editor 's agenda " , and to himself . Haley was an important contributor to the Autobiography 's popular appeal , writes Wideman . Wideman expounds upon the " inevitable compromise " of biographers , and argues that in order to allow readers to insert themselves into the broader socio @-@ psychological narrative , neither coauthor 's voice is as strong as it could have been . Wideman details some of the specific pitfalls Haley encountered while <unk> the Autobiography : 
 You are serving many masters , and inevitably you are compromised . The man speaks and you listen but you do not take notes , the first compromise and perhaps betrayal . You may attempt through various stylistic conventions and devices to reconstitute for the reader your experience of hearing face to face the man 's words . The sound of the man 's narration may be represented by vocabulary , syntax , imagery , graphic devices of various sorts — quotation marks , punctuation , line breaks , visual patterning of white space and black space , markers that encode print analogs to speech — vernacular interjections , parentheses , ellipses , asterisks , footnotes , italics , dashes .... 
 In the body of the Autobiography , Wideman writes , Haley 's authorial agency is seemingly absent : " Haley does so much with so little fuss ... an approach that appears so rudimentary in fact conceals sophisticated choices , quiet mastery of a medium " . Wideman argues that Haley wrote the body of the Autobiography in a manner of Malcolm X 's choosing and the epilogue as an extension of the biography itself , his subject having given him carte blanche for the chapter . Haley 's voice in the body of the book is a tactic , Wideman writes , producing a text nominally written by Malcolm X but seemingly written by no author . The <unk> of Haley 's own voice in the narrative allows the reader to feel as though the voice of Malcolm X is speaking directly and continuously , a stylistic tactic that , in Wideman 's view , was a matter of Haley 's authorial choice : " Haley grants Malcolm the tyrannical authority of an author , a disembodied speaker whose implied presence blends into the reader 's imagining of the tale being told . " 
 In " Two Create One : The Act of Collaboration in Recent Black Autobiography : Ossie <unk> , Nate Shaw , and Malcolm X " , Stone argues that Haley played an " essential role " in " recovering the historical identity " of Malcolm X. Stone also reminds the reader that collaboration is a cooperative endeavor , requiring more than Haley 's prose alone can provide , " convincing and coherent " as it may be : 
 Though a writer 's skill and imagination have combined words and voice into a more or less convincing and coherent narrative , the actual writer [ Haley ] has no large fund of memories to draw upon : the subject 's [ Malcolm X ] memory and imagination are the original sources of the arranged story and have also come into play critically as the text takes final shape . Thus where material comes from , and what has been done to it are separable and of equal significance in collaborations . 
 In Stone 's estimation , supported by Wideman , the source of autobiographical material and the efforts made to shape them into a workable narrative are distinct , and of equal value in a critical assessment of the collaboration that produced the Autobiography . While Haley 's skills as writer have significant influence on the narrative 's shape , Stone writes , they require a " subject possessed of a powerful memory and imagination " to produce a workable narrative . 
 = = = Collaboration between Malcolm X and Haley = = = 
 The collaboration between Malcolm X and Haley took on many dimensions ; editing , revising and composing the Autobiography was a power struggle between two men with sometimes competing ideas of the final shape for the book . Haley " took pains to show how Malcolm dominated their relationship and tried to control the composition of the book " , writes Rampersad . Rampersad also writes that Haley was aware that memory is selective and that autobiographies are " almost by definition projects in fiction " , and that it was his responsibility as biographer to select material based on his authorial discretion . The narrative shape crafted by Haley and Malcolm X is the result of a life account " distorted and diminished " by the " process of selection " , Rampersad suggests , yet the narrative 's shape may in actuality be more revealing than the narrative itself . In the epilogue Haley describes the process used to edit the manuscript , giving specific examples of how Malcolm X controlled the language . 
 While Haley ultimately deferred to Malcolm X 's specific choice of words when composing the manuscript , Wideman writes , " the nature of writing biography or autobiography ... means that Haley 's promise to Malcolm , his intent to be a ' dispassionate chronicler ' , is a matter of disguising , not removing , his authorial presence . " Haley played an important role in persuading Malcolm X not to re @-@ edit the book as a polemic against Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam at a time when Haley already had most of the material needed to complete the book , and asserted his authorial agency when the Autobiography 's " fractured construction " , caused by Malcolm X 's rift with Elijah Muhammad and the Nation of Islam , " overturned the design " of the manuscript and created a narrative crisis . In the Autobiography 's epilogue , Haley describes the incident : 
 I sent Malcolm X some rough chapters to read . I was appalled when they were soon returned , red @-@ inked in many places where he had told of his almost father @-@ and @-@ son relationship with Elijah Muhammad . <unk> Malcolm X , I reminded him of his previous decisions , and I stressed that if those chapters contained such telegraphing to readers of what was to lie ahead , then the book would automatically be robbed of some of its building suspense and drama . Malcolm X said , gruffly , ' Whose book is this ? ' I told him ' yours , of course , ' and that I only made the objection in my position as a writer . But late that night Malcolm X telephoned . ' I 'm sorry . You 're right . I was upset about something . Forget what I wanted changed , let what you already had stand . ' I never again gave him chapters to review unless I was with him . Several times I would covertly watch him frown and wince as he read , but he never again asked for any change in what he had originally said . 
 Haley 's warning to avoid " telegraphing to readers " and his advice about " building suspense and drama " demonstrate his efforts to influence the narrative 's content and assert his authorial agency while ultimately deferring final discretion to Malcolm X. In the above passage Haley asserts his authorial presence , reminding his subject that as a writer he has concerns about narrative direction and focus , but presenting himself in such a way as to give no doubt that he deferred final approval to his subject . In the words of Eakin , " Because this complex vision of his existence is clearly not that of the early sections of the Autobiography , Alex Haley and Malcolm X were forced to confront the consequences of this discontinuity in perspective for the narrative , already a year old . " Malcolm X , after giving the matter some thought , later accepted Haley 's suggestion . 
 While Marable argues that Malcolm X was his own best revisionist , he also points out that Haley 's collaborative role in shaping the Autobiography was notable . Haley influenced the narrative 's direction and tone while remaining faithful to his subject 's syntax and diction . Marable writes that Haley worked " hundreds of sentences into paragraphs " , and organized them into " subject areas " . Author William L. Andrews writes : 
 [ T ] he narrative evolved out of Haley 's interviews with Malcolm , but Malcolm had read Haley 's typescript , and had made <unk> notes and often stipulated substantive changes , at least in the earlier parts of the text . As the work progressed , however , according to Haley , Malcolm yielded more and more to the authority of his ghostwriter , partly because Haley never let Malcolm read the manuscript unless he was present to defend it , partly because in his last months Malcolm had less and less opportunity to reflect on the text of his life because he was so busy living it , and partly because Malcolm had eventually resigned himself to letting Haley 's ideas about effective storytelling take precedence over his own desire to denounce straightaway those whom he had once revered . 
 Andrews suggests that Haley 's role expanded because the book 's subject became less available to micro @-@ manage the manuscript , and " Malcolm had eventually resigned himself " to allowing " Haley 's ideas about effective storytelling " to shape the narrative . 
 Marable studied the Autobiography manuscript " raw materials " archived by Haley 's biographer , Anne Romaine , and described a critical element of the collaboration , Haley 's writing tactic to capture the voice of his subject accurately , a disjoint system of data mining that included notes on scrap paper , in @-@ depth interviews , and long " free style " discussions . Marable writes , " Malcolm also had a habit of scribbling notes to himself as he spoke . " Haley would secretly " pocket these sketchy notes " and reassemble them in a sub rosa attempt to integrate Malcolm X 's " subconscious reflections " into the " workable narrative " . This is an example of Haley asserting authorial agency during the writing of the Autobiography , indicating that their relationship was fraught with minor power struggles . Wideman and Rampersad agree with Marable 's description of Haley 's book @-@ writing process . 
 The timing of the collaboration meant that Haley occupied an advantageous position to document the multiple conversion experiences of Malcolm X and his challenge was to form them , however incongruent , into a cohesive workable narrative . Dyson suggests that " profound personal , intellectual , and ideological changes ... led him to order events of his life to support a mythology of metamorphosis and transformation " . Marable addresses the confounding factors of the publisher and Haley 's authorial influence , passages that support the argument that while Malcolm X may have considered Haley a ghostwriter , he acted in actuality as a coauthor , at times without Malcolm X 's direct knowledge or expressed consent : 
 Although Malcolm X retained final approval of their hybrid text , he was not privy to the actual editorial processes superimposed from Haley 's side . The Library of Congress held the answers . This collection includes the papers of Doubleday 's then @-@ executive editor , Kenneth McCormick , who had worked closely with Haley for several years as the Autobiography had been constructed . As in the Romaine papers , I found more evidence of Haley 's sometimes @-@ weekly private commentary with McCormick about the laborious process of composing the book . They also revealed how several attorneys retained by Doubleday closely monitored and vetted entire sections of the controversial text in 1964 , demanding numerous name changes , the reworking and deletion of blocks of paragraphs , and so forth . In late 1963 , Haley was particularly worried about what he viewed as Malcolm X 's anti @-@ Semitism . He therefore rewrote material to eliminate a number of negative statements about Jews in the book manuscript , with the explicit covert goal of ' getting them past Malcolm X , ' without his coauthor 's knowledge or consent . Thus , the censorship of Malcolm X had begun well prior to his assassination . 
 Marable says the resulting text was stylistically and ideologically distinct from what Marable believes Malcolm X would have written without Haley 's influence , and it also differs from what may have actually been said in the interviews between Haley and Malcolm X. 
 = = = Myth @-@ making = = = 
 In Making Malcolm : The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X , Dyson criticizes historians and biographers of the time for re @-@ purposing the Autobiography as a transcendent narrative by a " mythological " Malcolm X without being critical enough of the underlying ideas . Further , because much of the available biographical studies of Malcolm X have been written by white authors , Dyson suggests their ability to " interpret black experience " is suspect . The Autobiography of Malcolm X , Dyson says , reflects both Malcolm X 's goal of narrating his life story for public consumption and Haley 's political ideologies . Dyson writes , " The Autobiography of Malcolm X ... has been criticized for avoiding or distorting certain facts . Indeed , the autobiography is as much a testament to Haley 's ingenuity in shaping the manuscript as it is a record of Malcolm 's attempt to tell his story . " 
 Rampersad suggests that Haley understood autobiographies as " almost fiction " . In " The Color of His Eyes : Bruce Perry 's Malcolm and Malcolm 's Malcolm " , Rampersad criticizes Perry 's biography , Malcolm : The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America , and makes the general point that the writing of the Autobiography is part of the narrative of blackness in the 20th century and consequently should " not be held utterly beyond inquiry " . To Rampersad , the Autobiography is about psychology , ideology , a conversion narrative , and the myth @-@ making process . " Malcolm inscribed in it the terms of his understanding of the form even as the unstable , even treacherous form concealed and distorted particular aspects of his quest . But there is no Malcolm untouched by doubt or fiction . Malcolm 's Malcolm is in itself a fabrication ; the ' truth ' about him is impossible to know . " Rampersad suggests that since his 1965 assassination , Malcolm X has " become the desires of his admirers , who have reshaped memory , historical record and the autobiography according to their wishes , which is to say , according to their needs as they perceive them . " Further , Rampersad says , many admirers of Malcolm X perceive " accomplished and admirable " figures like Martin Luther King , Jr . , and W. E. B. Du Bois inadequate to fully express black humanity as it struggles with oppression , " while Malcolm is seen as the apotheosis of black individual greatness ... he is a perfect hero — his wisdom is surpassing , his courage definitive , his sacrifice messianic " . Rampersad suggests that devotees have helped shape the myth of Malcolm X. 
 Author Joe Wood writes : 
 [ T ] he autobiography <unk> Malcolm twice , not once . Its second Malcolm — the El @-@ Hajj Malik El @-@ Shabazz finale — is a mask with no distinct ideology , it is not particularly Islamic , not particularly nationalist , not particularly humanist . Like any well crafted icon or story , the mask is evidence of its subject 's humanity , of Malcolm 's strong human spirit . But both masks hide as much character as they show . The first mask served a nationalism Malcolm had rejected before the book was finished ; the second is mostly empty and available . 
 To Eakin , a significant portion of the Autobiography involves Haley and Malcolm X shaping the fiction of the completed self . Stone writes that Haley 's description of the Autobiography 's composition makes clear that this fiction is " especially misleading in the case of Malcolm X " ; both Haley and the Autobiography itself are " out of phase " with its subject 's " life and identity " . Dyson writes , " [ Louis ] Lomax says that Malcolm became a ' lukewarm integrationist ' . [ Peter ] Goldman suggests that Malcolm was ' improvising ' , that he embraced and discarded ideological options as he went along . [ Albert ] <unk> and [ Oba ] T <unk> hold that he remained a revolutionary black nationalist . And [ James Hal ] Cone asserts that he became an internationalist with a humanist bent . " Marable writes that Malcolm X was a " committed internationalist " and " black nationalist " at the end of his life , not an " integrationist " , noting , " what I find in my own research is greater continuity than discontinuity " . 
 Marable , in " Rediscovering Malcolm 's Life : A Historian 's Adventures in Living History " , critically analyzes the collaboration that produced the Autobiography . Marable argues autobiographical " memoirs " are " inherently biased " , representing the subject as he would appear with certain facts privileged , others deliberately omitted . Autobiographical narratives self @-@ censor , reorder event chronology , and alter names . According to Marable , " nearly everyone writing about Malcolm X " has failed to critically and objectively analyze and research the subject properly . Marable suggests that most historians have assumed that the Autobiography is veritable truth , devoid of any ideological influence or stylistic embellishment by Malcolm X or Haley . Further , Marable believes the " most talented revisionist of Malcolm X , was Malcolm X " , who actively fashioned and reinvented his public image and verbiage so as to increase favor with diverse groups of people in various situations . 
 Haley writes that during the last months of Malcolm X 's life " uncertainty and confusion " about his views were widespread in Harlem , his base of operations . In an interview four days before his death Malcolm X said , " I 'm man enough to tell you that I can 't put my finger on exactly what my philosophy is now , but I 'm flexible . " Malcolm X had not yet formulated a cohesive Black ideology at the time of his assassination and , Dyson writes , was " experiencing a radical shift " in his core " personal and political understandings " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Eliot Fremont @-@ Smith , reviewing The Autobiography of Malcolm X for The New York Times in 1965 , describes it as " extraordinary " and says it is a " brilliant , painful , important book " . Two years later , historian John William Ward writes that the book " will surely become one of the classics in American autobiography " . Bayard Rustin argues the book suffered from a lack of critical analysis , which he attributes to Malcolm X 's expectation that Haley be a " chronicler , not an interpreter . " Newsweek also highlights the limited insight and criticism in The Autobiography but praises it for power and poignance . However , Truman Nelson in The Nation lauds the epilogue as revelatory and describes Haley as a " skillful amanuensis " . Variety calls it a " mesmerizing page @-@ turner " in 1992 , and in 1998 , Time names The Autobiography of Malcolm X one of ten " required reading " nonfiction books . 
 The Autobiography of Malcolm X has influenced generations of readers . In 1990 , Charles Solomon writes in the Los Angeles Times , " Unlike many ' 60s icons , The Autobiography of Malcolm X , with its double message of anger and love , remains an inspiring document . " Cultural historian Howard Bruce Franklin describes it as " one of the most influential books in late @-@ twentieth @-@ century American culture " , and the Concise Oxford Companion to African American Literature credits Haley with shaping " what has undoubtedly become the most influential twentieth @-@ century African American autobiography " . 
 Considering the literary impact of Malcolm X 's Autobiography , we may note the tremendous influence of the book , as well as its subject generally , on the development of the Black Arts Movement . Indeed , it was the day after Malcolm 's assassination that the poet and playwright , Amiri Baraka , established the Black Arts Repertory Theater , which would serve to catalyze the aesthetic progression of the movement . Writers and thinkers associated with the Black Arts movement found in the Autobiography an aesthetic embodiment of his profoundly influential qualities , namely , " the vibrancy of his public voice , the clarity of his analyses of oppression 's hidden history and inner logic , the fearlessness of his opposition to white supremacy , and the unconstrained ardor of his advocacy for revolution ' by any means necessary . ' " 
 bell hooks writes " When I was a young college student in the early seventies , the book I read which revolutionized my thinking about race and politics was The Autobiography of Malcolm X. " David Bradley adds : 
 She [ hooks ] is not alone . Ask any middle @-@ aged socially conscious intellectual to list the books that influenced his or her youthful thinking , and he or she will most likely mention The Autobiography of Malcolm X. Some will do more than mention it . Some will say that ... they picked it up — by accident , or maybe by assignment , or because a friend pressed it on them — and that they approached the reading of it without great expectations , but somehow that book ... took hold of them . Got inside them . Altered their vision , their outlook , their insight . Changed their lives . 
 Max <unk> concurs , writing that " The Autobiography of Malcolm X was without question the single most widely read and influential book among young people of all racial backgrounds who went to their first demonstration sometime between 1965 and 1968 . " 
 At the end of his tenure as the first African @-@ American U.S. Attorney General , Eric Holder selected The Autobiography of Malcolm X when asked what book he would recommend to a young person coming to Washington , D.C. 
 = = = Publication and sales = = = 
 Doubleday had contracted to publish The Autobiography of Malcolm X and paid a $ 30 @,@ 000 advance to Malcolm X and Haley in 1963 . In March 1965 , three weeks after Malcolm X 's assassination , Nelson Doubleday , Jr . , canceled its contract out of fear for the safety of his employees . Grove Press then published the book later that year . Since The Autobiography of Malcolm X has sold millions of copies , Marable described Doubleday 's choice as the " most disastrous decision in corporate publishing history " . 
 The Autobiography of Malcolm X has sold well since its 1965 publication . According to The New York Times , the paperback edition sold 400 @,@ 000 copies in 1967 and 800 @,@ 000 copies the following year . The Autobiography entered its 18th printing by 1970 . The New York Times reported that six million copies of the book had been sold by 1977 . The book experienced increased readership and returned to the best @-@ seller list in the 1990s , helped in part by the publicity surrounding Spike Lee 's 1992 film Malcolm X. Between 1989 and 1992 , sales of the book increased by 300 % . 
 = = = Screenplay adaptations = = = 
 In 1968 film producer Marvin Worth hired novelist James Baldwin to write a screenplay based on The Autobiography of Malcolm X ; Baldwin was joined by screenwriter Arnold Perl , who died in 1971 before the screenplay could be finished . Baldwin developed his work on the screenplay into the book One Day , When I Was Lost : A Scenario Based on Alex Haley 's " The Autobiography of Malcolm X " , published in 1972 . Other authors who attempted to draft screenplays include playwright David Mamet , novelist David Bradley , author Charles Fuller , and screenwriter Calder Willingham . Director Spike Lee revised the Baldwin @-@ Perl script for his 1992 film Malcolm X. 
 = = = Missing chapters = = = 
 In 1992 , attorney Gregory Reed bought the original manuscripts of The Autobiography of Malcolm X for $ 100 @,@ 000 at the sale of the Haley Estate . The manuscripts included three " missing chapters " , titled " The Negro " , " The End of Christianity " , and " Twenty Million Black Muslims " , that were omitted from the original text . In a 1964 letter to his publisher , Haley had described these chapters as , " the most impact [ sic ] material of the book , some of it rather lava @-@ like " . Marable writes that the missing chapters were " dictated and written " during Malcolm X 's final months in the Nation of Islam . In them , Marable says , Malcolm X proposed the establishment of a union of African American civic and political organizations . Marable wonders whether this project might have led some within the Nation of Islam and the Federal Bureau of Investigation to try to silence Malcolm X. In April 2010 , the New York Post reported that the missing chapters would be published with a foreword by Malcolm X 's daughter Ilyasah Shabazz . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 The book has been published in more than 45 editions and in many languages , including Arabic , German , French , Indonesian . Important editions include : 
 = Gypsy Restaurant and Velvet Lounge = 
 The Gypsy Restaurant and Velvet Lounge was a restaurant and nightclub established in 1947 and located along Northwest 21st Avenue in the Northwest District neighborhood of Portland , Oregon , in the United States . Popular with young adults , the restaurant was known for serving fishbowl alcoholic beverages , for its 1950s furnishings , and for hosting karaoke , trivia competitions and goldfish racing tournaments . The restaurant is said to have influenced local alcohol policies ; noise complaints and signs of drunken behavior by patrons made the business a target for curfews and closure . Concept Entertainment owned the restaurant from 1992 until 2014 , when it was closed unexpectedly . 
 = = Description = = 
 Located at 625 Northwest 21st Avenue in the Nob Hill area of Portland 's Northwest District neighborhood , Gypsy was a " boisterous " , " disco @-@ balled " dive bar , recognizable by its bouncers , karaoke , and " wobbling smokers " . The Portland Mercury said the restaurant was a " kinda retro @-@ y bar ... popular with a young college @-@ y , <unk> ' , party crowd " . One Portland resident described the club as " the kind of place where you can go with your sophisticated friends and look at the Daddy @-@ O decor . Or you can go on a date and snuggle in a corner where the lighting is low . And if you want to meet new people you can stroll through there and see people whose faces you 've never seen before , which is a rare thing in Portland . " 
 The interior featured 1950s furnishings and " pinball @-@ panel " wall decorations . In 1963 , The Oregonian described the artwork on the interior walls , which included a large and colorful painting depicting a gypsy camp , and an " attractive " nude called Dian by Grace Harlow , a painter and former student of Louis Bunce . The venue also featured " mottled " iridescent red windows that were translucent , could seat 150 guests , and included a banquet area . 
 Gypsy was also known for serving fishbowl alcoholic beverages , and in its final years , for hosting goldfish racing tournaments . The restaurant served soup , sandwiches , and full entrees . Karaoke was available beginning at 9 pm on Tuesday through Saturday evenings . 
 = = History = = 
 Gypsy Restaurant and Lounge was established in 1947 and was originally located at 612 Northwest 21st Avenue . In 1948 , The Oregonian published an advertisement for business , promoting an eight @-@ course dinner for $ 1 @.@ 25 , between the hours of 4 pm and 3 am . The restaurant 's location was described as " next to 21st Avenue Theater " , between Northwest Hoyt and Irving Streets . In 1955 , the paper reported that $ 1 @,@ 000 was stolen from an unlocked safe stored at the Gypsy Restaurant . In 1963 , the restaurant and lounge moved to its final location , at the intersection of Northwest 21st Avenue and Hoyt Street , across from Cinema 21 . On opening night , the " New Gypsy " restaurant reportedly played songs by Frank Fontaine . 
 According to a 1973 Oregonian obituary , Gypsy Restaurant was then owned and operated by Stacy <unk> . An obituary published by The Oregonian in 1987 said that Gertrude " Tiny " <unk> of Lake Oswego co @-@ owned Gypsy and Gordon 's 7 @-@ Up Bar , also located in Northwest Portland . John <unk> continued to own and operate the restaurant until the early 1990s ; he died in 1999 . 
 Ownership of Gypsy transferred to Concept Entertainment in 1992 . The company has owned other Portland establishments such as Bar 71 , Barracuda Nightclub , Dixie Tavern , Grand Central Bowl , the Lotus <unk> and Cafe , Quest , and the Thirsty Lion . According to Willamette Week , the restaurant had an " odd " influence on local alcohol policies . In 1994 , city commissioner Charlie Hales and mayor Vera Katz sought to close the Gypsy due to repeated reports of assaults , public intoxication , and noise complaints . However , the Oregon Liquor Control Commission ( OLCC ) refused . In 2013 , when Hales was the mayor of Portland , he unsuccessfully requested that the OLCC enforce a 10 pm curfew for bar patios within the Portland city limits . 
 In 2007 , Gypsy was one of several Portland sites depicted in " Virtual Portland " , a three @-@ dimensional computer @-@ generated simulation of the city , designed for Second Life . In May 2013 , a tree limb fell and damaged the restaurant . 
 After operating for more than twenty years , and despite having advertised future events at the club , the business closed abruptly on February 20 , 2014 . Its website and social media pages were shut down immediately , and a sign was posted at the club noting that Concept Entertainment had decided to sell . The space that Gypsy had occupied was immediately available for long @-@ term lease , with furniture included . 
 = = Events = = 
 Gypsy hosted a variety of musical acts and events throughout its history , including trivia competitions and rock band karaoke , featuring a live backing band . In 1985 , the Chris Conrad Quartet performed in the " Rhythm Room " . In 2000 , Gypsy hosted opening and closing night parties for Sensory Perceptions ' annual film festival , which spanned two weekends at neighboring Cinema 21 . Nearly twenty years after the death of Andy Warhol , the Gypsy held a birthday party in his honor in 2006 . One Oregonian contributor called Gypsy a " fitting setting " for the celebration , given its lava lamps and blue and orange fishbowl drinks , which he said were " like Pop art through a straw " . Gypsy partnered with Cinema 21 in 2009 when the theater hosted " Can 't Stop the Serenity " , a benefit for Equality Now that included two screenings of the film Serenity ( 2005 ) . Festivities included a costume contest , pub quiz , and Dr. Horrible 's Sing @-@ Along Blog karaoke . Pub Quiz USA hosted an " All ' Lost ' Trivia Night " at the Gypsy in 2010 for fans of the television program Lost . Gypsy often screened episodes of Mad Men , the American television series set in the 1960s , and pay @-@ per @-@ view Ultimate Fighting Championship matches . 
 In an attempt to offer " something different and exciting to do " , Gypsy began hosting goldfish racing tournaments in 2010 . A chef who worked at Gypsy proposed hosting the tournaments after seeing videos of fish racing online . Two other establishments owned by Concept Entertainment also hosted goldfish races . Gypsy 's cross @-@ shaped track was 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) long and " tricked out with fancy runway lights " . The tournaments prompted criticism by a local veterinarian and a spokesperson for the Oregon Humane Society , who suggested they " may skirt the line of the humane society 's guiding principle , which is to not inflict pain and suffering on animals for enjoyment " . The spokesperson also said , " I do wish people could find different ways to entertain themselves . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2009 , The NW Examiner included Gypsy in an article about happy hours in Northwest Portland . In her review , Desiree Andrews wrote that the fried artichoke hearts and pub chips were forgettable and recommended the black bean <unk> . She said , " Overall , the atmosphere was a little too much like a Big Lebowski hallucination for me , and the food triggered clogged @-@ artery images , but the friendliness of the staff made up for a lot . " 
 = December 1969 nor 'easter = 
 The December 1969 nor 'easter was a strong winter storm that mainly affected the Northeastern United States and southern Quebec between December 25 and December 28 , 1969 . The multi @-@ faceted storm system included a tornado outbreak , record snow accumulations , a damaging ice storm , and flooding rains . 
 The storm developed over Texas by December 25 and advanced eastward , spawning over a dozen tornadoes in Louisiana , Georgia , and Florida . Upon reaching the Eastern Seaboard , the cyclone turned northeastward and intensified into a powerful nor 'easter . On December 26 and 27 , the storm 's forward movement slowed to a drift , causing very heavy snow over Upstate New York , Vermont , and southern Quebec . Warm onshore winds , caused by a storm track close to the shore , allowed precipitation to change to sleet and rain in central and eastern New England . Where precipitation remained as snow , accumulations reached 40 inches ( 100 cm ) or more , crippling travel . Drifts up to 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high blocked roadways , isolating some communities and forcing emergency workers to rely on snowmobiles for transportation . At least 20 fatalities were attributed to the storm in New York and New England . 
 In central New England , a severe freezing rain event occurred along the boundary between cold air to the west and warmer air to the east . Several inches of glaze ice , accompanied by gale @-@ force winds , caused damage comparable to the aftermath of the 1938 New England hurricane . Throughout the region , the snow and ice — in some cases further weighted by heavy rainfall — caused roofs to cave in . Montreal received 27 @.@ 5 in ( 70 cm ) of snow in that city 's biggest snowstorm on record at the time ; officials blamed the storm for 15 deaths in Quebec . In eastern New England , ice jams , poor drainage , and several inches of rain caused flooding that forced people from their homes and submerged roadways . Wind gusts to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and strong waves battered the coastline . 
 = = Background = = 
 The winter of 1969 – 1970 continued a long @-@ term El Niño from the previous winter , which featured two significant storms in the Northeastern United States , including the " Lindsay storm " in February . North Atlantic Oscillation ( NAO ) values ranged from weakly negative to weakly positive in the period leading up to the storm , trending more consistently negative in the days surrounding its genesis . NAO values dropped significantly in the wake of the nor 'easter , signaling abnormally cold temperatures during January 1970 . December 1969 was a month of active weather throughout the Northeast , with frequent light to moderate snow events preceding the late @-@ month nor 'easter . A significant storm on December 22 – 23 dropped 8 to 24 in ( 20 to 60 cm ) of snow in eastern New York and northern New England , as well as significant freezing rain in southern and eastern New England . Many of the same areas would be impacted again just days later . 
 Before the cyclone 's arrival , a 1 @,@ 033 hPa ( 30 @.@ 5 inHg ) high pressure area situated north of New England funneled very cold air into the region ; the − 22 ° F ( − 30 ° C ) air temperature at Albany , New York , on December 25 still holds the record for the city 's coldest December temperature . On December 25 and 26 , extensive cold air damming and frontogenesis occurred along the U.S. East Coast . The high pressure area slowly retreated as the storm approached . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The nor 'easter originated in a weak area of surface low pressure that formed over northern Texas by December 25 . It moved generally eastward over the next day as it crossed the Deep South . A southerly low @-@ level jet ( a localized wind stream in the lower levels of the atmosphere ) developed by midday over Mississippi and Alabama , and drifted eastward . Precipitation soon blossomed , with heavy snow falling over the Appalachian Mountains by late on December 25 . The low turned toward the northeast by early on December 26 to follow the temperature gradient along the East Coast , at which time the storm underwent the first of two periods of rapid intensification . In 12 hours , barometric pressure fell 12 hPa to 996 hPa ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) while the nor 'easter accelerated from Georgia to the coast of New Jersey . This bout of strengthening occurred as the associated upper @-@ level trough at the 500 @-@ millibar level – several miles into the atmosphere – assumed a negative tilt from northwest to southeast . Heavy precipitation overspread the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England early on December 26 . 
 The low @-@ level jet continued to strengthen and delivered warm air to areas east of the storm center , where precipitation quickly transitioned to rain . The jet ultimately reached extremely high velocities of 55 m / s ( 120 mph ) as it wrapped around the northern side of the low , feeding abundant moisture into areas of heavy precipitation . The storm slowed drastically on December 26 , and over the next 24 hours , it moved very slowly from Cape May , New Jersey , to near Boston , Massachusetts . During this period , exceptionally heavy snow fell over eastern New York , Vermont , and southern Quebec . While located just east of Long Island on December 27 , the nor 'easter began its second phase of rapid strengthening that brought central pressure down to 976 hPa ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . During this period of intensification , snow propagated around the western side of the system , reaching as far south as Long Island . 
 With a storm track very close to the shore and a retreating high pressure area to the northeast , onshore winds allowed temperatures to warm above freezing in eastern and northern New England . A frontal boundary between the warm Atlantic air and a residual wedge of colder air over the interior served as the focus for a severe ice storm in central New England . Thunder and lightning accompanied the precipitation in some areas . By 12 : 00 UTC on December 27 , the attendant upper @-@ level trough matured into a closed cold @-@ core low . The nor 'easter continued to drift toward the east @-@ northeast over the next 24 hours . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Southeast U.S. and Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 The developing extratropical cyclone spawned 16 known tornadoes and waterspouts in Louisiana , Georgia , and Florida , becoming the largest Christmas Day tornado outbreak on record . A short @-@ lived F3 tornado touched down in Vermillion Parish , Louisiana , destroying eight homes near Kaplan and damaging 25 more . One woman was killed and eight were injured , three severely enough to require hospitalization . Another damaging tornado moved through several settlements in southern Iberville Parish just over two hours later ; the tornado destroyed seven homes and damaged multiple other buildings , with one injury reported . The tornado was officially classified an F3 , though meteorologist Thomas P. <unk> determined it to have caused damage consistent with an F2 rating . A non @-@ tornadic wind gust destroyed a nearby trailer home . Later that day , a tornado skipped along a path through <unk> and Concordia parishes , touching down three different times . The F2 tornado damaged about 20 trailer homes in Glade , and caused further damage near the end of its track . 
 A tornado in southern Georgia , about 9 mi ( 14 km ) west of Albany , damaged or destroyed several small homes , killed three head of cattle , toppled numerous trees , and injured seven people . Elsewhere in the state , there were isolated reports of hail and damaging thunderstorm winds . Several tornadoes in the Florida Panhandle caused minor to moderate damage to trees and homes , the most destructive of them occurring in Quincy , Florida . That tornado struck an industrial area and unroofed at least three structures . A tornado in Lee , Florida , destroyed a trailer , damaged farm buildings , and injured one person . 
 In addition to widespread rain , parts of northern South Carolina experienced freezing rain that damaged trees and power lines . Freezing rain and sleet fell over the southern Piedmont of North Carolina , resulting in power outages and dangerous travel conditions . At least one fatal traffic accident was reported . Heavy snow covered the northwest Piedmont and Mountain Region of the state , accumulating to around 12 in ( 30 cm ) at Asheville ; occurring on the heels of another winter storm , this snowfall contributed to depths up to 2 ft ( 60 cm ) at higher elevations . High winds from the storm left at least 50 @,@ 000 electric customers in the Richmond , Virginia region without power . In Carroll County , strong winds uprooted trees . Significant snow accumulations occurred throughout the Mid @-@ Atlantic , chiefly away from the coastal plain . Snowfall exceeded 10 in ( 25 cm ) in parts of western Virginia , western Maryland , and West Virginia ; Washington , D.C. received 12 @.@ 1 in ( 31 cm ) of snow . 
 = = = Northeast U.S. = = = 
 The cyclone was rated by meteorology researchers <unk> and <unk> ( 2004 ) as a high @-@ end Category 3 on the Northeast Snowfall Impact Scale , equating to a " major " winter storm . However , more recent data from the National Climatic Data Center classifies the nor 'easter as a low @-@ end " crippling " Category 4 . By December 30 , at least 20 deaths in New York and New England had been attributed to the storm , largely from traffic accidents and physical exhaustion . 
 Areas of northeastern Pennsylvania , eastern New York , and Vermont received snowfall in excess of 20 in ( 51 cm ) , including 29 @.@ 8 in ( 760 mm ) at Burlington , 26 @.@ 4 in ( 67 cm ) at Albany , and 21 @.@ 9 in ( 56 cm ) at Binghamton , New York . Accumulations locally exceeded 40 in ( 100 cm ) , with 45 in ( 110 cm ) measured at Waitsfield , Vermont and 48 in ( 120 cm ) in the small village of East Wallingford , Vermont . The storm remains one of the greatest on record in cities like Albany and Burlington , and contributed to high monthly snowfall totals ; in Albany , December 1969 stands as the snowiest documented month , with 57 @.@ 5 in ( 146 cm ) . Throughout the region , the weight of the snow , combined with gale @-@ force winds , collapsed roofs and brought down power lines . The winds blew snow from this and previous storms into drifts as high as 30 ft ( 9 m ) , blocking roads and leaving some communities isolated . In some areas , travel was only possible with snowmobiles , which were used by emergency workers to deliver emergency supplies as needed . Rescuers also used snowmobiles and aircraft to search for stranded residents and travelers . Many cities and counties throughout the Northeast issued snow emergencies . Business and industry suffered extensively in the days following the storm . 
 While major highways were generally cleared by December 29 , some local roads reportedly remained covered for up to a month . About 230 mi ( 370 km ) of the New York State Thruway — nearly half its total length — was closed for 27 hours . The snowfall also caused widespread property damage , as the roofs of barns , sheds , and other buildings caved in under the weight of the snow . An airport hangar in Oneonta collapsed , destroying five aircraft inside . In the aftermath of the storm , many homes sustained water damage from melting snow . " Innumerable " traffic accidents were reported , and many motorists became stranded or were forced to abandon their vehicles . Four people in a stalled automobile died of carbon monoxide . Also in New York , one man froze to death , and three individuals were killed in a building collapse . In the Capital District , the snow fell with a high water content , occasionally mixing with freezing rain . As a result , it was much denser than normal and proved difficult to manage . The City of Albany spent a record $ 2 million USD on snow removal , and the city restricted nearly all traffic except for vehicles necessary to maintain emergency supplies . Governor Nelson Rockefeller closed state offices in Albany on December 29 and 30 , in an effort to enable efficient snow removal . Mayor Erastus Corning 2nd assessed the situation as a " dire emergency " . 
 Governor Deane C. Davis of Vermont declared a state of emergency and ordered the National Guard to assist with cleanup efforts . Blowing snow continuously blocked roads after being cleared , and snow removal vehicles , not equipped to withstand the excessive snow , began experiencing mechanical issues . The storm left some communities without power or telephone service for up to two days , although isolated outages persisted longer . One person died in <unk> River . With roads impassable in both New York and New England , tank trucks could not reach dairy farmers , who were in some cases forced to discard thousands of gallons of milk . In other cases , power outages rendered equipment useless , requiring milking to be done manually . One person in New Hampshire died of exhaustion during the storm . 
 The influx of warm , moist air over a wedge of cold air near the surface resulted in a severe ice storm across central and northern New England , most notably in the upper Connecticut River Valley . Glaze ice thicker than 2 in ( 51 mm ) , and reportedly up to 6 in ( 150 mm ) thick in Vermont , built up on trees and power lines , wreaking " unbelievable " havoc . In the hardest @-@ hit areas , damage from the ice storm was comparable to that caused by the 1938 New England hurricane . The combined load of snow and ice caused significant damage to many residential and industrial buildings , with several factory and warehouse roofs collapsing . Livestock were killed in multiple rural building collapses throughout the area . Southern Maine endured its second damaging ice storm in a week , with many of the same communities losing power on both occasion . Precipitation also transitioned to freezing rain and sleet across interior Connecticut , where the dangerous conditions induced numerous traffic accidents . Due to the abnormally cold temperatures in the wake of the storm , the glaze persisted for up to six weeks , much longer than the typical three days for ice storms in New England . 
 The changeover to heavy rain in southern and eastern New England swelled frozen rivers , creating ice jams which induced severe flooding . Flooding of roadways and homes was compounded by drainage issues from the dense <unk> . Rising floodwaters forced hundreds of families to leave their homes in Massachusetts , New Hampshire , and Maine . Up to 4 in ( 100 mm ) of rain fell in the Boston region , where thousands of homes were inundated . Rivers had begun to recede by December 29 after cresting well above flood stage . Up to 4 in ( 100 mm ) of rain fell over Rhode Island after 6 to 11 in ( 15 to 28 cm ) of snow , with widespread flooding reported in multiple towns . Frequent automobile accidents and large traffic jams were reported in the state . Winds were strongest in Cape Cod , Massachusetts , where gusts peaked near 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The gales were particularly damaging to trees laden with snow and ice . The heavy rainfall in eastern Massachusetts added tremendous weigh to the snow that had already fallen , causing roof collapses and making it difficult to clear the snow . In southeastern New Hampshire , the strong winds toppled trees and blew out windows in Hampton Beach . Although the coastal plain of New England avoided the heaviest snow accumulations , pounding surf and strong winds battered piers , boats , and other coastal installations , while low @-@ lying areas experienced storm surge flooding . 
 = = = Quebec = = = 
 The storm dropped up to 30 in ( 75 cm ) of snow in southern Quebec , where wind gusts up to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) damaged buildings and brought down power lines . Over a period of 60 hours , 27 @.@ 5 in ( 70 cm ) of snow fell at Montreal in what was then the city 's heaviest snowfall on record . Rail , air , and automobile transportation were paralyzed . One individual in Quebec City was struck and killed by a snowplow , and two more died of exposure to cold while ice fishing on the St. Lawrence River . Several fires broke out in Montreal during the storm , killing at least six people and leaving 23 families homeless . In total , the storm was connected to at least 15 fatalities in the province . 
 = Alekseyev I @-@ 212 = 
 The Alekseyev I @-@ 212 was a twin @-@ engined , jet fighter designed in the USSR in 1947 at OKB @-@ 21 ( OKB - experimental design bureau ) . It was a two @-@ seat variant of the I @-@ 21 ( Istrebitel ' - Fighter ) designed in response to a requirement for a very long @-@ range fighter issued by the <unk> @-@ Vozdushnye Sily ( VVS ) , ( Soviet Air Forces ) , in 1946 . Intended as an escort fighter , it was also designed for use as a night fighter and reconnaissance aircraft . Sources are unclear whether a prototype was built , but it is known that the aircraft never flew . 
 = = Development = = 
 After working as Lavochkin 's right @-@ hand man during World War II , Semyon Alekseyev was appointed as Chief Designer of OKB @-@ 21 at Gor <unk> in 1946 . The Council of the People 's Commissars directed Alekseyev , among others , to develop jet fighters using more powerful engines than the captured German examples and Soviet @-@ built copies . The OKB was tasked to design a single @-@ seat jet fighter that could meet the very demanding specification of a maximum speed of 980 km / h ( 610 mph ) and a range of 3 @,@ 000 km ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) with drop tanks . The OKB responded with the I @-@ 21 , which was planned to be built in several variants . 
 Development of the I @-@ 212 , one such variant , began in 1947 as a twin @-@ engined , all @-@ metal , two @-@ seat jet fighter . The round , streamlined fuselage was optimized to reduce drag and house the considerable amount of equipment and fuel required by the VVS . It had mid @-@ mounted straight laminar flow wings and the engine nacelles were mounted in the middle of the wing , with the wing spars continued by banjo rings around the engines . The cruciform tail unit was swept at 45 ° . To save weight , the main load @-@ bearing structures of the airframe were constructed from V @-@ 95 aluminum alloy and high @-@ strength steel . Elektron ( a magnesium alloy ) was used for many components and castings . The aircraft used a tricycle undercarriage with the main wheels retracting into the fuselage . <unk> actuated air brakes were fitted either side of the rear fuselage . 
 The pilot and gunner / radio operator sat in tandem , back to back in a single pressurized cockpit , protected by armour plates to their front and rear , as well as by a bulletproof windscreen , seated on ejection seats . The aircraft was intended to use Klimov VK @-@ 1 engines , a derivative of the Rolls @-@ Royce Nene , but the Klimov engine was still under development , so Kuznetsov RD @-@ 45s were substituted instead . The aircraft carried a <unk> @-@ 1 radar for use by the gunner / radio operator . 
 Armament was to have been mounted in the nose and a remote controlled tail barbette , with variations of 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) Berezin B @-@ 20 cannon , or 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 906 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon in a remote @-@ controlled barbette and 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 906 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon , 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 457 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 37 cannon and 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 772 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 45 in the nose of the aircraft . A single hardpoint under each wing could carry a single 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bomb or a drop tank carrying 550 kg ( 1 @,@ 210 lb ) of fuel . 
 A prototype reportedly began taxiing tests on 30 June 1948 , but there is no evidence that it flew at any time , however , it is also unclear if a prototype was actually built . A training version designated UTI @-@ 212 was planned if the aircraft had gone into production . The I @-@ 217 variant , in two versions with forward @-@ swept and <unk> wings , did not proceed beyond the drawing board . 
 = = Variants = = 
 I @-@ 212 
 Initial version , never built . 
 I @-@ 214 
 Proposed version with the tail barbette replaced with a rearwards @-@ facing radar and heavier forward @-@ facing armament . 
 I @-@ 217 
 Project with forward @-@ swept and <unk> wings . 
 UTI @-@ 212 
 Proposed training variant of the I @-@ 212 . 
 = = Specifications ( I @-@ 212 RD @-@ 45 engines ) = = 
 Data from The Osprey Encyclopedia of Russian Aircraft 1875 @-@ 1995 , Early Soviet Jet Fighters 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Length : 13 @.@ 08 m ( 42 ft 11 in ) 
 Wingspan : 16 @.@ 2 m ( 53 ft 2 in ) 
 Wing area : 33 m2 ( 360 sq ft ) 
 Gross weight : 9 @,@ 250 kg ( 20 @,@ 393 lb ) 
 Max takeoff weight : 10 @,@ 500 kg ( 23 @,@ 149 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Kuznetsov RD @-@ 45 centrifugal compressor turbojet , 22 kN ( 5 @,@ 000 lbf ) thrust each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 1 @,@ 000 km / h ( 621 mph ; 540 kn ) 
 Range : 2 @,@ 300 km ( 1 @,@ 429 mi ; 1 @,@ 242 nmi ) 
 Ferry range : 3 @,@ 100 km ( 1 @,@ 926 mi ; 1 @,@ 674 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 14 @,@ 800 m ( 48 @,@ 556 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 30 m / s ( 5 @,@ 900 ft / min ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 
 4x 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 906 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon with 150 rpg . 
 2x 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) Berezin B @-@ 20 cannon in a remote @-@ controlled tail barbette . 
 or 
 1 × 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 457 in ) Nudel 'man N @-@ 37 cannon . 
 2 × 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 906 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon . 
 2x 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) Berezin B @-@ 20 cannon in a remote @-@ controlled tail barbette . 
 or 
 2x 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 906 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon with 150 rpg . 
 1x 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 772 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 45 cannon with 40 rpg . 
 2x 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 906 in ) Nudel 'man Suranov NS @-@ 23 cannon in a remote @-@ controlled barbette . 
 Hardpoints : 2 with provisions to carry combinations of : 
 Bombs : 2x 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bombs . 
 or 
 Other : 2x 550 kg ( 1 @,@ 210 lb ) capacity drop tanks . 
 Avionics 
 <unk> @-@ 1 radar , Navigation aids and radios . 
 = Georgia ( U.S. state ) = 
 Georgia ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is a state located in the southeastern United States . It was established in 1732 , the last of the original Thirteen Colonies . Named after King George II of Great Britain , Georgia was the fourth state to ratify the United States Constitution , on January 2 , 1788 . It declared its secession from the Union on January 19 , 1861 , and was one of the original seven Confederate states . It was the last state to be restored to the Union , on July 15 , 1870 . Georgia is the 24th largest and the 8th most populous of the 50 United States . From 2007 to 2008 , 14 of Georgia 's counties ranked among the nation 's 100 fastest @-@ growing , second only to Texas . Georgia is known as the Peach State and the Empire State of the South . Atlanta is the state 's capital and its most populous city . 
 Georgia is bordered on the south by Florida , on the east by the Atlantic Ocean and South Carolina , on the west by Alabama , and on the north by Tennessee and North Carolina . The northern part of the state is in the Blue Ridge Mountains , part of the Appalachian Mountains system . The Piedmont extends through the central part of the state from the foothills of the Blue Ridge to the Fall Line , where the rivers cascade down in elevation to the coastal plain of the southern part of the state . The highest point in Georgia is <unk> Bald at 4 @,@ 784 feet ( 1 @,@ 458 m ) above sea level ; the lowest point is the Atlantic Ocean . Georgia is the largest state east of the Mississippi River in land area . 
 = = History = = 
 Before settlement by Europeans , Georgia was inhabited by the mound building cultures . The British colony of Georgia was founded by James Oglethorpe on February 12 , 1733 . The colony was administered by the Trustees for the Establishment of the Colony of Georgia in America under a charter issued by ( and named for ) King George II . The Trustees implemented an elaborate plan for the colony 's settlement , known as the Oglethorpe Plan , which envisioned an agrarian society of yeoman farmers and prohibited slavery . In 1742 the colony was invaded by the Spanish during the War of Jenkins ' Ear . In 1752 , after the government failed to renew subsidies that had helped support the colony , the Trustees turned over control to the crown . Georgia became a crown colony , with a governor appointed by the king . 
 The Province of Georgia was one of the Thirteen Colonies that revolted against British rule in the American Revolution by signing the 1776 Declaration of Independence . The State of Georgia 's first constitution was ratified in February 1777 . Georgia was the 10th state to ratify the Articles of Confederation on July 24 , 1778 , and was the 4th state to ratify the current Constitution on January 2 , 1788 . 
 In 1829 , gold was discovered in the North Georgia mountains , which led to the Georgia Gold Rush and an established federal mint in Dahlonega , which continued its operation until 1861 . The subsequent influx of white settlers put pressure on the government to take land from the Cherokee Nation . In 1830 , President Andrew Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act into law , sending many eastern Native American nations to reservations in present @-@ day Oklahoma , including all of Georgia 's tribes . Despite the Supreme Court 's ruling in Worcester v. Georgia that states were not permitted to redraw the Indian boundaries , President Jackson and the state of Georgia ignored the ruling . In 1838 , his successor , Martin Van Buren , dispatched federal troops to gather the Cherokee and deport them west of the Mississippi . This forced relocation , known as the Trail of Tears , led to the death of over 4 @,@ 000 Cherokees . 
 In early 1861 , Georgia joined the Confederacy and became a major theater of the Civil War . Major battles took place at Chickamauga , Kennesaw Mountain , and Atlanta . In December 1864 , a large swath of the state from Atlanta to Savannah was destroyed during General William Tecumseh Sherman 's March to the Sea . 18 @,@ 253 Georgian soldiers died in service , roughly 1 of every 5 who served . In 1870 , following reconstruction , Georgia became the last Confederate state restored to the Union . 
 With white Democrats having regained power in the state legislature , they passed a poll tax in 1877 , which disenfranchised many poor blacks and whites , preventing them from registering . In 1908 , the state established a white primary ; with the only competitive contests within the Democratic Party , it was another way to exclude blacks from politics . They constituted 46 @.@ 7 % of the state 's population in 1900 , but the proportion of Georgia 's population that was African American dropped thereafter to 28 % primarily due to leaving the state during the Great Migration . This disfranchisement persisted through the mid @-@ 1960s , until federal legislation with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Boundaries = = = 
 Beginning from the Atlantic Ocean , the state 's eastern border with South Carolina runs up the Savannah River , northwest to its origin at the confluence of the <unk> and Seneca Rivers . It then continues up the <unk> ( originally <unk> ) and into the <unk> River , its most significant tributary . These bounds were decided in the 1797 Treaty of Beaufort , and tested in the U.S. Supreme Court in the two Georgia v. South Carolina cases in 1923 and 1989 . 
 The border then takes a sharp turn around the tip of <unk> County , at latitude 35 ° N , though from this point it diverges slightly south ( due to inaccuracies in the original survey ) . This was originally the Georgia and North Carolina border all the way back to the Mississippi River , until Tennessee was divided from North Carolina , and the Yazoo companies induced the legislature of Georgia to pass an act , approved by the governor in 1795 , to sell the greater part of Georgia 's territory presently comprising Alabama and Mississippi . 
 The state 's western border then departs in another straight line south @-@ southeastward , at a point southwest of Chattanooga , to meet the westernmost point of the Chattahoochee River near West Point . It continues down to the point where it ends at the Flint River ( the confluence of the two forming Florida 's Apalachicola River ) , and goes almost due east and very slightly south , in a straight line to the origin of the St. Mary 's River , which then forms the remainder of the boundary back to the ocean . 
 The water boundaries are still set to be the original thalweg of the rivers . Since then , several have been inundated by lakes created by dams , including the Apalachicola / Chattahoochee / Flint point now under Lake Seminole . 
 Georgia state legislators have claimed that in an 1818 survey , the state 's border with Tennessee was erroneously placed one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) farther south than intended , and they proposed a correction in 2010 . The state was then in the midst of a significant drought , and the new border would allow Georgia access to water from the Tennessee River . 
 = = = Geology and terrain = = = 
 Each region has its own distinctive characteristics . For instance , the Ridge and Valley , which lies in the northwest corner of the state , includes limestone , sandstone , shale and other sedimentary rocks , which have yielded construction @-@ grade limestone , barite , ocher , and small amounts of coal . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The state of Georgia has approximately 250 tree species and 58 protected plants . Georgia 's native trees include red cedar , a variety of pines , oaks , <unk> , cypress , sweetgum , scaly @-@ bark and white hickories and <unk> palmetto . East Georgia is in the subtropical coniferous forest biome and conifer species as other broadleaf evergreen flora make up the majority of the southern and coastal regions . Yellow jasmine , and mountain laurel make up just a few of the flowering shrubs in the state . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 White @-@ tailed ( Virginia ) deer are in nearly all counties . The northern mockingbird and brown thrasher are among the 160 bird species that live in the state . 
 Reptiles and amphibians include the eastern diamondback , copperhead , and cottonmouth , salamanders , frogs , alligators and toads . There are about 79 species of reptile and 63 amphibians known to live in Georgia . 
 The most popular freshwater game fish are trout , bream , bass , and catfish , all but the last of which are produced in state hatcheries for restocking . Popular saltwater game fish include red drum , spotted seatrout , flounder , and tarpon . Porpoises , whales , shrimp , oysters , and blue crabs are found inshore and offshore of the Georgia coast . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The majority of the state is primarily a humid subtropical climate . Hot and humid summers are typical , except at the highest elevations . The entire state , including the North Georgia mountains , receives moderate to heavy precipitation , which varies from 45 inches ( 1143 mm ) in central Georgia to approximately 75 inches ( 1905 mm ) around the northeast part of the state . The degree to which the weather of a certain region of Georgia is subtropical depends on the latitude , its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean or Gulf of Mexico , and the elevation . The latter factor is felt chiefly in the mountainous areas of the northern part of the state , which are farther away from the ocean and can be 4500 feet ( 1350 m ) above sea level . The USDA Plant hardiness zones for Georgia range from zone 6b ( no colder than − 5 ° F ( − 21 ° C ) ) in the Blue Ridge Mountains to zone 8b ( no colder than 15 ° F ( − 9 ° C ) ) along the Atlantic coast and Florida border . 
 The highest temperature ever recorded is 112 ° F ( 44 @.@ 4 ° C ) in Louisville on July 24 , 1952 , while the lowest is − 17 ° F ( − 27 @.@ 2 ° C ) in northern Floyd County on January 27 , 1940 . Georgia is one of the leading states in frequency of tornadoes , though they are rarely stronger than F1 . Although tornadoes striking the city are very rare , a F2 nonviolent tornado hit downtown Atlanta on March 14 , 2008 , causing moderate to severe damage to various buildings . With a coastline on the Atlantic Ocean , Georgia is also vulnerable to hurricanes , although direct hurricane strikes were rare during the 20th century . Georgia often is affected by hurricanes that strike the Florida panhandle , weaken over land , and bring strong tropical storm winds and heavy rain to the interior , as well as hurricanes that come close to the Georgia coastline , brushing the coast on their way north . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of Georgia was 10 @,@ 214 @,@ 860 on July 1 , 2015 , a 5 @.@ 44 % increase since the 2010 United States Census . 
 In 2015 , Georgia had an estimated population of 10 @,@ 214 @,@ 860 which was an increase of 117 @,@ 517 from the previous year , and an increase of 527 @,@ 207 since 2010 . This includes a natural increase since the last census of 438 @,@ 939 people ( that is 849 @,@ 414 births minus 410 @,@ 475 deaths ) and an increase from net migration of 606 @,@ 673 people into the state . Immigration resulted in a net increase of 228 @,@ 415 people , and migration within the country produced a net increase of 378 @,@ 258 people . 
 As of 2010 , the state has the sixth highest number of illegal immigrants in the country . There were 35 @,@ 000 in 1990 ; the count more than doubled from January 2000 to January 2009 , at 480 @,@ 000 . 
 There were 743 @,@ 000 veterans in 2009 . 
 = = = Race and age = = = 
 According to the 2010 United States Census , Georgia had a population of 9 @,@ 687 @,@ 653 . In terms of race and ethnicity , the state was 59 @.@ 7 % White ( 55 @.@ 9 % Non @-@ Hispanic White Alone ) , 30 @.@ 5 % Black or African American , 0 @.@ 3 % American Indian and Alaska Native , 3 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander , 4 @.@ 0 % from Some Other Race , and 2 @.@ 1 % from Two or More Races . Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 8 @.@ 8 % of the population . 
 As of 2011 , 58 @.@ 8 % of Georgia 's population younger than age 1 were minorities ( meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non @-@ Hispanic white ) compared to other states like California with 75 @.@ 1 % , New York with 55 @.@ 6 % , and Texas with 69 @.@ 8 % . 
 The largest European ancestry groups are : 
 English 8 @.@ 1 % 
 Irish 8 @.@ 1 % 
 German 7 @.@ 2 % 
 In the 1980 census 1 @,@ 584 @,@ 303 Georgians claimed English ancestry out of a total state population of 3 @,@ 994 @,@ 817 , making them 40 % of the state , and the largest ethnic group at the time . Today , many of these same people claiming that they are of " American " ancestry are actually of English descent , and some are of Scots @-@ Irish descent ; however , their families have lived in the state for so long , in many cases since the colonial period , that they choose to identify simply as having " American " ancestry or do not in fact know their own ancestry . Their ancestry primarily goes back to the original thirteen colonies and for this reason many of them today simply claim " American " ancestry , though they are of predominately English ancestry . 
 As of 2004 , 7 @.@ 7 % of Georgia 's population was reported as under 5 years of age , 26 @.@ 4 % under 18 , and 9 @.@ 6 % were 65 or older . Also as of 2004 , females made up approximately 50 @.@ 6 % of the population and African Americans made up approximately 29 @.@ 6 % . 
 Historically , about half of Georgia 's population was composed of African Americans who , before the Civil War , were almost exclusively enslaved . The Great Migration of hundreds of thousands of blacks from the rural South to the industrial North from 1914 – 70 reduced the African American population . 
 Georgia had the second @-@ fastest @-@ growing Asian population growth in the U.S. from 1990 to 2000 , more than doubling in size during the ten @-@ year period . In addition , according to census estimates , Georgia ranks third among the states in terms of the percent of the total population that is African American ( after Mississippi and Louisiana ) and third in numerical Black population after New York and Florida . Georgia was the state with the largest numerical increase in the black population from 2006 to 2007 with 84 @,@ 000 . 
 Georgia is the state with the third @-@ lowest percentage of older people ( 65 or older ) , at 10 @.@ 1 percent ( as of 2008 ) . 
 The colonial settlement of large numbers of Scottish American , English American and Scotch @-@ Irish Americans in the mountains and piedmont , and coastal settlement by some English Americans and African Americans , have strongly influenced the state 's culture in food , language and music . The concentration of Africans imported to coastal areas in the 18th century repeatedly from rice @-@ growing regions of West Africa led to the development of Gullah @-@ <unk> language and culture in the Low Country among African Americans . They share a unique heritage in which African traditions of food , religion and culture were continued more than in some other areas . In the <unk> of Southern culture , their <unk> became an integral part of all Southern cooking in the Low Country . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 As of 2010 , 87 @.@ 35 % ( 7 @,@ 666 @,@ 663 ) of Georgia residents age 5 and older spoke English at home as a primary language , while 7 @.@ 42 % ( 651 @,@ 583 ) spoke Spanish , 0 @.@ 51 % ( 44 @,@ 702 ) Korean , 0 @.@ 44 % ( 38 @,@ 244 ) Vietnamese , 0 @.@ 42 % ( 36 @,@ 679 ) French , 0 @.@ 38 % ( 33 @,@ 009 ) Chinese ( which includes Mandarin ) , and German , which was spoken as a main language by 0 @.@ 29 % ( 23 @,@ 351 ) of the population over the age of five . In total , 12 @.@ 65 % ( 1 @,@ 109 @,@ 888 ) of Georgia 's population age 5 and older spoke a mother language other than English . 
 = = = Major cities = = = 
 Populations indicated above are the latest 2015 estimates from the US Census Bureau . In 2012 , voters in Macon and Bibb County approved the consolidation of the city of Macon and unincorporated Bibb County , and they officially merged on January 1 , 2014 . Macon joined Columbus , Augusta , and Athens as consolidated cities in Georgia . 
 The U.S. Census Bureau lists fourteen metropolitan areas in Georgia . The largest , Atlanta , is the ninth most populous metro area in the United States . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The composition of religious affiliation in Georgia is 70 % Protestant , 9 % Catholic , 1 % Mormon , 1 % Jewish , 0 @.@ 5 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 5 % Buddhist and 0 @.@ 5 % Hindu . Atheists , deists , agnostics and other unaffiliated people make up 13 % of the population . The largest Christian denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Southern Baptist Convention with 1 @,@ 759 @,@ 317 ; the United Methodist Church with 619 @,@ 394 ; and the Roman Catholic Church with 596 @,@ 384 . Non @-@ denominational Evangelical Protestant had 566 @,@ 782 members , the Church of God ( Cleveland , Tennessee ) has 175 @,@ 184 members , and the National Baptist Convention , USA , Inc. has 172 @,@ 982 members . The Presbyterian Church ( USA ) is the largest Presbyterian body in the state , with 300 congregations and 100 @,@ 000 members . The other large body , Presbyterian Church in America , had at its founding date 14 congregations and 2 @,@ 800 members ; in 2010 it counted 139 congregations and 32 @,@ 000 members . The Roman Catholic Church is noteworthy in Georgia 's urban areas , and includes the Archdiocese of Atlanta and the Diocese of Savannah . Georgia is home to the largest Hindu temple in the United States , the BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Atlanta . Georgia is home to several historical synagogues including The Temple ( Atlanta ) , Congregation Beth Jacob ( Atlanta ) , and Congregation <unk> Israel ( Savannah ) . Chabad and the Rohr Jewish Learning Institute are also active in the state . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = State government = = = 
 As with all other US states and the federal government , Georgia 's government is based on the separation of legislative , executive , and judicial power . Executive authority in the state rests with the governor , currently Nathan Deal ( Republican ) . Both the Governor of Georgia and lieutenant governor are elected on separate ballots to four @-@ year terms of office . Unlike the federal government , but like many other U.S. States , most of the executive officials who comprise the governor 's cabinet are elected by the citizens of Georgia rather than appointed by the governor . 
 Legislative authority resides in the General Assembly , composed of the Senate and House of Representatives . The Lieutenant Governor presides over the Senate , while members of the House of Representatives select their own Speaker . The Georgia Constitution mandates a maximum of 56 senators , elected from single @-@ member districts , and a minimum of 180 representatives , apportioned among representative districts ( which sometimes results in more than one representative per district ) ; there are currently 56 senators and 180 representatives . The term of office for senators and representatives is two years . The laws enacted by the General Assembly are codified in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated . 
 The present Code is descendant of the first successfully enacted attempt in any English @-@ speaking jurisdiction at a comprehensive codification of the substance of the common law , the Code of Georgia of 1861 . Georgia stands alone as the only U.S. state to enact a full codification of the common law of contracts , torts , property and domestic relations that was completely independent of the work of David Dudley Field II . This resulted from the breakdown in North @-@ South communications preceding the Civil War , which meant that the Georgia <unk> and Field were unaware of each other 's work . ( The four other common law states that pursued such codification enacted versions of Field 's civil code . ) 
 State judicial authority rests with the state Supreme Court and Court of Appeals , which have statewide authority . In addition , there are smaller courts which have more limited geographical jurisdiction , including Superior Courts , State Courts , Juvenile Courts , Magistrate Courts and Probate Courts . Justices of the Supreme Court and judges of the Court of Appeals are elected statewide by the citizens in non @-@ partisan elections to six @-@ year terms . Judges for the smaller courts are elected to four @-@ year terms by the state 's citizens who live within that court 's jurisdiction . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 Georgia consists of 159 counties , second only to Texas , with 254 . Georgia had 161 counties until the end of 1931 , when Milton and Campbell were merged into the existing Fulton . Some counties have been named for prominent figures in both American and Georgian history , and many bear names with Native American origin . Counties in Georgia have their own elected legislative branch , usually called the Board of Commissioners , which usually also has executive authority in the county . Several counties have a sole Commissioner form of government , with legislative and executive authority vested in a single person . Georgia is the only state with Sole Commissioner counties . Georgia 's Constitution provides all counties and cities with " home rule " authority . The county commissions have considerable power to pass legislation within their county , as a municipality would . 
 Georgia recognizes all local units of government as cities , so every incorporated town is legally a city . Georgia does not provide for townships or independent cities , though there have been bills proposed in the Legislature to provide for townships ; it does allow consolidated city @-@ county governments by local referendum . All of Georgia 's second @-@ tier cities except Savannah have now formed consolidated city @-@ county governments by referendum : Columbus ( in 1970 ) , Athens ( 1990 ) , Augusta ( 1995 ) , and Macon ( 2012 ) . ( Augusta and Athens have excluded one or more small , incorporated towns within their consolidated boundaries , while Macon has excluded a small unincorporated area ; Columbus eventually absorbed all smaller incorporated entities within its consolidated boundaries . ) The small town of <unk> adopted a consolidated city @-@ county government in 2003 . 
 There is no true metropolitan government in Georgia , though the Atlanta Regional Commission ( ARC ) and Georgia Regional Transportation Authority do provide some services , and the ARC must approve all major land development projects in the Atlanta metropolitan area . 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 Until 1964 , Georgia 's state government had the longest unbroken record of single @-@ party dominance , by the Democratic Party , of any state in the Union . This record was established largely due to the disenfranchisement of most blacks and many poor whites by the state in its constitution and laws in the early 20th century . Some elements , such as requiring payment of poll taxes and passing literacy tests , prevented blacks from registering to vote ; their exclusion from the political system lasted into the 1960s and reduced the Republican Party to a non @-@ competitive status in the early 20th century . 
 White Democrats regained power after Reconstruction due in part to the efforts of some using intimidation and violence , but this method came into disrepute . In 1900 , shortly before Georgia adopted a <unk> constitutional amendment in 1908 , blacks comprised 47 % of the state 's population and , rather than using intimidation and violence , the 1908 amendment successfully disenfranchised blacks and poor whites to the extent of half the state population by requiring that any male at least 21 years of age wanting to register to vote must also : ( a ) be of good character and able to pass a test on citizenship , ( b ) be able to read and write provisions of the U.S. and Georgia constitutions , or ( c ) own at least 40 acres of land or $ 500 in property . Any Georgian who had fought in any war from the American Revolution through the Spanish – American War was exempted from these additional qualifications . More importantly , any Georgian descended from a veteran of any of these wars also was exempted . Because by 1908 many white Georgia males were grandsons of veterans and / or owned the required property , the exemption and the property requirement basically allowed only well @-@ to @-@ do whites to vote , the qualifications of good character , citizenship knowledge , literacy , and property ownership in turn effectively applied to blacks and poor whites such that they had difficulty meeting the requirements and were thus barred from voter registration . In the early 20th century , Progressives promoted electoral reform and reducing the power of ward bosses to clean up politics . However , additional rules such as the eight @-@ box law continued to effectively closed out people who were illiterate . White , one @-@ party rule was solidified . 
 For more than 130 years , from 1872 to 2003 , Georgians nominated and elected only white Democratic governors , and white Democrats held the majority of seats in the General Assembly . Most of the Democrats elected throughout these years were Southern Democrats , who were fiscally and socially conservative by national standards . This voting pattern continued after the segregationist period . 
 Segregation was ended by court orders in the 1960s . According to the 1960 census , the proportion of Georgia 's population that was African American was 28 % ; many blacks had left the state in the Great Migration , and new generations of whites had come from migration and immigration . Following support from the national Democratic Party for the civil rights movement and especially civil rights legislation of 1964 and 1965 , most African @-@ American voters , as well as other minority voters , have largely supported the Democratic Party in Georgia . In the decades since the late 20th century , the white @-@ majority voters have increasingly supported Republicans for national and state offices . 
 In 2003 , incumbent moderate Democratic Governor Roy Barnes was defeated by Republican Sonny Perdue , a state legislator and former Democrat . While Democrats retained control of the State House , they lost their majority in the Senate when four Democrats switched parties . They lost the House in the 2004 election . Republicans then controlled all three partisan elements of the state government . 
 Even before 2003 , the state had become increasingly supportive of Republicans in Presidential elections . It has supported a Democrat for president only three times since 1960 . In 1976 and 1980 , native son Jimmy Carter carried the state ; in 1992 , the former Arkansas governor Bill Clinton narrowly won the state . Generally , Republicans are strongest in the predominantly white suburban ( especially the Atlanta suburbs ) and rural portions of the state . Many of these areas were represented by conservative Democrats in the state legislature well into the 21st century . One of the most conservative of these was U.S. Congressman Larry McDonald , former head of the John Birch Society , who died when the Soviet Union shot down KAL 007 near Sakhalin Island . Democratic candidates have tended to win a higher percentage of the vote in the areas where black voters are most numerous , as well as in the cities ( especially Atlanta and Athens ) , and the rural Black Belt region that passes through the central and southwestern portion of the state . 
 The ascendancy of the Republican Party in Georgia and in the South in general also resulted in Georgia U.S. House of Representatives member Newt Gingrich being elected as Speaker of the House following the election of a Republican majority in the House in 1994 . Gingrich served as Speaker until 1999 , when he resigned in the aftermath of the loss of House seats held by members of the GOP . Gingrich also mounted an unsuccessful bid for President in the 2012 election , but withdrew after winning only the South Carolina and Georgia primaries . 
 In recent events , Democrat Jim Martin ran against incumbent Republican Senator Saxby Chambliss . Chambliss failed to acquire the necessary 50 percent of votes , a Libertarian Party candidate receiving the remainder of votes . In the runoff election held on December 2 , 2008 , Chambliss became the second Georgia Republican to be reelected to the U.S. Senate . 
 As of the 2010 reapportionment , the state has 14 seats in the U.S. House of Representatives . These are held by 10 Republicans and 4 Democrats . The Georgia House of Representatives has 61 Democrats , 118 Republicans , and 1 Independent , while the Georgia Senate has 17 Democrats and 39 Republicans . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 During the 1960s and 1970s , Georgia made significant changes in civil rights , governance , and economic growth focused on Atlanta . It was a bedrock of the emerging " New South " . 
 In the 21st century , many conservative Democrats , including former U.S. Senator and governor Zell Miller , have decided to support Republicans . The state 's socially conservative bent results in wide support for such measures as restrictions on abortion . In 2004 , a state constitutional amendment banning same @-@ sex marriages was approved by 76 % of voters . However , after the United States Supreme Court issued its ruling in Obergefell v. Hodges , all Georgia counties came into full compliance , recognizing the rights of same @-@ sex couples to marry in the State . 
 On April 1 , 2009 , Senate Resolution 632 passed by a vote of 43 – 1 . It reads in part : 
 Any Act by the Congress of the United States , Executive Order of the President of the United States of America or Judicial Order by the <unk> of the United States of America which assumes a power not delegated to the government of the United States of America by the Constitution for the United States of America and which serves to diminish the liberty of any of the several States or their citizens shall constitute a nullification of the Constitution for the United States of America by the government of the United States of America . 
 On April 16 , Jay Bookman of The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution wrote " It wasn 't quite the firing on Fort Sumter that launched the Civil War . But on April 1 , your Georgia Senate did threaten by a vote of 43 – 1 to secede from and even disband the United States . " 
 = = Economy = = 
 Georgia 's 2010 total gross state product was $ 403 billion . Its per capita personal income for 2011 put it 39th in the nation at $ <unk> years Georgia as a state has had the highest credit rating by Standard and Poor 's ( AAA ) and is one of only 15 states with a AAA rating . If Georgia were a stand @-@ alone country , it would be the 28th largest economy in the world . 
 There are 15 Fortune 500 companies and 26 Fortune 1000 companies with headquarters in Georgia , including such names as Home Depot , UPS , Coca @-@ Cola , Delta Air Lines , Aflac , Southern Company , and SunTrust Banks . Hartsfield @-@ Jackson Atlanta International Airport , the world 's busiest airport as measured by both passenger traffic and aircraft traffic , is located in Georgia . Georgia has over 1 @,@ 700 internationally headquartered facilities representing 43 countries , employing more than 112 @,@ 000 Georgians with an estimated capital investment of $ 23 billion . 
 Atlanta has a large effect on the state of Georgia and the Southeastern United States . Atlanta has been the site of growth in real estate , service , and the communications industries . 
 Tourism makes an important contribution to the economy . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Widespread farms produce peanuts , corn , and soybeans across middle and south Georgia . The state is the number one producer of pecans in the world , with the region around Albany in southwest Georgia being the center of Georgia 's pecan production . Gainesville in northeast Georgia touts itself as the Poultry Capital of the World . Georgia is in the top five blueberry producers in the United States . 
 Georgia 's agricultural outputs include poultry and eggs , pecans , peaches , cotton , peanuts , rye , cattle , hogs , dairy products , <unk> , timber , particularly pine trees , tobacco and vegetables . 
 = = = Mining = = = 
 Major products in the mineral industry include a variety of clays , stones , sands and the clay <unk> , known as <unk> . 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 Industry in Georgia is diverse . 
 The textile industry is located around the cities of Rome , Columbus , Augusta , Macon and along the I @-@ 75 corridor between Atlanta and Chattanooga , Tennessee , to include the towns of Cartersville , Calhoun , Ringgold and Dalton ( the Carpet Capital of the World ) . 
 In November 2009 , Kia started production at the first U.S. Kia Motors plant , Kia Motors Manufacturing Georgia in West Point . 
 Industrial output includes textiles and apparel , transportation equipment , food processing , paper products , chemical products , and electric equipment . 
 = = = Logistics = = = 
 The Georgia Ports Authority owns and operates four ports in the state : Port of Savannah , Port of Brunswick , Port Bainbridge , and Port Columbus . The Port of Savannah is the fourth largest seaport in the United States , importing and exporting a total of 2 @.@ 3 million TEUs per year . Several major companies including Target , IKEA , and Heineken operate distribution centers in close proximity to the Port of Savannah . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Georgia has one of the largest military presences in the country . Several US military installations are located in the state including Fort Stewart , Hunter Army Airfield , Naval Submarine Base Kings Bay , Fort Benning , Moody Air Force Base , Robins Air Force Base , Fort Gordon , Marine Corps Logistics Base Albany , Dobbins Air Reserve Base , Coast Guard Air Station Savannah and Coast Guard Station Brunswick . 
 = = = Energy use and production = = = 
 Georgia 's electricity generation and consumption are among the highest in the United States , with natural gas being the primary electrical generation fuel , followed by coal . However , the state also has two nuclear power plants which contribute almost one fourth of Georgia 's electricity generation . In 2013 , the generation mix was 39 % gas , 35 % coal , 23 % nuclear , 3 % hydro and other renewable sources . The leading area of energy consumption is the industrial sector because Georgia " is a leader in the energy @-@ intensive wood and paper products industry " . Solar generated energy is becoming more in use with solar energy generators currently installed ranking Georgia 15th in the country in installed solar capacity . In 2013 , $ 189 million was invested in Georgia to install solar for home , business and utility use representing a 795 % increase over the previous year . 
 = = = State taxes = = = 
 Georgia has a progressive income tax structure with six brackets of state income tax rates that range from 1 % to 6 % . In 2009 , Georgians paid 9 % of their income in state and local taxes , compared to the US average of 9 @.@ 8 % of income . This ranks Georgia 25th among the states for total state and local tax burden . The state sales tax in Georgia is 4 % with additional percentages added through local options ( e.g. Special @-@ purpose local @-@ option sales tax or SPLOST ) , but there is no sales tax on prescription drugs , certain medical devices , or food items for home consumption . 
 The state legislature may allow municipalities to institute local sales taxes and special local taxes , such as the 2 % SPLOST tax and the 1 % sales tax for MARTA serviced counties . Excise taxes are levied on alcohol , tobacco , and motor fuel . Owners of real property in Georgia pay property tax to their county . All taxes are collected by the Georgia Department of Revenue and then properly distributed according to any agreements that each county has with its cities . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The Georgia Film , Music and Digital Entertainment Office promotes filming in the state . Since 1972 , seven hundred film and television projects have been filmed on location in Georgia . In 2008 – 2009 , Georgia 's film and television industry created a $ 1 @.@ 15 billion economic impact on the state 's economy . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 In the Atlanta area , World of Coke , Georgia Aquarium , Zoo Atlanta and Stone Mountain are important tourist attractions . Stone Mountain is Georgia 's " most popular attraction " ; receiving over four million tourists per year . The Georgia Aquarium , in Atlanta , was the largest aquarium in the world in 2010 according to Guinness World Records . 
 Callaway Gardens , in western Georgia , is a family resort . The area is also popular with golfers . 
 The Savannah Historic District attracts over eleven million tourists each year . 
 The Golden Isles are a string of barrier islands off the Atlantic coast of Georgia near Brunswick that include beaches , golf courses and the Cumberland Island National Seashore . 
 Several sites honor the lives and careers of noted American leaders : the Little White House in Warm Springs , which served as the summer residence of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt while he was being treated for polio ; President Jimmy Carter 's hometown of Plains and the Carter Presidential Center in Atlanta ; the Martin Luther King , Jr . , National Historic Site in Atlanta , which is the final resting place of Martin Luther King , Jr. and Coretta Scott King ; and Atlanta 's Ebenezer Baptist Church , where Dr. King preached . 
 = = Cultural = = 
 = = = Fine and performing arts = = = 
 Georgia 's major fine art museums include the High Museum of Art and the Michael C. Carlos Museum , both in Atlanta ; the Georgia Museum of Art on the campus of the University of Georgia in Athens ; Telfair Museum of Art and the <unk> Museum of Art in Savannah ; and the Morris Museum of Art in Augusta . 
 The state theatre of Georgia is the Springer Opera House located in Columbus . 
 The Atlanta Opera brings opera to Georgia stages . The Atlanta Symphony Orchestra is the most widely recognized orchestra and largest arts organization in the southeastern United States . 
 There are a number of performing arts venues in the state , among the largest are the Fox Theatre , and the Alliance Theatre at the Woodruff Arts Center , both on Peachtree Street in Midtown Atlanta as well as the Cobb Energy Performing Arts Centre , located in Northwest Atlanta . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The rich heritage and southern antebellum atmosphere of Georgia has given rise to a great number of works such as Margaret Mitchell 's Gone with the Wind , Olive Ann Burns ' Cold Sassy Tree , and Alice Walker 's The Color Purple . 
 A number of noted authors , poets and playwrights have lived in Georgia such as James Dickey , Flannery O 'Connor , Sidney Lanier , Frank <unk> and Lewis Grizzard . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Well @-@ known television shows set in Atlanta include , from Tyler Perry Studios , House of Payne and Tyler Perry 's Meet the Browns , The Real Housewives of Atlanta , the CBS sitcom Designing Women , Matlock , the popular AMC series The Walking Dead , Lifetime Drop Dead Diva , <unk> and numerous HGTV original productions . 
 The Dukes of Hazzard , a 1980s TV show that spun off several films , was set in the fictional Hazzard County , Georgia . The show was filmed at Warner Bros. back lot in Burbank , California and on location in Conyers and Covington , Georgia as well as some locations in Atlanta . 
 Also filmed in Georgia is The Vampire Diaries , using Covington as the setting for the fictional Mystic Falls . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 A number of notable musicians in various genres of popular music are from Georgia . Included is Ray Charles ( whose many hits include " Georgia on My Mind " , now the official state song ) , and Gladys Knight ( known for her Georgia @-@ themed song , " Midnight Train to Georgia " ) . 
 Rock groups from Georgia include the Atlanta Rhythm Section , The Black Crowes , and The Allman Brothers . 
 The university city of Athens sparked an influential rock music scene in the 1980s and 1990s . Among the groups achieving their initial prominence in that city were R.E.M. , Widespread Panic , and the B @-@ 52 's . 
 Since the 1990s , various hip @-@ hop and R & B musicians have included top @-@ selling artists such as Outkast , Usher , Ludacris , TLC , B.o.B. , and Ciara . Atlanta is mentioned in a number of these artists ' tracks , such as Usher 's " A @-@ Town Down " reference in his 2004 hit Yeah ! ( which also features Atlanta artists Lil Jon and Ludacris ) , Ludacris ' " Welcome to Atlanta " , Outkast 's album " ATLiens " , and B.o.B. ' s multiple references to Decatur , such as in his hit song " Strange Clouds " . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Films set in Georgia include two pictures both set in Atlanta that were awarded the Oscar for Best Picture : , Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) and Driving Miss Daisy ( 1989 ) . Other films set in Georgia include Deliverance ( 1972 ) , which was based on the novel of the same name by James Dickey , and Parental Guidance ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Sports in Georgia include professional teams in all major sports , Olympic Games contenders and medalists , collegiate teams in major and small @-@ school conferences and associations , and active amateur teams and individual sports . The state of Georgia has a team in three major professional leagues — Atlanta Braves of Major League Baseball , Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League , Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association — and in 2017 is scheduled to land a fourth with an expansion franchise in Major League Soccer . 
 The Georgia Bulldogs ( Southeastern Conference ) and Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets ( Atlantic Coast Conference ) are two major college football teams in the NCAA Division I FBS , where they have won multiple national championships . 
 The 1996 Summer Olympics took place in Atlanta . The stadium that was built to host various Olympic events was converted to Turner Field , the home of the Atlanta Braves . 
 The Masters golf tournament , the first of the PGA tour 's four " majors " , is held annually the second weekend of April at the Augusta National Golf Club . The Atlanta Motor Speedway hosts the Dixie 500 NASCAR Cup Series stock car race and Road Atlanta the Petit Le Mans endurance sports car race . 
 Atlanta 's Georgia Dome hosted Super Bowl XXVIII in 1994 and Super Bowl XXXIV in 2000 . The Georgia Dome hosted the NCAA Final Four Men 's Basketball National Championship in 2002 , 2007 , and 2013 . It hosted WWE 's WrestleMania XXVII in 2011 , an event which set an attendance record of 71 @,@ 617 . The dome is also the venue of the annual Chick @-@ fil @-@ A Bowl post @-@ season college football games . Since 2004 the FIRST World Championships have been held there . 
 Professional baseball 's Ty Cobb was the first player inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame . He was from Narrows and was nicknamed " The Georgia Peach . " 
 = = Parks and recreational activities = = 
 There are 63 parks in Georgia , 48 of which are state parks and 15 that are historic sites , and numerous state wildlife preserves , under the supervision of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources . Other historic sites and parks are supervised by the National Park Service and include the Andersonville National Historic Site in Andersonville ; Appalachian National Scenic Trail ; Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area near Atlanta ; Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park at Fort Oglethorpe ; Cumberland Island National Seashore near St. Marys ; Fort Frederica National Monument on St. Simons Island ; Fort Pulaski National Monument in Savannah ; Jimmy Carter National Historic Site near Plains ; Kennesaw Mountain National Battlefield Park near Kennesaw ; Martin Luther King , Jr . , National Historic Site in Atlanta ; Ocmulgee National Monument at Macon ; Trail of Tears National Historic Trail ; and the Okefenokee Swamp in Waycross , Georgia 
 Outdoor recreational activities include hiking along the Appalachian Trail ; Civil War Heritage Trails ; rock climbing and whitewater paddling . Other outdoor activities include hunting and fishing . 
 = = Education = = 
 Georgia county and city public school systems are administered by school boards with members elected at the local level . As of 2013 , all but 19 of 181 boards are elected from single @-@ member districts . Residents and activist groups in Fayette County , Georgia sued the board of commissioners and school board for maintaining an election system based on at @-@ large voting , which tended to increase the power of the majority and effectively prevented minority participation on elected local boards for nearly 200 years . A change to single @-@ member districts has resulted in the African @-@ American minority being able to elect representatives of its choice . 
 Georgia high schools ( grades nine through twelve ) are required to administer a standardized , multiple choice End of Course Test , or <unk> , in each of eight core subjects including algebra , geometry , U.S. history , economics , biology , physical science , Ninth Grade Literature and composition , and American literature . The official purpose of the tests is to assess " specific content knowledge and skills . " Although a minimum test score is not required for the student to receive credit in the course , completion of the test is mandatory . The <unk> score accounts for 15 % of a student 's grade in the course . The Georgia Milestone is taken by public school students in the state . 
 Georgia has almost 70 public colleges , universities , and technical colleges in addition to over 45 private institutes of higher learning . Among Georgia 's public universities is the flagship research university , University of Georgia , the oldest public university in the United States . The University System of Georgia is the presiding body over public education in the state . The System includes 29 institutions of higher learning . The System is governed by the Georgia Board of Regents . 
 The HOPE Scholarship , funded by the state lottery , is available to all Georgia residents who have graduated from high school or earned a General Educational Development certificate . The student must maintain a 3 @.@ 2 or higher grade point average and attend a public college or university in the state . 
 = = Media = = 
 The Atlanta metropolitan area is the ninth largest media market in the United States as ranked by Nielsen Media Research . The state 's other top markets are Savannah ( 95th largest ) , Augusta ( 115th largest ) , and Columbus ( 127th largest ) . 
 There are 48 television broadcast stations in Georgia including TBS , TNT , TCM , Cartoon Network , CNN and Headline News , all founded by notable Georgia resident Ted Turner . 
 By far , the largest daily newspaper in Georgia is the Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution with a daily readership of 195 @,@ 592 and a Sunday readership of 397 @,@ 925 . Other large dailies include The Augusta Chronicle , the Columbus Ledger @-@ Enquirer , The Telegraph ( formerly The Macon Telegraph ) and the Savannah Morning News . 
 WSB @-@ AM in Atlanta was the first licensed radio station in the southeastern United States , signing on in 1922 . Georgia Public Radio has been in service since 1984 and , with the exception of Atlanta , it broadcasts daily on several FM ( and one AM ) stations across the state . Georgia Public Radio reaches nearly all of Georgia ( with the exception of the Atlanta area , which is served by <unk> ) . 
 WSB @-@ TV in Atlanta is the state 's oldest television station , having begun operations in 1948 . WSB was only the second such operation founded in the Southern U.S. , trailing only <unk> in Richmond , Virginia . 
 Also the main headquarters of The Weather Channel is in Atlanta . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Transportation in Georgia is overseen by the Georgia Department of Transportation , a part of the executive branch of the state government . Georgia 's major Interstate Highways are I @-@ 20 , I @-@ 75 , I @-@ 85 , and I @-@ 95 . On March 18 , 1998 , the Georgia House of Representatives passed a resolution naming the portion of Interstate Highway 75 , which runs from the Chattahoochee River northward to the Tennessee state line the Larry McDonald Memorial Highway . Larry McDonald , a Democratic member of the House of Representatives , had been on Korean Air Lines Flight 007 when it was shot down by the Soviets on September 1 , 1983 . 
 Georgia 's primary commercial airport is Hartsfield – Jackson Atlanta International Airport ( ATL ) , and is the world 's busiest passenger airport . In addition to Hartsfield @-@ Jackson , there are eight other airports serving major commercial traffic in Georgia . Savannah / Hilton Head International Airport is the second @-@ busiest airport in the state as measured by passengers served , and is the only additional international airport . Other commercial airports ( ranked in order of passengers served ) are located in Augusta , Columbus , Albany , Macon , Brunswick , Valdosta , and Athens . 
 The Georgia Ports Authority manages two deepwater seaports , at Savannah and Brunswick , and two river ports , at Bainbridge and Columbus . The Port of Savannah is a major U.S. seaport on the Atlantic coast . 
 The Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority ( MARTA ) is the principal rapid transit system in the Atlanta metropolitan area . Formed in 1971 as strictly a bus system , MARTA operates a network of bus routes linked to a rapid transit system consisting of 48 miles ( 77 km ) of rail track with 38 train stations . MARTA operates almost exclusively in Fulton and DeKalb counties , with bus service to two destinations in Cobb county and the Cumberland Transfer Center next to the Cumberland Mall , and a single rail station in Clayton County at Hartsfield @-@ Jackson Atlanta International Airport . MARTA also operates a separate paratransit service for disabled customers . As of 2009 , the average total daily ridership for the system ( bus and rail ) was 482 @,@ 500 passengers . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 The state has 151 general hospitals , over 15 @,@ 000 doctors and almost 6 @,@ 000 dentists . The state is ranked forty @-@ first in the percentage of residents who engage in regular exercise . 
 = = Cities = = 
 Atlanta , located in north @-@ central Georgia at the Eastern Continental Divide , has been Georgia 's capital city since 1868 . It is the most populous city in Georgia , with just over 420 @,@ 000 residents in 2010 . 
 The Atlanta metropolitan area is the cultural and economic center of the Southeast , and its population in 2010 was 5 @,@ 268 @,@ 860 , or 53 @.@ 6 % of Georgia 's total . Atlanta is the nation 's ninth largest metropolitan area . 
 The state has fourteen other cities with populations above 50 @,@ 000 ( based on 2012 census estimates ) . In descending order of size they are Columbus , Augusta , Macon , Savannah , Athens , Sandy Springs , Roswell , Albany , Johns Creek , Warner Robins , Alpharetta , Marietta , Valdosta and Smyrna . 
 Along with the rest of the Southeast , Georgia 's population continues to grow rapidly , with primary gains concentrated in urban areas . The population of the Atlanta metropolitan area added 1 @.@ 23 million people ( 24 percent ) between 2000 and 2010 , and Atlanta rose in rank from the eleventh largest metropolitan area in the United States to the ninth largest . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Jimmy Carter , from Plains , Georgia , was President of the United States from 1977 to 1981 . 
 = = State symbols = = 
 Amphibian : American green tree frog 
 Bird : brown thrasher 
 Butterfly : eastern tiger swallowtail 
 Dance : square dance 
 Fish : largemouth bass 
 Flower : Cherokee rose 
 Food : grits , peach , <unk> onion 
 Fossil : shark tooth 
 Gem : quartz 
 Insect : European honey bee 
 Mammal : White @-@ tailed deer 
 Marine mammal : right whale 
 Mineral : <unk> 
 Nicknames : 
 " Peach State " 
 " Empire State of the South " 
 Reptile : gopher tortoise 
 Rock : granite 
 Shell : knobbed whelk 
 Soil : <unk> 
 Song : " Georgia on My Mind " 
 Tree : live oak 
 = Church of the Holy Mother of God , Asen 's Fortress = 
 The Church of the Holy Mother of God ( Bulgarian : църква " Света <unk> " , tsarkva " Sveta <unk> " ) is the popular name of a medieval Eastern Orthodox church located in Asen 's Fortress . It lies near Asenovgrad in the Rhodope Mountains of Plovdiv Province , south central Bulgaria . Constructed most likely in the 12th century , it features two stories , of which the upper story is the church proper and the lower story is of unclear function . The rectangular tower over the church 's narthex is regarded as the earliest preserved of its kind in the Balkans . Fragments of frescoes are visible on the walls of the church 's upper story . 
 = = Location and history = = 
 The Church of the Holy Mother of God lies on an elevation near the road from Plovdiv to <unk> , 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south of the town of Asenovgrad ( medieval Stenimachos ) . It forms part of a now mostly ruined castle known as Asen 's Fortress , of which the church is the best preserved building . The church is dated by most scholars to the 12th century ; however , some researchers place its construction in the 11th century and a few others in the 13th century . 
 Though the church is commonly known as the Church of the Holy Mother of God , this may well not have been its actual name . The dedication is alleged based on a partial Medieval Greek inscription in the church , which may have been a donor 's inscription . In the early 20th century , the part of the inscription that was still visible was deciphered as " <unk> <unk> τῆς <unk> " , equivalent to " or the Mother of God of <unk> " . However , this was the name of the main church ( katholikon ) of the nearby Bachkovo Monastery , which makes it more likely that the inscription references the monastery and its relation to the church in Asen 's Fortress in some way , rather than providing the name of the church . 
 At the turn of the 20th century , the Church of the Holy Mother of God was the terminus of two rival religious processions organised by the ethnic Greek and Bulgarian communities of Asenovgrad . A Greek procession took place in 1899 and a comparable Bulgarian one was carried out several years later . These processions began after a man claimed to have seen lights and heard chants while passing near the then @-@ abandoned church . Both processions ended with a Divine Liturgy observed at night by the church . 
 After suffering damage during an earthquake in 1904 , the church was reconstructed by a team directed by architect Aleksandar <unk> in 1936 . As of 2008 , it continues to function as a place of worship . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Church of the Holy Mother of God measures approximately 18 metres ( 59 ft ) in length , 7 metres ( 23 ft ) in width and 12 metres ( 39 ft ) in height ( over 15 metres ( 49 ft ) according to other data ) . The walls of the church were constructed out of interchanging bands of stones and three rows of brickwork tied together with mortar . An exception is the north wall , which was built almost exclusively of stones , with only a single band of bricks . The walls vary from 0 @.@ 85 to 1 @.@ 15 m ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 8 ft ) in thickness . 
 The church features two stories : while the upper story was certainly the church proper and the place of liturgy , the role of the lower story is unclear . Its construction may have been necessitated due to the unfavourable rocky terrain , or it may have served as a tomb or a storage facility . The latter is considered more likely because no human remains have been discovered inside , even though the lower stories of similar churches were commonly used as tombs . 
 The church has a single elongated nave . It is surmounted by a dome and finishes with a single apse in its eastern part . The dome is supported by arches to the north and south and vaults to the west and east . The apse is five @-@ sided on the outside and round on the inside . To the west of it is the sanctuary which features three vaults which hosted the <unk> , the prothesis and the diaconicon . The sanctuary was separated from the rest of the nave via two pillars . Three buttresses support the south wall and the apse . The entrance to the church is on the south wall . The church has a total of 16 windows : three on the apse , one on the south wall , four on the north wall and one on the narthex . 
 To the west of the nave is a small narthex , which is topped by an unusual rectangular tower . The tower was used either as a bell tower or watchtower , or possibly both . It was accessible via wooden ladders on the inside and the outside . It features four wide vaulted windows in its upper part and a rectangular dome covered with roof tiles . According to art historian Robert G. Ousterhout , the tower of the Church of the Holy Mother of God is the earliest example of a belfry integrated into a church building and arranged above the narthex in Balkan architecture . This design would later establish itself as standard in the Balkans . The construction of an integrated tower has been attributed to either Western European or oriental ( Syriac or Armenian ) influences . 
 = = Decoration = = 
 The church 's exterior appearance has been described as " harmonic " , " graceful " and " proportionate " . The Church of the Holy Mother of God is richly decorated on the outside . Blind arches , a design element very typical for medieval Bulgarian architecture , feature prominently on the south facade and the dome . A large arch on the south wall ties together the lower and upper story . The apse is particularly richly decorated . Besides rows of elongated bricks , it also includes triangular shapes and lattice patterns above , both made of red bricks . 
 The church 's upper story features fragments of frescoes , mostly on the interior , though there are traces of mural painting on one of the blind arches as well . The interior includes images of the Baptism of Christ , Pilate 's Court , the Dormition of the Mother of God and the Crucifixion of Jesus . Among the portraits of saints that can be recognised are John the Baptist , the apostles Peter and Paul , Constantine and Helena and the Forty Martyrs of Sebaste . Military saints were depicted on the south wall , while the north wall mostly features monks . All of the preserved frescoes were done in the 14th century and are an example of Palaiologan art . All captions to the frescoes are in Medieval Greek . 
 = Brown Dog affair = 
 The Brown Dog affair was a political controversy about vivisection that raged in England from 1903 until 1910 . It involved the infiltration by Swedish feminists of University of London medical lectures , pitched battles between medical students and the police , police protection for the statue of a dog , a libel trial at the Royal Courts of Justice , and the establishment of a Royal Commission to investigate the use of animals in experiments . The affair became a cause célèbre that divided the country . 
 The controversy was triggered by allegations that , in February 1903 , William Bayliss of the Department of Physiology at University College London performed an illegal vivisection , before an audience of 60 medical students , on a brown terrier dog – adequately anaesthetized , according to Bayliss and his team ; conscious and struggling , according to the Swedish activists . The procedure was condemned as cruel and unlawful by the National Anti @-@ Vivisection Society . Bayliss , whose research on dogs led to the discovery of hormones , was outraged by the assault on his reputation . He sued for libel and won . 
 Anti @-@ vivisectionists commissioned a bronze statue of the dog as a memorial , unveiled in Battersea in 1906 , but medical students were angered by its provocative plaque – " Men and women of England , how long shall these Things be ? " – leading to frequent vandalism of the memorial and the need for a 24 @-@ hour police guard against the so @-@ called anti @-@ doggers . On 10 December 1907 1 @,@ 000 medical students marched through central London waving effigies of the brown dog on sticks , clashing with suffragettes , trade unionists and 400 police officers , one of a series of battles known as the Brown Dog riots . 
 In March 1910 , tired of the controversy , Battersea Council sent four workers accompanied by 120 police officers to remove the statue under cover of darkness , after which it was reportedly melted down by the council 's blacksmith , despite a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong petition in its favour . A new statue of the brown dog was commissioned by anti @-@ vivisection groups over 70 years later , and was erected in Battersea Park in 1985 . Peter Mason wrote in 1997 that all that was left of the old statue was a hump in the pavement , the sign on a nearby fence reading " No Dogs . " 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 = = = 
 There was significant opposition to vivisection in England , in both houses of parliament , during the 1837 – 1901 reign of Queen Victoria . The Queen herself was strongly opposed to it . The term vivisection referred to the dissection of living animals , with and without anaesthesia , often in front of audiences of medical students . There were around 300 experiments on animals in the UK in 1875 , a figure that had risen to 19 @,@ 084 in 1903 when the brown dog was vivisected , and 4 @.@ 11 million in 2012 , 4 @,@ 643 of them on dogs . 
 <unk> in the 19th century were frequently criticized for their work , including the well @-@ known French physiologist Claude Bernard . Bernard appears to have shared the distaste of his critics , who included his wife , referring to " the science of life " as a " superb and dazzlingly lighted hall which may be reached only by passing through a long and ghastly kitchen . " Irish feminist Frances Power Cobbe founded the National Anti @-@ Vivisection Society ( <unk> ) in London in 1875 and the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection in 1898 . The former sought to restrict vivisection and the latter to abolish it . 
 The opposition led the British government , in July 1875 , to set up the first Royal Commission on the " Practice of Subjecting Live Animals to Experiments for Scientific Purposes . " After hearing that researchers did not use anaesthetics regularly , the Commission recommended a series of measures , including a ban on experiments on dogs , cats , horses , donkeys and mules . The General Medical Council and British Medical Journal objected , so additional protection was introduced instead . The result was the Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 , criticized by <unk> as " infamous but well @-@ named . " 
 The Act stipulated that researchers could not be prosecuted for cruelty , but that the animal must be anaesthetized , unless the anaesthesia would interfere with the point of the experiment . Each animal could be used only once , though several procedures regarded as part of the same experiment were permitted . The animal had to be killed when the study was over , unless doing so would frustrate the object of the experiment . Prosecutions could take place only with the approval of the Home Secretary . At the time of the Brown Dog affair this was Aretas Akers @-@ Douglas , who was unsympathetic to the anti @-@ vivisectionist cause . 
 = = = Ernest Starling and William Bayliss = = = 
 In the early twentieth century , Ernest Starling , Professor of Physiology at University College London , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law William Bayliss , were using vivisection on dogs to determine whether the nervous system controls pancreatic secretions , as postulated by Ivan Pavlov . According to Starling 's biographer , John Henderson , Starling and Bayliss were " compulsive experimenters , " and Starling 's lab was the busiest in London . Bayliss had held a licence to practice vivisection since 1890 and had taught physiology since 1900 . 
 The men knew that the pancreas produces digestive juices in response to increased acidity in the duodenum and jejunum , because of the arrival of <unk> there . By severing the duodenal and <unk> nerves in anaesthetized dogs , while leaving the blood vessels intact , then introducing acid into the duodenum and jejunum , they discovered that the process is not mediated by a nervous response , but by a new type of chemical reflex . They named the chemical messenger secretin , because it is secreted by the intestinal lining into the bloodstream , stimulating the pancreas on circulation . 
 In 1905 Starling coined the term hormone – from the Greek <unk> <unk> meaning " I arouse " or " I excite " – to describe chemicals such as secretin that are capable , in extremely small quantities , of stimulating organs from a distance . Bayliss and Starling had also used vivisection on anaesthetized dogs to discover peristalsis in 1899 . They went on to discover a variety of other important physiological phenomena and principles , many of which were based on their experimental work involving animal vivisection . 
 = = = Lizzy Lind af Hageby and <unk> Schartau = = = 
 Starling and Bayliss 's lectures had been infiltrated by two Swedish feminists and anti @-@ vivisection activists , Lizzy Lind af Hageby and <unk> Katherine Schartau . The women had known each other since childhood and came from distinguished families . Lind af Hageby was the granddaughter of a chamberlain to the King of Sweden , the daughter of a former chief justice of Sweden , and had attended Cheltenham Ladies College in England . Schartau 's father was a Swedish army captain . 
 In 1900 the women visited the Pasteur Institute in Paris , a centre of animal experimentation , and were shocked by the rooms full of caged animals given diseases by the researchers . They founded the Anti @-@ Vivisection Society of Sweden when they returned home , and in 1902 enrolled as students at the London School of Medicine for Women , a vivisection @-@ free college that had visiting arrangements with other London colleges , to gain medical training for their anti @-@ vivisectionist campaigns . 
 They attended 100 lectures and demonstrations at King 's and University College , including 50 experiments on live animals , of which 20 were what Mason called " full @-@ scale vivisection . " They kept a diary , calling it Eye @-@ Witnesses , and later The Shambles of Science : Extracts from the Diary of Two Students of Physiology ( shambles was a name for a slaughterhouse ) . The women were present when the brown dog was vivisected , and wrote a chapter about it called " Fun , " referring to the laughter they said they heard in the lecture room during the procedure . 
 = = The brown dog = = 
 = = = Vivisection of the dog = = = 
 The brown dog was a terrier mix with a short rough coat , weighing 14 – 15 lb ( around 6 kg ) . He was first used in a vivisection in December 1902 by Starling , who cut open his abdomen and <unk> the pancreatic duct . He lived in a cage for the next two months , until Starling and Bayliss used him again for two procedures on 2 February 1903 , the day the Swedish women were present . 
 Outside the lecture room before the students arrived , according to testimony Starling and others gave in court , Starling first cut the dog open again to inspect the results of the previous surgery , which took about 45 minutes , after which he clamped the wound with forceps and handed the dog over to Bayliss . 
 Bayliss cut a new opening in the dog 's neck to expose the lingual nerves of the salivary glands , which he attached to electrodes . The intention was to stimulate the nerves with electricity to demonstrate that salivary pressure was independent of blood pressure . The dog was then carried to the lecture theatre , stretched on his back on an operating board , with his legs tied to the board , his head clamped and his mouth muzzled . 
 According to Bayliss , the dog had been given a morphine injection earlier in the day , then was anaesthetized during the procedure with six fluid ounces of alcohol , chloroform and ether ( ACE ) , delivered from an ante @-@ room to a tube in his trachea , via a pipe hidden behind the bench on which the men were working . The Swedish students disputed that the dog had been adequately anaesthetized . They said the dog had appeared conscious during the procedure , had tried to lift himself off the board , and that there was no smell of anaesthesia or the usual hissing sound of the apparatus . Other students said the dog had not struggled , but had merely twitched . 
 In front of around 60 students , Bayliss stimulated the nerves with electricity for half an hour , but was unable to demonstrate his point . The dog was then handed to a student , Henry Dale , a future Nobel laureate , who removed the dog 's pancreas , then killed him with a knife through the heart . This became a point of embarrassment during the libel trial , when Bayliss 's laboratory assistant , Charles Scuttle , testified that the dog had been killed with chloroform or the ACE mixture . After Scuttle 's testimony Dale told the court that he had , in fact , used a knife . 
 = = = Women 's diary = = = 
 On 14 April 1903 Lind af Hageby and Schartau showed their unpublished 200 @-@ page diary to barrister Stephen Coleridge , secretary of the National Anti @-@ Vivisection Society , son of John Duke Coleridge , former Lord Chief Justice of England , and great @-@ grandson of the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge . His attention was drawn to the account of the brown dog . The 1876 Cruelty to Animals Act forbade the use of an animal in more than one experiment , yet it appeared that the brown dog had been used by Starling to perform surgery on the pancreas , used again by him when he opened the dog to inspect the results of the previous surgery , and used for a third time by Bayliss to study the salivary glands . The diary said of the procedures on the brown dog : 
 The allegations of repeated use and inadequate anaesthesia represented prima facie violations of the Cruelty to Animals Act . In addition the diary said the dog had been killed by Henry Dale , an unlicensed research student , and that the students had laughed during the procedure ; there were " jokes and laughter everywhere " in the lecture hall , it said . 
 = = = Stephen Coleridge 's speech = = = 
 According to Mason , Coleridge decided there was no point in relying on a prosecution under the Act , which he regarded as deliberately obstructive . Instead he gave an angry speech about the dog on 1 May 1903 to the annual meeting of the National Anti @-@ Vivisection Society at St James 's Hall , attended by 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 people . ( Mason writes that support and apologies for absence were sent by writers Jerome K. Jerome , Thomas Hardy and Rudyard Kipling . ) Coleridge accused the scientists of torture . " If this is not torture , let Mr. Bayliss and his friends ... tell us in Heaven 's name what torture is . " 
 Details of the speech were published the next day by the radical Daily News ( founded in 1846 by Charles Dickens ) , and questions were raised in the House of Commons , particularly by Sir Frederick Banbury , a Conservative MP and sponsor of a bill aimed at ending vivisection demonstrations . Bayliss demanded a public apology , and when by 12 May it had failed to materialize he issued a writ for libel . 
 Ernest Starling decided not to sue ; The Lancet , no friend of Coleridge , wrote that " it may be contended that Professor Starling ... committed a technical infringement of the Act . " Coleridge tried to persuade the women not to publish their diary before the trial began , but they went ahead anyway , and it was published by Ernest Bell of Covent Garden in July 1903 . 
 = = Bayliss v Coleridge = = 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 The trial opened at the Old Bailey on 11 November 1903 before Lord Alverstone , the Lord Chief Justice , and lasted four days , closing on 18 November . There were queues 30 yards long outside the courthouse . The British Medical Journal called it " a test case of the utmost gravity . " 
 Bayliss 's counsel , Rufus Isaacs , called Starling as his first witness . Starling admitted that he had broken the law by using the dog twice , but said that he had done so to avoid sacrificing two dogs . Bayliss testified that the dog had been given one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half grains of morphia earlier in the day , then six ounces of alcohol , chloroform and ether , delivered from an ante room to a tube connected to the dog 's trachea . Bayliss said the tubes were fragile , and that had the dog been struggling they would have broken . 
 A veterinarian , Alfred Sewell , said the system Bayliss was using was unlikely to be adequate , but other witnesses , including Frederick Hobday of the Royal Veterinary College , disagreed ; there was even a claim that Bayliss had used too much anaesthesia , which is why the dog had failed to respond to the electrical stimulation . Bayliss said the dog had been suffering from chorea , a disease that causes involuntary spasm , and that any movement Lind af Hageby and Schartau had seen was not purposive . Four students , three women and a man , were called by Bayliss 's counsel and testified that the dog had appeared to be unconscious . 
 Coleridge 's barrister , John Lawson Walton , called Lind af Hageby and Schartau . They repeated they had been the first students to arrive and had been left alone with the dog for about two minutes . They had observed scars from the previous operations and an incision in the neck where two tubes had been placed . They had not smelled the anaesthetic and had not seen any apparatus delivering it . They said , Mason wrote , that the dog had arched his back and jerked his legs in what they regarded as an effort to escape . When the experiment began the dog continued to " <unk> its abdomen " and tremble , they said , movements they regarded as " violent and purposeful . " 
 Bayliss 's lawyer criticized Coleridge for having accepted the women 's statements without seeking corroboration , and for speaking about the issue publicly without first approaching Bayliss , despite knowing that doing so could lead to litigation . Coleridge replied that he had not sought verification because he knew the claims would be denied , and that he continued to regard the women 's statement as true . The Times wrote of his testimony : " The Defendant , when placed in the witness box , did as much damage to his own case as the time at his disposal for the purpose would allow . " 
 = = = Verdict = = = 
 Lord Alverstone told the jury that the case was an important one of national interest . He called The Shambles of Science " hysterical , " but advised the jury not to be swayed by arguments about the validity of vivisection . After retiring for 25 minutes on 18 November 1903 , the jury unanimously found that Bayliss had been defamed , to the applause of physicians in the public gallery . Bayliss was awarded £ 2 @,@ 000 with £ 3 @,@ 000 costs ; Coleridge gave him a cheque the next day . 
 The Daily News asked for donations and raised £ 5 @,@ 700 within four months to cover Coleridge 's costs . Bayliss donated his damages to UCL for use in research ; according to Mason , Bayliss ignored the Daily Mail 's suggestion that he call it the " Stephen Coleridge Vivisection Fund . " <unk> wrote in 2004 that the fund may still have been in use then to buy animals . 
 The Times declared itself satisfied with the verdict , though it criticized the rowdy behaviour of medical students during the trial , accusing them of " medical hooliganism . " The Sun , Star and Daily News backed Coleridge , calling the decision a miscarriage of justice . Ernest Bell , publisher and printer of The Shambles of Science , apologized to Bayliss on 25 November , and pledged to withdraw the diary and pass its remaining copies to Bayliss 's solicitors . 
 The Animal Defence and Anti @-@ Vivisection Society , founded by Lind af Hageby in 1903 , republished the book , printing a fifth edition by 1913 . The chapter " Fun " was replaced by one called " The <unk> of the Brown Dog , " describing the experiment and the trial . The novelist Thomas Hardy kept a copy of it on a table for visitors . According to historian Hilda Kean , the Research Defence Society , a lobby group founded in 1908 to counteract the <unk> campaign , discussed how to have the revised editions withdrawn . 
 In December 1903 Mark Twain , who opposed vivisection , published a short story , A Dog 's Tale , in Harper 's , written from the point of view of a dog whose puppy is experimented on and killed . Given the timing and Twain 's views , the story may have been inspired by the libel trial , according to Mark Twain scholar Shelley Fisher Fishkin . Coleridge ordered 3 @,@ 000 copies of A Dog 's Tale , which were specially printed for him by Harper 's . 
 = = Second Royal Commission on Vivisection = = 
 The government appointed the Second Royal Commission on Vivisection on 17 September 1906 . It heard evidence from scientists and anti @-@ vivisection groups ; Ernest Starling addressed the commission for three days in December 1906 . 
 After much delay ( two of its ten members died and several fell ill ) , the commission reported its findings in March 1912 . Its 139 @-@ page report recommended an increase in the number of full @-@ time inspectors from two to four ; restrictions on the use of curare , a poison used to immobilize animals during experiments ; the euthanasia of animals in severe pain , even if it meant frustrating the experiment ; and the tightening of the definition and practice of <unk> . It also recommended the maintenance of more detailed records and the establishment of a committee to advise the Secretary of State on matters related to the Cruelty to Animals Act ; this became the Animal Procedures Committee under the Animals ( Scientific Procedures ) Act 1986 . 
 = = Brown Dog memorial = = 
 = = = Statue = = = 
 After the trial Anna Louisa Woodward , founder of the World League Against Vivisection , raised £ 120 for a public memorial , and commissioned a bronze statue of the dog from sculptor Joseph Whitehead . The statue sat on top of a granite memorial stone , 7 ft 6 in ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) tall , that housed a drinking fountain for human beings and a lower trough for dogs and horses . It also carried an inscription ( right ) , described by The New York Times in 1910 as the " hysterical language customary of anti @-@ vivisectionists " and " a slander on the whole medical profession . " 
 The group turned to the borough of Battersea for a location for the memorial . Lansbury wrote that the area was a hotbed of radicalism – proletarian , socialist , full of belching smoke and slums , and closely associated with the anti @-@ vivisection movement . The National Anti @-@ Vivisection and Battersea General Hospital – which opened in 1896 on the corner of Albert Bridge Road and Prince of Wales Drive , and closed in 1972 – refused until 1935 to perform vivisection or employ doctors who engaged in it , and was known locally as the " <unk> " or the " old anti . " The chairman of the Battersea Dogs Home , William Cavendish @-@ Bentinck , 6th Duke of Portland , rejected a request in 1907 that its lost dogs be sold to <unk> as " not only horrible , but absurd . " 
 Battersea council agreed to provide space for the statue on its Latchmere Recreation Ground , part of the council 's new Latchmere Estate , which offered terraced homes to rent for seven and sixpence a week . The statue was unveiled on 15 September 1906 in front of a large crowd , with speakers that included George Bernard Shaw and the Irish feminist Charlotte Despard . 
 = = = Riots = = = 
 = = = = November – December 1907 = = = = 
 Medical students at London 's teaching hospitals were enraged by the plaque . The first year of the statue 's existence was a quiet one , while University College explored whether they could take legal action over it , but from November 1907 the students turned Battersea into the scene of frequent disruption . 
 The first action was on 20 November , when undergraduate William Howard Lister led a group of students across the Thames to Battersea to attack the statue with a crowbar and sledgehammer . Ten of them were arrested by just two police officers . According to Mason , a local doctor told the South Western Star that this signalled the " utter degeneration " of junior doctors : " I can remember the time when it was more than 10 policemen could do to take one student . The Anglo @-@ Saxon race is played out . " 
 Several students were fined ₤ 5 by the magistrate , Paul Taylor , at South @-@ West London Police Court in Battersea . This triggered another protest two days later , when 1 @,@ 000 medical students from UCL , King 's , Guy 's and the West Middlesex hospitals marched along the Strand toward King 's College , waving miniature brown dogs on sticks and a life @-@ sized effigy of the magistrate , and singing , " Let 's hang Paul Taylor on a sour apple tree / As we go marching on . " The Times reported that they tried to burn the effigy but , unable to light it , threw it in the Thames instead . 
 Women 's suffrage meetings were invaded , though the students knew that not all suffragettes were anti @-@ vivisectionists . A meeting organized by Millicent Fawcett on 5 December 1907 was left with chairs and tables smashed and one steward with a torn ear . The Daily Express reported it as " Medical Students Gallant Fight with Women . " 
 = = = = 10 December 1907 = = = = 
 The rioting reached its height five days later , on Tuesday , 10 December , when 100 medical students tried to pull the memorial down . The previous protests had been spontaneous , but this one was organized to coincide with the annual Oxford @-@ Cambridge rugby match at Queen 's Club , West Kensington . The protesters hoped ( in vain , as it turned out ) that some of the thousands of Oxbridge students would swell their numbers . The intention was that , after toppling the statue and throwing it in the Thames , 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 students would meet at 11 : 30 pm in Trafalgar Square . Street vendors sold handkerchiefs stamped with the date of the protest and the words , " Brown Dog 's inscription is a lie , and the statuette an insult to the London University . " 
 In the afternoon protesters headed for the statue , but were driven off by locals . The students proceeded down Battersea Park Road instead , intending to attack the Anti @-@ Vivisection Hospital , but were again forced back . When one student fell from the top of a tram , the workers shouted that it was " the brown dog 's revenge " and refused to take him to hospital . The British Medical Journal responded that , given that it was the Anti @-@ Vivisection Hospital , the crowd 's actions may have been " prompted by benevolence . " 
 A second group of students headed for central London , waving effigies of the brown dog , joined by a police escort and , briefly , a busker with bagpipes . As the marchers reached Trafalgar Square , they were 1 @,@ 000 strong , facing 400 police officers , 15 of them on horseback . The students gathered around Nelson 's Column , where the ringleaders climbed onto its base to make speeches . 
 As students fought with police on the ground , mounted police charged the crowd , scattering them into smaller groups and arresting the stragglers , including one Cambridge undergraduate , Alexander Bowley , who was arrested for " barking like a dog . " The fighting continued for hours before the police gained control . At Bow Street magistrate 's court the next day , ten students were bound over to keep the peace , and several were fined 40 shillings , or £ 3 if they had fought with police . 
 = = = = Strange relationships = = = = 
 Rioting broke out elsewhere over the following days and months , with medical and veterinary students uniting . When Lizzy Lind af Hageby arranged a meeting of the Ealing and Acton Anti @-@ Vivisection Society at Acton Central Hall on 11 December 1906 , over 100 students disrupted it , throwing chairs and stink bombs when she tried to speak . The Daily Chronicle reported : " The rest of Miss Lind @-@ af @-@ Hageby 's indignation was lost in a beautiful ' eggy ' atmosphere that was now rolling heavily across the hall . ' Change your socks ! ' shouted one of the students . " Furniture was smashed and clothing torn . 
 For Susan McHugh of the University of New England , the dog 's mongrel status reflected the political coalition that rallied to the statue 's defence . The riots saw trade unionists , socialists , Marxists , liberals and suffragettes descend on Battersea to fight the medical students , even though , she writes , the suffragettes were not a group toward whom male workers felt any warmth . But the " Brown Terrier Dog Done to Death " by the male scientific establishment united them all . 
 Lizzy Lind af @-@ Hageby and Charlotte Despard saw the affair as a battle between feminism and machismo . Coral Lansbury wrote that the fight for women 's suffrage became closely linked with the anti @-@ vivisection movement . Three of the four vice @-@ presidents of the National Anti @-@ Vivisection Hospital were women . She argued that the Brown Dog affair became a matter of opposing symbols , the iconography of vivisection striking a chord with women . The vivisected dog on the operating board blurred into images of suffragettes force @-@ fed in Brixton Prison , or women strapped down for childbirth or forced to have their ovaries and uteruses removed as a cure for " mania . " 
 Both sides saw themselves as heirs to the future . Hilda Kean wrote that the Swedish activists were young and female , anti @-@ establishment and progressive , and viewed the scientists as remnants of a previous age . Their access to higher education that had made the case possible , creating what feminist scholar Susan Hamilton called a " new form of witnessing . " Against this , Lansbury wrote , the students saw themselves and their teachers as the " New Priesthood , " and the women and trade unionists as representatives of superstition and sentimentality . 
 = = = " Exit the ' Brown Dog ' " = = = 
 Questions were asked in the House of Commons about the cost of policing the statue , which required six constables a day at a cost of £ 700 a year . London 's police commissioner wrote to Battersea Council to ask that they contribute to it . Councillor John Archer , later Mayor of Battersea and one of the first black people to be elected to public office in the UK , told the Daily Mail that he was amazed by the request , considering Battersea was already paying £ 22 @,@ 000 a year in police rates . The Canine Defence League wondered whether , if Battersea were to organize raids on laboratories , the laboratories would be asked to pay the policing costs themselves . 
 Other councillors suggested the statue be encased in a steel cage and surrounded by a barbed wire fence . Suggestions were made through the letters pages of the Times and elsewhere that it be moved , perhaps to the grounds of the Anti @-@ Vivisection Hospital . The British Medical Journal wrote : 
 Battersea Council grew tired of the controversy . A new Conservative council was elected in November 1909 amid talk of removing the statue . There were protests in support of it , and the 500 @-@ strong Brown Dog memorial defence committee was established . Twenty thousand people signed a petition , and 1 @,@ 500 attended a rally in February 1910 addressed by Lind af Hageby , Charlotte Despard and Liberal MP George Greenwood . There were more demonstrations in central London and speeches in Hyde Park , with supporters wearing masks of dogs . 
 The protests were to no avail . The statue was quietly removed before dawn on 10 March 1910 by four council workmen accompanied by 120 police officers . Nine days later 3 @,@ 000 anti @-@ vivisectionists gathered in Trafalgar Square to demand its return , but it was clear by then that Battersea Council had turned its back on the affair . The statue was at first kept hidden in the borough surveyor 's bicycle shed , according to a letter his daughter wrote in 1956 to the British Medical Journal , then reportedly destroyed by a council blacksmith , who melted it down . Anti @-@ vivisectionists filed a High Court petition demanding its return , but the case was dismissed in January 1911 . 
 = = = Memorial restored = = = 
 The New York Times wrote in March 1910 that " it is not considered at all probable that the effigy will ever again be exhibited in a public place , " but on 12 December 1985 , a new memorial to the brown dog , by sculptor Nicola Hicks , was unveiled by actress Geraldine James in Battersea Park behind the Pump House . Commissioned by the National Anti @-@ Vivisection Society and the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection , the new dog is mounted on a 5 @-@ foot @-@ high ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) Portland stone plinth , and is based on Hicks 's own terrier , Brock . Peter Mason describes it as " a coquettish contrast to its down @-@ to @-@ earth predecessor . " 
 Echoing the fate of the previous memorial , the new dog was moved into storage in 1992 by Battersea Park 's owners , the Conservative Borough of Wandsworth , they said as part of a park renovation scheme . Anti @-@ vivisectionists campaigned for its return , suspicious of the explanation . It was reinstated in the park 's Woodland Walk in 1994 , near the Old English Garden , a more secluded location than before . 
 The new statue was criticized in 2003 by historian Hilda Kean . She saw the old Brown Dog as a radical statement , upright and defiant , not begging for mercy . For Kean , the new Brown Dog , located near the Old English Garden as " heritage , " has been separated from its anti @-@ vivisection iconography – the balaclavas of activists and painful eyes of rabbits . It is too safe , she argued ; unlike its controversial ancestor , it makes no one uncomfortable . 
 = OS T1000 = 
 T1000 and T1300 were two rapid transit train classes used on Oslo Metro in Oslo , Norway . The 197 cars were built by Strømmens Verksted , Norsk Elektrisk & Brown Boveri and AEG between 1960 and 1981 . They were the first metro trains used in Oslo , and had remained in active use until being replaced by OS MX3000 trains in 2007 . Each car is equipped with a driver 's cab at one or both ends and four motors , each with 98 kilowatts ( 131 hp ) . The cars are 17 metres ( 56 ft ) long , 3 @.@ 2 metres ( 10 ft ) wide and 3 @.@ 65 metres ( 12 @.@ 0 ft ) tall . The trains use 750 V current , and are capable of 70 kilometres per hour ( 43 mph ) . Signaling is provided through automatic train protection . 
 In 1960 , two less powerful T single @-@ car units were built , designed to be prototypes used on the Oslo Tramway . After a one @-@ year trial , they were put into scheduled traffic to the Kolsås Line , where they remained in regular service until 1983 . The production series is somewhat different in design and performance . T1000 is both used to refer to the class as a whole , or the first 162 cars , that are only equipped with third @-@ rail shoes . They have four slight variations , which have been given the designations T1 – T4 . The T1300 is a series of 33 new and sixteen rebuilt T4 trains equipped with pantographs which previously allowed them operate on the western part of the network , prior to it being upgraded to third @-@ rail metro standards . The newer units were designated T5 and T6 , while the rebuilt units were designated T7 and T8 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1954 , the Oslo City Council decided to build a four @-@ line metro to the new suburbs to the east of the city center . The plans would lead to the system opening in 1966 , after the conversion of the Østensjø and the Lambertseter Line of the Oslo Tramway to metro standard , and supplemented with the new Furuset and Grorud Line . The system would feature higher and longer platforms , allowing step @-@ free access to six @-@ car trains , automatic train protection and third rail power supply . This would make the metro incompatible with the existing tramways . 
 The first two single @-@ car trains were delivered in 1959 and given the designation T. They were delivered by Strømmens Værksted and NEBB as prototypes , without compensation from the planning office . They were tested on the Østensjø and Lambertseter Lines until 1 December 1960 , when they were transferred to Bærumsbanen , who used them on the Kolsås Line . During their service they were prone to technical problems , and were more in the depot than in service . However , they gave valuable knowledge for the serial production . The trains were originally painted silver with a dark @-@ blue cheatline and numbered 1 and 2 . About 1970 , they were repainted dark blue with a silver cheatline , and in 1971 given the numbers 451 and 452 . The latter remained in service until 1977 , when it was put aside , and scrapped in 1987 . The former remained in service until it was put aside as defect , although it had rarely been used since 1982 . It was fixed up and made operational again 1993 , but was withdrawn the same year and scrapped the following year . 
 Serial production started in 1964 , with the bodies built at Strømmens Værksted , the motors built by NEBB and the electrical equipment by AEG . By 1978 , 162 cars had been delivered to Oslo Sporveier . These were manufactured in four series , named T1 through T4 , with varying specifications . T1 was manufactured in 90 units from 1964 to 1966 for the opening of the Grorud Line and the conversion of the Lambertseter Line . The first 30 have driver 's cabs in both directions ( designated T1 @-@ 2 ) , while the latter 60 have it in only one end ( designated T1 @-@ 1 ) . In 1967 , 15 T2s were built for the conversion of the Østensjø Line . Although given a new designation , they are in all ways identical to the T1 @-@ 1s . From 1969 to 1972 , 30 <unk> were built for the Furuset Line . Further expansions of the lines resulted in 37 T4s being built from 1976 to 1978 . The T1000s are numbered 1001 – 1162 . 
 The need for new rolling stock on the western suburban tramways prompted Oslo Sporveier to order a modified version to the T1000 . This was because they had plans to connect the eastern and western networks , and gradually convert the western lines to metro standard . The T1300 units were built with the same specifications as the T1000 , but were also equipped with pantographs so they could operate on the light rail lines . They also had a slightly different front . The initial order was for 33 units , which were designated T5 and T6 . The former 18 units had a cab in one end , while the latter 15 had a cab in both ends , allowing Oslo Sporveier to operate single @-@ car trains . The new units were put into service on the Røa and Sognsvann Lines , and were also used on the Kolsås Line outside rush @-@ hour . 
 To replace the aging Class C trains , from 1985 to 1987 , ten T4s were converted to T1300 . They were equipped with a pantograph , received a new front and the doors were moved . Six additional T4s were converted in 1989 , and given the designation T8 . These only had the pantographs equipped and kept the same front and door arrangement . With the introduction of the T1300 , the western lines could remove the conductor and have single @-@ manned trains with the motorman selling tickets . The T1300 @-@ units have had better regularity than the older models they replaced . However , because they are designed for a closed system with automatic train protection , the braking systems are not sufficiently dimensioned for when the drivers use line of sight to regulate the speed and distances between trains . The 1300 units were numbered 1301 – 1349 . After the conversions , Oslo Sporveier operated 49 T1300 @-@ cars and 146 T1000 @-@ cars . The trains were originally painted red with a beige cheatline . 
 The Sognsvann Line was finished upgraded to metro standard on 7 January 1993 , allowing the first T1000 trains to operate through the Common Tunnel into the western network , converting parts of the Oslo Tramway to metro . The Røa Line was finished on 19 November 1995 , allowing all trains from the east to operate through the city center . To have sufficient metro @-@ compatible trains , six two @-@ car T2000 units were bought , and during the mid @-@ 1990s were considered to be a possible replacement for the T1000s . Starting in 1995 , Oslo Sporveier made an interior and livery upgrade to the T1000 trains . The main red color to the exterior was kept , but the doors and around the windows were painted blue . The lights and seats were changed , and the latter colored gray . The interior walls were painted red at the end , white on the sides , blue on the doors and received yellow hand bars . 
 Oslo City Council decided in 2003 to order 33 new three @-@ car units from Siemens , that would be designated MX3000 . In 2005 , the city council voted to replace all existing T1000 and T1300 stock with the MX3000 , increasing the order by another 30 units . Following a labor dispute in 2006 , it was decided that all rolling stock belonging to Oslo Sporveier would be transferred to a new holding company , Oslo Vognselskap . 
 The first deliveries of the MX3000 were made in April 2007 . The first T1000 was scrapped on 14 March 2007 , and the last T1000 train was run on 19 July 2009 . Oslo Tramway Museum has preserved seven T1000 cars : numbers 1002 ( T1 @-@ 2 ) , 1018 ( T1 @-@ 2 ) , 1076 ( T1 @-@ 1 ) , 1089 ( T1 @-@ 1 ) , 1092 ( T2 ) , 1129 ( T3 ) and 1141 ( T4 ) . 1089 is displayed in the museum , the other six cars are meant to be kept as an operative train . Of the T1000 units , no . 1076 was the one to run the furthest , reaching 2 @,@ 974 @,@ 076 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 848 @,@ 005 mi ) before retirement . On 22 April 2010 , the last T1300 was taken out of service , leaving only MX3000 units in service . Oslo Tramway Museum has preserved three T1300 cars : numbers 1306 ( T5 ) , 1320 ( T6 ) and 1335 ( T7 , originally T4 no . 1155 ) . The three cars are meant to be kept as an operative train . No T8 car was preserved . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 All versions have identical bodies , that are 17 metres ( 55 ft 9 in ) long , 3 @.@ 2 metres ( 10 ft 6 in ) wide and 3 @.@ 65 metres ( 12 ft 0 in ) high . Each car is equipped with two bogies , each with two axles . The axle distance is 2 @.@ 17 metres ( 7 ft 1 in ) , the bogie distance is 11 metres ( 36 ft 1 in ) and the wheel diameter is 82 centimetres ( 2 ft 8 in ) . They are each equipped with four 98 @-@ kilowatt ( 131 hp ) motors from NEBB , giving a maximum speed of 70 kilometres per hour ( 43 mph ) . They each weigh 27 @.@ 740 tonnes ( 27 @.@ 302 long tons ; 30 @.@ 578 short tons ) . The electrical equipment was delivered by AEG . 
 The train 's speed is controlled by an ATP system . The speed codes are transferred from the ATP points in the infrastructure , using 75 hertz pulses in the tracks . The trains pick up the signals via antennas . The speed codes are 15 km / h ( 9 mph ) , 30 km / h ( 19 mph ) , 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) and 70 km / h ( 43 mph ) . The permitted speeds are presented to the driver via displays in the driver 's cab ; in addition , the system will automatically reduce the speed , should the limit be exceeded . The driver can put the trains in an automatic mode , where the train adjusts its own speed to match the speed limit . The driver is always responsible for starting and stopping the train at stations . 
 The prototype T series consisted of two single @-@ car units . It had the same dimensions as the T1000 and T1300 , but had four 75 @-@ kilowatt ( 101 hp ) motors and weighed only 26 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 26 @.@ 1 long tons ; 29 @.@ 2 short tons ) . They were equipped with a pantograph and were bi @-@ directional , but lacked ATP and third rail shoes . For the T1000 @-@ series , the T1 @-@ 2 are the only to have a cab on both ends , although this is also featured on the T6 . Since the T3 , the trains have been delivered with electromagnetic brakes in addition to dynamic brakes , hand brakes and air brakes with . Models from T4 and onwards have larger cabs . 
 The T1300 differ in that they had a pantograph and were built for conductors . The seating varies between the models : T1000 has a total capacity of 180 passengers , of which 63 can be seated . T5 has the same total capacity , but 70 people can be seated . T6 has a capacity for 154 people , of which 64 can be seated . T7 and T8 have a capacity for 177 passengers , of which 60 can be seated . All models are capable of operating six cars in multiple , although they are commonly used in shorter configurations . 
 = Hughes Airwest Flight 706 = 
 Hughes Airwest Flight 706 was a regularly scheduled flight operated by Hughes Airwest , from Los Angeles , California , to Seattle , Washington , with several intermediate stops . On Sunday , June 6 , 1971 , the Douglas DC @-@ 9 @-@ 31 serving the flight collided in mid @-@ air with a U.S. Marine Corps F @-@ 4B Phantom II over southern California . 
 Flight 706 had departed Los Angeles just after 6 pm , en route to Seattle , with scheduled stopovers in Salt Lake City , Utah ; Boise , Idaho ; Lewiston , Idaho ; Pasco , Washington and Yakima , Washington . The F @-@ 4B Phantom was arriving at Marine Corps Air Station El Toro near Irvine from Naval Air Station Fallon in Nevada . The F @-@ 4 pilot and all 49 passengers and crew aboard the civilian airliner died in the collision over the San Gabriel Mountains , near Duarte . Only the radar intercept officer of the F @-@ 4B survived . The crash of RW 706 prompted the US Armed Forces to agree to both reduce the number of military aircraft operating under visual flight rules in civilian air corridors , and to require military aircraft to contact civilian air traffic controllers . 
 = = Flight histories = = 
 Flight 706 was a scheduled passenger flight from Los Angeles International Airport , California and Seattle – Tacoma International Airport , Washington . The McDonnell Douglas DC @-@ 9 @-@ 31 aircraft had accumulated 5 @,@ 542 airframe hours since entering service in 1969 . The aircraft was operating under the livery and name of Air West . The airline had been recently purchased by Howard Hughes and rebranded Hughes Airwest . 
 The aircraft was piloted by Captain Theodore Nicolai , 50 , who had logged 15 @,@ 490 hours of total flying time , with 2 @,@ 562 hours in DC @-@ 9s . His co @-@ pilot was First Officer Price Bruner , 49 , who had 17 @,@ 128 total hours flying time and 272 hours in DC @-@ 9s . Other crew members included three flight attendants : Joan R. <unk> , 34 ; Patricia Shelton , 28 ; and Helena <unk> , 30 . 
 Flight 706 departed from Los Angeles at 6 : 02 p.m. PDT for Salt Lake City , Utah , the first of five intermediate stops en route to Seattle . Control of the flight was transferred to Los Angeles Air Route Traffic Control Center at 6 : 06 p.m. and passed through 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) at 6 : 09 p.m. and instructed to head 040 ( magnetic ) until receiving the Daggett VOR , then direct . Flight 706 's acknowledgement of this instruction was the last radio transmission received from the aircraft . 
 The U.S. Marine Corps F @-@ 4B @-@ 18 @-@ MC Phantom II , Bureau Number ( BuNo ) 151458 , coded ' 458 ' , had been in operation since April 15 , 1964 . At the time of the accident it was assigned to Marine Fighter Attack Squadron 323 , Marine Aircraft Group 11 , 3rd Marine Air Wing , though it had been operated by various squadrons prior to that . The fighter plane was piloted by 1st Lt. James R. Phillips , 27 . The Radar Intercept Officer was 1st Lt. Christopher E. Schiess , 24 . The jet and its crew were based at MCAS El Toro . 
 <unk> ' was part of a cross @-@ country flight of two aircraft when its radio failed while landing at Mountain Home Air Force Base in southwest Idaho . The aircraft was ordered to effect repairs at Mountain Home AFB and then return to MCAS El Toro . Diagnostic tests at Mountain Home revealed that the aircraft had an inoperative radio , inoperative transponder , oxygen system leak , and a degraded radar system . Maintenance personnel were able to fix the radio and confirm the oxygen leak , but the base did not have the necessary personnel to repair either the transponder or the radar . 
 Lt. Phillips received permission from his superiors to fly the F @-@ 4B with an inoperative transponder . As the fighter proceeded to NAS Fallon in Nevada , the oxygen leak worsened until the system was disabled completely , and the pilot was instructed to fly at low altitude . The Phantom II departed NAS Fallon at 5 : 16 p.m. following a flight plan routing across the Fresno , Bakersfield , and Los Angeles air corridors . 
 Flight 706 was operating under instrument flight rules ( IFR ) . Under IFR procedures , the pilot guides the aircraft using the cockpit 's instrument panel for navigation , in addition to radioed guidance from air traffic controllers and ground radar . BuNo 151458 was operating under visual flight rules ( VFR ) . At the time of the accident , VFR require pilots to " see and avoid " other aircraft , a doctrine that dates back to early aviation . The " see and avoid " rule requires pilots of all aircraft flying in VMC to be maintain vigilance for other aircraft flying in their vicinity , in addition to traffic advisories from ATC . 
