 = = Collision = = 
 Near the Bakersfield Flight Service Station , the crew of ' 458 ' decided to deviate east from their flight plan to avoid heavy air traffic in the Los Angeles area . Lt. Phillips was forced to climb to 15 @,@ 500 feet ( 4 @,@ 700 m ) from 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) because of deteriorating weather conditions . Meanwhile , shortly after takeoff , Flight 706 received two radar traffic advisories , neither of which indicated the presence of ' 458 ' . 
 Soon after reaching 15 @,@ 500 feet ( 4 @,@ 700 m ) , the fighter 's DME ( radio ) showed MCAS El Toro was 50 miles ( 80 km ) away . The pilot of ' 458 ' then performed an aileron roll , a flight maneuver that rolled the aircraft 360 ° in order to allow the pilot to observe any air traffic above or below the aircraft . Lt. Schiess , the Radar Intercept Officer , was operating the fighter 's radar , which was unable to detect any aircraft due to its deteriorated condition . Because of the stowed position of the scope , he had been leaning forward and looking downward at the instrument . Between three and ten seconds prior to the collision , he glanced up and observed the DC @-@ 9 in his peripheral vision and shouted a warning to the pilot . The pilot attempted an evasive roll but was unable to clear the oncoming airliner . 
 At about 6 : 11 p.m. , Flight 706 and ' 458 ' collided at about 15 @,@ 150 feet ( 4 @,@ 620 m ) altitude , over the San Gabriel Mountains in the vicinity of Duarte . The collision tore the F @-@ 4 's tail off , and the DC @-@ 9 's cockpit was shorn off as a result . The stricken airliner " cartwheeled " through the air and plunged downwards . Witnesses in nearby Duarte described hearing a loud noise and seeing two flaming objects falling from the sky . A second explosion shook the area as the DC @-@ 9 hit the mountain . Lt. Schiess , the Radar Intercept Officer , ejected from the F @-@ 4B and parachuted to safety ; Lt. Phillips , the pilot , was unable to eject in time , and was killed . The F @-@ 4B crashed on Mount Bliss , approximately 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the airliner wreckage . Burning debris from the collision and subsequent crashes set off numerous small brush fires in the area . Wreckage was scattered across a mile of nearly inaccessible terrain in the Angeles National Forest . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The stricken airliner crashed onto Mount Bliss in the San Gabriel Mountains at an elevation of approximately 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) , where the bulk of the wreckage landed in a gorge . Fire department officials sent search and rescue helicopters to the crash site , but efforts were hampered by thick fog . Nine bodies were initially found at the crash site , a number of them intact and still strapped into their seats . News reports indicated that these bodies had apparently been thrown clear on impact , and had come to rest alongside the tail section of the aircraft . 
 Some eyewitnesses reported that the F @-@ 4B 's right wing struck the center of the airliner 's fuselage immediately after performing a barrel roll . Other witnesses claimed that the F @-@ 4B ripped a large hole in the fuselage of the DC @-@ 9 , through which papers and luggage streamed as the crippled airliner fell . Though papers with the words " Air West " and the date of June 6 were collected by Sheriff 's deputies , no luggage was recovered . 
 The National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) investigated the incident , assisted by the Marine Corps , Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) , Hughes Airwest , and the Airline Pilots Association . Early statements released by the NTSB revealed that the F @-@ 4B fighter had attempted to swerve away from the DC @-@ 9 immediately prior to impact , and that an additional 10 feet of clearance would have averted the entire collision . Additionally , the NTSB confirmed that the fighter had impacted the DC @-@ 9 in two places , with its right wing impacting the airliner 's forward passenger cabin and the vertical stabilizer " slicing through " the cockpit . 
 The DC @-@ 9 carried a primitive flight data recorder that recorded basic information about the aircraft 's air speed , acceleration , heading , and altitude on metal foil tapes . Additionally , the aircraft was equipped with a simple cockpit voice recorder that recorded all conversations that took place in the cockpit of the aircraft . The flight recorder was recovered by investigators on Thursday , June 10 , 1971 , and sent to Washington D.C. for analysis . Though the voice recorder was also recovered , the thermal protective measures had failed and the recording tapes were destroyed by fire . 
 = = = Survivability = = = 
 The NTSB determined that it had been impossible for any passenger aboard the Hughes Airwest DC @-@ 9 to survive the collision , disintegration , and crash of the aircraft . Though a severe ground fire ravaged both crash sites , the NTSB determined that all of the victims had died in the crash itself . 
 It was determined , however , that both crewmembers aboard the Marine F @-@ 4B could have survived the collision . Further investigation by the NTSB revealed a design flaw in the ejector seat and canopy assemblies of the fighter plane whereby the pilot would probably not be able to eject if the radar intercept officer ejected first . Since the specific design of ejector seats installed in the F @-@ 4B were not intended to be fired through the aircraft 's canopy , a circuit breaker kept the seat from ejecting if the canopy was in place . Once the canopy was manually unlocked , the ejector seat circuit was completed and could be fired . This specific design of ejector seat , however , had a tendency of being unable to complete the circuit in the pilot 's ejector seat if the aft ejector seat was fired first . The F @-@ 4B aircraft were in the process of being modified with a newly designed canopy when the collision occurred . Aircraft based at MCAS El Toro were slated to begin upgrades in July 1971 ; at the time of the collision , BuNo 151458 was still operating with the original canopy configuration , and the pilot was consequently unable to eject from the aircraft . 
 = = = Probable cause and recommendations = = = 
 The NTSB released their final accident report on August 30 , 1972 . The report concluded : 
 During the course of the accident investigation , the NTSB attempted to recreate the conditions of the accident to determine the visibility of <unk> on June 6 . They also calculated that their closing rate was about 1000 ft / s , similar to the muzzle velocity of a .45 caliber gun . The NTSB , Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) , and the Marine Corps flew a series of F @-@ 4B fighters along the flight paths described by Lt. Schiess , the radar intercept officer , and various witnesses . While the tests were sufficient to determine the difficulty in locating and identifying the fighter on the radar scope , the many other variables involved in the June 6 incident , including the deteriorated condition of ' 458 ' , compromised the validity of the study . This inability to ascertain the exact actions and circumstances of the air traffic controllers led the NTSB to recommend that the FAA install both video and audio surveillance in all air traffic control areas . 
 The NTSB report included a total of five recommendations for the FAA . These recommendations included : installing recorders for radar displays , installing audio conversation recorders at air traffic control facilities ; establishing climb and descent corridors under ATC positive control in the vicinity of air terminals ; and establishing more definitive procedures for receiving and handling the emergency transponder code 7700 . Additionally , the NTSB strongly recommended that the FAA and the Department of Defense cooperate to develop a program , in areas where a large intermix of civil and military traffic exists , to ensure that appropriate graphical depictions of airspace utilization and typical flow patterns are prominently displayed at all airports and operational bases for the benefit of all airspace users . 
 In addition to these recommendations , the NTSB also recommended that the Department of Defense restrict high @-@ speed , low @-@ altitude aircraft operation in civilian air corridors , consider collision avoidance technologies on military aircraft , and make military pilots aware of the FAA 's radar advisory service . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Congressmen Sherman P. Lloyd ( R @-@ Utah ) and Henry S. Reuss ( D @-@ Wis ) both decried the actions of the Marine jet fighter , which media at the time indicated had been " stunting " prior to the collision . In actuality , the 360 ° aileron roll maneuver the fighter pilot executed was to observe any air traffic above or below the aircraft . Lloyd said that military aircraft should be required to establish contact with air traffic controllers when entering high @-@ traffic air corridors and around airports , while Reuss advocated the complete ban of military aircraft from any high @-@ traffic civilian air corridors . Senator Frank Moss ( D @-@ Utah ) sponsored a bill in December that would require the installation of anti @-@ collision gear on all aircraft by 1975 . 
 VFR and the " see and avoid " doctrine faced sharp criticism in the press . Oscar M. Laurel , a member of the National Transportation Safety Board ( NTSB ) team investigating the crash , was widely quoted saying that now " may be a good time to take another look " at VFR flights near metropolitan areas . 
 The validity of the " see and avoid " doctrine as a safe means of aircraft navigation was a point of contention between the NTSB and the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) . The NTSB had faulted the doctrine in several earlier collisions , including the 1969 collision of Allegheny Airlines Flight 853 with a privately owned Piper PA @-@ 28 and the 1967 collision of Piedmont Airlines Flight 22 with a privately owned Cessna 310 . The FAA rebutted these findings and insisted that , regardless of the mode of operation , it is the duty of the aircraft pilot to be aware of any aircraft in his immediate vicinity . 
 In March 1971 , the NTSB released a report summarizing the findings of a study of midair collisions . The report indicated that 204 of 396 fatalities in U.S. jetliner crashes since 1967 had occurred in mid @-@ air collisions . Additionally , near @-@ miss situations involving jetliners occurred on average at least once per day , with the Los Angeles and New York areas noted as being especially high @-@ risk . Finally , the report noted that the current trend in air casualties indicated that a further 528 people would die in mid @-@ air collisions during the following ten years . These figures did not include the casualties from Flight 706 . 
 A FAA study in 1968 had found that a quarter of the 2 @,@ 230 near @-@ miss aircraft encounters reported that year had involved a military aircraft . Following the in @-@ flight collision of Flight 706 , the FAA and the US Military agreed to cut down on VFR flights and operate instead under IFR . This transition would require military aircraft to file flight plans and obey civilian air traffic controllers . 
 Shortly after the collision , on June 21 , 1971 , the Airline Pilots Association and Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization issued a joint statement asking the FAA for a series of safety regulations that included a speed limit of 250 knots ( 290 mph ) for aircraft operating under VFR . Other demands included the installation of transponders in all aircraft to amplify aircraft 's presence on radar screens , and the re @-@ evaluation of VFR due to the increased complexity , congestion , and speed of modern air travel . 
 The New York Times reported that the incidence of deaths in commercial aviation accidents had risen sharply in 1971 , up from 146 deaths in 1970 and 158 deaths in 1969 . Additionally , these deaths had occurred at a time when airlines were cutting back flights due to the economic recession , and airlines had flown about 6 % fewer hours in 1971 than 1970 . The eight fatal accidents of 1971 included three mid @-@ air collisions and four landing approach crashes ; one of these collisions , All Nippon Airways Flight 58 , which also involved a military aircraft , became the deadliest air disaster worldwide at the time it took place with 162 deaths . Additionally , 1971 saw the crash of Alaska Airlines Flight 1866 , at the time the worst single plane crash in US civil aviation history . 
 Later that year , Hughes Airwest changed its livery to its signature all @-@ yellow . 
 = = = Litigation = = = 
 A week after the crash , the families of various passengers aboard Flight 706 began filing lawsuits and court papers against Hughes Airwest and , later , the government of the United States . The first filing was by the family of Keith A. Gabel , which filed a motion to perpetuate testimony in the Central District of California on June 16 , 1971 . This motion requests that the court issue a court order for a person 's deposition to be taken , and can be done prior to a lawsuit being filed under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure . 
 Lawsuits against the United States government were delayed six months by the Federal Tort Claims Act . In January 1972 , the Gabel family filed a lawsuit against the United States that contained class @-@ action allegations and sought a " declaratory judgment on the issue of liability . " The Judicial Panel on <unk> Litigation decided to move all related court actions to the Central District of California . Eleven actions were transferred in July 1972 . The US District Court ordered the transfer of all 72 actions filed in other district courts to be transferred to the jurisdiction of the Central District on March 19 , 1973 . 
 On August 30 , 1972 , all the cases were consolidated into a single case to determine liability . The cases against the United States , Hughes Airwest , and Hughes Air Corporation were consolidated into a single class @-@ action lawsuit in October 1972 . On April 5 , 1973 , Hughes Airwest and the US Government agreed not to contest the issue of liability . Most claimants settled by December 1973 for payments of various negotiated amounts . 
 = = Dramatization = = 
 The story of the accident was featured on the thirteenth season of the Canadian TV series Mayday ( known as Air Emergency in the US , Mayday in Ireland and Air Crash Investigation in the UK and the rest of world ) in an episode entitled " Speed Trap " . It was also the feature of " Air Disasters " episode on The Smithsonian Channel . 
 = Villa Park = 
 Villa Park is a football stadium in Aston , Birmingham , England , with a seating capacity of 42 @,@ 682 . It has been the home of Aston Villa Football Club since 1897 . The ground is less than a mile from both Witton and Aston railway stations and has hosted sixteen England internationals at senior level , the first in 1899 and the most recent in 2005 . It was the first English ground to stage international football in three different centuries . Villa Park has hosted more FA Cup semi @-@ finals than any other stadium , having hosted 55 matches in total . 
 In 1897 , Aston Villa moved into the Aston Lower Grounds , a sports ground in a Victorian amusement park in the former grounds of Aston Hall , a Jacobean stately home . The stadium has gone through various stages of renovation and development , resulting in the current stand configuration of the Holte End , Trinity Road Stand , North Stand and the Doug Ellis Stand . The club has initial planning permission to redevelop the North Stand , which will increase the capacity of Villa Park from 42 @,@ 682 to approximately 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Before 1914 , a cycling track ran around the perimeter of the pitch where regular cycling meetings were hosted as well as athletic events . Aside from football @-@ related uses , the stadium has seen various concerts staged along with other sporting events including boxing matches and international rugby league and rugby union matches . In 1999 , the last ever final of the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup took place at Villa Park . Villa Park also hosted the 2012 FA Community Shield , as Wembley Stadium was unavailable due to it staging the final of the Olympic football tournament . 
 = = History = = 
 The Aston Lower Grounds , later renamed Villa Park , was not the first home of Aston Villa F.C. Their previous venue , Wellington Road faced increasing problems including an uneven pitch , poor spectator facilities , a lack of access and exorbitant rents . As a result , in 1894 , Villa 's committee began negotiations with the owners of the Aston Lower Grounds , " the finest sports ground in the district . " Situated in the former grounds of Aston Hall , a Jacobean stately home , the Lower Grounds had seen varied uses over the years . Originally the kitchen garden of Aston Hall 's owner Sir Thomas Holte , the man who gave his name to the Holte End stand , it later became a Victorian amusement park complete with aquarium and great hall . The current pitch stands on the site of the <unk> Pool , an ornamental pond drained in 1889 . In place of the pool the owners of the Lower Grounds built a cycle track and sports ground that opened on 10 June 1889 for a combined cycling and athletics event that drew an estimated crowd of 15 @,@ 000 . Negotiations continued for two years before the Villa committee reached agreement with the site 's owner , Edgar Flower , to rent the Lower Grounds for £ 300 per annum on a 21 @-@ year lease with an option to buy the site at any point during the term . The committee immediately engaged an architect who began preparing plans for the site , which included construction of a new 440 yards ( 400 metres ) cement cycle track to replace the existing cinder one . The main stand was to be built to the east on the Witton Lane side , with the track and pitch fully enclosed by banking . Construction of the final phase of the stadium began in the winter of 1896 following negotiations with contractors over the price . Several months behind schedule , the almost @-@ complete stadium finally opened on 17 April 1897 . The process of fixing issues with the building work would continue for a number of months thereafter . As built , the stadium could house 40 @,@ 000 spectators , most of whom would stand in the open on the banking . The first match at the ground , a friendly against Blackburn Rovers , took place on 17 April 1897 , one week after Aston Villa had completed the League and FA Cup ' Double ' . 
 After winning the league championship in 1899 , Villa 's record @-@ breaking average crowd of 21 @,@ 000 allowed the club to invest in a two @-@ stage ground improvement programme . The first stage extended the terrace covering on the Trinity Road side at a cost of £ 887 while the second cost £ 1 @,@ 300 and involved re @-@ laying all terracing around the track to remedy a design flaw that caused poor sightlines for the majority of the crowd . In 1911 , Villa bought the freehold of the ground for £ 8 @,@ 250 , the office buildings in the old aquarium and car park area for £ 1 @,@ 500 and the carriage drive and bowling green for £ 2 @,@ 000 . This was the first stage in plans drawn up by ambitious Villa director Frederick Rinder , that would see the capacity of Villa Park increased to 104 @,@ 000 . In June 1914 , another phase of enhancements began at Villa Park to compete with improvements at other grounds around the country , including Everton 's Goodison Park , where a new two @-@ tiered stand had just been completed . The first stage of improvements saw the cycling track removed , new banking at the Holte Hotel End ( Holte End ) and a re @-@ profiling of all the terracing to bring it closer to the newly squared @-@ off pitch . Rinder turned to the renowned architect Archibald Leitch to design a new Villa Park . Their joint plans included large banked end stands at the Holte and Witton ends and the incorporation of the original Victorian Lower Grounds buildings , including the aquarium and the newly acquired bowling greens . The outbreak of the First World War severely hampered design and construction efforts . 
 As a result of the worsening economic situation , 1919 quotes for the implementation of the pre @-@ war construction plans came to £ 66 @,@ 000 , compared to the 1914 quote of £ 27 @,@ 000 . By March 1922 this price had reduced to £ 41 @,@ 775 and the directors pushed ahead with the plans for the new Trinity Road Stand . Construction began in April 1922 with the stand partially opened in August that year . Construction continued throughout the 1922 – 23 season with the stand officially opened on 26 January 1924 by the then Duke of York , later King George VI . He commented to Rinder that he had " no idea that a ground so finely equipped in every way — and devoted to football — existed . " On completion the Trinity Road Stand was considered one of the grandest in Britain , complete with stained glass windows , Italian mosaics , Dutch gables in the style of Aston Hall and a sweeping staircase . Several commentators including Simon Inglis consider it to be Leitch 's masterpiece , described in 1960 by a Sunday Times reporter as the " St Pancras of football . " The final cost of the stand and associated 1922 – 24 ground developments was calculated at £ 89 @,@ 000 , a sum that enraged the club 's directors who ordered an investigation into cost and in 1925 forced the resignation of Rinder . 
 Villa Park was to remain in much the same state for another 30 years with no major developments until the late 1950s . During the 1930s the earth and timber terraces with wooden crash barriers were completely replaced by concrete terracing and metal barriers , a process first begun by Rinder . In 1936 he was voted back onto the board at the age of 78 after the club were relegated to the Second Division . Nearly 25 years after he had created his 1914 masterplan , Rinder resurrected it and looked to carry out the third phase of his developments . He died in December 1938 after Leitch who had died in April 1938 , leaving his construction business to his son , Archibald Junior . The complete redevelopment and extension of the Holte End began in early 1939 supervised by Archibald Junior . When the Second World War broke out in September 1939 , all construction across the country stopped . Unusually , given the austerity measures in place at the time , Villa acquired a special permit to continue construction of the Holte End ; Simon Inglis notes " How they achieved this is not recorded . " Work on the ground was completed by April 1940 and the stand was immediately mothballed as Villa Park switched to its war time role . The Trinity Road Stand became an air @-@ raid shelter and ammunition store while the home dressing room became the temporary home of a rifle company from the 9th Battalion , Royal Warwickshire Regiment . German bombs caused £ 20 @,@ 000 worth of damage to the Witton Lane Stand , which was not remedied until 1954 . 
 Apart from running repairs and fixing bomb damage , no major projects were undertaken until 1958 – 59 when four projects were announced . As a result , the old Bowling Green pavilion on the Trinity Road became a medical centre , the basement of the aquarium building was converted into a gym , four large floodlight pylons were installed and a training ground was purchased 500 yards ( 460 metres ) from Villa Park . The floodlights were first used in November 1958 for a friendly match against the Scottish side Heart of Midlothian . In the summer of 1962 , £ 40 @,@ 000 was spent on a roof for the Holte End , the first to provide cover for the ordinary terrace fans at Villa Park since 1922 . The old barrel @-@ shaped roof on the Witton Lane Stand , the only remaining feature of the 1897 Villa Park , was removed in the summer of 1963 and replaced with a plain sloping roof in the same style as the Holte End . Villa Park was chosen by FIFA to host three matches for the 1966 World Cup on the condition that the Witton Lane Stand became all @-@ seater . The players ' tunnel also required covering with a cage while the pitch was to be widened by 3 yards ( 2 @.@ 7 metres ) . Regular ground developments and innovations began in the summer of 1969 under the direction of the new chairman , Doug Ellis , who set about redeveloping Villa Park for the modern era . Much of the stadium had fallen into various states of disrepair and was in need of modernisation . Ellis updated the infrastructure , installed a new public address system , carried out plumbing work , which included installing new toilets , resurfaced the terraces and built a new ticket office . His tenure also saw executive lounges replace the old offices in the Trinity Road Stand . 
 Redevelopment of the Witton End stand began in the summer of 1976 . The stand had not seen any major work since 1924 and its rear remained a mound of earth . Initial renovations saw the levelling of the earthen mound and new concrete terraces constructed on the lower tier in preparation for the construction of an upper tier . Stage two began in February 1977 and was officially opened in late October that year . The stand 's design and fittings were impressive for the time , including novelties such as an ' AV ' logo spelled out in coloured seats and a double row of executive boxes . As well as the new Witton End stand , renamed the North Stand , Villa Park went through further renovations throughout the ground . The cost of the work was £ 1 @.@ 3 million . As a result , and as with the construction of the Trinity Road Stand fifty years earlier , Villa were again burdened with debt . An internal investigation found that £ 700 @,@ 000 of the £ 1 @.@ 3 million worth of bills were unaccounted for . A later report by accountants Deloitte Haskins & Sells found that the bills were inflated by only 10 % but that there were " serious breaches of recommended codes of practice and poor site supervision . " 
 In response to the Hillsborough disaster , the Taylor Report of August 1989 mandated that all major stadia be converted to become all @-@ seater as a safety measure . During the summer of 1990 , the first changes were made to comply with the report 's requirements . The North Stand saw the addition of 2 @,@ 900 seats to the lower tier of the stand in place of terracing , the Holte End 's roof was extended in preparation for more seats , the Trinity Road Stand had its roof replaced and the Witton Lane Stand had more corporate boxes added . By that time , all four floodlight pylons had been removed to make way for boxes or in preparation for seating and new floodlights were installed on new gantries on the Trinity and Witton stands . In February 1992 , the club 's application to the Council for permission to demolish the Holte Hotel was rejected . After several months of negotiations , Villa gained permission for a new stand to replace the Witton Lane Stand . The new design meant that the club had to realign Witton Lane and , as a condition of the planning permission , pay £ 600 @,@ 000 to compulsory purchase the houses along Witton Lane and upgrade the road from a B to an A road , as well as moving its utilities . The stand was fully operational by January 1994 at a cost of £ 5 million with 4 @,@ 686 seats , which brought Villa Park up to a capacity of 46 @,@ 005 . It was announced at the 70th birthday gala of chairman Doug Ellis that the stand was to be renamed the " Doug Ellis Stand " , a move that caused some controversy among Villa fans with some still referring to it as the Witton Lane Stand . Nevertheless , during the 1993 – 94 season , the newly rebuilt Witton Lane Stand became the Doug Ellis Stand . The Holte End was the only remaining stand that did not meet the Taylor Report requirements and a structural survey revealed that putting seats onto the existing terracing would be uneconomical . Instead the decision was taken to build a new stand consisting of two tiers , just four years after construction of the new roof . The demolition of the stand began on the last day of the 1994 season . Its replacement began to open in August 1994 with 3 @,@ 000 seats in the lower tier occupied for the first seating @-@ only game at Villa Park . By December the same year it was fully operational and had a capacity of 13 @,@ 501 seats , bringing the Villa Park capacity to 40 @,@ 310 . Upon completion , the Holte was the largest single end stand in Britain . 
 The next development at Villa Park was the Trinity Road Stand in 2000 . It had stood since 1922 though it had seen a number of renovations and additions since . The demolition of the old stand began after the last game of the 1999 – 2000 season , an event met with an element of sadness from observers such as Simon Inglis who stated that " the landscape of English football will never be the same . " The new stand was much larger and more spacious than the old one , taking Villa 's capacity from 39 @,@ 399 to its present 42 @,@ 682 . It was officially opened in November 2001 by HRH The Prince of Wales , just as the old stand had been opened by his grandfather George VI , 77 years earlier , when he was still the Duke of York . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 Villa Park comprises 42 @,@ 682 seats split between four stands . These four stands are the Holte End to the South , the Trinity Road Stand to the West , the Doug Ellis Stand opposite the Trinity Road Stand , and the North Stand behind the northern goal . All of the stands are composed of two tiers except the Trinity Road Stand , which has three . 
 The Holte End is a large two @-@ tiered stand at the south end of the stadium . Originally a large terraced banking providing accommodation for more than 20 @,@ 000 spectators , the current incarnation was constructed in 1994 – 95 and consists of two tiers with no executive boxes . The two tiers are slightly curved in a parabola to provide good sightlines from all seats while inside there are three levels of spacious concourse area as well as the Holte Suite , a large hospitality room for supporters . The roof is a variant of the " King Truss " system and the front third slopes slightly forward . Two large staircases , pediments , Dutch gables and a mosaic introduced in the 2007 season in the style of the old Trinity Road Stand make up the facade , itself inspired by Aston Hall . The Holte End is the most renowned stand at Villa Park amongst home and away team supporters . Traditionally Villa 's most vocal and passionate supporters gather here , including some Aston Villa hooligan firms . 
 Built in 2000 , the main Trinity Road Stand is the most recently completed at Villa Park and houses the dressing rooms , club offices and director 's boxes . The stand is composed of three tiers with a row of executive boxes between the second and third tiers . Although much larger than the other stands , the stand has roughly the same roof level as the other three sides . The players ' tunnel and the technical area where the managers and substitutes sit during the match are in the middle of the stand at pitch level . The press and the directors ' VIP area are situated in the centre of the middle tier . The upper tiers of the stand extend over Trinity Road , the street that cuts behind the ground . Cars travelling along Trinity Road have to pass through what is effectively a tunnel formed by the Trinity Road Stand . 
 The oldest stand at Villa Park is the North Stand , formerly known as the Witton End , completed in 1977 . It is a two @-@ tiered stand , with a double row of 39 executive boxes running between the two tiers . Upper tier seats are claret with " AV " written in blue while the lower tier consists of sky blue seats . The North Stand was " the first major stand in Britain to use what is now broadly termed the ' goalpost ' structure . " The facade of the stand is a " textured concrete render " typical of the time . Since the segregation of supporters in the 1970s , away fans had been situated in the lower tier of the North Stand . Former manager Martin O 'Neill expressed his desire to have Villa fans seated in the North Stand to improve the atmosphere at Villa Park . For the start of the 2007 – 08 season the club released cut @-@ price season tickets for the lower tier of the stand . This meant moving the away fans to the northern end of the Doug Ellis Stand across both tiers . The Doug Ellis Stand , formerly known as the Witton Lane Stand , is a two @-@ tiered stand with a row of executive boxes dividing the tiers . The roof was originally planned to be a goalpost structure , the same as the Holte End and North Stand , but the plans were changed to a simpler cantilever design . It saw slight refurbishment prior to the 1996 European Championships to join the corners with the lower tier of the North Stand , improve leg @-@ room and increase the curve of the terracing to improve sightlines . The main television camera viewpoint is situated here , so televised matches at Villa Park take the point of view of a fan who is sitting on the half @-@ way line in the Doug Ellis Stand . 
 In the south @-@ west corner , between the Holte End and the Trinity Road Stand , there is a three @-@ storey pavilion @-@ like structure , which is used for corporate hospitality . There is also a large television screen in the same location . On 28 November 2009 , a bronze statue of former Villa chairman and founder of the Football League , William McGregor was unveiled outside the stadium . Behind the North Stand is the " Villa Village " made up of club and ticket offices as well as a club shop . The buildings were bought by the club from British Telecom in the 1990s . 
 = = Future = = 
 Aston Villa have initial planning permission to rebuild the North Stand in the same style as the Trinity Road Stand . Owner Randy Lerner has expressed his support for increased capacity as average attendances increased . When completed , the capacity of Villa Park will increase to around 50 @,@ 000 . As of the start of the 2010 season , designs are at a conceptual stage and due to a " multi @-@ year effort to consider business and supporter needs " there is no defined date for construction to start . In the meantime , the entrance to the North Stand , " R Block " , has been redecorated inside and out . The facelift has seen the curved fascia above the turnstiles replaced with cladding and canopies similar to those in front of the Holte Suite . The " R Block " concourse has also been expanded to create a larger , brighter open space . 
 Villa Park was originally listed as one of the six stadiums that will hold Olympic football matches in the 2012 Summer Olympics . On 10 August 2009 it was announced that the organising committee for the games and the football club had decided that uncertainty around expansion plans meant that the club were " unable to commit fully to hosting matches . " 
 = = Non @-@ Villa games and other sports = = 
 Villa Park was the first English ground to stage international football in three different centuries and has hosted matches during several international tournaments . Three World Cup matches were played at the ground during the 1966 World Cup and four matches during Euro ' 96 . The ground has also hosted a number of England internationals at senior level . The first was in 1899 and the most recent in 2005 . Sixteen international matches have been hosted at the stadium in total . 
 Villa Park has been the venue for several Cup competitions . It is the most often used stadium in FA Cup semi @-@ finals history , having hosted 55 semi @-@ finals . The club hosted the League Cup Final in 1980 – 81 when Liverpool beat West Ham 2 – 1 in a replay . In 1999 , the stadium hosted the last ever final of the European Cup Winners ' Cup in which Lazio beat Real Mallorca 2 – 1 . During the construction of the new Wembley Stadium between 2001 and 2005 , the FA Trophy Final was held at Villa Park . The 2012 Community Shield was held at Villa Park instead of Wembley due to Olympic Games at the stadium . 
 Many athletics and cycle events took place at the ground prior to the First World War while boxing has been hosted on several occasions . On 28 June 1948 , Dick Turpin , brother of Randolph Turpin , became the first non @-@ white boxer to win a British title in a fight against Vince Hawkins in front of 40 @,@ 000 spectators following the British Boxing Board of Control lifting their ban on non @-@ whites challenging for titles . On 21 June 1972 Danny <unk> defeated Jack <unk> in a British and Empire Heavyweight title fight . 
 The first ever rugby league test series was secured by Great Britain at the ground , when they defeated the touring Australian Kangaroos side 6 – 5 on 14 February 1909 in front of a crowd of 9 @,@ 000 . A second rugby league game followed three years later on New Year 's Day 1912 but only 4 @,@ 000 people turned up to see Australia beat Great Britain 33 – 8 . The stadium has also seen several international rugby union tour matches . On 8 October 1924 , a North Midlands XV lost 40 – 3 to the New Zealand side touring Europe and Canada at the time . The second game took place on 30 December 1953 when Midlands Counties played another New Zealand side on their 1953 – 54 tour of United Kingdom , Ireland , France and North America . The Midlands side lost 18 – 3 . On 26 August 1985 , it played host to the first ever American football " <unk> , " intended to be the English equivalent to the Super Bowl . The game was played between the London Ravens and the Streatham Olympians and the low turn @-@ out of 8 @,@ 000 spectators meant that the <unk> was not repeated in subsequent years . 
 Villa Park was chosen as the venue for two pool matches in the 2015 Rugby World Cup . The first was a Pool B match between South Africa and Samoa on September 26 , 2015 with South Africa easily winning 46 - 6 with 39 @,@ 526 in attendance . The second was a Pool A match between Australia and Uruguay the next day with Australia easily winning 65 - 3 with 39 @,@ 605 in attendance . 
 = = Other Uses = = 
 Aside from sporting uses , Villa Park has been a venue for musicians from multiple genres as well as evangelical preachers . The stadium has hosted several rock concerts , including Bruce Springsteen who played two concerts in June 1988 as part of his Tunnel of Love Tour , and most recently Bon Jovi , who played the stadium in 2013 as part of the Because We Can : The Tour . Duran Duran held a charity concert in 1983 to raise money for <unk> . Other singers who have played at the ground include Belinda Carlisle , Rod Stewart and Robert Palmer . The American evangelist Billy Graham attracted 257 @,@ 181 people to a series of prayer meetings held at the stadium over the summer of 1984 . Archbishop Desmond Tutu held a religious gathering at the stadium in 1989 . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance recorded at Villa Park was 76 @,@ 588 , on 2 March 1946 in an FA Cup 6th round tie against Derby County . The highest attendance in the all @-@ seater era was 42 @,@ 788 on 29 December 2009 in a Premier League game against Liverpool . The highest average post Second World War attendance at Villa Park was 47 @,@ 168 in the 1948 – 49 season , while the lowest average post @-@ war attendance was 15 @,@ 237 in the 1985 – 86 season . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Villa Park is within a short distance of two mainline railway stations . Witton railway station is approximately 500 metres ( 0 @.@ 3 miles ) from Villa Park , and Aston railway station is approximately 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 9 miles ) . Under current owner Randy Lerner , there have been discussions on changing the name of Witton Station to Villa Park as is the case with West Bromwich Albion 's local railway station , The Hawthorns . Aston Villa 's former CEO , Bruce Langham , has said that the West Midlands Passenger Transport Executive ( Centro ) are amenable to the idea as long as it is done at the expense of the club . No action has yet been taken . 
 = 2001 Avjet Aspen crash = 
 On March 29 , 2001 , a chartered Gulfstream III business jet , operated by Avjet Corporation , crashed into the ground while on instrument approach to Aspen – Pitkin County Airport , Colorado . All three crew members and fifteen passengers on board perished . 
 The subsequent investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board concluded that the cause of the accident was the captain 's premature descent below the minimum descent altitude , carried out without having the runway in sight . 
 The accident 's investigation also brought into focus several generic safety issues , such as pressure applied on charter pilots by customers , night flight into airports near mountainous terrain , and the ambiguity of some Federal Aviation Administration rules . 
 = = Flight history = = 
 The captain and first officer reported for duty at Avjet 's Burbank , California facility around noon on the day of the accident . After checking the weather and the aircraft , they embarked on an 11 @-@ minute repositioning flight to Los Angeles International Airport ( LAX ) to pick up their passengers . The flight was originally scheduled to leave LAX at 16 : 30 MST , but departed after a 41 @-@ minute delay for late passengers at 17 : 11 MST . 
 Earlier in the day , an FAA specialist had informed the crew that it would be illegal to land at night in Aspen under instrument flight rules . In addition , the crew were aware that due to noise abatement restrictions , their jet aircraft was required to land at Aspen by the 18 : 58 MST night curfew . Following the delayed departure from LAX , their estimated arrival time was 18 : 46 MST , twelve minutes before the curfew took effect . 
 As the flight approached Aspen – Pitkin County Airport , it became evident that some of the other inbound flights were performing missed approaches , as they had been unable to complete an instrument approach to the airport 's runway . The airport is surrounded by high terrain on all sides and a fairly steep descent is required in order to land . 
 At 18 : 56 : 06 MST , the flight was cleared for the VOR / DME @-@ C instrument approach to the airport , whereupon it proceeded to the Red Table VOR , executed a sequence of designated step @-@ down maneuvers and began final approach to the runway . As it continued its descent past the missed approach point – where the runway must be in sight to continue – the pilots had still not visually located the runway in the increasing darkness and snow showers . At 19 : 01 : 57 MST , while in a steep left bank , the aircraft crashed into the terrain , killing all 18 persons on board . 
 = = Investigation and final report = = 
 Following the crash , the aircraft 's cockpit voice recorder was recovered from the wreckage and the data recorded found to be intact and usable . Under Code of Federal Regulations ( CFR ) Part 135 Air Taxi rules , no flight data recorder was required for this type of flight and one had not been installed . 
 Part of the subsequent NTSB investigation focused on the fact that the instrument approach at the destination airport was not legal for night landing , and the overall pressure applied on the charter company and flight crew by the charter customer to complete the flight into the original destination . According to witnesses , the charter customer , upon learning that the flight might have to be diverted to an alternate airport due to the night landing restriction , had his business assistant call Avjet management , to " let them know that the airplane was not going to be redirected " . 
 In addition , witnesses claimed that when the charter customer learned that the captain had discussed the possible diversion with some of the passengers waiting for the late arrivals , he had his assistant call Avjet to instruct the captain to " keep his comments to himself " . 
 The Avjet charter department scheduler subsequently testified that " the captain felt that it was important to land at [ Aspen ] because of the substantial amount of money that the [ charter ] customer spent for a dinner party " . 
 Based on information obtained from the cockpit voice recorder , the flight attendant had escorted an unidentified male passenger to the flight deck 's jump seat during the approach sequence . According to the NTSB 's analysis , " the presence of this passenger in the cockpit , especially if it were the charter customer , most likely further heightened the pressure on the flight crew to land at [ Aspen ] " . 
 The NTSB issued its final report on June 11 , 2002 , with the following probable cause : 
 The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this accident was the flight crew 's operation of the airplane below the minimum descent altitude without an appropriate visual reference for the runway . 
 The NTSB added the following contributing factors : 
 Contributing to the cause of the accident were the Federal Aviation Administration 's ( FAA ) unclear wording of the March 27 , 2001 Notice to Airmen regarding the nighttime restriction for the VOR / DME @-@ C approach to the airport and the FAA 's failure to communicate this restriction to the Aspen tower ; the inability of the flight crew to adequately see the mountainous terrain because of the darkness and the weather conditions ; and the pressure on the captain to land from the charter customer and because of the airplane 's delayed departure and the airport 's nighttime landing restriction . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the accident , Avjet decided to prohibit airport operations at Aspen and three other mountainous airports between sunset and sunrise . It also issued the following memorandum to its flight crews and schedulers : 
 " if you cannot accomplish a landing and be on the ground at one of these airports before sunset you must divert to a suitable alternate . All passengers for one of these destinations must be informed of this policy . Flight crew members must report any violation of this policy or pressure from passengers to violate this policy to the Director of Operations or Chief Pilot . " 
 Avjet also added the following policy to its operations manual after the accident : 
 " Only an Avjet assigned crewmember , check airman , or FAA observer may occupy the observer 's seat ( jump seat ) in any Avjet aircraft . Charter passengers shall never be allowed to occupy the observer 's seat at any time . " 
 = = Litigation = = 
 A wrongful death lawsuit was filed by the families of three of the victims in Los Angeles , CA . After a jury found the captain and Avjet Corporation negligent , an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement was reached , where Avjet agreed to pay the plaintiffs a total of US $ <unk> in damages . There were reportedly also other settlements for other victims . 
 = Lavochkin La @-@ 150 = 
 The Lavochkin La @-@ 150 ( also known as the Izdeliye 150 – Aircraft or Article 150 , USAF / DOD designation Type 3 ) , was designed by the Lavochkin design bureau ( OKB ) in response to a 1945 order to build a single @-@ seat jet fighter using a single German turbojet . By this time both the Americans and British , as well as the Germans , had already flown jet fighters and the single Soviet jet engine under development ( the Lyulka TR @-@ 1 ) was not yet ready for production . The design was completed quickly , but the construction of the five flying prototypes was protracted by the factory 's inexperience in building metal aircraft . The aircraft made its first flight in September 1946 , but proved to require extensive modifications to meet the Soviet Air Forces ' requirements . These took so long to make and test that the aircraft was essentially obsolete by the time that they were completed . Even one variant with a much more powerful engine was inferior to other aircraft that the OKB had under development and all work was terminated in 1947 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 The Lavochkin OKB was ordered to design a fighter using a single Junkers Jumo <unk> axial @-@ flow turbojet in February 1945 . Much like their rivals at the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich OKB with their MiG @-@ 9 , the OKB chose a " pod @-@ and @-@ boom " layout for their new fighter , based on advice from the Central <unk> Institute ( TsAGI ) , although their design had a shoulder @-@ mounted wing . The wings of the all @-@ metal aircraft had fixed leading edges and slotted flaps . The cockpit was well forward , giving the pilot good visibility , and he was protected by an armored headrest . The windscreen of the teardrop @-@ shaped canopy was also armored . Two 23 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) Nudelman @-@ Suranov NS @-@ 23 autocannon were mounted on the lower side of the fuselage with 75 rounds per gun . The tricycle landing gear retracted into the fuselage which gave the 150 a very narrow track . The Soviet derivative of the Jumo engine , the RD @-@ 10 , was rated at 900 kilograms @-@ force ( 8 @.@ 8 kN ; 2 @,@ 000 lbf ) and was mounted behind the cockpit . A steel heat shield protected the bottom of the rear fuselage from the engine 's exhaust . Air was supplied by an intake in the aircraft nose that split around the cockpit before reaching the engine . Seven tanks , five in the fuselage and one in each wing , carried a total of 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) of fuel . 
 Construction of a full @-@ scale mockup was completed in June 1945 by Factory No. 81 , but the order for five prototypes was given to Factory No. 381 as Factory No. 81 was already fully committed to other programs . Manufacturing drawings were delivered to Factory No. 381 by the end of August , but the prototypes were delayed because the plant had no experience building metal aircraft and lacked the necessary tooling . By the end of the year , the factory had only managed to complete a single airframe for static load testing . This showed that the rear fuselage , wings and tail needed to be reinforced , and the opportunity was taken to enlarge the vertical stabilizer as well . These tests and modifications required six months of work so that the first flying prototype was not completed until July 1946 . Manufacturer 's testing of the first prototype began on 27 August , after ground testing had required replacing the engine twice , and the first flight was made on 11 September . 
 The following day , the Council of Ministers ordered that a small batch of jets from each OKB were to participate in the 7 November parade commemorating the October Revolution . Because of the tight deadline , the components for the two incomplete prototypes were turned over to Factory No. 301 at Khimki , the new headquarters for the Lavochkin OKB , for assembly by Factory No. 381 . Factory No. 21 in Gorky joined the program with three more aircraft built in record time with support from Factory No. 301 . <unk> was constructed in 5 – 10 days with the first aircraft completed in a week and a half . 
 = = = Testing and evaluation = = = 
 All eight aircraft were complete by 1 November and had been tested to ensure their readiness to participate in the parade . They were later given the unofficial service designation of La @-@ 13 . It was considered too risky to fly the aircraft from Gorky to Moscow and their wings could not be dismounted which meant that they could not be railed to Moscow either . Special three @-@ wheeled trailers were built and the aircraft were driven to Moscow , but the flypast was cancelled because of bad weather . 
 The tests conducted in preparation for the parade revealed a number of flaws in the design including poor directional stability , a cramped cockpit without heating or ventilation , poor access to the engine , inadequate fuel capacity , compounded by the lack of a fuel gauge , and poor elevator control forces . Five aircraft were modified to correct these issues before resuming the factory 's testing in late 1946 . The modifications were not entirely successful and the lateral stability was now too great and the elevator forces remained too weak . Engine problems , however , plagued the tests as the first prototype alone required four engine changes . 
 After the conclusion of the manufacturer 's trials in April 1947 , one aircraft was returned to the factory for extensive modifications as the 150M . The wing tips were angled downward 35 ° to reduce the lateral stability , the wing was redesigned to detach from the fuselage , and the aerodynamic balancing of the elevators was reduced from 24 % to 20 % . The fuel capacity was increased to 660 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 460 lb ) , the cockpit was widened by 80 centimeters ( 31 in ) and fitted with an ejection seat . Fore and aft armor plates were fitted to protect the pilot and a new radio aerial mast was installed . All these changes added 365 kilograms ( 805 lb ) of weight and increased drag which reduced the aircraft 's top speed by 73 to 805 km / h ( 45 to 500 mph ) , and slowed its time to 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) from 4 @.@ 8 to 7 @.@ 2 minutes in comparison to the unmodified aircraft . Given that a higher @-@ performance design , the Aircraft 156 , had already been submitted for state acceptance trials , Semyon Lavochkin decided not to continue the development of the 150M . 
 In the meantime , the OKB had been developing two afterburning versions of the RD @-@ 10 in an effort to increase the engine 's power . The more successful model was only 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) longer and weighed an additional 31 kilograms ( 68 lb ) more than the original engine . Its power , however , was increased by an additional 340 kilograms @-@ force ( 3 @.@ 3 kN ; 750 lbf ) , over 30 % more thrust . This engine was designated the izdeliye YuF by the bureau and was fitted into an aircraft 150 prototype in July 1947 , designated as the 150F . The additional power increased the aircraft 's top speed to 950 km / h ( 590 mph ) at sea level and 915 km / h ( 569 mph ) at an altitude of 4 @,@ 320 meters ( 14 @,@ 170 ft ) . This made the 150F the second @-@ fastest Soviet fighter of the period , after the MiG @-@ 9 powered by two afterburning RD @-@ 21 engines . Nevertheless , Lavochkin decided not to submit the 150F for state acceptance trials as the fundamental design flaws of the airframe still had not been resolved . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Force 
 = = Variants = = 
 150M – One 150 prototype was modified with drooped wingtips , a wider cockpit and extra fuel . 
 150F – One 150 prototype was modified with a Izdeliye YuF engine , an afterburning RD @-@ 10 . 
 = = Specifications ( Aircraft 150 ) = = 
 Data from Early Soviet Jet Fighters 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 , pilot 
 Length : 9 @.@ 42 m ( 30 ft 11 in ) 
 Wingspan : 8 @.@ 20 m ( 26 ft 10 @.@ 83 in ) 
 Height : 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 ft 6 @.@ 36 in ) 
 Wing area : 12 @.@ 15 m ² ( 130 @.@ 64 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 2 @,@ 156 kg ( 4 @,@ 753 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 2 @,@ 973 kg ( 6 @,@ 554 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × RD @-@ 10 turbojet , 8 @.@ 8 kN ( 1 @,@ 984 lbf ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 546 mph ( 878 km / h ) 
 Range : 306 mi ( 493 km ) 
 Service ceiling : <unk> ( <unk> ) 
 Rate of climb : 22 @.@ 1 m ( 4 @,@ 349 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 244 @.@ 6 kg / m ² ( 50 @.@ 22 lb / ft ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 303 
 Armament 
 2 × 23 mm Nudelman @-@ Suranov NS @-@ 23 autocannon with 75 rpg 
 = 45th Infantry Division ( United States ) = 
 The 45th Infantry Division was an infantry division of the United States Army , part of the Oklahoma Army National Guard , from 1920 to 1968 . Headquartered mostly in Oklahoma City , the guardsmen fought in both World War II and the Korean War . They trace their lineage from frontier militias that operated in the Southwestern United States throughout the late 1800s . 
 The 45th Infantry Division guardsmen saw no major action until they became one of the first National Guard units activated in World War II in 1941 . They took part in intense fighting during the invasion of Sicily and the attack on Salerno in the 1943 Italian Campaign . Slowly advancing through Italy , they fought in Anzio and in Monte Cassino . After landing in France during Operation Dragoon , they joined the 1945 drive into Germany that ended the War in Europe . 
 After brief inactivation and subsequent reorganization as a unit restricted to Oklahomans , the division returned to duty in 1951 for the Korean War . It joined the United Nations troops on the front lines during the stalemate of the second half of the war , with constant , low @-@ level fighting and trench warfare against the People 's Volunteer Army of China that produced little gain for either side . The division remained on the front lines in such engagements as Old Baldy Hill and Hill Eerie until the end of the war , returning to the U.S. in 1954 . 
 The division remained a National Guard formation until its inactivation in 1968 as part of a downsizing of the Guard . Several units were activated to replace the division and carry on its lineage . Over the course of its history , the 45th Infantry Division sustained over 25 @,@ 000 battle casualties , and its men were awarded nine Medals of Honor , twelve campaign streamers , the Croix de Guerre and the Republic of Korea Presidential Unit Citation . 
 = = History = = 
 With the outbreak of World War I , troops of the National Guard were formed into the units which exist today , with the Colorado Guard forming the 157th Infantry Regiment , the Arizona Guard forming the 158th Infantry Regiment , and the New Mexico Guard forming the 120th Engineer Regiment . These units were attached to the 40th Infantry Division and deployed to France where they were used as " depot " forces to provide replacements for front @-@ line units . They returned home at the end of the war . The Oklahoma Guard units that would later become the 179th Infantry Regiment and 180th Infantry Regiment were assigned to the 36th Infantry Division and would earn a combat participation credit during the Meuse @-@ Argonne Campaign ( 26 September – 11 November 1918 ) in France as the 142nd Infantry . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 On 19 October 1920 , the Oklahoma State militia was organized as the 45th Infantry Division of the Oklahoma Army National Guard , and manned with troops from Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , and Oklahoma . The division was formed and federally recognized as a National Guard unit on 3 August 1923 in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma . It was assigned the 89th Infantry Brigade of the Colorado and Arizona National Guards , and the 90th Infantry Brigade of the Oklahoma National Guard . As a consequence of these militia roots , when the division was properly organized , many of its members were marksmen and outdoorsmen from the remote frontier regions of the Southwestern United States . The division 's first commander was Major General Baird H. Markham . 
 The 45th Infantry Division engaged in regular drills but no major events in its first few years , though the division 's Colorado elements were called in to help quell a large coal mining strike . The onset of the Great Depression in the 1930s severely curtailed its funding for training and equipment . Major General Roy Hoffman took command in 1931 , followed by Alexander M. Tuthill , Alexander E. <unk> in 1935 , and William S. Key in 1936 . In 1937 , the division 's troops were once again called up , this time to help manage a locust plague affecting Colorado . 
 The division 's original shoulder sleeve insignia , approved in August 1924 , featured a swastika , a common Native American symbol , as a tribute to the Southwestern United States region which had a large population of Native Americans . However , with the rise of the Nazi Party in Germany , with its infamous swastika symbol , the 45th Division stopped using the insignia . Following a long process of submissions for new designs , a new shoulder sleeve insignia , designed by a Carnegie , Oklahoma native named Woody Big Bow , featuring the Thunderbird , another Native American symbol , was approved in 1939 . 
 In August 1941 , the 45th Infantry Division took part in the Louisiana Maneuvers , the largest peacetime exercises in U.S. military history . It was assigned to VIII Corps with the 2nd Infantry Division and the 36th Infantry Division , camped near Pitkin , Louisiana . Still operating with outmoded equipment from World War I , the division did not perform well during these exercises . With poor weather and bad equipment , the <unk> 45th Infantry Division was criticized by officers who considered it " feeble " . In spite of these deficiencies , less than one month later , the men were recalled to the active duty force , much to their chagrin , because of concerns of an impending American entry into World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 On 16 September 1941 , the 45th Infantry Division was federalized from state control into the regular army force . It was one of four National Guard divisions to be federalized , alongside the 30th Infantry Division , the 41st Infantry Division and the 44th Infantry Division , originally for a one @-@ year period . Its men immediately began basic combat training at Fort Sill , Oklahoma . Throughout 1942 , it continued this training at Camp <unk> , Texas , before moving to Fort Devens , Massachusetts , to undergo amphibious assault training in preparation for an invasion of Italy . It then moved to Pine Camp , New York briefly for winter warfare training , but was hampered by continuously poor weather . In January 1943 it moved to Fort Pickett , Virginia , for its final training . The division moved to the Hampton Roads Port of Embarkation embarkation 's Camp Patrick Henry to await combat loading on the transports . 
 The division 's two combat commands , the 89th and 90th Brigades , were not activated , as the Army favored smaller and more versatile regimental commands for the new conflict . The 45th Infantry Division was instead based around the 157th , 179th , and 180th Infantry Regiments . Also assigned to the division were the 158th , 160th , 171st , and 189th Field Artillery Battalions , the 45th Signal Company , the 700th Ordnance Company , the 45th Quartermaster Company , the 45th Reconnaissance Troop , the 120th Engineer Combat Battalion , and the 120th Medical Battalion . 
 = = = = Sicily = = = = 
 The 45th Division , under the command of Major General Troy Middleton , sailed from the Hampton Roads Port of Embarkation for the Mediterranean region on 8 June 1943 , combat loaded aboard thirteen attack transports and five cargo attack vessels as convoy <unk> @-@ 9 headed by the communications ship USS Ancon . By the time the 45th Division landed in North Africa on 22 June 1943 , the Allies had largely secured the African theater . As a result , the division was not sent into combat upon arrival and instead commenced training at Arzew , French Morocco , in preparation for the invasion of Sicily . Allied intelligence estimated that the island was defended by approximately 230 @,@ 000 troops , the majority of which were drawn mostly from weak Italian formations and two German divisions which had been reconstituted after being destroyed earlier . Against this , the Allies planned to land 180 @,@ 000 troops , including the 45th Division , which was assigned to II Corps of the U.S. Seventh Army , under Lieutenant General George Patton , for the operation . 
 The division was subsequently assigned a lead role in the amphibious assault on Sicily , coming ashore on 10 July . Landing near Scoglitti , the southernmost U.S. objective on the island , the division advanced north on the U.S. force 's eastern flank . After initially encountering resistance from armor of the Herman Goering Division , the division advanced , supported by paratroopers of the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division who landed inland on 11 July . The 82nd paratroopers , conducting their first combat jump of the war , then set up to protect the 45th 's flank against German counterattack , but without weapons to counter heavy armor , the paratroopers had to rely on support from U.S. armored units to repulse the German Tiger I tanks . As the division advanced towards its main objective to capture the airfields at Biscari and Comiso , German forces pushed back . For most of the first two weeks while the division moved slowly north , it encountered only light resistance from Italian forces fighting delaying actions . Italian and German forces resisted fiercely at Motta Hill on 26 July , however , and for four days the 45th Infantry Division was held up there . After this , division was allocated to drive towards Messina , being ordered by General Patton to cover the distance as quickly as possible . It spent a few days in that city , but on 1 August , the division was withdrawn from the front line for rest and rear @-@ guard patrol duty , after which the division was assigned to VI Corps of the U.S. Fifth Army , under Lieutenant General Mark Clark , in preparation for the invasion of mainland Italy . 
 = = = = Salerno = = = = 
 On 3 September , Italy surrendered to the Allied powers . Hoping to occupy as much of the country as possible before the German Army could react , the U.S. Fifth Army prepared to attack Salerno . On 10 September 1943 , the division conducted its second landing at <unk> and <unk> with the 36th Infantry Division , on the southernmost beaches of the attack . Opposing them were elements of the German 29th Panzergrenadier Division and XVI Panzer Corps . Against stiff resistance , the 45th pushed to the <unk> River after a week of heavy fighting . The Fifth Army was battered and pushed back by German forces until 20 September , when Allied forces were finally able to break out and establish a more secure beachhead . On 3 November it crossed the Volturno River and took Venafro . The division had great difficulty moving across the rivers and through the mountainous terrain , and the advance was slow . After linking up with the British Eighth Army , which had advanced from the south , the combined force , under the 15th Army Group , was stalled when it reached the Gustav Line . Until 9 January 1944 , the division inched forward into the mountains reaching St. Elia , north of Cassino , before moving to a rest area . 
 = = = = Anzio = = = = 
 Allied forces conducted a frontal assault on the Gustav Line stronghold at Monte Cassino , and VI Corps , British 1st Infantry Division included , was assigned to Operation Shingle , detached from the 15th Army Group to land behind enemy lines at Anzio on 22 January 1944 . For this mission , CCA ( Combat Command A ) of the 1st Armored Division was attached to the 45th Infantry Division . Landing on schedule , VI Corps surprised the Germans , but Major General John P. Lucas 's decision to consolidate the beachhead instead of attacking gave the Germans time to bring the LXXVI Panzer Corps forward to oppose the landings . 
 One regiment of the 45th ( the 179th ) went ashore with the landings . In company with the British 1st Division , they advanced north along the Anzio @-@ Albano road and captured the Aprilia " factory " , but encountered heavy resistance from German armored units a few miles further on . Lucas then ordered the rest of the division <unk> . The 45th Division was deployed on the southeastern side of the beachhead , along the lower Mussolini Canal . 
 On 30 January 1944 , when VI Corps advanced from the beaches , it encountered heavy resistance and took heavy casualties . VI Corps was stopped at the " Pimlott Line " ( the perimeter of the beachhead ) , and the fight became a battle of attrition . 
 The first major German counterattack came in early February , was against British 1st Division . Two regiments of the 45th ( the 179th and 157th ) were sent to the Aprilia sector to reinforce the British . The 179th Infantry and a tank battalion of CCA tried to recapture Aprilia but were repulsed . Lucas then moved the rest of the 45th Division to the left @-@ center of the perimeter , at Aprilia and along the west branch of the Mussolini Canal . For the next four months the 45th Infantry Division was mostly stuck in place , holding its ground during repeated German counterattacks , and subjected to bombardment from aircraft and artillery . 
 On 16 February , a major German attack struck the 45th , and nearly broke through the 179th Infantry on 18 February . Lucas sent famed Ranger leader Colonel William O. Darby to assume command of the 157th , and the Germans were repulsed . 
 On 23 May , VI Corps went on the offensive , breaking out of the beachhead to the northeast , with the 45th Division forming the left half of the attack . By 31 May , the German defenses were shattered , and the 45th Division turned northwest , toward the Alban Hills and Rome . On 4 June the 45th crossed the Tiber River below Rome , and entered the city along with other VI Corps troops . Men of the 45th Division were the first Allied troops to reach the Vatican . 
 On 16 June , the 45th Division withdrew for rest in preparation for other operations . At this time , VI Corps was attached to the Seventh United States Army , Sixth United States Army Group . The 45th , 36th , and 3rd Infantry divisions were pulled from the line in Italy in preparation for Operation Dragoon ( formerly Anvil ) , the invasion of southern France . Dragoon was originally planned to coincide with the Normandy landings in the north , but was delayed until August because of a shortage of landing craft . 
 = = = = France and Germany = = = = 
 The 45th Infantry Division participated in its fourth assault landing during Operation Dragoon on 15 August 1944 , at St. Maxime , in Southern France . The division landed its 157th and 180th regimental combat teams and captured the heights of the <unk> de Mar before meeting the 1st Special Service Force . The German Army , reeling from the Battle of Normandy , pulled back after a short fight , part of an overall German withdrawal to the east following the landings . Soldiers of the 45th Infantry Division engaged the dispersed forces of German Army Group G , suffering very few casualties . The Seventh Army , along with Free French forces , were able to advance north quickly . By 12 September , the Seventh Army linked up with the Third United States Army , advancing from Normandy , joining the two forces at Dijon . Against slight opposition , it spearheaded the drive for the Belfort Gap . The 45th Infantry Division took the strongly defended city of <unk> on 24 September . The division was then reassigned to V Corps for its next advance . On 30 September the division crossed the Moselle River and entered the western foothills of the Vosges , taking <unk> . It would remain in the area for a month waiting for other units to catch up before crossing the <unk> River on 23 October . The division remained on the line with the Sixth United States Army Group , the southernmost of three Army Groups advancing through France . 
 After the crossing was complete , the division was relieved from V Corps and assigned to XV Corps . The division was allowed a one @-@ month rest , resuming its advance on 25 November , attacking the forts north of Mutzig . These forts had been designed by Kaiser Wilhelm II in 1893 to block access to the plain of Alsace . The 45th Division next crossed the <unk> River before pushing through the Maginot defenses . During this time much of the division 's artillery assets were attached to the 44th Infantry Division to provide additional support . The 45th Infantry Division was reassigned to VI Corps on New Year 's Day . From 2 January 1945 , the division fought defensively along the German border , withdrawing to the Moder River . It sent half of its artillery to support the 70th Infantry Division . On 17 February the division was pulled off the line for rest and training . Once this rest period was complete , the division was assigned to XV Corps for the final push into German territory . The 45th moved north to the Sarreguemines area and smashed through the Siegfried Line , on 17 March taking Homburg on the 21st and crossing the Rhine between Worms and Hamm on the 26th . The advance continued , with Aschaffenburg falling on 3 April , and Nuremberg on the 20th . The division crossed the Danube River on 27 April , and liberated 32 @,@ 000 captives of the Dachau concentration camp on 29 April 1945 . The division captured Munich during the next two days , occupying the city until V @-@ E Day and the surrender of Germany . During the next month , the division remained in Munich and set up collection points and camps for the massive numbers of surrendering troops of the German armies . The number of POWs taken by the 45th Division during its almost two years of fighting totalled 124 @,@ 840 men . The division was then slated to move to the Pacific theater of operations to participate in the invasion of mainland Japan on the island of Honshu , but these plans were scrubbed before the division could depart after the surrender of Japan , on V @-@ J Day . 
 = = = = Criminal allegations = = = = 
 After the war , courts @-@ martial were convened to investigate possible war crimes by members of the division . In the first case , dubbed the Biscari massacre , American troops from C Company , 180th Infantry Regiment , were alleged to have shot 74 Italian and two German prisoners in <unk> in July 1943 following the capture of an airfield in the area . Patton asked General Omar Bradley to get the case dismissed to prevent bad press , but Bradley refused . A non @-@ commissioned officer later confessed to the crimes and was found guilty , but an officer who claimed he had only been following orders was acquitted . 
 In a second incident , the Army considered court @-@ <unk> several officers of the 157th Infantry Regiment under Lieutenant Colonel Felix L. Sparks after servicemen were accused of massacring German soldiers who were surrendering at the Dachau concentration camp in 1945 . Some of the German troops were camp guards ; the others were sick and wounded troops from a nearby hospital . The soldiers of the 45th Division who liberated the camp were outraged at the malnourishment and maltreatment of the 32 @,@ 000 prisoners they liberated , some barely alive , and all victims of the Holocaust . After entering the camp , the soldiers found boxcars filled with dead bodies of prisoners who had succumbed to starvation or last @-@ minute executions , and in rooms adjacent to gas chambers they found naked bodies piled from the floor to the ceiling . The cremation ovens , which were still in operation when the soldiers arrived , contained bodies and skeletons as well . Some of the victims apparently had died only hours before the 45th Division entered the camp , while many others lay where they had died in states of decomposition that overwhelmed the soldiers ' senses . Accounts conflict over what happened and over how many German troops were killed . After investigating the incident , the Army considered court @-@ <unk> several officers involved , but Patton successfully intervened . Seventh Army was being disbanded and Patton had been appointed Military Governor of Bavaria , placing the matter in his hands . Some veterans of the 45th Infantry Division have said that only 30 to 50 German soldiers were killed and that very few were killed trying to surrender , while others have admitted to killing or refusing to treat wounded German guards . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 During World War II , the 45th Division fought in 511 days of combat . Nine soldiers were awarded the Medal of Honor during their service with the 45th Infantry Division : Van T. Barfoot , Ernest Childers , Almond E. Fisher , William J. Johnston , Salvador J. Lara , Jack C. Montgomery , James D. Slaton , Jack Treadwell , and Edward G. Wilkin . Soldiers of the division also received 61 Distinguished Service Crosses , three Distinguished Service Medals , 1 @,@ 848 Silver Star Medals , 38 Legion of Merit medals , 59 Soldier 's Medals , 5 @,@ 744 Bronze Star Medals , and 52 Air Medals . The division received seven distinguished unit citations and eight campaign streamers during the conflict . The division suffered 3 @,@ 650 killed in action , 13 @,@ 729 wounded in action , 3 @,@ 615 missing in action , 266 captured , and 41 @,@ 647 non @-@ battle casualties for a total of 62 @,@ 907 casualties during the war . 
 Most of the division returned to New York in September 1945 , and from there went to Camp Bowie , Texas . On 7 December 1945 , the division was deactivated from the active duty force and its members reassigned to other Army units . The following year , on 10 September 1946 , the 45th Infantry Division was reconstituted as a National Guard unit . Instead of comprising units from several states , the post @-@ war 45th was an all @-@ Oklahoma organization . During this time the division was also reorganized and as a part of this process the 157th Infantry was removed from the division 's order of battle and replaced with the 279th Infantry Regiment . 
 During this time , the U.S. Army underwent a drastic reduction in size . At the end of World War II , it contained 89 divisions , but by 1950 , there were just 10 active divisions in the force , along with a few reserve divisions such as the 45th Infantry Division which were combat @-@ ineffective . The division retained many of its best officers as senior commanders as the force downsized , and it enjoyed a good relationship with its community . The 45th in this time was regarded as one of the better @-@ trained National Guard divisions . Regardless , by mid @-@ 1950 the division had only 8 @,@ 413 troops , less than 45 percent of its full @-@ strength authorization . Only 10 percent of the division 's officers and 5 percent of its enlisted men had combat experience with the division from World War II . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 , the U.S. Army looked to expand its force again to prepare for major conflict . After the North Korean People 's Army invaded the Republic of Korea four understrength U.S. divisions on occupation duty in Japan were rushed to South Korea to stand alongside the Republic of Korea Army . These were the 7th Infantry Division , the 1st Cavalry Division , the 24th Infantry Division , and the 25th Infantry Division , which were all under the control of the Eighth United States Army . Due to drastic reductions in U.S. military spending following the end of World War II , these divisions were equipped with worn @-@ out or obsolete weaponry and suffered from a shortage of anti @-@ armor weapons capable of penetrating the hulls of the North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks . 
 = = = = Reinforcement pool = = = = 
 Initially , the division was used to provide a pool of reinforcements for the divisions which had been sent to the Korean War theater , and in January 1951 it provided 650 enlisted fillers for overseas service . Later that month , it was given 4 @,@ 006 new recruits for its three infantry regiments and artillery assets , and each unit created a 14 @-@ week training program to prepare these new soldiers for combat . Because of heavy casualties and slow reinforcement rates , the Army looked to the National Guard to provide additional units to relieve the beleaguered Eighth Army . At the time , the 45th Infantry Division was comprised overwhelmingly of high school students or recent graduates and only about 60 percent of its divisional troops had conducted training and drills with the division for a year or more . Additionally , only about 20 percent of its personnel had prior experience of military service from World War II . Nevertheless , the division was one of four National Guard divisions identified as being among the most prepared for combat based on the effectiveness of its equipment , training , and leadership . As a result , in February 1951 , the 45th Infantry Division was alerted that it would sail for Japan . 
 In preparation for the deployment , the division was sent to Fort Polk , Louisiana , to begin training and to fill its ranks . After its basic training was complete , the division was sent to Japan in April 1951 for advanced training and to act as a reserve force for the Eighth United States Army , then fighting in Korea . The involvement of the National Guard in the fighting in Korea was further expanded when the 40th Infantry Division of the California Army National Guard received warning orders for deployment as well . 
 = = = = Initial struggles = = = = 
 On 1 September 1951 , the 45th Infantry Division was activated as the first National Guard division to be deployed to the Far East theater since World War II . Nevertheless , it was not deployed to Korea until December 1951 , when its advanced training was complete . Following its arrival , the division moved to the front line to replace the 1st Cavalry Division , who were then delegated to the Far East reserve , having suffered over 16 @,@ 000 casualties in less than 18 months of fighting . 
 Though the 45th remained de facto segregated as an all @-@ white unit in 1950 , individual unit commanders went to great lengths to integrate reinforcements from different areas and ethnicity into their units . By 1952 , it was fully integrated . Additionally , in an effort to reduce the burden on the National Guard , troops from the division were often replaced by enlisted and drafted soldiers from the active duty force . When it arrived in Korea , only half the division 's manpower were National Guard troops , and over 4 @,@ 500 guardsmen left between May and July 1952 , continually replaced by more active duty troops , including an increasing number of African Americans . Though the division was no longer an " All @-@ Oklahoma " unit , leaders opted to keep its designation as the 45th Infantry Division . 
 By the time the division was in place , the battle lines on both sides had largely solidified , leaving the 45th Infantry Division in a stationary position as it conducted attacks and counterattacks for the same ground . The division was put under the command of Eighth Army 's I Corps for most of the conflict . It was deployed around Chorwon and assigned to protect the key routes from that area into Seoul . The terrain was difficult and the weather was poor in the region . The division suffered its first casualty on 11 December 1951 . 
 Initially , the division did not fare well , though it improved quickly . Its anti @-@ aircraft and armor assets were used as mobile artillery , which continuously pounded Chinese positions . The 45th , in turn , was under constant artillery and mortar attack . It also conducted constant small @-@ unit patrols along the border seeking to engage Chinese outposts or patrols . These small @-@ unit actions made up the majority of the division 's combat in Korea . Chinese troops were well dug @-@ in and better trained than the troops of the inexperienced 45th , and it suffered casualties and frequently had to disengage when it was attacked . 
 In the division 's first few months on the line , Chinese forces conducted three raids in its sector . In retaliation , the 245th Tank Battalion sent nine tanks to raid Agok . Two companies of Chinese forces ambushed and devastated a patrol from the 179th Infantry a short time later . In the spring , the division launched Operation Counter , which was an effort to establish 11 patrol bases around Old Baldy Hill . The division then defended the hill against a series of Chinese assaults from the Chinese 38th Army . 
 = = = = Final engagements and the end of the war = = = = 
 The 45th Infantry Division , along with the 7th Infantry Division , fought off repeated Chinese attacks all along the front line throughout 1952 , and Chinese forces frequently attacked Old Baldy Hill into the fall of that year . Around that time , the 45th Infantry Division relinquished command of Old Baldy Hill to the 2nd Infantry Division . Almost immediately the Chinese launched a concentrated attack on the hill , overrunning the U.S. forces . Heavy rainstorms prevented the divisions from retaking the hill for around a month , and when it was finally retaken it was heavily fortified to prevent further attacks . The 245th Tank Battalion was sent to assault Chinese positions throughout late 1952 , but most of the division held a stationary defensive line against the Chinese . 
 In early 1953 , North Korean forces launched a large @-@ scale attack against Hill 812 , which was then under the control of K Company , 3rd Battalion , 179th Infantry . The ensuing Battle of Hill Eerie was one of a series of larger attacks by Chinese and North Korean forces which produced heavier fighting than the previous year had seen . These offensives were conducted largely in order to secure a better position during the ongoing truce negotiations . Chinese forces continued to mount concentrated attacks on the lines of the UN forces , including the 45th Infantry Division , but the division managed to hold most of its ground , remaining stationary until the end of the war in the summer of 1953 . 
 During the Korean War the 45th Infantry Division suffered 4 @,@ 004 casualties , consisting of 834 killed in action and 3 @,@ 170 wounded in action . The division was awarded four campaign streamers and one Presidential Unit Citation . One soldier from the division , Charles George , was awarded the Medal of Honor while serving in Korea . 
 = = = After Korea = = = 
 The division briefly patrolled the Korean Demilitarized Zone following the signing of the armistice ending the war , but most of its men returned home and reverted to National Guard status on 30 April 1954 . Its colors were returned to Oklahoma on 25 September of that year , formally ending the division 's presence in Korea . 
 The division remained as a unit of the Oklahoma National Guard , and participated in no major actions throughout the rest of the 1950s save regular weekend and summer training exercises . In 1963 , the formation was reorganized in accordance with the Reorganization Objective Army Divisions plan , which saw the establishment of a 1st , 2nd and 3rd Brigade within the division . These brigades would see no major deployments or events , and were deactivated five years later in 1968 . That same year , due to the perceived lack of need for so many large formations in the Army National Guard , the 45th Infantry Division was deactivated , as part of a larger move to reduce the number of Army National Guard divisions from 15 to eight , while increasing the number of separate brigades from seven to 18 . In its place , the independent 45th Infantry Brigade ( Separate ) was established . The 45th Infantry Brigade received all of the 45th Division 's lineage and heraldry , including its shoulder sleeve insignia . Also activated from division assets were the 45th Field Artillery Group , later redesignated the 45th Fires Brigade , and the 90th Troop Command . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The 45th Infantry Division was awarded eight campaign streamers and one unit award in World War II and four campaign streamers and one unit decoration in the Korean War , for a total of twelve campaign streamers and two unit decorations in its operational history . 
 = = Commanding Generals = = 
 Note : Similarity of dates for General Muldrow and commanders beginning with General Ruffner is because 45th Infantry Division , AUS , was retained in Korea while twin unit , 45th Infantry Division , NGUS , was activated in Oklahoma . 
 = 1995 Brazilian Grand Prix = 
 The 1995 Brazilian Grand Prix ( formally the XXIV Grande Prêmio do Brasil ) was a Formula One motor race held on 26 March 1995 at the Autódromo José Carlos Pace , São Paulo , Brazil . It was the first round of the 1995 Formula One season . The 71 @-@ lap race was won by Michael Schumacher for the Benetton team after starting from second position . David Coulthard finished second in a Williams , with Gerhard Berger third in a Ferrari . Damon Hill , who started the race from pole position , spun out while leading on lap 30 with an apparent gearbox problem , which was later found to be a suspension failure . Schumacher 's win came despite Benetton encountering steering problems with his car during Friday practice , leading to him crashing heavily and necessitating steering component changes for the rest of the event . Despite Schumacher 's victory , Hill proved to be faster during the race , and seemed to be on course for a comfortable victory before his sudden retirement . 
 Other notable performances came from Berger , who took the final podium position despite being delayed during one of his routine pit stops due to a problem with a loose wheel nut ; Mika Häkkinen , who finished fourth for the McLaren team despite its new car proving to be uncompetitive in pre @-@ season testing ; and Mika Salo , who drove strongly in the first half of the race to run third in his first Grand Prix for the Tyrrell team , only to suffer from a cramp and drop back to seventh place at the finish . Behind Häkkinen , the other points @-@ scoring finishers were Jean Alesi in the second Ferrari and Mark Blundell , who drove the second McLaren . Blundell was standing in for regular driver Nigel Mansell in the second McLaren until the team could produce a wider chassis in which to accommodate him , as the car 's initial cockpit design had proved to be too narrow for him to drive comfortably . 
 Several hours after the conclusion of the race , Schumacher and Coulthard were excluded from the race result as the chemical " fingerprint " of fuel samples from their cars taken after qualifying and the race did not match the specified sample lodged with the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) prior to the event . Berger was thus declared the winner , but the race stewards ' decision to exclude them was overturned at an appeal hearing on April 13 . Schumacher and Coulthard were reinstated in first and second places respectively , but the two teams did not receive their respective constructors ' points . The Ferrari team was unhappy with the decision made at the appeal hearing ; Berger called the sport " a joke " . The rule concerning the legality of fuels had been changed for the 1995 season , as had the new standardised equipment used for refuelling during the race , the drivers ' weighing @-@ in procedure and the conditions of the drivers ' racing licences ; all of these changes produced controversies which at times threatened to overshadow the race , as did the excessively bumpy condition of the track . The race also marked the first Brazilian Grand Prix to take place since the death of Brazilian triple World Champion Ayrton Senna the previous year ; his passing was commemorated in various ways throughout the event . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The race was the first round of the 1995 Formula One season after a four month break since the last race of the 1994 season in Australia . Over the winter months , the Autódromo José Carlos Pace race track was resurfaced in an attempt to reduce its <unk> . The drivers were unhappy with the resurfacing work , though , as the track became more bumpy than in the previous year . Williams driver David Coulthard described the track as " bumpy as hell , quite unbelievable " . He was also concerned about his stamina for the duration of the 71 @-@ lap race , as he had suffered from a bout of tonsillitis in the run @-@ up to the event which had disrupted his physical training . Local Jordan driver Rubens Barrichello was even more vocal in his criticism of the track 's condition , declaring that the circuit organisers were " a bunch of idiots . The track is three times <unk> than before . It is not by applying layer upon layer of tarmac that they will improve matters . " Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen claimed that the bumping was so bad that he was close to passing out ; the Sauber car handled badly over the bumps throughout the weekend . 
 The race marked the first Brazilian Grand Prix to be held since the death of three @-@ time champion Ayrton Senna the previous year in a racing accident at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix . As such , various tributes were paid to him throughout the weekend , including a parade lap on the back of a truck with all the drivers waving Brazilian flags ; a display from the Brazilian Air Force which resulted in a large " S " trail in the sky ; and the renaming of a local highway to <unk> Ayrton Senna . The São Paulo city authorities had planned to rename the circuit after Senna , but the family of Carlos Pace , the existing dedicatee , objected . Barrichello also sported a special helmet design as a personal tribute to his compatriot . As a result of Senna 's death , the event was lower @-@ key than in recent years : fewer spectators turned out to watch practice and qualifying , but the race itself was watched by a capacity crowd . 
 The threat of a drivers ' boycott over the terms of their 1995 FIA Super Licences , which allowed the FIA to demand promotional appearances and forbade the drivers from criticising the championship , was defused by the governing body prior to the race , ensuring full driver participation in the championship . Although the Super License issue was resolved with 14 teams and 28 drivers on the official 1995 entry list , the Larrousse team with drivers Éric Bernard and Christophe Bouchut did not make an appearance at the circuit for any of the on @-@ track sessions . This was due to the team running short of money : in the period prior to the event , with French government aid not forthcoming and a 1995 chassis not yet built , team owner Gérard Larrousse elected to miss the first two rounds of the season in the hope of competing from the San Marino Grand Prix onwards . 
 The construction of some of the cars was only just completed prior to the beginning of the season ; the Footwork <unk> and Simtek <unk> chassis arrived at the event with virtually no testing , having been completed shortly beforehand . Of the initial 1995 drivers , Pedro Diniz was the only " complete " rookie , having not been officially entered in any other Formula One race meetings , while Andrea Montermini started his first race after failing to qualify for the 1994 Spanish Grand Prix due to injury . Mika Salo and Domenico Schiattarella had competed in two races , with Taki Inoue competing in one race the previous season . 
 At the front of the field , Michael Schumacher and Damon Hill in the Benetton and Williams cars respectively were the favourites to battle for the Drivers ' Championship , with Schumacher anticipating a " struggle " for the championship . Bernard <unk> , Renault Sport 's Chief Engineer , said that he believed Benetton was less well @-@ prepared than Williams , as the former team had changed its engine supplier to Renault , whereas Williams had been in partnership with the company since 1989 . Hill arrived at the event with the psychological advantage of having set the fastest time at the final pre @-@ season testing session at the Autódromo do Estoril , 0 @.@ 35 seconds faster than Schumacher 's best around the circuit . The Williams team had also completed 2 @,@ 500 miles of testing with its FW17 chassis , significantly more than Benetton ; the team had encountered some reliability problems with its own B195 chassis . 
 Heading into the new season , attention also focused on the McLaren team and its driver Nigel Mansell . He was initially announced as the partner of Mika Häkkinen ; however , a week before the first race , McLaren announced that Mansell would not compete in the first two races of the new season , as he could not fit into the MP4 / 10 car . Mansell 's arrival at McLaren was due to demand from the team 's sponsors , including Philip Morris , whose brand , Marlboro , was on the car , who wanted to enjoy the publicity associated with the 1992 World Champion 's return even if it meant him performing worse than teammate Häkkinen . His place at McLaren for the first two races was taken by the team 's test driver , Mark Blundell , as McLaren worked to build a wider monocoque to accommodate Mansell . McLaren were also concerned about the standard refuelling equipment provided for 1995 by suppliers Intertechnique , having suffered a major leak in a test of the new rig outside of its factory . Intertechnique had redesigned the fuel equipment , which was used by all of the teams , in the wake of a pit lane fire suffered by driver Jos Verstappen during the previous year 's German Grand Prix . The new fuel rigs , in addition to being half the size of the 1994 , also featured longer nozzles , and were designed to lock onto the car before any fuel could begin to flow . Intertechnique traced the problem to a faulty valve within the equipment , which caused 10 kilograms ( 22 lb ) of fuel to leak , and modified the parts accordingly . Intertechnique and the FIA advised the teams to refuel the cars slowly and carefully during pitstops to avoid any further leaks , a situation that was considered unsatisfactory by many of the team principals and mechanics . A new regulation for 1995 also mandated the teams ' fuel suppliers to send samples of their fuel to the FIA prior to each Grand Prix , which the governing body would use as a reference when conducting fuel tests at the event itself . Thus only fuel approved by the FIA in advance was allowed ; any deviations from the samples on file was not permitted . As before , all cars were subject to routine fuel tests as part of the scrutineering process throughout the weekend to ensure compliance with the sport 's technical regulations . The rule change had been proposed by the Elf oil company in 1993 and unanimously supported by the other F1 suppliers in order to speed up the fuel @-@ testing process . 
 Controversy also surrounded the new Ligier JS41 car , with rival team owners comparing it to the Benetton B195 car because of their similar design , the only apparent difference being the engine in each car . The Ligier team was being run in 1995 by Tom Walkinshaw , who had been Benetton 's Engineering Director the previous season . Commenting on the design similarities , Walkinshaw said : 
 Mechanically it [ the JS41 ] is totally different [ from the B195 ] and structurally it is quite different as well . <unk> , it 's as close as we can make it to being the same . I don 't know how you would end up with anything else if you take a core of engineers who have been working on the Benetton . Of course the damn thing looks the same . But if you go into the detail of the car , there is nothing interchangeable . 
 One of the rule revisions stated that the minimum weight limit of 595 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 312 lb ) applied to both car and driver together . Prior to the first session of the season , all of the drivers were weighed to establish a reference weight to be used on occasions when the two were weighed separately , or if the driver was unavailable to be weighed . As such , a small competitive advantage could be established if the driver attempted to register a weight as heavy as possible , so their actual weight when driving the car would be lower . Williams Technical Director Patrick Head estimated that a weight penalty of 7 kilograms ( 15 lb ) could cost 14 seconds over the course of 70 laps of the circuit . In the drivers ' weigh @-@ in , Schumacher weighed in at 77 kilograms ( 170 lb ) , compared to 69 kilograms ( 152 lb ) at the beginning of the 1994 season . Sauber driver Karl Wendlinger gained the most weight compared to 1994 , gaining 22 pounds ( 10 @.@ 0 kg ) . Wendlinger 's teammate Frentzen and Tyrrell driver Ukyo Katayama added the least amount of weight , gaining 3 pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) . When Schumacher was weighed after the race , his weight had decreased to 71 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 158 lb ) , although this weight , when combined with that of his car , still left it above the limit , at 599 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 321 lb ) . Schumacher explained the weight gain as a consequence of a fitness regime over the winter that had converted excess fat to muscle , and also admitted to eating and drinking heavily , in addition to refraining from using the toilet , prior to the weigh @-@ in . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held before the race ; the first was held on Friday morning , with the second held on Saturday morning . Both were held in damp conditions due to overnight rain with the track drying towards the conclusion of the respective sessions . Both sessions lasted 1 hour and 45 minutes . Qualifying was split into two one @-@ hour sessions ; the first was held on Friday afternoon with the second held on Saturday afternoon . The fastest time from either of the two qualifying sessions counted towards their final grid position . 
 In the first practice session , Hill was fastest with a time of 1 : 21 @.@ 664 , two thousands of a second ahead of teammate Coulthard . Schumacher was third , with the Ferrari cars of Jean Alesi and Gerhard Berger , who had been the leading two for most session , close behind . Blundell in the McLaren was sixth , with teammate Häkkinen finishing the session in 14th position , the Finnish driver complaining of steering problems with the car . The two Ferrari drivers used different pedal layouts in the 412T2 chassis : Berger 's car was equipped with two pedals and a hand @-@ operated clutch , whereas Alesi preferred the traditional three @-@ pedal system . 
 Hill set a provisional pole position time of 1 : 20 @.@ 081 during the first qualifying session , ahead of Berger , Coulthard , Alesi , Häkkinen and Schumacher . The session was disrupted after Schumacher crashed heavily into the tyre barrier at turn eight , a corner normally taken at a speed of 140 miles per hour ( 230 km / h ) . As a precaution , Benetton opted to keep Schumacher 's teammate , Johnny Herbert , in the garage while the team found out what was wrong with the car . This meant that Herbert did not set a time in the session , while Schumacher completed only two of his twelve allotted laps . Speaking of the incident , Schumacher said that " there was a little movement in the steering wheel at the previous corner and at the next it went completely . I spun the car backwards into the tyre barrier and the safety structure behind my head did a good job of protecting me . For sure I am not very happy about this , but I believe that the team will spend a lot of time investigating the situation for tomorrow and they will find the problem . " The problem was determined to be a steering failure , specifically a joint in the car 's steering column . Replacement steering components were sourced from São Paulo by Benetton engineer Tim Wright , and the team did not encounter any problems over the remainder of the weekend . 
 The second practice session was held in wet but drying weather conditions . During the session , Schumacher went off the track at the exit of turn five , damaging his car 's front wing in the process . However , he still set the fastest time of the session ( 1 : 23 @.@ 607 ) after a change to his car 's ride height proved beneficial to its performance . The top six was completed by Berger , Hill , Häkkinen , Alesi , and Olivier Panis ' Ligier . 
 Schumacher also set the fastest time in the second qualifying session with a lap of 1 : 20 @.@ 382 , but it was not good enough to beat Hill 's fastest time overall set in the first session . Hill made a set @-@ up change that he turned out not to be happy with , but maintained his pole position , his first since the 1994 British Grand Prix . The Williams and Benetton formation continued on the second row , as Coulthard was third , with Herbert qualifying fourth after a late flying lap , equalling his best @-@ ever qualifying position , achieved at the 1994 Italian Grand Prix for the Lotus team . However , a hole was punched in the bottom of Herbert 's monocoque chassis during the session as a result of damage , leading to a night of repairs in order for him to be able to take the start in his designated race car . The work required to repair both Benetton cars caused Schumacher 's race engineer , Pat Symonds , to describe the weekend as " one of the hardest [ ... ] I can remember for many years " . It also meant that three British drivers started in the top four , leading Hill to joke that " the English [ sic ] have got Michael surrounded " . Behind the leading four , the two Ferrari cars were fifth and sixth , Berger qualifying in front of Alesi . Both were optimistic on their race prospects , despite the fact that the former suffered an engine failure during the session . The two McLaren cars of Häkkinen and Blundell were seventh and ninth , the two split by Eddie Irvine in a Jordan car . Irvine set his time despite spinning off during the session ; his teammate Barrichello suffered the season 's first engine failure during a timed session on Friday and then gearbox problems on Saturday , before also spinning off during that day 's qualifying session , restricting his to a disappointing 16th position on the grid at his home race . Katayama and Salo proved evenly @-@ matched for Tyrrell , qualifying in 11th and 12th respectively , behind Panis . The Minardi drivers were also close , with Pierluigi Martini and Luca Badoer taking 17th and 18th positions on the grid respectively , separated from the <unk> by Gianni Morbidelli ( Footwork ) , Frentzen , Aguri Suzuki ( Ligier ) and Barrichello . Wendlinger took 19th position , the Sauber cars handling particularly badly on the bumpy track , ahead of Bertrand Gachot and Montermini ( both Pacific drivers ) , who sandwiched Inoue in the second Footwork . At the back of the grid , the two Forti and Simtek cars covered positions 23 to 26 . Schiattarella , in a Simtek , was last out of the four positions , having caused one of the two red flags in qualifying , crashing on the exit of turn three at the beginning of the second qualifying session . The Simtek team 's testing time was limited on Friday as the mandatory onboard fire extinguishers for its cars failed to arrive in time ; a similar problem with the late arrival of parts affecting Martini 's Minardi . The times in the second session were generally quicker , with only Hill , Badoer and Wendlinger setting their quickest lap times during the first session . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The conditions for the race were dry , with a capacity crowd of some 40 @,@ 000 fans turning out to watch the race . The drivers took to the track on Sunday morning for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . Both Williams cars maintained their good performance from qualifying ; Coulthard was fastest with teammate Hill in second . Schumacher completed the top three positions . Herbert and Katayama both suffered from gearbox problems with their race cars , and elected to start the race with their teams ' spare cars . The Simtek team did not take part in the session , as both drivers waited for stronger suspension components flown out from the United Kingdom to be fitted to the cars for the race . Minutes before the race started , a press release from the FIA was given to all media and team personnel , notifying them that the chromatographic analysis of the Elf fuel samples taken from Schumacher 's Benetton and the Coulthard 's Williams during qualifying did not match the sample provided by the fuel company before the start of the season for reference purposes , thus rendering both cars illegal . Both teams were fined $ 30 @,@ 000 and raced under appeal , as the standard penalty for the offence was disqualification from the event . Neither Schumacher nor Coulthard were informed of the situation , as the teams did not want to unsettle their drivers before the race start . Hill and Herbert 's races were not affected by the judgement , despite using the same type of fuel . Samples from Ferrari 's Agip and McLaren 's Mobil fuel were also tested ; both were in accordance with the regulations . Though 26 cars qualified for the race , only 25 took the start : Martini retired on the parade lap , his Minardi car suffering a gearbox problem . 
 Hill had a bad start from pole position , allowing Schumacher to overtake him into turn one . Panis , who started from tenth position in a Ligier , spun at the first corner after a nudge from Katayama , hitting the wall in the process and retiring from the race . Herbert , racing the spare Benetton chassis , dropped three places by the end of lap one , dropping behind Häkkinen and the two Ferrari cars . Blundell also made a poor start , dropping to fourteenth position after his gearbox changed from first to third gear as he accelerated away from the grid . At the end of the first lap , the race order was Schumacher leading Hill , from Coulthard , Häkkinen , Berger , Alesi , Herbert , Irvine , Katayama and Salo , with the two <unk> switching places on the next lap . At the start of lap three , Hill attempted to overtake Schumacher heading into turn five , but Schumacher closed the door on Hill . Hill lost the advantage for a moment , with teammate Coulthard drawing alongside , but unable to get past with Hill on the inside line into turn six . Henceforth , Schumacher and Hill began to gradually pull away from Coulthard , who realised that he could not match the pace of the leaders and settled into his own rhythm , albeit one that was still comfortably faster than the cars behind him . By lap five , Herbert had dropped down to tenth position , unhappy with the handling of the spare car and having been overtaken by Irvine , Salo and Katayama . On lap ten , Schumacher lapped last @-@ placed Diniz for the first time ; the presence of slower cars a constant factor for the front @-@ runners thereafter . On the same lap Frentzen retired from 12th position with electrical failure . He was joined by Schiattarella two laps later after his Simtek car developed a steering problem . Irvine made a pit stop earlier than expected on lap fifteen , retiring from the race with a gearbox actuator problem . On the same lap , Katayama spun at the fourth corner , stalled his car in the process and retired from the race . The two retirements meant Herbert moved back up to eighth position . Alesi was the first of the leading drivers to make a scheduled pit stop on lap 17 , rejoining the track in eleventh place . Barrichello , Irvine 's teammate , retired a lap later , driving into the pit lane slowly with a gearbox problem . On the same lap , Verstappen retired his Simtek car with a clutch problem . 
 The Benetton and Williams teams were employing different pit stop strategies – the Benetton team were planning a three stop strategy whereas the Williams team were only planning for two stops . Schumacher pitted on lap 18 , but was momentarily baulked by the slowing Jordan car of Barrichello as he was entering the pitlane . Schumacher exited the stop behind Berger , but overtook the Austrian driver at the beginning of the next lap . Hill , who had remained close behind Schumacher before the German pitted , made his own stop on lap 21 , exiting the pitlane in front of Schumacher . Coulthard took the lead of the race for one lap , before pitting and dropping behind the two leaders and the yet @-@ to @-@ stop Häkkinen and Berger . Häkkinen and Berger were the final drivers of the leading teams to pit , however , the McLaren mechanics had trouble getting the fuel hose off the Finn 's car when he stopped on lap 23 , losing him ten seconds . Several other teams experienced problems with attaching and detaching the refuelling nozzles , and occasional small sprays of fuel were observed , reinforcing the problem experienced by McLaren with the equipment before the race meeting . Berger , adopting a strategy of pitting late , was the only driver not to have stopped by lap 24 and thus was third , with Hill , Schumacher , Coulthard , Alesi and Salo the other drivers in the top six places . Salo 's stop had been faultless , gaining him significant time on those drivers who had been running in front of him . By this stage Gachot had retired his Pacific car after it got stuck in fifth gear . Berger made his stop on lap 27 , but had problems leaving the pits after a communication problem between him and his mechanics nearly led to him leaving the pit lane with a loose wheel nut on the front right @-@ hand wheel . The pit " lollipop " , signalling the driver when to leave , was raised and lowered again in quick succession , preventing Berger from leaving until the wheel nut was sufficiently tightened . The miscommunication cost Berger 13 seconds , dropping him back to seventh position . Alesi fell behind Salo and Häkkinen after the first set of pit stops , Salo overtaking him on lap 25 , with Häkkinen moving past three laps later as Alesi was held up behind the lapped Montermini . 
 Once in front of Schumacher , Hill was able to gradually extend his lead to 3 @.@ 4 seconds by lap 30 despite carrying a heavier fuel load for one fewer planned pit stop . However , he lost second gear during the course of that lap , and then spun off at turn two on lap 31 , retiring from the race with a suspected gearbox seizure . On the same lap , Herbert also retired from the race after suffering damage in a collision with Suzuki , who himself had to make an unscheduled pit stop to replace his car 's damaged nosecone . Schumacher thus assumed the lead as a result of Hill 's retirement , leading by 11 @.@ 5 seconds from Coulthard . Salo was third in the remaining Tyrrell , 39 @.@ 4 seconds behind Coulthard . Häkkinen and the two Ferrari cars completed the top six positions . Schumacher made his second pit stop on lap 37 , exiting in second position behind Coulthard . Salo and Häkkinen , both performing much better than had been expected prior to the race , battled over third position until lap 39 , when Salo , suffering from cramp and driving with one hand , spun at the final bend . He pitted soon after for fresh tyres , dropping down to eighth position . Häkkinen , having moved up to third , made his second stop on lap 43 , exiting behind the two Ferrari cars , Berger moving in front of Alesi as the latter made his stop on the following lap , rejoining in seventh . Coulthard pitted from the lead on lap 47 , the gap between him and Schumacher not big enough to allow him to maintain the lead . Schumacher set the fastest lap of the race , 1 : 30 @.@ 921 , extending his lead to such an extent that when he made his own final stop on lap 52 , he maintained the lead . After his final stop , Schumacher gradually opened his leading margin 11 seconds , winning the race after 71 laps in a time of 1 : 48 : <unk> , with Coulthard finishing second in his Williams . The Ferraris of Berger – who made his final stop on lap 49 without losing a place – and Alesi were third and fifth respectively , but off the pace as Schumacher lapped them both in the closing stages . Häkkinen , despite losing part of his rear wing after his car was struck by a bird , split them both to take fourth position . In the closing stages , Morbidelli and Blundell both overtook Salo , only for the Footwork driver to retire on lap 62 with a blocked fuel line . Blundell , who had earlier changed his steering wheel and was driving without the use of third gear , thus took the final point in sixth place , ahead of Salo , Suzuki , Montermini – who completed the race distance despite struggling with a broken floor on his chassis , taking the Pacific team 's first race finish – and Diniz . The race saw a high attrition rate ; only ten out of the 25 starters finished the race . Of the other late retirements , Wendlinger suffered a broken battery cable on lap 41 , Roberto Moreno and Badoer retired on lap 47 due to a spin and gearbox problem respectively , and Inoue 's car caught fire on lap 48 . The Japanese driver was in any case due to receive the black flag for receiving an illegal push @-@ start from the marshals following a spin on the circuit . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Moments after his spin , Hill was interviewed by the BBC , revealing that his spin was due to a gearbox problem ; the Williams car losing second gear before apparently seizing completely . Hill also said that he was " very , very disappointed " with the result , and that " we could have beaten him [ Schumacher ] today " . Further post @-@ race analysis conducted by the Williams team , however , found that the problem was actually a broken left @-@ rear suspension <unk> . 
 During the podium ceremony , Schumacher , Coulthard and Berger did not spray the traditional champagne as a mark of respect to Senna . Schumacher felt lucky to win the race , conceding that " Damon was a little bit quicker than me ... he ended up going off and that 's racing , but I don 't think I could have caught him . " He also believed that his good start was fortunate , as it was the first one he had made in the new Benetton car ; the team had not practised starts previously due to being short of time . He also specified his evasion of Barrichello 's slowing car in the pit @-@ lane entry while making his first stop as a crucial moment of the race . Coulthard admitted that he had been affected by his tonsillitis : " I wasn 't able to match Michael and Damon 's pace so I settled for running my own race " . Berger , meanwhile , was frustrated to finish a lap down on Schumacher , saying that " He was faster everywhere : down the straights , going in and out of the corners . What can you do in these conditions ? Okay , the car 's <unk> is not bad . We must work very hard now . But at least I finished , that 's something . " 
 After the Grand Prix , Schumacher 's Benetton and Coulthard 's Williams cars were excluded from the race classification as a result of the illegal fuel sample " fingerprints " , and Berger declared the new victor . Further samples of both cars ' fuel were taken after the race ; these also did not match the specified sample . Patrick Head was surprised by this outcome as he believed that " there was no question of disqualification until the fuel samples had been returned to Europe for further analysis " . In addition to Benetton and Williams , fuel samples were taken from the Ferrari ( Agip ) and McLaren ( Mobil ) cars during the event , all of which were declared legal after FIA analysis . After an appeal was made by the two teams , the drivers were reinstated into the race classification at the hearing on April 13 ( after the Argentine Grand Prix had taken place ) ; however , the teams did not receive Constructors ' points . The two teams were fined a further $ 200 @,@ 000 during the hearing . It was generally agreed that the illegal fuel did not offer a performance advantage or break any of the regulations relating to chemical composition , only that it did not precisely match the sample that had previously been lodged with the FIA . Niki Lauda , an advisor to Ferrari , was not happy with the decision made at the appeal : 
 I cannot separate car and driver completely . If this is a new rule , you can build an illegal car and let the team pay for victory . The whole thing is only commercial and has nothing to do with sport any more . It 's like scoring a half @-@ goal in soccer – it is not possible . Either you score a goal or not . The decision for me is the biggest defeat for the FIA , who cannot govern the sport any longer . 
 Berger also commented on the situation , saying " I no longer understand anything . Formula One has become a joke . " In the lead @-@ up to the San Marino Grand Prix , Schumacher was quoted saying that Berger should " concentrate on racing instead of thinking how he can criticise me . I have never understood how someone can celebrate a victory like that [ Brazil ] one lap down and winning after someone else has been disqualified . " Berger responded to Schumacher 's comments by saying : 
 I never criticised Schumacher . I only criticised the decision [ to reinstate him ] . I can live with Schumacher being angry . I was declared the winner by the FIA Stewards so I have every reason to open the champagne . 
 Max Mosley , the president of the FIA , also responded to Schumacher 's comments saying that his comments " reflect poorly on the sport and show a lack of adult attitude " . Mosley also commented on the weight issue surrounding Schumacher saying that " it is a pity that it became a matter for public discussion , whether he drank a huge amount of water , didn 't go to the loo or had a heavy helmet . It is just a pity he didn 't take care that it didn 't happen " . Elf was also unhappy with the way in which the episode had been handled , the company 's Commercial Director Michel Bonnet declaring that " We believe the FIA acted in a high @-@ handed manner in disqualifying our two cars so quickly . It should have declared the results provisional and waited for the results of further analysis . Acting the way it did , the FIA has affected the image of large industrial companies , of top F1 teams and of famous drivers . The fact that we have been treated as cheats by a red team – probably red with embarrassment at having finished one lap behind our cars – and by Gerhard Berger is a serious slur against us . " Elf also threatened to take the matter to a tribunal if the cars were not reinstated . Company representative Valerie <unk> also highlighted the need for a consistent chromatographic analysis of fuel samples , drawing attention to the fact that the samples provided during the event had been analysed by a different company than the reference sample , and that the differences may have been caused by the use of different analytical machines and methods . The incident was seen as unfortunate for the sport , which was trying to make a fresh start after several controversies the previous year . From the San Marino Grand Prix onwards , an FIA mobile fuel laboratory accompanied the teams to each event to permit more detailed testing at the track , in addition to ensuring consistency between events . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for the Drivers ' standings . Only top two included for the Constructors ' standings as only two teams had scored points . Benetton and Williams did not receive Constructors ' points at this race . 
 = Commandaria = 
 Commandaria ( also called <unk> and <unk> ; Greek : <unk> , <unk> and Greek : <unk> ) is an amber @-@ coloured sweet dessert wine made in the Commandaria region of Cyprus on the foothills of the <unk> mountains . Commandaria is made from sun @-@ dried grapes of the varieties Xynisteri and Mavro . While often a fortified wine , through its production method it often reaches high alcohol levels , around 15 % , already before fortification . It represents an ancient wine style documented in Cyprus back to 800 BC and has the distinction of being the world 's oldest named wine still in production , with the name Commandaria dating back to the crusades in the 12th century . 
 = = History = = 
 The wine has a rich history , said to date back to the time of the ancient Greeks , where it was a popular drink at festivals . A dried grape wine from Cyprus was first known to be described in 800 BC by the Greek poet Hesiod and was known , by much later , as the Cypriot Manna . 
 During the crusades , Commandaria was served at the 12th century wedding of King Richard the Lionheart to Berengaria of Navarre , in the town of Limassol ; it was during the wedding that King Richard pronounced Commandaria " the wine of kings and the king of wines " . Near the end of the century he sold the island to the Knights Templar , who then sold it to Guy de Lusignan , but kept a large feudal estate at <unk> , close to Limassol , to themselves . This estate was referred to as " La Grande Commanderie " . The word Commanderie referred to the military headquarters whilst Grande helped distinguish it from two smaller such command posts on the island , one close to Paphos ( Phoenix ) and another near Kyrenia ( <unk> ) . This area under the control of the Knights Templar ( and subsequently the Knights Hospitaller ) became known as Commandaria . When the knights began producing large quantities of the wine for export to Europe 's royal courts and for supplying pilgrims en route to the holy lands , the wine assumed the name of the region . Thus it has the distinction of being the world 's oldest named wine still in production . 
 Although today it is produced and marketed under the name Commandaria , it has been referred to with several similar names and spellings in the past . In 1863 , Thomas George Shaw in his book Wine , the vine , and the cellar refers to this wine as <unk> whilst in 1879 , Samuel Baker refers to it as <unk> . In 1833 Cyrus Redding in his book " A history and description of modern wines " makes reference to the wine of the " Commandery " . 
 Legend has it that in the 13th century Philip Augustus of France held the first ever wine tasting competition . The event , branded The Battle of the Wines ( fr . La Bataille des Vins ) , was recorded in a notable French poem written by Henry d <unk> in 1224 . The competition which included wines from all over Europe and France , was won by a sweet wine from Cyprus widely believed to be Commandaria . The Commandery region itself fell into the control of his descendant Philip IV in 1307 , after the suppression of the Knights Templar . 
 Another legend has it that the Ottoman sultan Selim II invaded the island just to acquire Commandaria ; also that the grapes used to make this wine were the same grapes exported to Portugal that eventually became famous as the source of port wine . 
 = = Production = = 
 Commandaria is made exclusively from two types of indigenous Cyprus grapes : Xynisteri and Mavro . The grapes are left to overripe on the vine and when sugar content reaches acceptable levels ( corresponding to high must weight ) they are harvested . More specifically , Xynisteri is picked when at around 12 degrees <unk> ( ° Bé ) and Mavro at 15 @-@ 16 ° Bé . The grapes are then laid out in the sun to further increase the sugar density through evaporation . When the must weight reaches 19 to 23 ° Bé the juice is extracted thorough crushing and pressing . Fermentation takes place in reservoirs and will arrest naturally due to the high levels of alcohol achieved at around 15 % . The above process has to take place within the confines of 14 designated villages that lie in the Commandaria Region ( see below ) . Commandaria , by law is aged for at least four years in Oak Barrels but this can take place outside the above designated area within Cyprus under strict control and under the conditions laid down in Cypriot legislation . 
 Once fermentation has been completed , at a minimum alcohol level of 10 % ( which is often exceeded ) , the alcoholic strength of Commandaria may be increased by the addition of pure 95 % grape alcohol or a wine distillate of at least 70 % alcohol . However , after this addition , the wine 's actual alcohol content may not exceed 20 % , while its total potential alcohol ( including its sugar content ) must be at least 22 @.@ 5 % . Thus , Commandaria may be a fortified wine , but fortification is not mandatory . 
 The origins of the production method are not definite . In his poem Works and Days , written in the 7th century BC , Hesiod , writes : 
 Pliny the Elder describes similar methods employed by the Greeks for making a sweet wines , 
 In his account Samuel Baker describes the production in 1879 
 Interestingly he claims that the evolution of this method was more out of necessity than choice .. … 
 Commandaria is produced both by the large wine industries ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) and by small local producers of the Commandaria appellation zone ( see below ) . 
 Data recorded by Samuel Baker in his book Cyprus - How I saw it in 1879 reveal that in the late 19th century Cyprus had an annual production of about 300 @,@ 000 okes , equivalent to about 385 @,@ 000 litres ( data reflects only duty @-@ paid production ) . Of this , Cyprus exported 180 @,@ 103 okes from Limassol Port , of which the vast majority went to Austria ( 155 @,@ 000 okes valued at UK £ 2 @,@ 075 ) . 
 Official figures released by Cyprus ’ Vines Products Commission show that there is a general increasing trend in the volumes produced . Much of Commandaria production is still targeted for export . 
 = = Authentication = = 
 Currently Commandaria holds a protected designation of origin ( PDO ) within the European Union , the United States and Canada . By Cypriot legislation passed on March 2 , 1990 , it is only produced in a collection of 14 neighbouring villages : Agios Georgios , Agios Konstantinos , Agios Mamas , Agios Pavlos , <unk> , Gerasa , <unk> , <unk> , Kalo <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The designated area has assumed the name of the Commandaria Region and is located on the south facing slopes of the <unk> Mountains at an altitude of 500 @-@ <unk> within the Limassol District . Only grapes from vineyards that have been planted for at least 4 years are allowed . Vine training must follow the goblet method and watering is prohibited . The grape harvest may only commence after the vine products commission of Cyprus has given the green light , based on the average sugar content of the grapes . <unk> grapes must demonstrate a sugar content of 212 g / L whilst Mavro can only qualify with a reading of 258 g / L and above . The sugar concentration is then raised by laying the grapes in the sun , usually for 7 – 10 days , to a strict window of 390 to <unk> / L. 
 In February 2006 , the Wine Products Association of Cyprus selected an official Commandaria wine glass , manufactured by Riedel , an Austrian wine glass company . 
 = Carpenter Street ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Carpenter Street " is the sixty @-@ third episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the eleventh episode of season three . It first aired on November 26 , 2003 on the UPN network in the United States . The episode was written by executive producers Rick Berman and Brannon Braga . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . Season three of the series shows the ship enter the Delphic Expanse to search for a Xindi superweapon in response to an attack on Earth . In this episode , Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) and Sub @-@ commander T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) travel back to early 21st century Earth to find a group of Xindi @-@ Reptilians who were seeking to wipe out the human race by using a biological agent . 
 The production of the episode used several different methods to represent 21st century Detroit , including exterior shots in Los Angeles , the Paramount studios downtown New York standing sets and exterior sets at the Lacy Street Production Center . The guest cast featured Matt Winston returning as Temporal Agent Daniels , and Jeffrey Dean Morgan as a Xindi @-@ Reptilian . It had the lowest number of viewers of season three at that point according to the Nielsen ratings , a decline that was attributed to pre @-@ Thanksgiving travel . Critical response was mostly negative , with criticism directed at the nature of the plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Temporal Agent Daniels informs Captain Archer that three Reptilians have traveled back in time to Detroit , Michigan , to the year 2004 , where they intend to produce a bio @-@ weapon to annihilate Humans . The Xindi Council had banned the use of bio @-@ weapons , forcing the Reptilians to take extraordinary measures . Daniels sends Archer and Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol back in time to investigate , and provides Archer with temporal tags to bring back anything foreign to that time @-@ frame . 
 Using a hand scanner , Archer is able to steal a vehicle , and T 'Pol locates the Xindi bio @-@ signs leading them to an abandoned factory on Carpenter Street . They notice Loomis , a blood bank employee , exiting the building . Suspecting something , they follow him home . After he tries to escape , T 'Pol uses the Vulcan nerve pinch to stop him . When he awakes , he believes that Archer and T 'Pol are police officers , and requests a lawyer . Archer punches him , and he admits delivering six bodies to his mysterious employers , one for a different blood type . Archer comes up with a plan , and decides to pose as one of the victims . 
 After being delivered by Loomis , Archer realizes that they are developing some sort of a bio @-@ weapon . Archer begins destroying their technology , and kills one of the three Reptilians . Two others try to escape with the deadly bio @-@ agent , and Archer kills another one as they flee . The last Xindi escapes due to the interference of Loomis , who T 'Pol stuns with her phaser . On the factory 's roof , Archer corners him as he attempts to release the bio @-@ agent . Archer and T 'Pol tag all non @-@ 21st @-@ century artefacts , and return to Enterprise . Loomis , still groggy in his car , is apprehended by real police officers and attempts to explain the " lizard people " and their " ray guns . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Rick Berman and Brannon Braga , the executive producers of Star Trek : Enterprise . It was directed by Mike Vejar , his sixth episode of the series . He previously directed episodes for three other Star Trek series . When asked about the use of time travel stories in Star Trek in relation to " Carpenter Street " , Scott Bakula said that " Obviously it 's something you want to be careful of , and yet at the same time I 'm told that the fans love the time travel episodes , and there 's certainly an effort on Rick and Brannon 's part to write things that they hope the fans will love . This particular journey back in time is very grounded in story . " He added that he believed that the setting for the episode was chosen because the production values were " easily accomplished " and that " because the episode deals with germ warfare , and that certainly is a relevant topic today . " 
 Guest stars on the episode included Matt Winston , who appeared for the fourth time as Temporal Agent Daniels , having previously played the role most recently in the second episode of " Shockwave " . Returning to Star Trek , but appearing for the first time in Enterprise , was Leland Orser , who played Loomis . The actor had previously appeared in the Star Trek : Voyager episode " <unk> " , as well as the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episodes " The Die Is Cast " and " Sanctuary " . Jeffrey Dean Morgan , who would later become better known for portraying Denny Duquette in medical drama Grey 's Anatomy and as The Comedian in the 2009 superhero film Watchmen , strongly disliked portraying a Xindi Reptilian in " Carpenter Street " . He later explained to Entertainment Weekly that " I had to pay my bills . I knew I 'd play some guy saying some stuff . Then I got a call saying I needed to go in for a prosthetic fitting . I remember them dripping goop on my face , and I had straws sticking out of my nose . I couldn 't eat lunch . I was claustrophobic . I 'd go home in tears . This was the job that made me want to quit acting . " 
 Filming began October 10 , 2003 , on the standing Enterprise sets as well as a temporary set which represented Loomis ' apartment . This filming continued on the following Monday , where filming was shared with production on both " Twilight " and " Similitude " . On October 13 , the location filming began for " Carpenter Street " in downtown Los Angeles . As these scenes take place in darkness , filming did not start until dusk and the shoot was conducted overnight . The filming on the first night comprised the scenes where the characters were in 21st century vehicles , and the rest of the week was spent at the Lacy Street Production Center , which had urban settings which could represent the downtown Detroit area . During the following week , the production moved back to the Paramount lot where the standing New York Street backlot was used ; this included the use of one area where a scene from Francis Ford Coppola 's The Godfather ( 1972 ) had been shot . The episode finished filming on October 23 , including an overlap with the production of " Chosen Realm " on October 22 . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Carpenter Street " first aired on November 26 , 2003 on the UPN network in the United States . It received a Nielsen rating of 2 @.@ 9 / 4 percent , meaning that it was watched by 2 @.@ 9 percent of all adults and 4 percent of all adults watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was the lowest ratings received by any episode during the third season . This slump had been attributed to the date of the broadcast , which had taken place on the night before Thanksgiving , a day which typically sees a large number of people travel , thereby decreasing the overall ratings of television shows . 
 In her review for the website TrekNation , Michelle Erica Green said that the episode entertained , but was a " ultimately pointless time @-@ travel episode that redeems its existence primarily by not requiring a reset button . " But she thought that Orser was " superb " as the " repugnant " Loomis , and the episode was " entertaining fluff " but was " warm and witty and well @-@ done . " Jamahl Epsicokhan on his website " Jammer 's Reviews " , called the episode a " turkey " and said that it was " a mediocre time @-@ travel bore with barely enough plot for me to accuse of not making sense . " He criticized the lack of explanation given to the Xindi 's involvement in the Temporal Cold War , and said that the plot itself was akin to " <unk> cheese " due to the number of plot holes . He gave the episode a score of one and a half out of four . 
 The only home media release of " Carpenter Street " has been as part of the season three DVD box set , released in the United States on September 27 , 2005 . The Blu @-@ ray release of Enterprise was announced in early 2013 , and released on January 7 , 2014 . 
 = This Love ( Maroon 5 song ) = 
 " This Love " is a song by the American pop rock band Maroon 5 . The song was written by frontman Adam Levine and keyboardist Jesse Carmichael for their debut album , Songs About Jane ( 2002 ) . The track is built around a piano @-@ led strut , which is immediately followed by synth percussion , and a repeating guitar sound . 
 The song 's lyrics are based on Levine 's break @-@ up with an ex @-@ girlfriend . He revealed that the song was written in the " most emotionally trying time " in his life . He has also described that the lyrics in this song are extremely erotic . " This Love " was critically acclaimed by music critics , who noted the track 's musicscape . It was released on January 27 , 2004 , as the second single from Songs About Jane . 
 The single entered the top ten on most charts , topping several of Billboard magazine 's component charts , including reaching the number one spot on the Hot Adult Top 40 Tracks chart . The music video was met with controversy , regarding extended intimate scenes between Levine and his then @-@ girlfriend . " This Love " helped Maroon 5 win the MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist and was the third most played song of 2004 . The song won Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 2006 Grammy Awards , and , to date , is one of Maroon 5 's most successful songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 " This Love " was the second single from Maroon 5 's 2002 debut album , Songs About Jane . In an interview with MTV News in August 2002 , Maroon 5 vocalist Adam Levine revealed that he wrote the song the day his girlfriend moved away when they broke up . In another interview , Levine revealed that the song was written in the " most emotionally trying time " in his life . He also added , " I was in a relationship that was ending , but I was really excited on the other end because the band was about to go make the record and I was ecstatic to go in the studio . She was literally leaving town within days of me writing the lyrics to ' This Love , ' so I was in prime emotional condition to write a song with that kind of conflict . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 During development of " This Love " , the band stated that the song was influenced by musician Stevie Wonder . The verses being written in the key of C harmonic minor and the chorus being written in the key of Eb Major , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 95 beats per minute . The introduction of " This Love " features a piano @-@ led strut . Maroon 5 has called " This Love " a prime pop @-@ rock song . The music featured in the song has a lot more rock @-@ guitar crunch , and is considered a soulful and pop / rock song . According to Johnny Loftus of Allmusic , the music featured in the song has " a slick channeling of vintage R & B rhythms into punchy pop dynamics " . Loftus felt that the song features " Levine 's wry falsetto around strutting , bottom @-@ heavy piano and percussion both programmed and live ; chirping backup vocals and washes of sunny synth and flute acted as counterweights " . Loftus also noted that the band has a " sexual charge " with the lyrics , " I tried my best to feed her appetite / To keep her coming every night / So hard to keep her satisfied " . The Boston Globe 's Steve Morse described the single 's sounds as " a rocking yet soulful tale about the breakup of a relationship " . Meghan Bard of The Daily Campus adds that the song has " Stevie Wonder @-@ esque vocals and a funky R & B beat " . In the extended version of the song , which is 4 minutes and 26 seconds long , the chorus of the band 's next single , " She Will Be Loved " , can be heard from 3 : 21 to 3 : 42 , during the outro . 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone , when asked about the lyrics " Keep her coming every night " and " Sinking my fingertips into every inch of you " , Levine said : " Yep , that 's sexual , all right . I was so sick of typical lyrics like ' Ooh , baby ' and ' I love you ' and all this vague shit . I thought the more explicit I got without being totally explicit was a nice approach . The little girls would enjoy them , and it would go right over my grandparents ' heads . But it would hit my ex @-@ girlfriend like a ton of bricks . It was perfect . " He also comments on how MTV played an edited version of the song for the music video , with the word " coming " edited out of the line " keep her coming every night " . Levine noted , " MTV has now edited the language . They won 't let me say , ' Keep her coming every night ' , and they took the sinking out of ' sinking my fingertips ' . It 's like communist China . It 's totally bizarre . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received critical acclaim from critics . In the Rolling Stone review of the album , critic Christian Hoard wrote : " Adam Levine 's urban @-@ romantic <unk> work best when his band really gets up on the good foot , as on ' This Love ' , which uses piano and James Brown @-@ like guitars to create a foundation on which Levine can obsess about beauty ( including his own ) . " Jason Thompson of PopMatters noted that on the songs " This Love " and " Must Get Out " , keyboardist Jesse Carmichael " manages to conjure up both the productions of Britney Spears and The New Radicals respectively " . Sam <unk> of the Daily Lobo , who was less enthusiastic about the album , complimented the band on " This Love " , in which he noted , " ... ' This Love ' , is a happier version of the first with a great backbeat reminiscent of Stevie Wonder 's ' Superstition ' . It might make a foot tap , a head nod or even a booty shake if played at a loud volume . " 
 In May 2004 , musician John Mayer told Rolling Stone that he liked the band 's album Songs About Jane . Mayer was also positive towards the song . " Once I heard ' This Love , ' it was a light @-@ fuse / stand @-@ back kind of situation . It 's one of those perfect songs you always hope to write . " The single also strengthened Maroon 5 's appeal , and helped position them as one of the year 's break @-@ out bands in 2004 . It has since been remixed by Kanye West , titled " This Love ( Kanye West remix ) " , in May 2004 . The band released an EP titled 1.22.03.Acoustic , which features " This Love " , however , in an acoustic version . The song was featured in the video game Guitar Hero : On Tour in 2008 . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The single was officially released to radio in North America in January 2004 , although the music video was released six months later . " This Love " appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at # 5 . The track 's Junior Vasquez Mixes remix topped the Billboard Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart . It also appeared in the Hot Dance Airplay chart at number eighteen . " This Love " reached number one on Billboard 's Top 40 Mainstream . It also reached the top spot on Billboard 's Hot Adult Top 40 Tracks at the one spot , it stayed there for 10 <unk> song was the top digital download of 2004 . In 2007 , the song re @-@ entered the chart at the number 36 position on Billboard 's Hot Digital Songs . As of June 2014 , the song has sold 2 @,@ 120 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 " This Love " reached the top ten in twelve countries . In the United Kingdom , it reached the number three spot in the UK Singles Chart on May 1 , 2004 . It entered the top ten in France , Belgium , and Australia . The single reached the top five in Norway , Switzerland , Netherlands , Austria , and New Zealand . Elsewhere , " This Love " appeared on the Italy , Swiss , Germany , and Ireland music charts . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " This Love " was directed by Sophie Muller . The video combines performance footage from the band in a courtyard built at Mack Sennett Studios and scenes of Adam Levine parting ways with a woman . According to Levine , the concept behind the music video was based on Prince . " An overt sexuality confuses people , too . That video was a very ' pop star ' thing to do . " 
 The music video for " This Love " also features Levine and his then @-@ girlfriend , model Kelly McKee , in a few intimate scenes . The video used creative camera angles , thereby avoiding possible FCC action . A version of the video where a stream of computer @-@ generated flowers cover up more was created for more conservative markets . When asked about the video , Levine said : " It was surprisingly not weird and surprisingly not sexual . It was totally comfortable . I didn 't get horny or anything , which was weird since I shot it with my girlfriend . " 
 The video was controversial enough to cause critics to comment on it . Sylvia Patterson of The Daily Telegraph described the video as a " porno @-@ pop video " . Bass player Michael Madden , asked to comment on the controversy , said that it was " an absurd over @-@ reaction . " 
 = = Live performances and cover versions = = 
 Maroon 5 performed " This Love " live on Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) in February 2004 . The band won the MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist for the music video of " This Love " in 2004 . Also in 2004 , the song was nominated for Choice Rock Track at the Teen Choice Awards . In the Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems , " This Love " was the third played song of 2004 , having 438 @,@ 589 total plays . At the 48th Grammy Awards , the song won a Grammy Award in the category for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . 
 The song appeared as a track in the Nintendo DS video game Guitar Hero : On Tour as well as being a part of the downloadable content library for Guitar Hero 5 ( and by association , Band Hero as they share the same catalog ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Other versions = = 
 A remix of this song has been produced by Kanye West and Miri Ben @-@ Ari with background vocals by John Legend . 
 A South Korean singer , G @-@ Dragon bought the song , then penned and sang the Korean version . The music video was released on October 2 , 2008 on YG Entertainment 's YouTube channel . 
 In 2013 , American singer Marlow Rosado covered the song in salsa and released it as a single . His version peaked at No. 36 on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 = M @-@ 294 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 294 is a state trunkline highway in Calhoun County in the US state of Michigan . It is one of a handful of highways that was established or realigned as a result of a rationalization process initiated in 1998 during the tenure of Governor John Engler . M @-@ 294 is approximately two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Interstate 194 ( I @-@ 194 ) and connects M @-@ 96 with I @-@ 94 southeast of Battle Creek . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 294 runs northward along Beadle Lake Road from I @-@ 94 at exit 100 north through a commercial area . Past these businesses , the adjoining land is not developed for a short distance , and the roadway runs through some woodlands . North of the intersection with Golden Avenue , the highway passes through a residential neighborhood before terminating at M @-@ 96 ( Columbia Avenue ) . The highway lies entirely within Emmett Township just southeast of Battle Creek . The trunkline carries an average annual daily traffic of 6 @,@ 078 vehicles south , and 5 @,@ 728 vehicles north , of Golden Avenue according to a traffic survey completed by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) in 2010 . The highway has not been included as a part of the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 Beadle Lake Road was transferred to state jurisdiction on October 31 , 1998 . The new highway was assigned the M @-@ 294 designation by MDOT and first included on the 1999 state map . The routing has remained unchanged since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Emmett Charter Township , Calhoun County . 
 = Lettice Knollys = 
 Lettice Knollys ( / <unk> / <unk> , sometimes called Laetitia , also known as Lettice Devereux or Lettice Dudley ) , Countess of Essex and Countess of Leicester ( 8 November 1543 – 25 December 1634 ) , was an English noblewoman and mother to the courtiers Robert Devereux , 2nd Earl of Essex and Lady Penelope Rich , although via her marriage to Elizabeth I 's favourite , Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester , she incurred the Queen 's unrelenting displeasure . 
 A grandniece of Anne Boleyn and close to Princess Elizabeth since childhood , Lettice Knollys was introduced early into court life . At 17 she married Walter Devereux , Viscount Hereford , who in 1572 became Earl of Essex . After her husband went to Ireland in 1573 she possibly became involved with Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester . There was plenty of scandalous talk , not least when Essex died in Ireland of dysentery in 1576 . Two years later Lettice Knollys married Robert Dudley in private . When the Queen was told of the marriage she banished the Countess forever from court , effectively curtailing her social life . The couple 's child , Robert , Lord Denbigh , died at the age of three , to the great grief of his parents and ending all prospects for the continuance of the House of Dudley . Lettice Knollys ' union with Leicester was nevertheless a happy one , as was her third marriage to the much younger Sir Christopher Blount , whom she unexpectedly married in 1589 only six months after the Earl 's death . She continued to style herself Lady Leicester . 
 The Countess was richly left under Leicester 's will ; yet the discharge of his overwhelming debts diminished her wealth . In 1604 – 1605 she successfully defended her widow 's rights in court when her possessions and her good name were threatened by the Earl 's illegitimate son , Robert Dudley , who claimed that he was his father 's legitimate heir , thus implicitly declaring her marriage bigamous . Lettice Knollys was always close to her large family circle . Helpless at the political eclipse of her eldest son , the second Earl of Essex , she lost both him and her third husband to the executioner in 1601 . From the 1590s she lived chiefly in the Staffordshire countryside , where , in reasonably good health until the end , she died at age 91 on Christmas Day 1634 . 
 = = Family and upbringing = = 
 Lettice Knollys was born on 8 November 1543 at Rotherfield Greys , Oxfordshire . Her father , Sir Francis Knollys , was a Member of Parliament and acted as Master of the Horse to Prince Edward . Her mother , Catherine Carey , was a daughter of Mary Boleyn , sister to Anne Boleyn . Thus Catherine Knollys was Elizabeth I 's first cousin , and Lettice Knollys her first cousin once removed . Lettice was the third of her parents ' 16 children . 
 Sir Francis and his wife were Protestants . In 1556 they went to Frankfurt in Germany to escape religious persecution under Queen Mary I , taking five of their children with them . It is unknown whether Lettice was among them , and she may have passed the next few years in the household of Princess Elizabeth with whom the family had a close relationship since the mid @-@ 1540s . They returned to England in January 1559 , two months after Elizabeth I 's succession . Francis Knollys was appointed Vice @-@ Chamberlain of the Royal Household ; Lady Knollys became a senior Lady of the Bedchamber , and her daughter Lettice a Maid of the Privy Chamber . 
 = = First marriage and love affair = = 
 In late 1560 Lettice Knollys married Walter Devereux , Viscount Hereford . The couple lived at the family seat of Chartley in Staffordshire . Here the two eldest of their five children , the daughters Penelope and Dorothy , were born in 1563 and 1564 , respectively . Lettice Devereux returned to court on at least one occasion , in the summer of 1565 , when the Spanish ambassador Diego Guzmán de Silva described her as " one of the best @-@ looking ladies of the court " and as a favourite with the Queen . Pregnant with her first son , she flirted with Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester , the Queen 's favourite . The Queen found out at once and succumbed to a fit of jealousy . The Viscountess went back to Staffordshire where , in November 1565 , she gave birth to Robert , later 2nd Earl of Essex . Two more sons followed : Walter , who was born in 1569 , and Francis , who died soon after birth at an unknown date . 
 Walter Devereux was raised to the earldom of Essex in 1572 . In 1573 he successfully suggested to the Queen a project to plant Englishmen in Ulster . In the autumn he went to Ireland , not to return for two years . During this time Lettice Devereux possibly engaged in a love @-@ affair with the Earl of Leicester ; her whereabouts in the following years are largely unknown , though . In 1573 Leicester sent her a present of venison to Chartley from his seat Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire , and she made hunting visits to Kenilworth in 1574 and 1576 . She was also present in July 1575 when Dudley entertained the Queen with a magnificent 19 @-@ days festival at the castle . Elizabeth and the court ( including the Earl of Leicester ) then progressed to Chartley , where they were welcomed by the Countess of Essex . 
 When Walter Devereux returned to England in December 1575 , the Spanish agent in London , Antonio de <unk> , reported : 
 As the thing is publicly talked of in the streets , there can be no harm in my writing openly about the great enmity between the Earl of Leicester and the Earl of Essex , in consequence , it is said , of the fact that while Essex was in Ireland his wife had two children by Leicester . ... Great discord is expected in consequence . 
 These rumours were elaborated on years later in Leicester 's Commonwealth , a Catholic underground libel against the Protestant Earl of Leicester satirically detailing his alleged enormities . Here the Countess of Essex , after having a daughter by Leicester , kills a second child " cruelly and unnaturally " by abortion to prevent her homecoming husband from discovering her affair . There is no evidence that any such children ever existed . 
 The Earl of Essex returned to Ireland in July 1576 . At Dublin , he died of dysentery on 22 September during an epidemic , bemoaning the " <unk> of women " in his last words . Rumours of poison , administered by Leicester , immediately sprung up and continued notwithstanding an official investigation which concluded that Essex had died of natural causes . His body was carried over to Carmarthen , where his widow attended the funeral . 
 The Countess ' jointure , the lands left to her under her husband 's will , was too little to live by and did not comprise Chartley , so that she and her children had to seek accommodation elsewhere . She partly lived in her father 's house at Rotherfield Greys , but also with friends ; Leicester 's Commonwealth claimed that Leicester had her move " up and down the country from house to house by privy ways " . She pleaded for an augmentation of her jointure with the authorities and , to reach a compromise with the late Earl 's executors , threatened " by some <unk> advice " to claim her dower rights . These would have amounted to one third of the Devereux estate . After seven months of wrangling a more satisfactory settlement was reached , the Countess declaring to be " content to respect my children more than myself " . She equally — though unsuccessfully — tried to move the Queen to forgive Essex ' debts to the Crown , which very much burdened the inheritance of her son , the young Earl of Essex . 
 = = Marriage to Leicester and banishment from court = = 
 Lettice Knollys married Robert Dudley , Earl of Leicester on 21 September 1578 at around seven o 'clock in the morning . Only six other people were present at the Earl 's country house at Wanstead , Essex ; among these were the bride 's father and brother , Francis and Richard Knollys , the bridegroom 's brother , Ambrose , Earl of Warwick , and his two friends , the Earl of Pembroke and Lord North . The officiating chaplain Humphrey Tyndall later remarked that the bride wore a " loose gown " ( an informal morning dress ) , which has triggered modern speculation that she was pregnant and that the ceremony happened under pressure from her father . The marriage was , however , in planning between Leicester and his wedding guests for almost a year . While Lettice Devereux may well have been pregnant , there is no further indication as to this . The marriage date coincided with the end of the customary two @-@ years @-@ mourning for a widow . 
 Leicester — a widower since 1560 — had for many years been in hope of marrying Elizabeth herself , " for whose sake he had hitherto <unk> marriage " , as he confessed to Lord North . He also feared Elizabeth 's reaction and insisted that his marriage be kept a secret . It did not remain one for long , the French ambassador , Michel de Castelnau , reporting it only two months later . When the Queen was told of the marriage the next year , she banished Lettice Dudley permanently from court ; she never forgave her cousin , nor could she ever accept the marriage . Even Lady Leicester 's movements through London were resented by the Queen , let alone summer visits to Kenilworth by husband and wife . 
 Lettice Dudley continued to style herself Countess of Essex for several years into her new marriage . She lived very discreetly , often with her relatives at the Knollys family home in Oxfordshire . In February 1580 she was expecting the birth of a child there . For the birth of Leicester 's heir , Robert , Lord Denbigh , in June 1581 , she moved to Leicester House on the Strand . A further advanced pregnancy was reported in September 1582 by the French ambassador , yet the outcome is again unknown . The next year Lettice Dudley became officially resident at Leicester House , and Elizabeth was once again furious with the Earl " about his marriage , for he opened the same more plainly than ever before " . A few weeks later Michel de Castelnau was a guest at Leicester 's palatial mansion : " He especially invited me to dine with him and his wife , who has much influence over him and whom he introduces only to those to whom he wishes to show a particular mark of attention . " 
 Robert Dudley had been close to the Knollys family since the early 1550s ; several of Lettice 's brothers had been in his service and his marriage only enhanced his relations with her siblings . To his four stepchildren he was a concerned and generous stepfather . The Dudleys ' domestic life is partly documented in the Earl 's accounts ; Lettice Dudley financed her personal expenses and servants out of her revenue as Dowager Countess of Essex , remaining largely excluded from society life . 
 The three @-@ year @-@ old Lord Denbigh died suddenly on 19 July 1584 at Wanstead . His death shattered the dynastical hopes of the House of Dudley . Leicester stayed away from his court duties for a few weeks " to comfort my sorrowful wife for the loss of my little son , whom God has lately taken from us . " He also thanked Lord Burghley for — unsuccessfully — pleading with the Queen " on behalf of my poor wife . For truly my Lord , in all reason she is hardly dealt with . " 
 In 1585 Leicester led an English expedition to assist the rebellious United Provinces against Spain . He incurred Elizabeth 's wrath when he accepted the title of Governor @-@ General in January 1586 — what had especially kindled her fury was a tale that the Countess of Leicester was planning to follow her husband to the Netherlands " with such a train of ladies , and gentlewomen , and such rich coaches , litters , and side @-@ saddles , as Her Majesty had none , and that there should be such a court of ladies , as should far pass Her Majesty 's court here . " Thomas Dudley , who informed Leicester about these events , stressed that " this information " was " most false " . At this same time the Earl was giving his wife authority to handle certain land issues during his absence , implying they had no plans to meet in Holland . William Davison , whom Leicester had sent to explain his doings to the Queen , described a visit to the Countess during the crisis : " I found her greatly troubled with tempestuous news she received from court , but somewhat comforted when she understood how I had proceeded with Her Majesty . " 
 The Earl returned to England in December 1586 , but was sent again to the Netherlands in the following June — to the grief of his wife , as the young Earl of Essex remarked in a letter . Leicester eventually resigned his post in December 1587 . The Countess was with him when he died unexpectedly , possibly of malaria , on 4 September 1588 at Cornbury Park , Oxfordshire ; they had been on their way to Kenilworth and Buxton . The Earl 's funeral at Warwick in October 1588 was attended by his widow as well as numerous members of her family circle . 
 = = Blount and Essex = = 
 Lettice Dudley was left a wealthy widow . Leicester 's will appointed her as executrix and her income from both her husbands ' <unk> amounted to £ 3 @,@ 000 annually , to which came plate and <unk> worth £ 6 @,@ 000 . However , her jointure was to suffer greatly from paying off Leicester 's debts , which at some £ 50 @,@ 000 were so overwhelming that she was advised to decline the responsibility of dealing with her husband 's financial legacy . 
 In March or April 1589 the Countess married Sir Christopher Blount , a relatively poor Catholic soldier 12 years her junior , who had been the Earl of Leicester 's Gentleman of the Horse and a trusted friend of his . The marriage was a great surprise and the Earl of Essex complained that it was an " unhappy choice " . In the face of tittle @-@ tattle that had reached even France , Lady Leicester — she continued to be styled thus — explained her choice with being a defenceless widow ; like her marriage to Leicester , the union proved to be a " genuinely happy " one . Some 60 years later it was claimed in a satirical poem that she had poisoned the Earl of Leicester on his deathbed , thereby forestalling her own murder at his hands , because he had found out about her supposed lover , Sir Christopher Blount . 
 In 1593 Lettice Knollys sold Leicester House to her son , after which it became known as Essex House . She moved to Drayton Bassett near Chartley in Staffordshire , her main residence for the rest of her life . Still banished from court , she saw no point in returning to London without being reconciled to Elizabeth . In December 1597 she had heard from friends that " Her Majesty is very well prepared to hearken to terms of pacification " , and was prepared to do " a winter journey " if her son thought " it be to any purpose " . " Otherwise a country life is fittest for disgraced persons " , she commented . She travelled to London , staying at Essex House from January till March 1598 , and seeking a reconciliation with Elizabeth . At last a short meeting was granted in which the Countess kissed the Queen and " the Queen kissed her " , but nothing really changed . 
 Lettice 's second son , Walter Devereux , died 1591 in France while on military duty , and in subsequent years she was anxious for her elder son 's safety . She addressed him " Sweet Robin " , longing for his letters and helpless about his moodiness and depression . After returning from his command in Ireland without licence , Essex was imprisoned in 1599 ; his mother came to London to intercede for him with the Queen . She tried to send Elizabeth a present in form of a gown , which Elizabeth neither accepted nor refused . Her efforts to get sight of her son made matters worse : " <unk> is taken that his mother and friends have been in a house that looks into York Garden where he uses to walk and have saluted each other out of a window . " 
 During Essex ' revolt , trial , and execution in February 1601 , Lettice remained at Drayton Basset . She not only lost her son but her " best friend " , as she called her third husband . Sir Christopher Blount was executed on 18 March 1601 , three weeks after the execution of his stepson , to whom he had been a friend and confidant for many years . 
 = = Litigation and old age = = 
 The executions and <unk> of Essex and Blount led to a legal dispute over the Countess of Leicester 's remaining property . In this context she claimed that Blount , in the process of paying off Leicester 's debts , had squandered her jewels and much of her landed wealth . The death of Elizabeth I in 1603 meant some form of rehabilitation for the Countess ; the new monarch , James I , not only restored her grandson , the third Earl of Essex , to his father 's title and estate , but quickly cancelled the rest of her debts to the Crown , almost £ 4 @,@ 000 . 
 Even more than his debts , the Earl of Leicester 's will triggered litigation . He had intended his illegitimate son from his early 1570s relationship with Douglas Sheffield , the adolescent Robert Dudley , to inherit Kenilworth after the death of his brother , Ambrose Dudley , 3rd Earl of Warwick . Some of the countess ' jointure manors lay in the castle 's vicinity , while at the same time they had been assigned to the younger Dudley 's inheritance by the overseers of Leicester 's will . After Warwick 's death in February 1590 , lengthy legal proceedings ensued over whether particular parts of Lady Leicester 's jointure belonged to the Kenilworth estate or not . 
 In 1603 Dudley initiated moves to prove that he was the legitimate son of his parents and thus the heir to the earldoms of Warwick and Leicester . If successful , this claim would not only have implied that Lettice Knollys ' union with Leicester had been bigamous , but would also have nullified her jointure rights . Consequently , in February 1604 , she filed a complaint against Dudley in the Star Chamber , accusing him of defamation . She was backed by Sir Robert Sidney , who considered himself the only legitimate heir of his uncles Leicester and Warwick . During the Star Chamber proceedings 56 former servants and friends of the Earl of Leicester testified that he had always regarded Dudley as his illegitimate son . The other side was unable to cite clear evidence and the King 's chief minister , Robert Cecil , thought it unwise to rake up the existing property settlement , so the outcome was in favour of Lady Leicester . All the evidence was impounded to preclude a resumption of the case . 
 Throughout her life , Lettice Knollys cared for her siblings , children , and grandchildren . Until their respective deaths in 1607 and 1619 , her daughters Penelope and Dorothy were her closest companions . The young third Earl of Essex , also called Robert , shared much of his life with the old Countess at Chartley and Drayton Bassett . Still walking a mile a day at nearly 90 , she died in her chair in the morning of 25 December 1634 , aged 91 . Widely mourned as a symbol of a by @-@ gone age , she wished to be buried " at Warwick by my dear lord and husband the Earl of Leicester with whom I desire to be entombed " . Her request was respected and she came to rest in the Beauchamp Chapel of Collegiate Church of St Mary , Warwick , opposite the tomb of her son , young Lord Denbigh . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Daniel Boone = 
 Daniel Boone ( November 2 , 1734 [ O.S. October 22 ] – September 26 , 1820 ) was an American pioneer , explorer , woodsman , and frontiersman , whose frontier exploits made him one of the first folk heroes of the United States . Boone is most famous for his exploration and settlement of what is now Kentucky , which was then part of Virginia , but on the other side of the mountains from the settled areas . As a young adult , Boone supplemented his farm income by hunting and trapping game , and selling their pelts in the fur market . Through this occupational interest , Boone first learned the easy routes to the area . Despite some resistance from American Indian tribes such as the Shawnee , in 1775 , Boone blazed his Wilderness Road through the Cumberland Gap in the Appalachian Mountains from North Carolina and Tennessee into Kentucky . There , he founded the village of Boonesborough , Kentucky , one of the first American settlements west of the Appalachians . Before the end of the 18th century , more than 200 @,@ 000 Americans migrated to Kentucky / Virginia by following the route marked by Boone . 
 Boone was a militia officer during the Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 83 ) , which , in Kentucky , was fought primarily between the American settlers and the British @-@ aided Indians . Boone was captured by Shawnee warriors in 1778 . He escaped and alerted Boonesborough that the Shawnees were planning an attack . Although heavily outnumbered , Americans repelled the Shawnee warriors in the Siege of Boonesborough . Boone was elected to the first of his three terms in the Virginia General Assembly , during the Revolutionary War , and fought in the Battle of Blue Licks in 1782 . Blue Licks , a Shawnee victory over the Patriots , was one of the last battles of the Revolutionary War , coming after the main fighting ended in October 1781 . 
 Following the war , Boone worked as a surveyor and merchant , but fell deeply into debt through failed Kentucky land speculation . Frustrated with the legal problems resulting from his land claims , in 1799 , Boone emigrated to eastern Missouri , where he spent most of the last two decades of his life ( 1800 – 20 ) . 
 Boone remains an iconic figure in American history . He was a legend in his own lifetime , especially after an account of his adventures was published in 1784 by John Filson , making him famous across Europe as the typical all @-@ American frontiersman . An American edition made him equally famous across the United States . After his death , he was frequently the subject of heroic tall tales and works of fiction . His adventures — real and legendary — were influential in creating the archetypal Western hero of American folklore . In American popular culture , he is remembered as one of the foremost early frontiersmen . The epic Daniel Boone mythology often overshadows the historical details of his life . 
 = = Youth = = 
 Daniel Boone was of English and Welsh ancestry . Because the Gregorian calendar was adopted during his lifetime , Boone 's birth date is sometimes given as November 2 , 1734 ( the " New Style " date ) , although Boone used the October date . The Boone family belonged to the Religious Society of Friends , called " Quakers " , and were persecuted in England for their dissenting beliefs . Daniel 's father , Squire ( his first name , not a title ) Boone ( 1696 – 1765 ) emigrated from the small town of <unk> , Devon ( near Exeter , England ) to Pennsylvania in 1713 , to join William Penn 's colony of dissenters . Squire Boone 's parents , George Boone III and Mary <unk> , followed their son to Pennsylvania in 1717 , and in 1720 built a log cabin at <unk> . 
 In 1720 , Squire Boone , who worked primarily as a weaver and a blacksmith , married Sarah Morgan ( 1700 – 77 ) . Sarah 's family were Quakers from Wales , and had settled in Towamencin Township , Montgomery County , Pennsylvania in 1708 . In 1731 , the Boones moved to the Oley Valley , near the modern city of Reading . There they built a log cabin , partially preserved today as the Daniel Boone Homestead . Daniel Boone was born there , the sixth of 11 children . 
 Daniel Boone spent his early years on what was then the edge of the Pennsylvania frontier . Several Lenape Indian villages were nearby . The pacifist Pennsylvania Quakers had good relations with the Indians , but the steady growth of the white population compelled many Indians to move further west . Boone was given his first rifle at the age of 12 , as families depended on hunting for much of their food . He learned to hunt from both local settlers and the Lenape . Folk tales have often emphasized Boone 's skills as a hunter . In one story , the young Boone was hunting in the woods with some other boys , when the howl of a panther scattered all but Boone . He calmly cocked his rifle and shot the predator through the heart just as it leaped at him . The validity of this claim is contested , but the story was told so often that it became part of his popular image . 
 In Boone 's youth , his family became a source of controversy in the local Quaker community when two of the oldest children married outside the endogamous community , in present @-@ day Lower Gwynedd Township , Pennsylvania . In 1742 , Boone 's parents were compelled to publicly apologize after their eldest child , Sarah , married John <unk> , a " <unk> " ( non @-@ Quaker ) . Because the young couple had " kept company " , they were considered " married without benefit of clergy " . When the Boones ' oldest son Israel married a " <unk> " in 1747 , Squire Boone stood by him . Both men were expelled from the Quakers ; Boone 's wife continued to attend monthly meetings with their younger children . 
 = = Yadkin River Valley , North Carolina = = 
 In 1750 , Squire Boone sold his land and moved the family to North Carolina . Daniel Boone did not attend church again . He identified as a Christian and had all of his children baptized . The Boones eventually settled on the Yadkin River , in what is now Davie County , about two miles ( 3 km ) west of <unk> . This was in the western backwoods area . 
 Because he grew up on the frontier , Boone had little formal education , but deep knowledge of the woods . According to one family tradition , a schoolteacher once expressed concern over Boone 's education , but Boone 's father said , " Let the girls do the spelling and Dan will do the shooting . " Boone received some tutoring from family members , though his spelling remained unorthodox . The historian John Mack Faragher cautions that the folk image of Boone as <unk> is misleading , and argues that he " acquired a level of literacy that was the equal of most men of his times . " Boone regularly took reading material with him on his hunting expeditions — the Bible and Gulliver 's Travels were favorites . He was often the only literate person in groups of frontiersmen . Boone would sometimes entertain his hunting companions by reading to them around the evening campfire . 
 = = = French and Indian War = = = 
 After the French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) broke out between the French and British , and their respective Indian allies , North Carolina Governor Matthew Rowan called up a militia , into whose service Daniel volunteered . He served under Captain Hugh Waddell on the North Carolina frontier . Waddell 's unit was assigned to serve in the command of General Edward Braddock in 1755 , and Boone acted as a wagoner , along with his cousin Daniel Morgan , who would later be a key general in the American Revolution . In the Battle of the Monongahela , the denouement of the campaign and a bitter defeat for the British , Boone narrowly escaped death when the baggage wagons were assaulted by Indian troops . Boone remained critical of Braddock 's blunders for the rest of his life . 
 While on the campaign , Boone met John Finley , a packer who worked for George Croghan in the trans @-@ Appalachian fur trade . Finley first interested Boone in the abundance of game and other natural wonders of the Ohio Valley . Finley took Boone on his first fateful hunting trip to Kentucky 12 years later . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 Boone returned home and on August 14 , 1756 , he married Rebecca Bryan , a neighbor in the Yadkin River Valley whose brother married one of Boone 's sisters . The couple initially lived in a cabin on his father 's farm . They eventually had 10 children . His son , Nathan Boone , was the first white man born in Kentucky . 
 Boone supported his growing family in these years as a market hunter and trapper , collecting pelts for the fur trade . Almost every autumn , Boone would go on " long hunts " , extended expeditions into the wilderness lasting weeks or months . Boone went alone or with a small group of men , accumulating hundreds of deer skins in the autumn , and trapping beaver and otter over the winter . The hunt followed a network of bison migration trails , known as the Medicine Trails . When the long hunters returned in the spring , they sold their take to commercial fur traders . 
 Such frontiersmen often carved messages on trees or wrote their names on cave walls , and Boone 's name or initials have been found in many places . One on a tree in present Washington County , Tennessee reads " D. Boon <unk> a . Bar [ killed a bear ] on [ this ] tree in the year 1760 " . A similar carving , preserved in the museum of the Filson Historical Society in Louisville , Kentucky , reads " D. Boon <unk> a Bar , 1803 . " The inscriptions may also be among numerous forgeries of the famous trapper , part of a long tradition of phony Boone relics . 
 = = = Cherokee conflict , temporary move to Virginia = = = 
 In 1758 , a conflict erupted between the British forces and the Cherokee , their allies in the French and Indian War ( which continued in other parts of the continent ) . After the Yadkin River Valley was raided by Cherokee , the Boones and many other families fled north to Culpeper County , Virginia . Boone served in the North Carolina militia during this " Cherokee Uprising " . His militia expeditions deep into Cherokee territory beyond the Blue Ridge Mountains separated him from his wife for about two years . 
 In 1762 , Boone , his wife and four children moved back to the Yadkin River Valley from Culpeper . By the mid @-@ 1760s , with peace made with the Cherokee , colonial immigration into the area increased . The competition of new settlers decreased the amount of game available . Boone had difficulty making ends meet ; he was often taken to court for nonpayment of debts . He sold his land to pay off creditors . After his father 's death in 1765 , Boone traveled with his brother Squire and a group of men to Florida , which had become British territory after the end of the war , to look into the possibility of settling there . According to a family story , Boone purchased land near Pensacola , but Rebecca refused to move so far away from her friends and family . The Boones moved to a more remote area of the Yadkin River Valley , and Boone began to hunt westward into the Blue Ridge Mountains . 
 = = Kentucky = = 
 Boone first reached Kentucky in the fall of 1767 while on a long hunt with his brother Squire Boone , Jr . Boone 's first steps in Kentucky were near present @-@ day Elkhorn City . While on the Braddock expedition years earlier , Boone had heard about the fertile land and abundant game of Kentucky from fellow wagoner John Findley , who had visited Kentucky to trade with American Indians . Boone and Findley happened to meet again , and Findley encouraged Boone with more tales of Kentucky . At the same time , news had arrived about the Treaty of Fort Stanwix , in which the Iroquois had ceded their claim to Kentucky to the British . This , as well as the unrest in North Carolina due to the Regulator Movement , likely prompted Boone to extend his exploration . 
 On May 11 , 1769 , Boone began a two @-@ year hunting expedition in Kentucky . On December 22 , 1769 , a fellow hunter and he were captured by a party of Shawnees , who confiscated all of their skins and told them to leave and never return . The Shawnees had not signed the Stanwix treaty , and since they regarded Kentucky as their hunting ground , they considered white hunters there to be poachers . Boone , however , continued hunting and exploring Kentucky until his return to North Carolina in 1771 , and returned to hunt there again in the autumn of 1772 . 
 On September 25 , 1773 , Boone packed up his family and , with a group of about 50 immigrants , began the first attempt by British colonists to establish a settlement in Kentucky . Boone was still an obscure hunter and trapper at the time ; the most prominent member of the expedition was William Russell , a well @-@ known Virginian and future brother @-@ in @-@ law of Patrick Henry . On October 9 , Boone 's eldest son James and a small group of men and boys who had left the main party to retrieve supplies were attacked by a band of Delawares , Shawnees , and Cherokees . Following the Treaty of Fort Stanwix , American Indians in the region had been debating what to do about the influx of settlers . This group had decided , in the words of historian John Mack Faragher , " to send a message of their opposition to settlement " . James Boone and William Russell 's son Henry were captured and gruesomely tortured to death . The brutality of the killings sent shock waves along the frontier , and Boone 's party abandoned its expedition . 
 The massacre was one of the first events in what became known as Dunmore 's War , a struggle between Virginia and , primarily , Shawnees of the Ohio Country for control of what is now West Virginia and Kentucky . In the summer of 1774 , Boone volunteered to travel with a companion to Kentucky to notify surveyors there about the outbreak of war . The two men journeyed more than 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) in two months to warn those who had not already fled the region . Upon his return to Virginia , Boone helped defend colonial settlements along the Clinch River , earning a promotion to captain in the militia , as well as acclaim from fellow citizens . After the brief war , which ended soon after Virginia 's victory in the Battle of Point Pleasant in October 1774 , the Shawnees relinquished their claims to Kentucky . 
 Following Dunmore 's War , Richard Henderson , a prominent judge from North Carolina , hired Boone to travel to the Cherokee towns in present North Carolina and Tennessee and inform them of an upcoming meeting . In the 1775 treaty , Henderson purchased the Cherokee claim to Kentucky to establish a colony called Transylvania . Afterwards , Henderson hired Boone to blaze what became known as the Wilderness Road , which went through the Cumberland Gap and into central Kentucky . Along with a party of about 30 workers , Boone marked a path to the Kentucky River , where he founded Boonesborough . Other settlements , notably Harrodsburg , were also established at this time . Despite occasional Indian attacks , Boone returned to the Clinch Valley and brought his family and other settlers to Boonesborough on September 8 , 1775 . 
 = = American Revolution = = 
 Violence in Kentucky increased with the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) . Native Americans who were unhappy about the loss of Kentucky in treaties saw the war as a chance to drive out the colonists . Isolated settlers and hunters became the frequent target of attacks , convincing many to abandon Kentucky . By late spring of 1776 , fewer than 200 colonists remained in Kentucky , primarily at the fortified settlements of Boonesborough , Harrodsburg , and Logan 's Station . 
 On July 14 , 1776 , Boone 's daughter Jemima and two other teenaged girls were captured outside Boonesborough by an Indian war party , who carried the girls north towards the Shawnee towns in the Ohio country . Boone and a group of men from Boonesborough followed in pursuit , finally catching up with them two days later . Boone and his men ambushed the Indians while they were stopped for a meal , rescuing the girls and driving off their captors . The incident became the most celebrated event of Boone 's life . James Fenimore Cooper created a fictionalized version of the episode in his classic novel The Last of the Mohicans ( 1826 ) . 
 In 1777 , Henry Hamilton , a British Lieutenant Governor of Canada , began to recruit American Indian war parties to raid the Kentucky settlements . On April 24 , Shawnee Indians led by Chief Blackfish attacked Boonesborough . Boone was shot in the ankle while outside the fort , but he was carried back inside amid a flurry of bullets by Simon Kenton , a recent arrival at Boonesborough . Kenton became Boone 's close friend , as well as a legendary frontiersman in his own right . 
 While Boone recovered , Shawnees kept up their attacks outside Boonesborough , destroying the surrounding cattle and crops . With the food supply running low , the settlers needed salt to preserve what meat they had , so in January 1778 , Boone led a party of 30 men to the salt springs on the Licking River . On February 7 , 1778 , when Boone was hunting meat for the expedition , he was surprised and captured by warriors led by Blackfish . Because Boone 's party was greatly outnumbered , Boone returned the next day with Blackfish and persuaded his men to surrender rather than put up a fight . 
 Blackfish wanted to continue to Boonesborough and capture it , since it was now poorly defended , but Boone convinced him that the women and children were not hardy enough to survive a winter trek . Instead , Boone promised that Boonesborough would surrender willingly to the Shawnees the following spring . Boone did not have an opportunity to tell his men that he was bluffing to prevent an immediate attack on Boonesborough , however . Boone pursued this strategy so convincingly that many of his men concluded that he had switched his loyalty to the British . 
 Boone and his men were taken to Blackfish 's town of Chillicothe , where they were made to run the gauntlet . As was their custom , the Shawnees adopted some of the prisoners into the tribe to replace fallen warriors ; the remainder were taken to Hamilton in Detroit . Boone was adopted into a Shawnee family at Chillicothe , perhaps into the family of Chief Blackfish himself , and given the name <unk> ( Big Turtle ) . On June 16 , 1778 , when he learned Blackfish was about to return to Boonesborough with a large force , Boone eluded his captors and raced home , covering the 160 miles ( 260 km ) to Boonesborough in five days on horseback and , after his horse gave out , on foot . 
 During Boone 's absence , his wife and children ( except for Jemima ) had returned to North Carolina , assuming he was dead . Upon his return to Boonesborough , some of the men expressed doubts about Boone 's loyalty , since after surrendering the salt @-@ making party , he had apparently lived quite happily among the Shawnees for months . Boone responded by leading a preemptive raid against the Shawnees across the Ohio River , and then by helping to successfully defend Boonesborough against a 10 @-@ day siege led by Blackfish , which began on September 7 , 1778 . 
 After the siege , Captain Benjamin Logan and Colonel Richard Callaway — both of whom had nephews who were still captives surrendered by Boone — brought charges against Boone for his recent activities . In the court martial that followed , Boone was found " not guilty " , and was even promoted after the court heard his testimony . Despite this vindication , Boone was humiliated by the court martial , and he rarely spoke of it . 
 After the trial , Boone returned to North Carolina to bring his family back to Kentucky . In the autumn of 1779 , a large party of emigrants came with him , including ( according to tradition ) the family of Abraham Lincoln 's grandfather . Rather than remain in Boonesborough , Boone founded the nearby settlement of Boone 's Station . He began earning money at this time by locating good land for other settlers . Transylvania land claims had been invalidated after Virginia created Kentucky County , so settlers needed to file new land claims with Virginia . In 1780 , Boone collected about $ 20 @,@ 000 in cash from various settlers and traveled to Williamsburg to purchase their land warrants . While he was sleeping in a tavern during the trip , the cash was stolen from his room . Some of the settlers forgave Boone the loss ; others insisted he repay the stolen money , which took him several years to do . 
 A popular image of Boone which emerged in later years is that of the backwoodsman who had little affinity for " civilized " society , moving away from places like Boonesborough when they became " too crowded " . In reality , however , Boone was a leading citizen of Kentucky at this time . When Kentucky was divided into three Virginia counties in November 1780 , Boone was promoted to lieutenant colonel in the Fayette County militia . In April 1781 , he was elected as a representative to the Virginia General Assembly , which was held in Richmond . In 1782 , he was elected sheriff of Fayette County . 
 Meanwhile , the American Revolutionary War continued . Boone joined General George Rogers Clark 's invasion of the Ohio country in 1780 , fighting in the Battle of Piqua on August 7 . In October , when Boone was hunting with his brother Ned , Shawnees shot and killed Ned . Apparently thinking that they had killed Daniel Boone , the Shawnees beheaded Ned and took the head home as a trophy . In 1781 , Boone traveled to Richmond to take his seat in the legislature , but British dragoons under Banastre Tarleton captured Boone and several other legislators near Charlottesville . The British released Boone on parole several days later . During Boone 's term , Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown in October 1781 , but the fighting continued in Kentucky unabated . Boone returned to Kentucky and in August 1782 fought in the Battle of Blue Licks , in which his son Israel was killed . In November 1782 , Boone took part in another Clark expedition into Ohio , the last major campaign of the war . 
 = = Businessman on the Ohio River = = 
 After the Revolution , Boone resettled in Limestone ( renamed Maysville , Kentucky in 1786 ) , then a booming Ohio River port . In 1787 , he was elected to the Virginia state assembly as a representative from Bourbon County . In Maysville , he kept a tavern and worked as a surveyor , horse trader , and land speculator . He was initially prosperous , owning seven slaves by 1787 , a relatively large number for Kentucky at the time . Boone became a celebrity while living in Maysville . In 1784 , on his 50th birthday , historian John Filson published The Discovery , Settlement And present State of <unk> , a book which included a chronicle of Boone 's adventures . 
 The Revolutionary War had ended , but the border war with American Indians north of the Ohio River resumed with the Northwest Indian War . In September 1786 , Boone took part in a military expedition into the Ohio Country led by Benjamin Logan . Back in Limestone , Boone housed and fed Shawnees who were captured during the raid , and helped to negotiate a truce and prisoner exchange . Although the war escalated and would not end until the American victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 , the 1786 expedition was the last time Boone saw military action . 
 Boone began to have financial troubles while living in Maysville . According to the later folk image , Boone the trailblazer was too unsophisticated for the civilization which followed him and which eventually defrauded him of his land . Boone was not the simple frontiersman of legend , however : he engaged in land speculation on a large scale , buying and selling claims to tens of thousands of acres . The land market in frontier Kentucky was chaotic , and Boone 's ventures ultimately failed because his investment strategy was faulty and because his sense of honor made him reluctant to profit at someone else 's expense . According to Faragher , " Boone lacked the ruthless instincts that speculation demanded . " 
 Frustrated with the legal hassles that went with land speculation , in 1788 , Boone moved upriver to Point Pleasant , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . There he operated a trading post and occasionally worked as a surveyor 's assistant . When Virginia created Kanawha County in 1789 , Boone was appointed lieutenant colonel of the county militia . In 1791 , he was elected to the Virginia legislature for the third time . He contracted to provide supplies for the Kanawha militia , but his debts prevented him from buying goods on credit , so he closed his store and returned to hunting and trapping . 
 In 1795 , Rebecca and he moved back to Kentucky , living in present Nicholas County on land owned by their son Daniel Morgan Boone . The next year , Boone applied to Isaac Shelby , the first governor of the new state of Kentucky , for a contract to widen the Wilderness Road into a wagon route , but the contract was awarded to someone else . Meanwhile , lawsuits over conflicting land claims continued to make their way through the Kentucky courts . Boone 's remaining land claims were sold off to pay legal fees and taxes , but he no longer paid attention to the process . In 1798 , a warrant was issued for Boone 's arrest after he ignored a summons to testify in a court case , although the sheriff never found him . That same year , the Kentucky assembly named Boone County in his honor . 
 = = Missouri = = 
 Having endured legal and financial setbacks , Boone sought to make a fresh start by leaving the United States . In 1799 , he moved his extended family to what is now St. Charles County , Missouri , but was then part of Spanish Louisiana . The Spanish , eager to promote settlement in the sparsely populated region , did not enforce the official requirement that all immigrants had to be Roman Catholic . The Spanish governor appointed Boone " syndic " ( judge and jury ) and commandant ( military leader ) of the Femme Osage district , The many anecdotes of Boone 's tenure as syndic suggest he sought to render fair judgments rather than to strictly observe the letter of the law . 
 Boone served as syndic and commandant until 1804 , when Missouri became part of the United States following the Louisiana Purchase . Because Boone 's land grants from the Spanish government had been largely based on verbal agreements , he once again lost his land claims . In 1809 , he petitioned Congress to restore his Spanish land claims , which was finally done in 1814 . Boone sold most of this land to repay old Kentucky debts . When the War of 1812 came to Missouri , Boone 's sons Daniel Morgan Boone and Nathan Boone took part , but by that time Boone was much too old for militia duty . 
 Boone spent his final years in Missouri , often in the company of children and grandchildren , where he continued to hunt and trap as much as his health and energy levels permitted . According to one story , in 1810 or later , Boone went with a group on a long hunt as far west as the Yellowstone River , a remarkable journey at his age , if true . In 1816 , a United States officer at Fort Osage , on the Missouri , wrote : 
 We have been honored by a visit from Colonel Boon , the first settler of Kentucky ; he lately spent two weeks with us .... He left this for the river Platt , some distance above . Col Boon is eighty @-@ five years of age , five feet seven inches high , stoutly made , and active for one of his years ; is still of vigorous mind , and is pretty well informed . He has taken part in all the wars of America , from before Braddock 's war to the present hour . 
 Stories were told of Boone making one last visit to Kentucky to pay off his creditors , although some or all of these tales may be folklore . American painter John James Audubon claimed to have gone hunting with Boone in the woods of Kentucky around 1810 . Years later , Audubon painted a portrait of Boone , supposedly from memory , although skeptics have noted the similarity of this painting to the well @-@ known portraits by Chester Harding . Boone 's family insisted he never returned to Kentucky after 1799 , although some historians believe Boone visited his brother Squire near Kentucky in 1810 and have therefore reported Audubon 's story as factual . 
 = = Death = = 
 Daniel Boone died of natural causes , other sources , from acute indigestion on September 26 , 1820 , at Nathan Boone 's home on Femme Osage Creek , 2 @-@ 1 / 2 months short of his 86th birthday . His last words were , " I 'm going now . My time has come . " He was buried next to Rebecca , who had died on March 18 , 1813 . The graves , which were unmarked until the mid @-@ 1830s , were near Jemima ( Boone ) Callaway 's home on <unk> Creek , about two miles ( 3 km ) from the present @-@ day <unk> , Missouri . In 1845 , the Boones ' remains were supposedly disinterred and reburied in a new cemetery Frankfort Cemetery in Frankfort , Kentucky . Resentment in Missouri about the disinterment grew over the years , and a legend arose that Boone 's remains never left Missouri . According to this story , Boone 's tombstone in Missouri had been inadvertently placed over the wrong grave , but no one had ever corrected the error . Boone 's relatives in Missouri , displeased with the Kentuckians who came to exhume Boone , kept quiet about the mistake , and they allowed the Kentuckians to dig up the wrong remains . No contemporary evidence indicates this actually happened , but in 1983 , a forensic anthropologist examined a crude plaster cast of Boone 's skull made before the Kentucky reburial and announced it might be the skull of an African American . Black slaves had also been buried at <unk> Creek , so it is possible the wrong remains were mistakenly removed from the crowded graveyard . Both the Frankfort Cemetery in Kentucky and the Old Bryan Farm graveyard in Missouri claim to have Boone 's remains . 
 = = Cultural legacy = = 
 Many heroic actions and chivalrous adventures are related of me which exist only in the regions of fancy . With me the world has taken great liberties , and yet I have been but a common man . 
 Daniel Boone remains an iconic figure in American history , although his status as an early American folk hero and later as a subject of fiction have tended to obscure the actual details of his life . Boone is commonly remembered as a hunter , pioneer , and " Indian @-@ fighter " , though most people are uncertain when he lived or exactly what he did . Several places in the United States are named for him , including the Daniel Boone National Forest , the <unk> Trace Trail , the town of Boone , North Carolina , various settlements carrying the name of " Boonville " , and seven counties : Boone County , Illinois , Boone County , Indiana , Boone County , Nebraska , Boone County , West Virginia , Boone County , Missouri , Boone County , Arkansas , and Boone County , Kentucky . Schools across the United States are named for Daniel Boone , including schools in <unk> , Pennsylvania , <unk> , Pennsylvania , Richmond , Kentucky , Wentzville , Missouri , Warrenton , Missouri , Gray , Tennessee , and Chicago . 
 Boone 's name has long been synonymous with the American outdoors . For example , the Boone and Crockett Club was a conservationist organization founded by Theodore Roosevelt in 1887 , and the Sons of Daniel Boone was the precursor of the Boy Scouts of America . 
 Daniel Boone was honored with a 6 @-@ cent stamp in the American Folklore Series on September 26 , 1968 , at Frankfort , Kentucky , where he was buried . He was a famous frontiersman in the development of Virginia , Kentucky and the trans @-@ Appalachian west . A wall of roughly @-@ hewn boards displays the tools of Boone 's trade — a Pennsylvania rifle , a powder horn , and a knife . The pipe tomahawk represents that the Shawnees had adopted Boone . His name and birth date were carved on the wall . 
 The U.S. Navy 's James Madison @-@ class Polaris submarine USS Daniel Boone ( <unk> @-@ 629 ) , was named for Boone . This nuclear submarine was decommissioned in 1994 , and has since been scrapped . She was a member of a class of 41 submarines , all of which were named for great Americans from history , including the USS Lewis and Clark , two other noteworthy frontiersmen of the Great West . 
 = = = Emergence as a legend = = = 
 Boone emerged as a legend in large part because of land speculator John Filson 's " The Adventures of Colonel Daniel Boon " , part of his book The Discovery , Settlement And present State of <unk> . First published in 1784 , Filson 's book was a pamphlet primarily intended to popularize Kentucky to immigrants . It was soon translated into French and German , and made Boone famous in America and Europe . Based on interviews with Boone , Filson 's book contained a mostly factual account of Boone 's adventures from the exploration of Kentucky through the American Revolution . However , because the real Boone was a man of few words , Filson invented florid , philosophical dialogue for this " autobiography " . Subsequent editors cut some of these passages and replaced them with more plausible — but still spurious — ones . Often reprinted , Filson 's book established Boone as one of the first popular heroes of the United States . 
 Like John Filson , Timothy Flint also interviewed Boone , and his Biographical Memoir of Daniel Boone , the First Settler of Kentucky ( 1833 ) became one of the best @-@ selling biographies of the 19th century . Flint greatly embellished Boone 's adventures , doing for Boone what Parson Weems did for George Washington . In Flint 's book , Boone fought hand @-@ to @-@ paw with a bear , escaped from Indians by swinging on vines ( as Tarzan would later do ) , and so on . Although Boone 's family thought the book was absurd , Flint greatly influenced the popular conception of Boone , since these tall tales were recycled in countless dime novels and books aimed at young boys . 
 = = = Symbol and stereotype = = = 
 Thanks to Filson 's book , in Europe , Boone became a symbol of the " natural man " who lives a virtuous , uncomplicated existence in the wilderness . This was most famously expressed in Lord Byron 's epic poem Don Juan ( 1822 ) , which devoted a number of stanzas to Boone , including this one : 
 Of the great names which in our faces stare , 
 The General Boon , back @-@ woodsman of Kentucky , 
 Was happiest amongst mortals any where ; 
 For killing nothing but a bear or buck , he 
 <unk> the lonely vigorous , harmless days 
 Of his old age in wilds of deepest maze . 
 Byron 's poem celebrated Boone as someone who found happiness by turning his back on civilization . In a similar vein , many folk tales depicted Boone as a man who migrated to more remote areas whenever civilization crowded in on him . In a typical anecdote , when asked why he was moving to Missouri , Boone supposedly replied , " I want more elbow room ! " Boone rejected such an interpretation of his life , however . " Nothing <unk> my old age , " he said late in life , like " the circulation of absurd stories that I retire as civilization advances ... " 
 Existing simultaneously with the image of Boone as a refugee from society was , paradoxically , the popular portrayal of him as civilization 's trailblazer . Boone was celebrated as an agent of Manifest Destiny , a pathfinder who tamed the wilderness , paving the way for the extension of American civilization . In 1852 , critic Henry Tuckerman dubbed Boone " the Columbus of the woods " , comparing Boone 's passage through the Cumberland Gap to Christopher Columbus 's voyage to the New World . In popular mythology , Boone became the first to explore and settle Kentucky , opening the way for countless others to follow . In fact , other Americans had explored and settled Kentucky before Boone , as <unk> in the 20th century often pointed out , but Boone came to symbolize them all , making him what historian Michael <unk> called " the founding father of westward expansion " . 
 In the 19th century , when Native Americans were being displaced from their lands and confined on reservations , Boone 's image was often reshaped into the stereotype of the belligerent , Indian @-@ hating frontiersman which was then popular . In John A. McClung 's Sketches of Western Adventure ( 1832 ) , for example , Boone was portrayed as longing for the " thrilling excitement of savage warfare . " Boone was transformed in the popular imagination into someone who regarded Indians with contempt and had killed scores of the " savages " . The real Boone disliked bloodshed , however . According to historian John <unk> , there is no record that Boone ever scalped Indians , unlike other frontiersmen of the era . Boone once told his son Nathan that he was certain of having killed only one Indian , during the battle at Blue Licks , although he believed others might have died from his bullets in other battles . Even though Boone had lost two sons in wars with Indians , he respected Indians and was respected by them . In Missouri , Boone often went hunting with the very Shawnees who had captured and adopted him decades earlier . Some 19th @-@ century writers regarded Boone 's sympathy for Indians as a character flaw and therefore altered his words to conform to contemporary attitudes . 
 = = = In fiction = = = 
 Boone 's adventures , real and mythical , formed the basis of the archetypal hero of the American West , popular in 19th @-@ century novels and 20th @-@ century films . The main character of James Fenimore Cooper 's Leatherstocking Tales , the first of which was published in 1823 , bore striking similarities to Boone ; even his name , Nathaniel <unk> , echoed Daniel Boone 's name . As mentioned above , The Last of the Mohicans ( 1826 ) , Cooper 's second Leatherstocking novel , featured a fictionalized version of Boone 's rescue of his daughter . After Cooper , other writers developed the Western hero , an iconic figure which began as a variation of Daniel Boone . 
 In the 20th century , Boone was featured in numerous comic strips , radio programs , and films , where the emphasis was usually on action and melodrama rather than historical accuracy . These are little remembered today ; probably the most noteworthy is the 1936 film Daniel Boone , with George O 'Brien playing the title role . Horn in the West , an outdoor drama performed annually in Boone , North Carolina since 1952 , is a fictional account of the lives of settlers whom Daniel Boone had led into the Appalachian Mountains . 
 Daniel Boone was the subject of a TV series that ran on NBC from 1964 to 1970 . In the popular theme song for the series , Boone was described as a " big man " in a " coonskin cap " , and the " <unk> 'est , <unk> 'est , <unk> 'est man the frontier ever knew ! " This did not describe the real Daniel Boone , who was not a big man and did not wear a coonskin cap . Boone was portrayed this way because Fess Parker , the tall actor who played Boone , was essentially reprising his role as Davy Crockett from an earlier TV series . That Boone could be portrayed the same way as Crockett , another American frontiersman with a very different persona , was another example of how Boone 's image could be reshaped to suit popular tastes . 
 = Quincy Miller = 
 Quincy Cortez Miller ( born November 18 , 1992 ) is an American professional basketball player for Maccabi Tel Aviv of the Israeli Premier League and the Euroleague . He has also previously played for the Sacramento Kings and Denver Nuggets as well as the Reno Bighorns , Iowa Energy and Grand Rapids Drive of the NBA Development League . 
 He was born in the Chicago metropolitan area and was raised there until the age of 13 , at which point he moved to live with an uncle in North Carolina so that he could live a better life . He attended four different high schools , but eventually became one of the top ten high school basketball prospects in the class of 2011 . He played for USA Basketball in the 2010 FIBA Americas Under @-@ 18 Championship . Early in his senior year , he tore his anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) rendering him incapable of playing the remainder of the season . 
 He played his true freshman season with the Baylor University Bears men 's basketball team as a forward for the 2011 – 12 team . In his freshman season , the team set school records for its best start ( 17 – 0 ) , longest winning streak ( 17 ) and highest ranking ( 3 / 3 ) . Following the 2011 – 12 Big 12 Conference men 's basketball season , he was named the Big 12 co @-@ Freshman of the Year and was recognized as an honorable mention All @-@ Big 12 and a Big 12 All @-@ Star Team selection by the Big 12 coaches . He was named Big 12 Freshman of the Year by Sporting News . 
 In the NBA , he has had a modest role for most of his first two seasons . He began to get regular playing time midway through his second season and in the final weeks of his second season he became an everyday starter due to injury . 
 = = High school career = = 
 At age 13 , his uncle Lamont Taylor from Fairmont , North Carolina took Miller in to get him away from the Chicago street life . He transferred from North Chicago High School and played his freshman season for Fairmont High School ( North Carolina ) before transferring to Quality Education Academy where he grew 8 inches ( 20 @.@ 3 cm ) as a sophomore . Miller was relatively unknown until the 2009 Pangos All @-@ American Camp and the Hoop Jamboree . Miller had begun playing AAU basketball for D @-@ One Sports . Then by July 2009 he was a top 10 class of 2011 prospect by Scout.com and top 25 by PrepStar and had interest from Duke , Wake Forest , Kentucky , Oklahoma , Baylor , Memphis and Kansas . Late in Miller 's 2009 – 10 junior season , he began receiving significant support from the 2010 ESPN HS Mr. Basketball USA voters who moved him into 11th place . At the time , he was competing for Quality Education Academy in Winston @-@ Salem . He led the school to the National Christian Schools Athletic Association title . Following the season he was named a second @-@ team <unk> All @-@ American forward and announced his transfer to Westchester Country Day School of High Point where his close friend Deuce Bello played . At the time , he held offers from Duke and Kentucky . He announced that along with the transfer , he would be changing jersey numbers from 35 to 22 . 
 The following summer SLAM Magazine rated him as the top prospect in the class of 2011 before he appeared at the June 2010 Pangos All @-@ American Camp . After leading his team in rebounding in the camp 's " Cream of the Crop " All @-@ Star finale game , Miller earned team MVP honors . In June 2010 , Miller was the sixth man for the gold medal @-@ winning team at the FIBA Americas Under @-@ 18 Championship . He led the team in rebounding average for the tournament , was second in scoring average , and made the game @-@ winning 3 @-@ point shot with 25 seconds remaining in the championship game against Brazil . His 2010 average of 9 @.@ 2 rebounds per game was tied with Chris Bosh 's 2002 average for second in the history of USA Basketball 's U18 competition behind only Shareef Abdur @-@ Rahim 1994 10 @.@ 1 average . Like most elite level high school players , Miller participated on the summer Amateur Athletic Union circuit , including showcase events such as the July NYC Summer Classic . 
 Based on his play during the high school basketball season , AAU tournaments and national summer camps , experts from ESPN RISE , ESPN College Basketball Recruiting and other talent evaluators selected him to the August 2010 Boost Mobile Elite 24 event . By the time of the event , he was the fourth ranked basketball player in the ESPNU 100 . Following his tournament play , ESPN HS began comparisons with him to Kevin Durant . At the event , his pass to Bello during the slam dunk contest appeared on SportsCenter . The following week , he played at the UIC Pavilion in the fourth annual adidas Nations global experience with many of the world 's elite high school players . In the September 2010 <unk> Elite 80 All Star Game in Greensboro , North Carolina , after fans heckled him that his team was trailing , he rattled off 18 consecutive points . 
 Following in the footsteps of basketball players like LeBron James , Kevin Love , <unk> Evans and Harrison Barnes , Miller was the 2010 – 11 high school diary keeper for SLAM Magazine . Once Miller and Bello were united , they were described as arguably the best high school basketball tandem in the country . Entering his senior season , Miller was a first team All @-@ Southeast Region team selection by ESPN HS . At the time he was listed in third in the 2010 @-@ 2011 Preseason ESPNHS Mr. Basketball USA voting ( behind Austin Rivers and Mike Gilchrist ) . The team was preseason # 32 in the <unk> FAB 50 ESPNHS Boys ' basketball team rankings . In December 2010 , Miller suffered a torn ACL , ending his senior season , and high school career . As a senior , he was ineligible for the McDonald 's All @-@ American Game , but was an honorary All @-@ American selection for the Jordan Brand Classic game . He did not play in the game , but participated in drills . His Jordan Brand workouts refueled Durant comparisons . He was also a first team All @-@ American selection by SLAM Magazine ( along with Gilchrist , Rivers , Bradley Beal , Anthony Davis and Marquis Teague ) . 
 He was rated as the # 4 player by Scout.com , the # 7 player in the ESPNU 100 , and the # 7 player by Rivals.com. 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman season = = = 
 On October 21 , 2010 , Miller and Bello jointly announced on ESPNU that they would attend Baylor University . In August 2010 , Scout.com had named Miller their number two prospect in the country behind Anthony Davis . At the time of the announcement , Miller was the top @-@ ranked high school class of 2011 power forward in the nation according to Rivals.com and the number two prospect in the nation behind Gilchrist according to PrepStar 's Rob Harrington , who had thought he might go to Louisville . In November , Miller and Bello signed their letters of intent . At the time he signed his letter of intent , he was ranked the 2nd best player in the nation by Scout.com and PrepStar , while Rivals.com listed him fifth . In 2011 , <unk> has repeatedly described Miller as a potential Top 10 draft pick . As an incoming freshman for the 2011 – 12 Bears , he was one of five Big 12 Conference players named to the Naismith College Player of the Year preseason top 50 watchlist . Baylor entered the season without 2011 – 12 Big 12 Conference basketball season preseason player of the year Perry Jones who was on a five @-@ game suspension for having accepted improper benefits before arriving at Baylor . Nonetheless , Dime Magazine included Miller , Jones and Bello in its list of Top 25 Breakout Players & Teams To Watch In The NBA , College & High School This Season . 
 In Baylor 's first three games , Miller scored 17 , 17 and 20 points against Texas Southern on November 11 , Jackson State on November 13 and San Diego State on November 15 , respectively . The New York Times described his second half contribution against San Diego State as key . His performance in these three games clarified the success of his rehabilitation according to the press . In the fifth game on November 23 against Texas @-@ Arlington , Miller posted his first double @-@ double with 17 points and 11 rebounds . After rolling his ankle in practice , Miller sat out the sixth game . After those first six games with a 15 @.@ 2 point per game average , Miller was mentioned in discussions about National Freshman of the Year candidates . However , as of 29 December 2011 , he had not scored 17 points in a game since Jones ' return to the lineup and his own return from injury . 
 By the end of December 2011 , Miller had contributed to the school 's first ever 13 – 0 start and a school @-@ record tying 13 @-@ game winning streak . Prior to the 13th victory on December 28 , which came over the ( 15 AP / 14 Coaches ) Mississippi State Bulldogs , the team ( 6 AP / 7 Coaches ) had already reach the highest rankings in school history in the 2011 – 12 NCAA Division I men 's basketball rankings . On January 14 , Miller posted 21 points as Baylor ( 4 AP / 4 Coaches ) defeated Oklahoma State , raising their record to 17 – 0 . Miller had 17 points when ( 3 AP / 3 Coaches ) Baylor suffered its first loss to ( 7 AP / 7 Coaches ) Kansas on January 16 . He had a career @-@ high 29 points in a January 21 89 – 88 loss to ( 5 AP / 5 Coaches ) Missouri . On February 18 , he posted another double @-@ double with 12 points and 11 rebounds against Kansas State . Following the 2011 – 12 Big 12 Conference men 's basketball season , he was named the Big 12 co @-@ Freshman of the Year ( with Le 'Bryan Nash ) and was recognized as an honorable mention All @-@ Big 12 and a Big 12 All @-@ Rookie Team selection by the league 's coaches . Miller was also selected as the Big 12 Freshman of the Year by The Sporting News . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Denver Nuggets ( 2012 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On April 10 , 2012 , Miller confirmed that he would return to Baylor for his sophomore year of eligibility . However , Miller later decided to forgo his final three years of eligibility and enter the NBA draft . He was selected in the second round of the 2012 NBA draft with the 38th pick overall by the Nuggets . His representative was <unk> Clifton of the <unk> Sports Agency . During the 2012 NBA Summer League , Miller averaged 6 @.@ 8 points and 5 @.@ 2 rebounds for Denver . Miller made the Nuggets ' regular season roster , though he did not play in any games during the preseason . 
 On November 13 , 2012 , the Nuggets assigned Miller to the Iowa Energy . In his professional debut , he had 17 points and 8 rebounds on November 24 against the Sioux Falls Skyforce in 27 minutes . In the Energy 's third game , first victory and home opener , Miller posted a double @-@ double with 17 points and 12 rebounds on December 1 . After three D @-@ League games in which he averaged 14 @.@ 0 points , 10 @.@ 7 rebounds and 2 @.@ 3 assists in 29 @.@ 0 minutes , the Nuggets recalled Miller on December 2 . He made his NBA debut on December 16 against the Sacramento Kings . On December 27 , he was reassigned to the Iowa Energy , but he was recalled by the Nuggets on February 13 . Overall , he averaged 11 @.@ 3 points and 6 @.@ 8 rebounds in 23 games in the D @-@ League . 
 He again participated in the NBA Summer League for the Nuggets in 2013 . Prior to his second season , head coach Brian Shaw described Miller as if he has the potential to be comparable to Paul George . Once the season began , Miller 's second year salary became fully guaranteed . On December 27 , 2013 , Miller scored a career @-@ high 9 points against the New Orleans Pelicans . With Wilson Chandler suffering from a groin injury , Miller made his first NBA career start on January 9 , 2014 against the Oklahoma City Thunder with Kevin Durant as his defensive assignment . The game was nationally televised . Miller matched his career high with 9 points , while Durant scored 30 , but Denver won 101 – 88 . In his second start in the following game against Orlando on January 11 , Miller achieved his first NBA double double with career highs of 16 points and 11 rebounds . Miller again served in the starting lineup on February 10 but this time in the backcourt when point guard Ty Lawson was injured and starting shooting guard Randy Foye shifted over to replace him . In late March , when Wilson Chandler missed several games , Miller moved into the starting lineup . On April 6 , Miller , who was still starting in place of Chandler , scored a career @-@ high 19 points in an overtime contest against Houston . 
 On October 27 , 2014 , Miller was waived by the Nuggets . 
 = = = Reno Bighorns and Sacramento Kings ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 After filling paperwork to enter the NBA Development League on December 10 , 2014 , Miller was acquired by the Reno Bighorns via the D @-@ League player pool on December 12 . He was a finalist for NBA D @-@ League Player of the Month that month . 
 On January 17 , 2015 , Miller signed a 10 @-@ day contract with the Sacramento Kings . On January 30 , he signed a second 10 @-@ day contract with the Kings . On February 4 , 2015 , he was named to the Futures All @-@ Star team for the 2015 NBA D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game . Following the expiration of his second 10 @-@ day contract , he parted ways with the Kings on February 10 and returned to the Bighorns with the intentions of playing in the D @-@ League All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = = Detroit Pistons ( 2015 ) = = = 
 On February 21 , 2015 , Miller signed a 10 @-@ day contract with the Detroit Pistons . On February 27 , he was assigned to the Grand Rapids Drive . After being recalled on March 2 , he signed a second 10 @-@ day contract with the Pistons the following day . On March 12 , he signed a two @-@ year , partially guaranteed deal with the Pistons . On March 25 , he was reassigned to Grand Rapids , and recalled two days later . Miller managed to appear in just four games for the Pistons to finish the season . 
 On July 13 , 2015 , Miller was traded to the Brooklyn Nets in exchange for Steve Blake . On October 20 , 2015 , he was waived by the Nets after appearing in four preseason games . 
 = = = Crvena zvezda = = = 
 On October 20 , 2015 , Miller signed with Serbian team Crvena zvezda for the rest of the 2015 – 16 season . He was a member of the 2015 – 16 ABA League champions . He was a 2015 – 16 Euroleague All @-@ League Second Team selection . 
 = = = Maccabi Tel Aviv = = = 
 On June 13 , 2016 , Miller signed a two @-@ year contract with the Israeli club Maccabi Tel Aviv . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Note : The Euroleague is not the only competition in which the player participated for the team during the season . He also played in domestic competition , and regional competition if applicable . 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 = = = Euroleague = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 Miller 's older sister Keisha was killed in a car accident in 2005 at the age of 17 , which inspired his jersey number change . Three additional close family members died in the three years prior to his 2011 ACL rehab . His mother is a nurse and he has 14 siblings . At Baylor , he served as Julius Randle 's host for his visit . 
 = Sleepless ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Sleepless " is the 4th episode of the second season and 28th overall of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States on October 7 , 1994 on Fox . The episode was written by supervising producer Howard Gordon , and directed by Rob Bowman . " Sleepless " earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 6 and was viewed by 8 @.@ 2 million households . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder is assigned a new partner , Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) . The two investigate a case where doctors and soldiers who were part of a sleep deprivation experiment are being killed off . 
 " Sleepless " featured what would become the recurring character of Alex Krycek , portrayed by Nicholas Lea . Krycek would progress from Mulder 's partner to one of his enemies . Howard Gordon , the episode 's writer , was inspired by various cases of insomnia . During the first season , Chris Carter had written a similar themed episode , but stopped working on it when he became " unhappy " with the result . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In New York City , Dr. Saul Grissom finds a fire outside his apartment . When firefighters arrive , they find no fire or any related damage , but discover Grissom 's lifeless body . 
 Mulder anonymously receives a tape cassette of Grissom 's 911 call . He tries to take the case , only to learn that another FBI agent , Alex Krycek , has opened it first . Deciding to leave Krycek out of the loop , Mulder calls Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and asks her to conduct Grissom 's autopsy . Mulder then heads to Grissom 's clinic in Stamford , Connecticut , where he is confronted by an angered Krycek . The two travel back to Quantico to see Scully , who says that Grissom 's body showed no signs of a fire , but yet seems to have biologically believed it was burning . 
 Meanwhile , in a Brooklyn apartment , Vietnam veteran Henry Willig is approached by a fellow ex @-@ Marine , Augustus Cole . Suddenly a group of wounded Vietnamese appear and gun him down . Examining his corpse , Mulder and Krycek find a scar on his neck and realize he was in the Special Forces stationed in Vietnam in 1970 , and one of only two survivors , the other being Cole . They head to the <unk> hospital in New Jersey where they discover that Cole was discharged , despite the fact that his doctor does not remember doing so . 
 Mulder meets the mysterious " X " , who gives him information on a secret military project that Grissom performed where he eradicated the need for sleep through lobotomy . X provides him with the name of Salvatore Matola , a squad member who was mistakenly reported as killed in action . A man matching Cole 's description robs a drug store . Mulder and Krycek arrive , but not before two gunshots are heard from the room where Cole is believed to be . It appears that the two officers in the room with him shot each other . Cole escapes . Mulder believes that Cole 's years of sleeplessness have provided him with illusionary abilities . Mulder and Krycek meet with Matola soon afterwards , who says that he has not slept in twenty @-@ four years , due to the experiment . He reveals that there was another doctor who was part of the squad , Dr. Girardi , and that he was the one who actually performed the <unk> . 
 Mulder and Krycek head to the subway station , where Dr. Girardi is expected to arrive for Grissom 's funeral . Mulder sees Cole there , and Cole seems to shoot Girardi , but this is shown to be in Mulder 's head . In reality , Cole has captured Girardi and holds him hostage , about to show him a similar fate as his other victims . By searching surveillance footage , they track his location and find Girardi wounded . Mulder finds Cole , who is ready to kill himself . Krycek , believing Cole is holding a gun instead of the Bible he is actually holding , shoots him , and Cole dies of his wounds . Mulder and Scully find both of their files on the case missing . Krycek reports to the Smoking Man and others , telling them that the dissolution of the X @-@ Files and the separation of Mulder and Scully has been ineffective , and their determination is only stronger . He also notes that Scully is a bigger problem than they anticipated . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Howard Gordon was initially inspired to write this episode based on insomnia he was suffering at the time . Gordon , who wrote many episodes with Alex Gansa in season one made his solo writing debut with this episode . Originally Chris Carter had written a script for the first season , which shared the same theme as " Sleepless . " The original conceit for Carter 's episode was " What makes the perfect soldier ? " He also liked the twist on sleep , noting that " sleep is where demons are released in our dreams . " He explained that the characters in " Sleepless " were haunted by their memories in real life because they were not able to sleep . Carter sees this episode as one of his favorites . 
 This episode marked the first appearance of Nicholas Lea as Alex Krycek . Carter had much interest in Krycek , because he replaced Dana Scully as Mulder 's new partner . Lea had previously appeared as a different character in the first season episode , " Gender Bender . " Bowman , who had directed " Gender Bender , " thought that Lea " was a [ ... ] strong choice for a fresh @-@ out @-@ of @-@ Quantico FBI agent . " When creating him , the writers always had in mind that he would be a recurring character , while they agreed if the character did not work they would kill him off . 
 " Sleepless " marked the first on screen appearance of Steven Williams as Fox Mulder 's new source , " X. " The character was originally intended to be a woman , and an actress was cast in the role , but after shooting her first scene the role was recast with Williams , an actor who had previous experience with writers Glen Morgan and James Wong . Natalija Nogulich , the actor who originally earned the role , was replaced because the writing staff felt she was not able to create the " right chemistry " between her co @-@ stars . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Sleepless " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 6 , with a 15 share . It was viewed by 8 @.@ 2 million households in the United States alone . Stephen Mark was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in 1995 in the category " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Editing for a Series — Single Camera Production " , but did not win . 
 Chris Carter enjoyed the episode , saying " I really love that show . It 's a great idea , well executed . We had a good cast ; Tony Todd was wonderful " and saying it was " beautifully directed by Rob Bowman . Entertainment Weekly rated " Sleepless " with a B + , considering that Tony Todd 's performance " elevates a just @-@ good story into a great one . " John Keegan Critical Myth gave the episode 7 out of 10 , saying it was best remembered for its introduction of Alex Krycek . The web site further stated that the episode was decent and was a " fairly standard exploration " for the early season episodes . Dave Golder from SFX named the episode one of the " 20 TV Sci @-@ Fi <unk> " due to its introduction of Krycek . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two noted that Gordon was able to make " the cliche of Vietnam war guilt " feel " very personal and even sorrowful . " However , Shearman and Pearson noted that the revelation of Krycek as an enemy was " the biggest shame " in the episode . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club wrote that , while the episode is " your standard <unk> riff " , it is important because it features the on @-@ screen introduction of both Krycek and X. 
 = Frozen Fever = 
 Frozen Fever is a 2015 American computer @-@ animated musical fantasy short film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures . It is a sequel to the 2013 feature film Frozen , and tells the story of Anna 's birthday party given by Elsa with the help of Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf . Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee again served as the directors with Kristen Bell , Idina Menzel , Jonathan Groff , and Josh Gad providing the lead voices . 
 Frozen Fever was first announced in September 2014 by Disney Animation 's chief creative officer John Lasseter . The film debuted in theaters alongside Walt Disney Pictures ' Cinderella on March 13 , 2015 . It received positive reviews from critics , along with praise for its new song " Making Today a Perfect Day " by Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez and Robert Lopez . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Elsa plans to give Anna a surprise birthday party with the help of Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf ; but while Anna is led on a " party treasure hunt " by a string that winds through the kingdom , Elsa has caught a cold , and unknowingly produces a group of small animated snowmen ( " Snowgies " ) with each sneeze , who begin to dismantle the birthday party 's decorations while Kristoff tries to stop them . While Elsa takes Anna on the hunt , Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf try to control the Snowgies and fix the decorations in time for Anna and Elsa 's return . After Elsa nearly falls off a clock tower , Anna convinces her to take rest . While Anna enjoys the party , Elsa sneezes a giant snowball through an <unk> , and stuns Hans overseas ; whereupon Elsa rests in bed under Anna 's care . Olaf , Kristoff , and Sven escort the Snowgies to Elsa 's ice palace , where they stay with her snow @-@ giant doorkeeper ' Marshmallow ' . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kristen Bell as Anna 
 Idina Menzel as Elsa 
 Jonathan Groff as Kristoff 
 Josh Gad as Olaf 
 Chris Williams as Oaken 
 Santino Fontana as Hans 
 Paul Briggs as Marshmallow 
 = = Production = = 
 On September 2 , 2014 , during the ABC airing of The Story of Frozen : Making a Disney Animated Classic , Walt Disney Animation Studios ' chief creative officer John Lasseter announced that a Frozen short film with a new song would be released in the future . On the same day , Variety announced that the short would be released in early 2015 under the title Frozen Fever , with Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee returning as co @-@ directors , Peter Del Vecho returning as producer and a new song by Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez and Robert Lopez . Olaf the snowman would also make an appearance in the short . On December 3 , 2014 , it was announced that Aimee Scribner would be a co @-@ producer and that Frozen Fever would debut in theaters alongside Walt Disney Pictures ' Cinderella on March 13 , 2015 . In late December , the co @-@ directors told the Associated Press " There is something magic about these characters and this cast and this music . Hopefully , the audiences will enjoy the short we 're doing , but we felt it again . It was really fun . " Around the same time , Dave Metzger , who worked on the orchestration for Frozen , disclosed he was already at work on Frozen Fever . 
 The short features the song " Making Today a Perfect Day " , by Anderson @-@ Lopez and Lopez . At the premiere of Cinderella and Frozen Fever at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California , on March 1 , 2015 , Josh Gad told USA Today , " I want to apologize to parents everywhere for the fact that children are going to be singing a whole new Frozen song [ . ] " 
 The creators started brainstorming possibilities for the short film in June 2014 . After early discussions about Olaf , head story artist Marc Smith pitched the idea of what might happen if Elsa had a cold , which became the basis for the short 's plot . The directors began working on the short in June and by August were back in the recording studio with the cast to lay down vocal tracks . The production of Frozen Fever took six months . All of the animators from Frozen wanted to come back to animate at least one shot on Frozen Fever , resulting in a large number of animator credits for a short film . They struggled to squeeze the animation phase of the short 's production into a tight time slot in fall 2014 after animation wrapped on Big Hero 6 and before the studio 's animators had to start working on subsequent features . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Frozen Fever premiered in theaters alongside Walt Disney Pictures ' Cinderella on March 13 , 2015 . Frozen Fever was released on Digital HD and Disney Movies Anywhere on August 11 , 2015 . It was released on the Walt Disney Animation Studios Short Films Collection Blu @-@ ray Disc on August 18 , 2015 . It was also included on the Blu @-@ ray , DVD , and digital HD releases of Cinderella on September 15 , 2015 . On November 9 , 2015 , it released on an exclusive DVD copy of its own , courtesy of Tesco stores across the UK . 
 USA Today 's Claudia Puig rated the short three stars out of four , and described the new song ( " Making Today a Perfect Day " ) as " pleasant " . She concluded that although the short " is not as exhilarating and inventive as the original , it 's still a treat to see an abridged tale of these two sisters in a warmhearted spinoff . " Writing for BBC , Natalie Jamieson called the new song " catchy and fun " . Dan Kois of the Slate called the film " a real bummer , the first recent misfire from Disney 's shorts program , and thus the first serious misfire from the Lasseter @-@ led Disney . " The Daily Telegraph 's Robbie Collin praised the song " Making Today a Perfect Day " , stating that " it 's a lip @-@ smacking confection , dusted with pure icing sugar , and suggests that songwriters Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez and Robert Lopez are capable of coming up with something special for the forthcoming feature @-@ length Frozen sequel . " 
 CraveOnline 's Witney Seibold wrote that the film " is a celebration of the very kind of conspicuous consumerism that Disney is always smearing the landscape with . " Mike Scott of The Times @-@ Picayune wrote that " with its blend of sweetness , silliness and <unk> , this animated Disney short is satisfyingly consistent in vision and in spirit with the original Frozen . " 
 = Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock = 
 The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock ( Rupicola peruvianus ) , also known as <unk> ( Quechua ) , is a large passerine bird of the cotinga family native to Andean cloud forests in South America . It is widely regarded as the national bird of Peru . It has four subspecies and its closest relative is the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock . 
 The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock exhibits marked sexual dimorphism ; the male has a large disk @-@ like crest and scarlet or brilliant orange plumage , while the female is significantly darker and browner . Gatherings of males compete for breeding females with each male displaying its colourful plumage , bobbing and hopping , and making a variety of calls . After mating , the female makes a nest under a rocky overhang , incubates the eggs , and rears the young , all by herself . 
 The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock eats a diet of fruit , supplemented by insects , amphibians , reptiles , and smaller mice . It is distributed all across the cloud forest of the Andes , having a range of around 260 @,@ 000 km2 ( 100 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Even though it is being affected by destruction of its habitat , the Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is not classified as threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 One of two species in the genus Rupicola , the other being the Guianan cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock , the Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock was first described by English ornithologist John Latham in 1790 . It is classified in the Cotingidae , a family of largely frugivorous tropical forest <unk> passerines . The generic name is derived from the Latin stems rupes " rock " or " cliff " , and cola " inhabiting " , and is derived from its habit of nesting in rock walls . Its specific epithet peruvianus " of Peru " is masculine despite the -a ending of the genus name ( in Latin , names in <unk> were masculine or neuter ) ; peruviana is seen in older works . 
 Four subspecies are known : 
 R. p. peruvianus – ( Latham , 1790 ) , nominate subspecies 
 R. p. aequatorialis – <unk> , 1889 
 R. p. sanguinolentus – Gould , 1859 
 R. p. saturatus – Cabanis and Heine , 1859 
 = = Description = = 
 The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is a large passerine , approximately 32 cm ( 13 in ) long and weighing around 265 grams ( 9 @.@ 3 oz ; 0 @.@ 584 lb ) , although males are somewhat larger and the heaviest specimens can reach 300 grams ( 11 oz ; 0 @.@ 66 lb ) . The birds is one of many birds species to exhibit marked sexual dimorphism . The male has a large disk @-@ like crest and brilliant scarlet or orange plumage . It has black tail and wings , and pale greyish scapulars . The female is significantly drabber and browner than the male and has a less prominent crest . The bill is yellowish in the male , and dark with a small yellow tip in the female . Depending on gender and subspecies there are significant variations in the colour of the iris , ranging from red over orange and yellow to bluish @-@ white in the male , and whitish over reddish to brown in the female . In addition to the display calls described in the breeding section below , foraging birds give a loud querulous “ tank ? ” when disturbed or in flight . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is distributed in cloud forests of the Andes . It lives in a large range of about 260 @,@ 000 km2 ( 100 @,@ 000 sq mi ) across Venezuela , Colombia , Ecuador , Perú , and Bolivia , mostly in ravines and forested streams in montane areas at 500 to 2 @,@ 400 m ( 1 @,@ 600 to 7 @,@ 900 ft ) elevation . It typically stays in the lower and middle forest levels , but will range higher in fruiting trees and will sometimes enter and cross clearings . It is generally shy and inconspicuous , often seen only briefly after being flushed out or while swiftly flying down a valley . 
 R. p. aequatorialis is the most widespread subspecies , ranging across the Andes of East Columbia to West Venezuela , East Ecuador and East Peru . The nominate subspecies , R. p. peruvianus has a small range stretching only through the Andes of Central Peru . R. p. sanguinolentus ranges throughout the Andes in West Columbia to Northwest Ecuador . The subspecies R. p. saturatus has a range across Southeast Peru and West Bolivia . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Food and feeding = = = 
 The diet consists mainly of fruit and insects , although small reptiles and frogs have been recorded . The fruits consumed are often from the plant families Lauraceae , <unk> , and Rubiaceae , although a few other plant families have also been reported in their diet . They are one of many species recorded following army ants . They occasionally will eat high protein fruits , but they prefer to eat the other fruits on their menu . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Male cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock are polygamous , and have nothing to do with nesting once mating is done . The male ’ s energy instead is devoted to very elaborate display rituals that show off its magnificent plumage . These displays take place in communal leks , where males gather to challenge rivals and beckon the females . The males are easily disturbed , so their behavior is not easy to see . One study reported that the display activity is dependent on light intensity , with the morning display period occurring during the same light intensity level as the afternoon period . 
 At the lek , males have been observed to break up into pairs , performing “ confrontation displays ” . This consists of facing each other while bowing , jumping , and flapping their wings , sometimes even snapping their bills , and at the same time giving off various squawking and grunting calls . When the female approaches , it becomes even more intense . The display turns into a cacophony of bright color and a frenzied activity filling the air with very strange sounds . 
 Breeding takes place during different times of year in different areas . In Colombia , breeding normally happens in February until July . In Ecuador , the breeding interval spans from July until February . 
 = = = Nesting = = = 
 The nests , built entirely by the female , are mud plastered to cave entrances or rocky outcrops in forest ravines . The nests are often constructed from the saliva of the females mixed in with vegetable matter and mud . The nest is shaped like a concave cup . The female typically lays two white eggs . The females incubates these eggs for about 25 to 28 days . 
 = = = Impact on environment = = = 
 Andean cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rocks influence the environment around them . It was found that a white @-@ capped dipper renovated an abandoned cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock nest to lay its eggs in . Cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rocks also change the surrounding flora through seed dispersal . Seeds that the birds ingest often are found deposited around lek and nesting sites . This favours the germination and growth of those seeds . The diversity of these types of seeds has been found to be increased at lek and nests and decreased throughout the surrounding forest . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Andean cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock face slightly larger predators than smaller songbirds . Predators are attracted to leks by the conspicuous behavior of the displaying males . The animals reported to prey on adult cocks @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock including hawk @-@ eagles , hawks , forest @-@ falcons , jaguar , mountain lion , ocelot and the boa constrictor . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is regarded as the national bird of Peru . Juveniles and adults have occasionally been used as pets . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The worldwide population size and trends in population numbers have not been determined , but is it believed that the Andean cock @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rock is not threatened . The species is evaluated as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species despite habitat destruction . It is patchily distributed , but its range is large enough to sustain it at a Least Concern status . 
 = Aval Appadithan = 
 Aval Appadithan ( English : That is how she is ) is a 1978 Indian Tamil @-@ language drama film directed by C. Rudhraiya in his directorial debut , and co @-@ written by him with <unk> . The film was produced by <unk> in association with the M.G.R. Government Film and Television Training Institute . It stars Kamal Haasan , Rajinikanth , and Sripriya , while Ilaiyaraaja composed the film 's music . The plot revolves around Manju ( Sripriya ) and the difficulties she faces in her life , due to her romantic relationships , resulting in her developing an aggressive and cynical nature towards men . 
 Aval Appadithan was released on 30 October 1978 , on Diwali day . Although the film received positive critical reception , it was not a box office success at the time of its release . However , the film began to develop an audience after directors P. Bharathiraja and Mrinal Sen commented positively about it . The film was noted for its stylish filmmaking , screenplay , and dialogue , a large portion of it being in English . 
 Aval Appadithan was the first film made by a graduate of the M.G.R. Government Film and Television Training Institute , facilitating students of film technology to achieve success in the field of cinema . The film received the second prize for Best Film at the 1978 Tamil Nadu State Film Awards , while Nallusamy and M. N. <unk> won the Best Cinematographer award . Additionally , Sripriya received a Special Award for the Best Actress of 1978 . In 2013 , CNN @-@ News18 included the film in its list , " The 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Manju ( Sripriya ) was raised in a dysfunctional family that consisted of a timid father and a philandering mother ; she hurtles from one disastrous affair to another , leading to her degenerating into a cynical woman . Into her life enter two radically different men . One of them is her boss , Thyagu ( Rajinikanth ) , who owns the advertising agency she works for . He is a stereotype of the successful man : money @-@ minded , opinionated , arrogant , and a male chauvinist . In sharp contrast is Arun ( Kamal Haasan ) , who has come to Chennai from Coimbatore to make a documentary on women . Sensitive and sincere , he believes his job has a purpose and is both shocked and amused at the cynical attitudes of Manju and Thyagu . 
 Manju has been drafted by Thyagu to assist Arun in his documentary . As Arun and Manju start working together , Arun begins to understand Manju 's complex personality . She tells Arun about her unfortunate past relationships : How she was molested by her uncle , the ending of her first relationship in college when her lover left her by marrying another woman for the sake of employment , and how her second love , Mano ( <unk> ) , a Christian priest 's son , used her to satisfy his needs and lust , calling her " sister " in front of her parents . These incidents have led to her present attitude towards men . Arun later shares these conversations with Thyagu , who warns him to steer clear of such women . 
 Inevitably , Arun falls for Manju . However Manju incurs Thyagu 's wrath when he overhears her reprimanding her office staff for commenting on her character . When Thyagu also comments about her , she resigns from her job . When he learns of this , Arun requests Thyagu to re @-@ employ her . Thyagu simply laughs and says that she is already back , after which Manju seems to have a change of heart and starts courting Thyagu . Arun is devastated to see that she has turned out to be just the sort of woman that Thyagu earlier said she was — opportunistic , money @-@ minded , and fickle . When he asks her about her contradicting stands in life , she responds by saying that is the way she is and will be . 
 The truth finally emerges that Manju was merely baiting Thyagu to teach him a lesson . When Thyagu starts believing that Manju has fallen for him , he attempts to take advantage of her at a party banquet , but she rebukes and slaps him , after which Thyagu runs away in fright . However , this revelation comes too late for her , as Arun , who is disillusioned with her behaviour , has already married a small town girl ( Saritha ) . When Manju tells her aunt about the attempt to humiliate Thyagu and its ramifications , her aunt tells Manju that she deserved it for leaving behind a golden opportunity to start a new life . In a final discussion in Thyagu 's car , Manju asks Arun 's wife , " What do you think of women 's liberation ? " . " What do you think of women 's liberation ? " , Arun 's wife replies , " I don 't know " . Manju replies with a cynical , " that is why you are happy " . The film ends with Manju standing on the road as the car carrying Thyagu and the married couple pulls away from her . A voice @-@ over says , " She died today . She will be reborn tomorrow . She will die again . She will be reborn again . That is how she is " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kamal Haasan as Arun 
 Rajinikanth as Thyagu 
 Sripriya as Manju 
 <unk> as Mano 
 Saritha as Arun 's wife 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 C. Rudhraiya , whose former name was <unk> , was introduced to Kamal Haasan by writer and director Ananthu . The three shared an interest in the works of Robert Bresson , Jean @-@ Luc Godard , Roman Polanski , and Roberto Rossellini . Godard and Bresson were part of the French New Wave , which focused on films based on social ideas , some of which were iconoclastic in nature . Rudhraiya , Haasan , and Ananthu wanted to experiment with their ideas in Tamil . This was Rudhraiya 's first film as director ; quite radical in his approach , he wanted to change the conventions of Tamil cinema at that time . K. Rajeshwar was writing a script dealing with women 's liberation at that time , and it was decided that his script would be used for the film ; the result was Aval Appadithan . The initial script by Rajeshwar consisted of two pages . 
 Aval Appadithan was the debut film for both Nallusamy and M. N. <unk> , who jointly handled the film 's cinematography . Vanna <unk> co @-@ wrote the screenplay with <unk> and Rudhraiya . The film was co @-@ produced by <unk> , in association with the students of the M.G.R. Government Film and Television Training Institute . Sripriya , who played Manju , was initially unsure about acting in the film due to her busy schedule at that time , and only agreed to do it on Haasan 's insistence . According to Rajeshwar , the characterisation of Manju was inspired from a woman he met and who had similar radical beliefs . In Rajinikanth : The Definitive Biography ( 2012 ) , Rajinikanth recalled , " if Kamal had said , “ Don ’ t cast Rajini ” , nobody would have taken me [ in Aval <unk> ] . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Throughout the film , the cinematography made extensive use of shadows and close up shots to emphasise the moods of the characters . Jump cuts were frequently used as well . Overall , 8 @,@ 230 metres of film negative was used to make the film , and the team incurred a cost of ₹ 20 @,@ 000 for exterior shooting equipment . The scenes where Arun interviewed women for his documentary were real scenes , improvised with women they would meet at colleges and bus stops , and shot using the live @-@ recording method . The film uses a sharp contrast of black and white colours to lend a surreal atmosphere to it , and no makeup was used for the lead actors . 
 Filming proceeded smoothly as almost all of the dialogues were ready by the time team went for filming the scenes . The camera angles were pre @-@ planned as well . Haasan shot the film in his spare time , as he was involved in over 20 other films as an actor during the production of Aval Appadithan . Before a shot , Haasan discussed the scene with Ananthu and Rudhraiya on how Godard would have done it . The film was shot in two @-@ hour sessions over a period of four @-@ five months . The opening scene where Haasan looks into the camera and says " Konjam left @-@ la <unk> " ( English : Sit a little to the left , please . ) was meant as a sign to the audience to support gender equality . According to the Tamil newspaper Dinamalar , Aval Appadithan was shot in 20 days . The film 's final length was 3 @,@ 136 metres ( 10 @,@ 289 ft ) . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Aval Appadithan 's central theme is on women and their plight in society , as exemplified by Manju and her relationships . Born to a timid father and a mother with loose moral values , she is also subsequently affected by two people she becomes romantically involved with . One , her college mate , left her to marry someone else for the sake of a job ; and the second is Mano , the son of a Christian priest , who used her to satisfy his lust and then trivialised their relationship by calling her " sister " in front of her parents . These relationships result in her becoming wary of men and developing an aggressive nature towards them . Conversations related to matters like the status of women in contemporary ( 1978 ) times and the nature of humankind are frequently seen in the film . 
 Sociologist Selvaraj Velayutham says in his book , Tamil Cinema : The Cultural Politics of India 's Other Film Industry , that " The woman ’ s characterisation is , of course , brought out entirely verbally by her [ Manju ] . According to her , she has become ' this way ' because of a wayward mother . [ ... ] The film constantly resorts to existing myths about women and relationships : that a wayward mother destroys her children ; that a woman who speaks the ' truth ' is always alone ; that men are scared of her ; that the woman who is different is confused , not sure of herself and is only seeking love from a man but does not know it herself . The only plus point of the film is that it does not expose the body of women in the way it is customary to do . [ ... ] The visuals constantly play upon the fact that she is pitted against the world . All this could have been avoided if only she had a ' proper ' mother ! " 
 Artist V. Jeevananthan compared Aval Appadithan to other films whose central theme was women , such as Charulata ( 1964 ) , Aval Oru Thodar Kathai ( 1974 ) , and <unk> ( 1986 ) , while also labelling them as " classics that put the spotlight on women . " Ashish Rajadhyaksha and Paul Willemen , in their book Encyclopedia of Indian Cinema , say the film was also inspired by the 1972 film , <unk> , which starred R. Muthuraman and Pandari Bai . The film is an exception on stereotypes of women , as shown by paralleling an independent woman , Manju , and a pious traditional woman : Manju gets into problems while Arun 's wife is happy . The last lines of the film where Manju asks " what do you think of ' women 's liberation ' " , Arun 's wife answers , " I don 't know " , to which Manju says " that is why you are happy " , send the message that one will inevitably get into trouble if one exhibits assertive behaviour . 
 Kamal Haasan 's character , Arun , is an early version of a metrosexual male — sensitive and sincere . Rajinikanth 's character , Thyagu , is the exact opposite of Arun — money @-@ minded , arrogant , and a womaniser . This is evident when Thyagu says to Arun : " Women should be enjoyed , not analysed . " According to Rajinikanth , Thyagu was very much similar to him in real life — he too smokes and drinks , but applies <unk> ( sacred ash ) on his forehead . This implies that Thyagu was also an atheist . According to film critic Naman Ramachandran , Thyagu was , by far , Rajinikanth 's most entertaining character up to that point in his career ; his character was a self @-@ confessed chauvinist who believed that men and women can never be equal , and that women are merely objects to be used for men 's pleasure . When Arun calls Thyagu " a prejudiced ass " , Thyagu responds by saying , " I am a male ass , " with the dialogue being in English . His opinion of Sripriya 's character , Manju , is seen when he says ( also in English ) , " She is a self pitying sex @-@ starved bitch ! " 
 = = Music = = 
 Aval Appadithan 's soundtrack and score were composed by Ilaiyaraaja . The soundtrack was released under the label of EMI Records . At that time , Ilaiyaraaja was one of the busiest persons in the Tamil film industry , but he took a reduced fee for his services , at the insistence of Rudhraiya and Haasan , due to the film 's budget . 
 After the recording session of " <unk> Oru Paravai " from the film , Sigappu Rojakkal ( 1978 ) , Ilaiyaraaja asked Haasan to record " Panneer Pushpangale " that same afternoon . During the recording session , Ilaiyaraaja suggested that Haasan tone down the opening notes ; when Haasan sang perfectly as per his suggestion , Ilaiyaraaja accepted Haasan 's next rendition of the song . The song " Uravugal Thodarkathai " was reused in the film Megha ( 2014 ) . Ilaiyaraaja wanted <unk> to write the lyrics for the song , since <unk> had difficulties in writing the lyrics , he opted out . He was subsequently replaced with Gangai Amaran . 
 The soundtrack received positive reviews from critics . G. Dhananjayan said in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema , " Ilaiyaraaja 's brooding background score added to the sombre nature of the movie . Two songs , " Uravugal Thodarkathai " sung by K. J. Yesudas and " Panneer Pushpangale " sung by Kamal Haasan remain popular even today . " B. Kolappan of The Hindu wrote , " If the song " Uravugal Thodarkathai " poignantly captures the vulnerable moments in the life of a woman , " Panneer Pushpangale " and " <unk> <unk> <unk> " in Aval Appadithan are known for their melody and philosophical touch . " According to Swarnavel Eswaran Pillai , author of the article The 1970s Tamil cinema and the post @-@ classical turn , Ilaiyaraaja 's songs were used " to punctuate the interiority of the characters rather than as a spectacle or as a device to move the plot forward . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Aval Appadithan was released on 30 October 1978 , on Diwali day . Awarded an " A " ( adults only ) certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification for its bold dialogue and subject matter , this led to the film initially struggling to find a distributor . After it was shown to several distributors and exhibitors , the Safire Theatre Group finally agreed to screen the film as a one @-@ print , one theatre release . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received generally positive reviews from critics . On 19 November 1978 , Ananda Vikatan criticised the gaps in the film , particularly the abundance of English dialogue , the excessive focus on naturalism , and lower standard of technical work ( especially the cinematography ) . Despite these perceived flaws , the magazine still appreciated the film , " None of the actors have acted in the film . Everyone has immersed in the character they played , leading to no one really acting before the camera but just living the characters ... The director demonstrated his intention to stand out from others and his keenness to tell something different ... " G. Dhananjayan said in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema , " The confidence and command of the filmmaker comes out strongly in this film . " K. Balamurugan of Rediff said , " It was what we would call parallel cinema these days . " 
 Writing for The Hindu , Baradwaj Rangan said , " Aval Appadithan was different . The shadowy black @-@ and @-@ white cinematography was different . The dialogues , which were more about revealing character than advancing plot , were different . The frank handling of sex and profanity ( ' she is a self @-@ pitying , sex @-@ starved bitch ! ' ) was different . The documentary @-@ like detours were different . The painfully sensitive , feminist hero was different . <unk> was different . " Another critic from The Hindu , B. Kolappan , called the performances of the lead cast " excellent " . D. Karthikeyan of The Hindu wrote in December 2009 that Aval Appadithan would " remain etched in every film lover 's memory by showing the best of Rajnikanth 's acting skills . " Director Mrinal Sen remarked , " The film was far ahead of its times . " Critics also appreciated the live @-@ recording method of shooting the sequences where Haasan 's character , Arun , interviewed women for his documentary . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film did not initially receive a big response from the public , and was not a box office success upon its release . However , after the directors P. Bharathiraja and Mrinal Sen wrote positive comments on it , people began to watch the film and appreciate it , leading Aval Appadithan to develop a cult following . In November 2014 , Haasan defended the financial failure of the film , " Aval Appadithan was a guerilla attack on the industry by insiders like me . It slipped through their fingers , so to speak . With all the attention that films get these days , I doubt we can get away with such a film any more . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film was awarded the Second Prize for Best Film at the 1978 Tamil Nadu State Film Awards . At the same ceremony , Nallusamy and M. N. <unk> won the award for Best Cinematographer , and Sripriya received a Special Award for Best Actress of the year . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Aval Appadithan is one of only two films ever directed by Rudhraiya ; the other was <unk> <unk> ( 1980 ) . Aval Appadithan was noted for its stylish filmmaking , screenplay and dialogue , a large portion of it being in English . The dialogues were sharp and were considered almost vulgar . It also broke the style of filmmaking followed up until that time . It was the first film made by a graduate from the M.G.R. Government Film and Television Training Institute , facilitating Indian film technology students to achieve success in the film industry . Sripriya included it in her list of favourite films she had worked in . 
 In a July 2004 interview with T. Saravanan of The Hindu , director Karu <unk> rated Aval Appadithan as one of the best films he had ever seen . In May 2007 , K. Balamurugan of Rediff included Aval Appadithan in his list of " Rajni 's Tamil Top 10 " . In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight Tamil film directors to list their all @-@ time favourite Tamil films ; two of them – Balu Mahendra and Ameer – named Aval Appadithan . Thiagarajan <unk> named Aval Appadithan as an inspiration for his film <unk> <unk> ( 2011 ) . S. Shiva Kumar of The Hindu included the film on his December 2010 list of " Electrifying Rajinikanth @-@ Kamal Haasan films " with Moondru Mudichu ( 1976 ) , Avargal ( 1977 ) and 16 Vayathinile ( 1977 ) . Haasan described the film as an " unconventional way of film making . " In April 2013 , CNN @-@ News18 included the film in its list , " The 100 greatest Indian films of all time " . In June 2013 , A. <unk> of Honey Bee Music enhanced the songs from their original version on the film 's soundtrack album to 5 @.@ 1 surround sound . In July 2013 , Sruti Harihara Subramanian , founder and trustee of The Cinema Resource Centre ( <unk> ) , told Janani Sampath of The New Indian Express that many people assumed the film was directed by K. Balachander , not by Rudhraiya . Sruti also has an album of promotional stills and photographs of the film 's production . 
 In November 2013 , The New Indian Express included the film in its list , " Kamal Haasan 's most underrated films " . In February 2014 , CNN @-@ News18 included Aval Appadithan in its list , titled " 12 Indian films that would make great books " . In Kathai <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 2014 ) , the hero 's writing team discusses the theme of Aval Appadithan to get ideas for their film 's story , until they realise that the film was a failure at the time of its release . Indo @-@ Asian News Service , in their review of Sripriya 's directorial venture Malini 22 Palayamkottai ( 2014 ) , a film about a rape victim , stated , " Sripriya , who was once a successful actress , played a rape victim in Tamil drama Aval Appadithan . It 's probably because of that role and the effect it had left on her , she handles this subject with great care and understanding that most of her peers would lack . " In January 2015 , K. Rajeshwar said , " I was told that if Aval Appadithan were made today , it would be a blockbuster . I don ’ t agree , for it ’ s still taboo for a woman to talk about her sexual encounters . The profile of the audience should change . " In July 2016 , The Hindu included Aval Appadithan in its list of " roles that defined Rajinikanth the actor " . 
 = The Boat Race 2007 = 
 The 153rd Boat Race took place on 7 April 2007 , and featured the most non @-@ British rowers in the history of the event . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The Cambridge crew were considerably heavier than their opponents . Oxford won the toss but Cambridge won the race by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths in a time of 17 minutes 49 seconds . 
 In the reserve race Goldie beat Isis and Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2006 race by five lengths , although Cambridge led overall with 78 victories to Oxford 's 73 ( excluding the dead heat of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Xchanging for the third time . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) was 9 pounds ( 4 @.@ 1 kg ) per man heavier than their Oxford rivals ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) . The Oxford crew featured four Americans , two Britons , a Canadian , a Croatian and a Pole , while the Cambridge crew consisted of four Britons , two Canadians , two Germans and an American . The race featured the most non @-@ British rowers in the history of the event , and in German Thorsten Engelmann , the heaviest rower ever . Rebecca Dowbiggin became the thirteenth female cox in the race 's history and the seventh female cox for Cambridge . Cambridge 's head coach was Duncan Holland , his Oxford counterpart was Sean Bowden . 
 – Dowbiggin replaced Cambridge 's first @-@ choice cox Russ Glenn ten days before the race . 
 = = Race description = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . They took an early lead , and were just ahead at Hammersmith Bridge . Cambridge edged back into contention by the Chiswick Steps and heading under Barnes Bridge were a length clear . They passed the finishing post first , in a time of 17 minutes 49 seconds , a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter ahead of Oxford . It was Cambridge 's first victory since 2004 and took their overall lead in the contest to 79 – 73 . At the finish , following tradition , the Cambridge crew threw their cox , Dowbiggin , into the water in celebration . She later said " They flung me a really long way in there , and the water was freezing , but it was worth it . " 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis . Earlier , Cambridge won the 62nd Women 's Boat Race by half a length . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford coach Sean Bowden said " We had a good race and made all the right moves to Hammersmith , but we couldn 't quite shake them off and didn 't quite have enough lead to defend " , while Cambridge 's number six Kieran West said " Credit to Oxford . They threw everything they had at us , but we absorbed it all . " Cambridge head coach Duncan Holland praised his cox : " Rebecca was magnificent . She steered a superb course . She steered exactly where we thought she should steer and she stayed calm , it was great . " Dowbiggin herself recounted : " The guys asked me to be very calm , very relaxed , not to panic , even if Oxford were pushing and moving , I was just like ' okay , they 're pushing , they 're moving , but we 're going to do this ' . " Bowden criticised the umpire who he claimed " pushed us too tight round the bend . From Hammersmith Bridge on that took away our advantage . " Cambridge 's Tom James was finally successful , winning the Boat Race at his fourth attempt : " I really couldn 't think about losing this race . Oxford really hounded us . The line was getting closer but never quickly enough . " 
 = Jovan Babunski = 
 Jovan Stojković ( Serbian Cyrillic : Јован <unk> ; 25 December 1878 – 17 February 1920 ) , known as Jovan Babunski ( Јован <unk> ) , was a Serbian Chetnik commander ( Serbian : vojvoda , вoјвода ) during the Balkan Wars and World War I. Following the murder of his brother and nephew by the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization ( IMRO ) , he joined a Chetnik band and took command of Chetnik units on the Vardar River , where he and his men often engaged Bulgarian and Ottoman forces . 
 With the outbreak of the First Balkan War he joined the Serbian Army and was wounded while fighting in the village of <unk> . During the Second Balkan War , he joined a Serbian volunteer detachment and fought at the Battle of Bregalnica . During World War I , Babunski and his Chetnik detachment fought Austro @-@ Hungarian forces in the summer of 1914 and later fought on the Salonika Front , where Babunski was ordained by French General Louis Franchet d 'Espèrey after he and his men captured two German midget submarines and their crews . After the war , Babunski and his 250 @-@ strong force helped Serb authorities suppress Bulgarian resistance in the Macedonian towns of Bitola and Tikveš , committing several atrocities in the process . Considered one of the most famous Chetnik commanders of his time , Babunski died in Veles in February 1920 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jovan Stojković was born in the village of <unk> in central Macedonia along the <unk> Mountains near Veles on 25 December 1878 . Some sources state that he was born in 1875 . In his youth he earned the nickname " Babunski " , derived from the name of Mount <unk> near which his birthplace was located . He began his education at age ten , attending what was the only Bulgarian @-@ language elementary school in Veles at the time . It was here that his teacher <unk> his name into " Ivan <unk> " . Displeased , Babunski 's father responded by taking his son to the Serbian consulate in Skopje , from where he was taken to continue his education in Belgrade . After studying in Belgrade , Valjevo and Niš , Babunski worked as a Serbian @-@ language teacher in the towns of Tetovo and Veles in the <unk> region . 
 = = Guerrilla activities = = 
 In 1905 , Babunski 's brother and nephew were killed by the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization ( IMRO ) . Seeking revenge , he joined the Chetnik band of <unk> Sokolović and <unk> <unk> . That year , he became a Chetnik vojvoda . Afterwards , he defended the right bank of the Vardar River against Bulgarian insurgents and protected persecuted Serb villages against Bulgarian and Ottoman attack . Through these actions , Babunski became one of the five leading Serbian guerilla chiefs in Macedonia . In 1907 , the Chetnik song " The Serb Trumpet Plays For Me " ( Serbian : Srpska mi <unk> <unk> ) was composed in his honour following his successful command of Chetnik forces during an attack against a group of IMRO militants commanded by Stefan Dimitrov . With the Young Turk Revolution in 1908 , Ottoman authorities declared a ceasefire between their forces and those of the Chetniks . Babunski left Chetnik ranks and returned to civilian life . He was later arrested by Ottoman authorities but quickly escaped from prison . That year , he returned to the Kingdom of Serbia . 
 = = Balkan Wars and World War I = = 
 Babunski fought with the Serbian Army during the First Balkan War and was wounded in a skirmish with Ottoman Turkish forces in the village of <unk> while serving under commander Vojin Popović . During the Second Balkan War , he fought with a Serbian volunteer detachment at the Battle of Bregalnica . With the outbreak of World War I Babunski formed the Sava Chetnik detachment , which was then placed under the command of Major Vojislav Tankosić . The unit went on to fight the Austro @-@ Hungarians in the late summer of 1914 and later destroyed a railway bridge on the Sava River to prevent Austro @-@ Hungarian forces from crossing it . In 1915 , Babunski and his men returned to Macedonia and fought Bulgarian guerillas . That autumn Babunski and his Chetniks were assigned to the town of Kačanik , where they joined other Serbian forces in fighting a Bulgarian division that they managed to hold to a standstill for nearly a month despite suffering heavy losses . With the Serbian army 's retreat through Albania that winter , Babunski and his men withdrew to the Greek island of Corfu . They then joined Serb forces at the Salonika Front . Here , Babunski was assigned to the Serbian First Army and was involved in guarding Lake Prespa from the Bulgarians . Later , he and his Chetnik detachments participated in capturing enemy soldiers and gathering intelligence from the front . In 1917 , French General Louis Franchet d 'Espèrey awarded Babunski a medal following the capture of two German midget submarines and their crews by him and his men . Babunski was also a recipient of the Order of the Star of Karađorđe . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After the war , Babunski was given command over a force of 250 men who helped Serb authorities suppress resistance in the towns of Bitola and Tikveš . During this time , forces under his command committed several atrocities in both Macedonia and Albania . Several further atrocities were carried out in Bregalnica and Tikveš and targeted local leaders sympathetic to Bulgarian <unk> . Chetnik bands , including those of Babunski , enslaved locals and turned them into forced labourers for the armed forces of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . By the summer of 1919 , Serbian and Yugoslav authorities decided that Chetnik bands such as those of Babunski were not " furthering the state 's aims in the region . " The armed forces were then deployed to maintain order in the southern territories of the state and more than 50 @,@ 000 Serbian professional soldiers were sent to Kosovo and Macedonia . Babunski died in Veles on 17 February 1920 , after falling from his horse and getting influenza . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Described by historian Dušan T. <unk> as " exceptionally courageous and determined , " Babunski is considered one of the most famous Chetnik commanders of his time . A monument dedicated to him was constructed in Veles in 1924 , but it was blown up by the Bulgarians during World War II . A street in the <unk> neighborhood of Belgrade used to bear his name . His nom de guerre ( " Chetnik name " ) , Babunski , was adopted as a surname by his descendants . Jovan is the great @-@ grandfather of Macedonian footballer Boban Babunski , and great @-@ great @-@ grandfather of footballers David and Dorian . 
 = Dreamland ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Dreamland " is the collective name for the fourth and fifth episodes of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Part one first aired on November 29 , and part two aired on December 6 , 1998 on Fox in the United States and Canada . The episode was written by Vince Gilligan , John Shiban , and Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Kim Manners ( " Dreamland " ) and Michael Watkins ( " Dreamland II " ) . Although dealing with a member of the Men in Black , the episode is largely unconnected to the mythology of The X @-@ Files , and is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story . Part one of " Dreamland " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 1 , being watched by 17 @.@ 48 million people in its initial broadcast ; Part two received a rating of 10 and was watched by 17 @.@ 01 million people . The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics , with many reviews critical of the episode 's reliance on humor . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In the episode , Mulder and Scully visit Area 51 . But when the agents witness the flight of a mysterious craft , Mulder and a member of the Men in Black switch bodies , unbeknownst the others . In part two , Scully begins to suspect that her partner ’ s strange behavior is more than it appears to be , while Mulder fights to return his life to normal before it is too late . 
 " Dreamland " became the first non @-@ mythology story to be spread across two episodes . Originally , the writers for the episode contacted Garry Shandling to play the part of Fletcher but he was unavailable for filming . Michael McKean was then cast in his place . The episode is notable for a scene featuring Mulder @-@ as @-@ Fletcher encountering his reflection and proceeding to do the dance from the 1933 Marx Brothers comedy film Duck Soup . The scene required Duchovny and McKean to synchronize their movements perfectly . Dreamland is one of the names used for the Area 51 facility . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part one = = = 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) visit the Area 51 installation in Nevada after receiving a tip from an inside source concerning alien spacecraft . As they drive on the highway , the agents are surrounded by Jeeps carrying soldiers led by a Man in Black named Morris Fletcher ( Michael McKean ) . A rumbling noise is heard as a mysterious craft flies overhead and a bright light from the object passes over them . Mulder and Fletcher find that their minds have been swapped into each other 's bodies , but nobody else present is aware of this . Fletcher and Scully depart , watched by the soldiers . 
 Mulder is driven back to Area 51 along with two other Men in Black , Howard Grodin and Jeff Smoodge . After an angry telephone call from Fletcher 's wife , Joanne , Mulder — still inside Fletcher 's body — goes to Fletcher 's home . Instead of sleeping in the bedroom , he decides to sleep downstairs in an easy chair and watch pornography . When he is awoken by Joanne , he mumbles Scully 's name . While changing his clothes , Mulder receives a telephone call from Smoodge , who explains that the military has surveyed the wreckage of the craft from the night before , finding one of the human pilots merged into a rock but still alive . Another soldier , Captain Robert McDonough , had switched bodies with an elderly Hopi woman , as evident from McDonough 's aberrant behavior , 
 Mulder telephones Scully and tries to explain that he 's the real Mulder . Scully does not believe him and asks Fletcher — in Mulder 's body — to pick up and listen to the conversation . Fletcher decides they should immediately report this incident , which further confuses Scully . She goes to Mulder ’ s apartment ( where Fletcher is having a tryst with Kersh 's assistant ) and tells Fletcher that they traced the telephone call to a pay phone near Area 51 and she suspects it is Mulder 's informant . Fletcher is indifferent to this news and Scully yells at him , sensing that his behavior is very strange and his lack of concern for the X @-@ Files is completely out of character . Scully decides to investigate , and drives through the desert towards Area 51 . She stops at a burned out gas station and finds a penny and a dime merged . Later , when Scully arrives at Fletcher 's house , Mulder tries desperately to convince Scully that he is really Mulder . Scully remains skeptical and thinks that any information Mulder describes could be obtained in other ways . Mulder tells Scully that he will bring proof of the defect of the UFO and the resultant problems that night , but Fletcher , having <unk> on the conversation , calls his old office posing as Mulder to inform them of the source of the leak — Mulder posing as Fletcher . Military police arrive at the appointed hour , and Mulder is dragged away , kicking and screaming , desperately trying to convince Scully . Mulder asks if he would turn in an informant to the authorities in this manner as he is carried away , and Scully begins to realize that Mulder may be telling the truth . 
 = = = Part two = = = 
 As Mulder — in Fletcher 's body — is dragged away by the soldiers , Scully begins to question whether what Mulder told her about the body @-@ swap was true . Fletcher — in Mulder 's body — approaches Scully and apologizes for telling Kersh and she feigns acceptance of it . After being reprimanded , Fletcher arranges a dinner date with Scully at Mulder 's apartment . Meanwhile , Mulder is confined in a cell next to the mind @-@ switched Lana Chee . Military police arrive and take Mulder to a meeting with General Wegman , Grodin and Smoodge . They believe that Mulder @-@ as @-@ Fletcher was trying to defraud the FBI , not help them . Mulder bluffs his way through the meeting , and claims that the real proof is safe and that he did not tell them about the scheme because he did not know if he could trust his colleagues , thinking any one of them could be the source of the leak . Mulder returns to Fletcher 's house and tells Joanne Fletcher that he is Agent Fox Mulder , but Joanne thinks her husband must be undergoing a mid @-@ life crisis . 
 At Mulder 's apartment , Scully announces that because of Mulder 's odd behavior , she realized Mulder 's body contains Morris Fletcher . Scully demands to know how to restore Mulder to his own body . Mulder 's informant calls again and Scully forces Fletcher to take the call and set up a meeting . Mulder , Joanne , Fletcher and Scully arrive at a bar in Rachel , Nevada , where Mulder 's informant is revealed to be General Wegman . Wegman admits that he sabotaged the UFO , but maintains that he only tried to merely disable the stealth module so that Mulder could see it . Wegman gives Fletcher , who he thinks is Mulder , the proof of the encounter , a flight data recorder in a paper bag . Meanwhile , Mulder leaves and talks to Scully in the car . Later , Mulder and Fletcher meet in the bar 's bathroom and argue about the flight data recorder . As they argue , General Wegman enters the bathroom and discovers the two . Mulder meets with General Wegman to discuss the UFO . Wegman believes that now that Fletcher knows Wegman 's identity , when restored to his own body , Fletcher will turn him in . Wegman explains that he hoped that Mulder could explain whether aliens actually exist ; apparently the craft are simply given to the military without knowing where they are from or how they work . 
 After the fiasco at the bar , Mulder and Scully meet . She sadly tells Mulder that she does not think he and Fletcher can be returned to their own bodies . However , soon after that , the warp caused by the alien craft begins to snap back and repair the natural order of the universe . Grodin , realizing that everything will be fixed naturally , gathers up Lana Chee and the pilot . Scully and Fletcher arrive at Fletcher ’ s home , and see Mulder standing by the moving truck . The shrill Joanne Fletcher berates Mulder about Scully but he insists that he and Fletcher have swapped bodies . Fletcher goes to help Joanne move a chair and confesses that Mulder is telling the truth . He tells her enough of their past to convince her he is Morris Fletcher . Jeff Smoodge and a group of troops appear at Fletcher 's home and detain Mulder , Fletcher , Scully and the flight data recorder in their car . Grodin explains that he is restoring everything and that he reversed the body @-@ swap between the pilot and the old Hopi woman . The warp passes over them and the past few days are rewritten . Mulder and Fletcher are restored to their own bodies and returned to the moment when Fletcher ’ s troops pulled them over on the highway . This time no ship passes overhead and Mulder and Scully leave uneventfully . After Mulder and Scully leave the highway near area 51 , Scully calls from FBI headquarters to tell Mulder that they have escaped reprimand from Director Kersh for going to Nevada . Scully opens her desk drawer to place a file inside and finds the penny and dime that were fused together from the event at the gas station in her desk drawer indicating that while some things have reversed themselves , not everything has . Mulder enters his apartment and finds that Morris Fletcher has completely reorganized and cleaned his apartment and both Mulder and Scully are left to puzzle over their recollection of events . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 When the episode was being cast , Michael McKean was not slated to play Morris Fletcher . Originally , the writers for the episode contacted Garry Shandling to play the part of Fletcher . Shandling , who was good friends with David Duchovny , was unavailable because he was filming a movie called Town and Country . Shandling would later appear in the seventh season episode " Hollywood A.D. " playing himself . In the meantime , the production staff began looking for a replacement . Rick Millikan , the casting director for The X @-@ Files , stated that they went through " lists and lists " of potential actors . Vince Gilligan noted , however , that McKean was at the top of the list for inclusion . McKean was very happy to play the part , although he did specifically ask the writers not to kill off his character . 
 Julia Vera was cast in the role of Lana Chee , the Hopi woman whose mind was switched with a young air force pilot . In order to age her , Vera wore special make @-@ up and facial appliances . Special contact lenses were also crafted to give her eyes a clouded look . It took five takes for her to flick her cigarette butt into Mulder 's lap because the lenses obstructed her vision . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In order to simulate the desert environment of Area 51 , production was temporarily relocated to " Club Ed " , a movie ranch located on the outskirts of Lancaster , California . Club Ed was two hours drive and almost 100 miles away from the Fox Studios , so most of the cast and crew camped out in motels in the desert . Because Club Ed was outside the 30 @-@ mile zone around Los Angeles , overtime , meal allowances , and per diem expenses had to be added to the budget . In the middle of filming , Duchovny was reported as saying , " When is this show moving back to Los Angeles ? " Within days , T @-@ shirts were made for the crew that featured exactly the same question . 
 Many of the locations in the episode were created from scratch , either through conventional means or through computer technology . The gas station , which could not be rented , was created by building a store on the side of the road on the outskirts of Lancaster and fitting it with gas pumps from a station that had recently gone out of business . The store was then loaded with merchandise obtained from restaurant supply houses and cooperative food manufactures . The last scene filmed was of the station exploding . After filming ceased , the station was demolished and the road returned to its previous state . Duke <unk> , The X @-@ Files construction coordinator , later said that , " it was if the whole thing never even existed " . Area 51 , the government airplanes , and the alien craft were constructed by visual effects producer Bill Millar on a Macintosh computer . Originally , the time warp effect resembled a " blue sheet " , according to producer John Shiban , sans the blurring effect visible in the finished episode . Eventually , the production crew felt that the sheet effect was not effective , and so the footage was blurred in order to create a " molecular <unk> " effect . 
 Several of the locations either were real , or were filmed with the use of stand @-@ ins . The gate for the Area 51 set was filmed at a fence on the San Bernardino county line , one hundred and twenty miles away from Los Angeles . The restaurant that the characters visit , the Little A <unk> <unk> , is an actual cafe off Highway 375 in Rachel , Nevada . The inside , however , was an elaborate set , as the original is much too small . 
 = = = Choreography = = = 
 The scene where Mulder @-@ as @-@ Fletcher encounters his reflection and proceeds to dance is an homage to the 1933 Marx Brothers comedy film Duck Soup . Originally , during production meetings , the staff of The X @-@ Files decided to create the scene by using digital technology , although this method would raise the budget significantly . Duchovny and McKean , however , volunteered to shoot the film the " old fashioned way " by choreographing their moves so that they would be in @-@ synch . Duchovny and McKean each watched Duck Soup and then practiced for a week and a half in order to perfect the scene . When the scene was filmed , a metronome was present so that the two actors could keep time with each other . This was then erased from the mix during post @-@ production . In addition , the set was actually two bedrooms , both mirror images of each other . The only part that featured any CGI was when Mulder blows on the mirror , producing fog . According to director Kim Manners , Duchovny and McKean filmed the shot that was used on the twelfth take . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Dreamland " first aired in the United States on November 29 , and " Dreamland II " aired on December 6 , 1998 . The first part of the episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 , with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 48 million people . The second part received a 10 rating , with a 15 share . It was subsequently viewed by 17 @.@ 01 million people . The first part aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on March 28 , 1999 and the second part aired on April 4 ; part one received 0 @.@ 73 million viewers and was the fourth most watched episode that week , and part two later received 0 @.@ 88 million viewers and was the second most watched episode that week , after an episode of Friends . Fox promoted the first part of the episode with the tagline " what if you could discover the truth by living inside another man 's body ? " They promoted the second part of the episode with the line " Can he get back ? " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics , with many commenting on the episode 's reliance on humor . In a review of part one , a critic from the Knight Ridder wrote , " As disorienting as this body transfer had to be for Mulder , the experience provided amusing television . And that seems to be a problem for some X @-@ Files fans . Knowing that the human population 's survival is imperiled by the colonization plans of a fierce extraterrestrial race , a large number of X @-@ Philes want the show to focus on our heroes ' efforts to come to the rescue " . The newspaper 's review of Part 2 was much more negative , with the article saying " by the end of the latest X @-@ Files episode , we were wishing we could push a reset button on Dreamland II , just to forget some of the silly stuff that transpired in this show " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five and noted that the episode lacked " structure and point " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave both episodes mixed reviews , awarding the first part two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four , and the second part two stars . Vitaris was unhappy with the amount of comedy used in the episode , noting that once Mulder visited Fletcher 's house , " the comedy turns sour " : she argued that the members of Fletcher 's family were examples of caricatures . Despite this , she praised the scene featuring the murder of the gas station attendant , claiming that " for a moment , this episode really clicks " . Vitaris , in her review for part two , called the episode " purely illogical " , although she noted it did feature " minor fun " , pointing out the scene wherein Scully catches Fletcher by handcuffing him . 
 Not all reviews were completely negative . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club wrote positively of the first part of the episode 's humor and awarded it a B + . Handlen noted that " the context of seeing actors in the wrong places " is " what ’ s funny about the episode " . However , he did slightly criticize the episode 's padding — specifically Nora Dunn 's role as Fletcher 's wife and the Duck Soup mirror gag — but argued that " for every bit that doesn ’ t play in the episode , there are three that do . " Todd VanDerWerff , also from The A.V. Club , gave the second half of the episode a B – and wrote , " I have basically nothing to add to what Zack said about the first ' Dreamland ' last week . ' Dreamland II ' is a fairly unnecessary hour of television , and there ’ s no reason this <unk> two @-@ parter couldn ’ t have become a much tighter one @-@ hour episode . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files wrote that " my final judgement on ' Dreamland ' [ part one ] is that I enjoyed the entertainment value it presented . It was fun and I 'm not one to begrudge a little romp now and then . " Kessenich , however , did note that the second part " felt strung out " . Den of Geek writer Juliette Harrisson , however , saw the episode in a more positive light and said , " Season six included some more excellent episodes only peripherally related to the main story arc , [ such as ] Dreamland parts one and two " . Kerry Fall from DVD Journal wrote positively of the episodes and described them , together as " one of the best episodes in years " . Gareth Wigmore of TV Zone gave the first part of the episode an 8 out of 10 rating and highlighted the " strong story @-@ telling , clever dialogue , and good acting " . Earl Cressey from DVD Talk concluded that both " Dreamland " parts one and two were among the " highlights of season six " . Topless Robot named " Dreamland " the fourth funniest episode of the series . 
 = The Way I See It = 
 The Way I See It is the third studio album by American recording artist Raphael Saadiq , released on September 16 , 2008 , by Columbia Records . After his 2004 album Ray Ray , Saadiq continued working on other artists ' projects and developed a partnership with audio engineer Charles Brungardt , who shared his fascination with historic recording techniques and equipment . In 2008 , he returned from a vacation that inspired him to pursue classic soul and recorded The Way I See It with Brungardt at Saadiq 's studio in North Hollywood . 
 In an attempt to recreate the Motown music aesthetic of the 1960s , Saadiq and Brungardt disregarded their previous experience with modern music production in favor of experimenting with older recording techniques . The Way I See It is a traditional soul album that draws on the 1960s Motown Sound and Philadelphia soul . Saadiq , whose lyrics mostly deal with romantic subject matter , described it as a series of love songs about music and remaining faithful to it despite trends . 
 Initially overlooked by consumers , The Way I See It sold steadily and charted for 41 weeks on the Billboard 200 , selling 282 @,@ 000 copies in the United States by May 2011 . It also performed well in European countries such as France , where it charted for 51 weeks . The album received generally positive reviews from critics and was an exemplary release of the classic soul revival at the time . Saadiq 's extensive touring for the album in the United States , Europe , and Asia garnered him a newer , more diverse audience . 
 = = Background = = 
 After releasing his second studio album Ray Ray in 2004 , Saadiq continued working as a producer , composer , and instrumentalist on other recording artists ' music . He was introduced to audio engineer Charles Brungardt through production and songwriting team Jake and the Phatman , who had worked on Ray Ray . Brungardt interned at Blakeslee Recording Company , Saadiq 's North Hollywood recording studio , and eventually became his principal sonic partner on projects . The two shared a fascination with historic recording techniques and equipment . They also studied the 2006 book Recording The Beatles together and had an interest in the knowledge of recording gear by engineers and technicians for English rock band The Beatles . Brungardt increased his engineering output , and in 2007 , Saadiq enlisted him to engineer and mix English singer Joss Stone 's studio album Introducing Joss Stone , which Saadiq produced . 
 While vacationing in the Bahamas and Costa Rica in 2008 , Saadiq observed people there listening to classic soul music and was inspired to pursue it as a musical direction for his next album . He recounted the experience in an interview for Blues & Soul , saying that " I was like ' Wow , maybe I should tap into this vibe , because it ’ s actually what I LOVE ! ' ... I realised that , though you can hear it in many of the records I 've done throughout my career , I 'd never paid 100 % attention to going in that direction before . So the difference this time is that I took a more focused route . " As a part of Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! during the late 1980s and 1990s , Saadiq had incorporated influences from the music of Motown in his songwriting for the group . Before recording The Way I See It , Saadiq signed to Columbia Records . Label executive Rick Rubin visited Saadiq 's home studio and was impressed by his material there . He said of Rubin 's visit and advice to him as a solo artist , " He told me to never box myself in . I just have to be myself . You 've got to follow your own path . I 've always gone down the road less traveled , but now I do it even more aggressively . " 
 Saadiq titled The Way I See It as a declaration to music listeners about how his perspective was more informed by classic soul than before in his career : " This is what I really love , and everything you ’ ve heard from me before has been based on the roots of this music . " According to him , the album 's cover photo " set the tone for the whole album ... Me singing that song , me wearing that suit , it said everything that this album should be . " The photo was taken at a show in 2006 at Sweet 's Ballroom in Oakland , in which Saadiq performed Marvin Gaye 's 1965 song " Ain 't That Peculiar " . It showed Saadiq singing into a microphone with his arms raised and wearing a suit , tie , and thick @-@ rimmed glasses : a look similar to that of Temptations singer David Ruffin . Music journalist Greg Kot said the cover " evokes the dramatic portraits and color schemes of old @-@ school jazz and soul albums . Think Ray Charles on Atlantic , Sonny Rollins on Blue Note , Sam and Dave on Stax ... With arms raised , he looks like he 's testifying as much as singing . " The rest of the album 's packaging also adheres to a retro aesthetic with its crimson @-@ tinted cover 's font and 1960s Columbia Records logo . The packaging 's photography was taken by Norman <unk> . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 After returning from his vacation , Saadiq started writing and recording The Way I See It , which took four months . In an interview for Sound on Sound , he discussed his comfort level when returning to Blakeslee Recording Company : " The music for this album flowed organically , naturally , and since I have my own studio I was able to perfect it and take my time to make it right . I was able to live with it day after day , and I think that had a lot to do with how the album turned out . " He wrote the songs extemporaneously , often by playing guitar and improvising riffs . He subsequently sung them while playing each instrument one at a time , including guitar , bass , and basic piano parts that he planned to include on the recordings . He attributed this secluded approach to " the state of the industry " and idealized " <unk> [ ing ] ideas off other people , do some writing with them , take the material to my band and say , ' OK , let 's cut it , ' with the orchestra already there . That 's my dream . I 'd crank records out weekly if I had staff writers like they did at Stax and Motown " . 
 Saadiq recorded mostly at Blakeslee Recording Company ; Additional sessions took place at Harmonie Park Studios in Detroit and The Music Shed Studios in New Orleans . While recording , he immersed himself in a composite character of classic soul singers from videos he watched , including Al Green , Gladys Knight & the Pips , the Four Tops , and the Temptations . He recorded his vocals with only Brungardt present in the studio , a preference he felt prevented him from " looking for answers from somebody who may not really know " . Saadiq said he tended to " record complete takes , and if something isn 't quite right but it 's got a feel that I know I can never ever capture again , I 'll leave it , even if it 's flat . I mean , there are flat parts on my record , because it 's not about perfection , it 's about the soul . " He recorded background vocals for all songs . Saadiq played most of the instruments , including drums , guitar , piano , sitar , and bass guitar , his instrument of choice throughout his career . He viewed the bass playing of James Jamerson as an integral part of Motown recordings , citing it as the inspiration for his own bass sound on the album . 
 Saadiq worked with other musicians , including Joss Stone , percussionist Jack Ashford , string arranger Paul Riser , multi @-@ instrumentalist Bobby Ozuna , singer CJ Hilton , and recording artist Stevie Wonder . Ashford and Riser were members of The Funk Brothers , a group of session musicians for Motown Records during the 1960s . Ashford played tambourine , vibraphone , bells , and shakers on songs such as " 100 Yard Dash " , " Love That Girl " , and " Staying in Love " . Ozuna , one @-@ half of Jake and the Phatman , co @-@ produced and co @-@ wrote three songs and played several instruments , including bongos , tambourine , and drums . Hilton co @-@ wrote " Never Give You Up " and played its drum and keyboard parts . Wonder 's contribution of a harmonica solo on the song was impromptu , as Saadiq reached out to Wonder after recording the song 's vocal parts with the improvised line , " I 'd like to invite Mr. Stevie Wonder to my album . Come on , Stevie ! " After having the idea recommended to him by rapper Q @-@ Tip , Saadiq also reached out to Jay @-@ Z to record a featured rap for a remix of " Oh Girl " ; it was included on the album as a bonus track . 
 The Way I See It was engineered by Saadiq , Gerry Brown , James <unk> , and Brungardt , who mixed the album with Saadiq . Saadiq and Brungardt both liked to layer multiple instruments and , prior to recording , had contemplated techniques such as sampling and drum programming . However , they ultimately found live instrumentalists more dynamic and challenged themselves to reproduce older music productions and the Motown aesthetic of the 1960s . To familiarize themselves with vintage recording techniques , they studied Mark Lewisohn 's 1988 book The Complete Beatles Recording Sessions , books about Motown Records , and images of the label 's studio personnel , setup of instruments , and microphone placement . They also studied Motown EQs to achieve a tone they found adequate for songs ' rhythm guitar parts . Saadiq said that he had to disregard " about 85 to 90 percent of the new techniques ... People used to take recording very seriously . They used to wear lab coats at Abbey Road . So I got serious with what I was trying to do , both mentally and physically . " Brungardt said in an interview for Mix that he abandoned the approach learned on previous records he had engineered , where " they wanted it clean with no distortion . I was taught to make sure it was polish , polish , polish , and to make sure everything fits right , the bass hits and things are clean for the big pop vocal . " 
