 On June 13 , 2012 , in a 10 – 0 victory , Cain threw the 22nd perfect game in MLB history , against the Houston Astros , striking @-@ out a career @-@ high 14 batters ( tying Sandy Koufax for the most strikeouts in a perfect game ) . It was the first perfect game for the Giants franchise ( first in San Francisco ) , the ninth in NL history , the fifth no @-@ hitter thrown by MLB pitchers in 2012 , and the second perfect game of the season after Chicago White Sox pitcher Philip Humber threw one on April 21 . Cain threw 125 pitches , the most by a pitcher in a perfect game , and received the most run support ever for a pitcher throwing a perfect game . Cain also singled against <unk> Cruz and scored in the fifth inning . San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee , in recognition of the perfect game , presented Cain with the key to the city and made a proclamation that June 13 every year will be known as " Matt Cain Day " . In addition , Cain set a franchise record for a single @-@ game score at 101 and is currently the first and only Giants pitcher to break the 100 barrier . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 Cain started on Opening Day for the Giants in 2013 . He pitched six shutout innings before being removed due to a high pitch count ; however , Kershaw threw a shutout , and the Dodgers beat the Giants 4 – 0 . On April 7 , Cain threw two no @-@ hit innings before giving up nine runs in the third inning and getting removed from the game , becoming the first Giants to allow nine runs in an inning since Ernie Shore in 1912 . The Cardinals beat the Giants 14 – 3 . On August 23 against the Pirates , Cain was hit by Gaby Sánchez 's line drive in the pitching arm , and was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list for the first time in his career . Cain would finish the season with a record of 8 @-@ 10 in 30 starts . For the first time since 2006 , Cain 's ERA sat in the 4 's , finishing with an exact 4 @.@ 00 ERA . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 Cain started the 2014 season 1 – 3 with a 3 @.@ 66 ERA in his first eight starts , before being placed on the 15 @-@ day DL with a strained right hamstring on May 30 , 2014 . Bruce Bochy stated that after the All Star break , Cain would move from the second place in the Giants starting rotation to fifth . Bochy added that Cain falling in the order had more to do with everyone else 's successes than any shortcomings of Cain . 
 On July 4 at Petco Park , Cain struck out the San Diego Padres ' Tommy Medica for his 1,500th career strikeout , becoming one of just eight Giants pitchers to reach that milestone . He also became the fourth Giants pitcher to reach the milestone since the franchise relocated to San Francisco in 1958 . 
 Cain struggled for the remainder of the season before being sidelined due to elbow difficulties in July , pitching his last game on July 9 , 2014 . He ended the season with a 2 – 7 record and a 4 @.@ 18 ERA . Before undergoing surgery on his right elbow to remove bone chips on August 11 , Cain revealed that he had pitched through bone chips for ten years , but that they had never been an issue until then . In late September , Cain underwent surgery on his right ankle to remove a bone spur . The Giants acquired Jake Peavy a few days before the trade deadline to fill in as a starting pitcher and went on to win the 2014 World Series . Cain won his third World Series ring in five years . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 After recovering from elbow surgery , Cain gained more range of motion in his pitching arm , saying , " I feel like I 'm 18 again . " Before he could make his first regular @-@ season start , Cain was placed on the disabled list with a flexor tendon strain in his right forearm . 
 In only 13 appearances ( 11 starts ) in 2015 , Cain went 2 – 4 and posted a career @-@ worst 5 @.@ 79 ERA . He also posted his lowest K / 9 of his career while allowing more hits than innings pitched . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 After starting the season 1 @-@ 5 , Cain was placed on the disabled list on May 28th with a hamstring injury . After missing almost two months due to a hamstring injury , the Giants activated Cain off the disabled list on July 20th . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Cain features a mix of mostly four pitches : a four @-@ seam fastball ( 90 – 93 mph ) , a cutter ( 84 – 87 ) , a curveball ( 76 – 79 ) , and a changeup ( 83 – 86 ) . Increasingly , he also throws a two @-@ seam fastball at 89 – 91 mph . Cain leads with his four @-@ seamer , throwing it over half the time in his career . His changeup is his secondary pitch to left @-@ handed hitters , while he throws cutters as a secondary pitch to right @-@ handed hitters . Cain throws curveballs in roughly equal proportions to righties and lefties . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cain met his wife Chelsea Williams during spring training while she was a student at Arizona State University majoring in sociology . At the time Chelsea was waitressing at a local steakhouse . The two were married in fall 2009 and had their first child , daughter Hartley , in December 2010 . The family has homes in Arizona and Tennessee , as well as a home in Orinda . Cain enjoys hunting as a hobby . Cain supports Project Open Hand , and has expressed his support for same @-@ sex marriage by appearing in the " No H8 " photo campaign opposing California 's Proposition 8 . 
 = Contrail ( song ) = 
 " Contrail " is a song recorded by Japanese recording artist Namie Amuro for her eleventh studio and second bilingual ( Japanese and English language ) album , Feel ( 2013 ) . The track was entirely written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician Nao 'ymt . The single premiered on May 29 , 2013 as the lead single from the album , and her second digital @-@ only single . Musically , " Contrail " is a dance song , influenced by electronic dance music . Lyrically , it is a self @-@ empowerment anthem that discusses themes of confidence and hope . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered generally favorable reviews from music critics . Many critics highlighted as one of the album 's best tracks , and complimented Nao 'ymt 's songwriting and production . Although it was unable to chart on Japan 's Oricon Singles Chart because of their restriction of digital sales , it did achieve success on the Japan Hot 100 chart provided by Billboard , peaking at number eight . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for digital sales of 250 @,@ 000 units . An accompanying music video was shot in downtown Los Angeles , California at Pershing square , which featured Amuro walking through the city with children . Amuro has performed the song on her Feel Tour ( 2013 ) , and her 2014 Live Style Tour . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 In March 2013 , Japanese network Tokyo Broadcasting System ( TBS ) approached Namie Amuro and asked if she could record a theme song for their 2013 television series Flying Public Relations Office , which she accepted . Then in May 2013 , Japanese music magazine CD Journal confirmed the release of a new single , entitled " Contrail " . The track was entirely written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician Nao 'ymt . It was recorded by D.O.I. at <unk> Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo in 2013 . The finished composition was then mastered by American music engineer Cris Gehringer at Sterling Studios , New York City , New York . 
 The single premiered on May 29 , 2013 as the lead single from Amuro 's eleventh studio and second bilingual ( Japanese and English language ) album , Feel ( 2013 ) . It is also her second digital @-@ only single after " Damage " ( 2012 ) , and Amuro 's second single released from her own label Dimension Point . The artwork to " Contrail " features a birds @-@ eye view of two contrails above a cityscape . Amuro had contemplated in releasing the single as a CD single , but later scrapped the idea because she felt the digital release and promotion through the television series would be enough . In 2014 , Amuro re @-@ recorded the song for her 2014 compilation album Ballada . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " Contrail " is a dance song , as described by staff members from CD Journal . A reviewer from music website 13th Geek compared the track to her song " Hands on Me " , explaining in a further detailed review ; " The song evokes a summer feel similar to ' Hands On Me ' but with a more relaxed and laid @-@ back approach . " Patrick St. Michel , writing for The Japan Times , included the track as part of a discussion about the Westernized music influences throughout the entirety of Feel , stating " nearly every track indulges in electronic trends , sometimes besting the American competition . " Michael McCarthy from <unk> believed that the song 's composition was " progressive pop " , saying " It 's not quite a dance song and it doesn 't fit your traditional pop mold either . " In a detail review , he further explained the song 's melody and structure : 
 " It starts off with a bit of keyboards that lead to a series of rapid but somewhat quiet beats over which she sings softly , almost whispering , until she reaches the chorus and fulminating beats drop . " What is life ? " she asks during the bilingual chorus , which simply ends with the word " contrail . " After the chorus the beats quiet down again and she once again whisper @-@ sings . It 's really quite intoxicating , the way her airy vocals gently glide over the hypnotic but subtle beats . " I didn 't know then , what I know now , " a loud , robotic voice sings -- well , it 's more like it just says the words about two thirds into the song . And that somehow makes it more intense when Namie sings the chorus again and asks " What is life ? " 
 Lyrically , it is a self @-@ empowerment anthem that discusses themes of confidence and hope . In an interview with Tokyo Broadcasting System ( TBS ) , Amuro stated that the song represented the " positive views of the world " . She furthered explained that " So when I 'm listening to the song on Sunday night , I 'll wake up on Monday morning feeling happy . " Nao 'ymt furthered commented to TBS that he song talked about looking forward and letting go of the past , alongside complimented Amuro 's " strong " vocals . In an interview with Billboard Japan , an English version of " Contrail " was written and recorded by Nao 'ymt , but was replaced with the Japanese version because Amuro felt the majority of the recordings on Feel felt " better in English " , and that the theme song for the television series was directed towards Japanese audiences only . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon its release , " Contrail " received highly positive reviews from most music critics . A reviewer from 13th Geek was highly positive towards the track , believing that " The song is so good that even the non @-@ Japanese speaker will want to learn the lyrics and just blare out the powerful chorus along with her . " The reviewer also stated that the song 's chorus was completely " off guard " to the rest of the track . CD Journal 's editors were positive towards the song , commending Nao 'ymt for " exhausting " the " goodness " out of Amuro 's vocal abilities . The 2014 Ballada version also received positive reviews from music critics . In another review with CD Journal , a reviewer complimented Amuro 's vocals and the song 's background piano composition ; the reviewer also labelled the production as " dramatic " . In another positive review , staff member 's at HMV felt that it was the best ballad on the compilation album . David <unk> from <unk> was slightly mixed in his review ; although he commended Amuro 's use of Japanese language throughout the song , he criticized the " heavy @-@ handed , obvious lyrics " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Contrail " was unable to chart on Japan 's Oricon Singles Chart because of their restriction of digital sales and position . However , it did have success on the Japan Hot 100 , provided by Billboard . It debuted at number 44 during the chart week of May 6 , due to strong airplay . It had climbed steadily , eventually reached number 15 during its sixth week of charting on June 10 . The following week on June 17 , it peaked at number eight for one week . It fell outside the top ten the following week , stalling at number 16 . It made its final appearance at number 42 on the chart date of July 29 , staying in the chart for 13 weeks in total . It debuted on Billboard 's competent chart , the Radio Songs , at number 21 . It rose to number seven the following week , its peaking position . The song 's final appearance was on June 10 , where it stalling at number 39 . On Billboard 's Year @-@ End chart , " Contrail " was ranked at number 65 . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for digital sales of 250 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video was directed by production team <unk> . It opens with a birds @-@ eye view shot from the ground , showing several buildings and trees ; just before the first verse , a short shot of Amuro is seen . The first verse opens with Amuro walking down a street in Los Angeles , California , singing to the track . During the verse , intercut scenes include various shadows of children holding instruments behind Amuro . The chorus opens with Amuro walking down along a bridge with the children playing their instruments behind her . When the second chorus starts , the camera pans over to several buildings and landscapes around Los Angeles . The camera then pans into several individuals citizens in the city : an elderly couple , a man in his car , a couple who have just finished surfing , and a woman walking her dog . 
 During the second chorus , Amuro and the children start marching and playing their instruments through downtown Los Angeles . The individuals walking in Los Angeles stop for a moment , and look towards the sky , which is cut off screen . As close @-@ up shots of Amuro finish by the end of the bridge section of the song , the camera pans towards rainbow @-@ coloured clouds , which puts all the citizens in surprise and glee . The final chorus has Amuro and the children dancing and singing at Pershing Square , surrounding by several lighting effects and rainbow @-@ coloured clouds . Several scenes of the clouds start to float within the city , above and near skyscrapers , and the video ends with Amuro , the children , and the citizens smiling . 
 The music video received positive reviews from a reviewer at CD Journal ; they labelled the content " refreshing " , and praised the visual effects . <unk> <unk> from Far East Vibes praised Amuro 's introduction to " Americanized multiculturalism " , identifying the inclusion of American people as an example . The music video and its " behind the scenes " was included on the DVD and Blu @-@ ray formats to Feel . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The single has been performed on some of Amuro 's concert tours . Its first performance was in 2013 , during her Feel concert tour . It appeared on the live DVD , which was released on February 26 , 2014 . It was included on Amuro 's 2014 Live Style Tour in Japan , which was later included on the live DVD , released on February 11 , 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted by the liner notes of the Feel album . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at <unk> Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo ( 2013 ) . 
 Personnel 
 Namie Amuro – vocals , background vocals 
 Nao 'ymt – production , composing , arranging , songwriting , programming , vocal production 
 D.O.I. – mixing 
 <unk> – music video direction 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certification = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade = 
 Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade is a 1989 American action @-@ adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg , from a story co @-@ written by executive producer George Lucas . It is the third installment in the Indiana Jones franchise . Harrison Ford reprises the title role and Sean Connery plays Indiana 's father , Henry Jones , Sr. Other cast members featured include Alison Doody , Denholm Elliott , Julian Glover , River Phoenix , and John Rhys @-@ Davies . In the film , set largely in 1938 , Indiana searches for his father , a Holy Grail scholar , who has been kidnapped by Nazis . 
 After the mixed reaction to Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , Spielberg chose to compensate with a film that toned down the violence and gore . During the five years between Temple of Doom and Last Crusade , he and executive producer Lucas reviewed several scripts before accepting Jeffrey Boam 's . Filming locations included Spain , Italy , the United Kingdom , Turkey and Jordan . 
 The film was released in North America on May 24 , 1989 , to mostly positive reviews . It was a financial success , earning $ 474 @,@ 171 @,@ 806 at the worldwide box office totals . It won an Academy Award for Best Sound Editing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1912 , 13 @-@ year @-@ old Indiana Jones is horseback riding with his Boy Scout troop at Arches National Park in Utah . While scouting caves , Indy discovers a group of grave robbers who have found a golden crucifix belonging to Coronado and steals it from them , hoping to donate it to a museum . The men give chase through a passing circus train , leaving Indy with a bloody cut across his chin from a bullwhip and a new phobia of snakes . Indy escapes , but the local sheriff makes him return the crucifix to the robbers . Impressed with Indy 's bravery , the leader of the robbers gives Indy his fedora , and encourages him to not give up . 
 In 1938 , Indy recovers the crucifix off the coast of Portugal and donates it to Marcus Brody 's museum . Later , Indy is introduced to Walter Donovan , who informs him that Indy 's father , Henry Jones , Sr. , has vanished while searching for the Holy Grail , using an incomplete inscription as his guide . Indy then receives Henry 's Grail diary via mail from Venice . Realizing that he would not have sent the diary unless he was in trouble , Indy and Marcus travel to Venice , where they meet Henry 's Austrian colleague , Dr. Elsa Schneider . Beneath the library where Henry was last seen , Indy and Elsa discover the tomb of a First Crusade knight , which also contains a complete version of the inscription that Henry had used , this one revealing the location of the Grail . They flee , however , when the catacombs are set aflame by the Brotherhood of the Cruciform Sword , a secret society that protects the Grail from evildoers . After a speedboat chase , Indy and Elsa capture one of the Brotherhood , Kazim , and Indy tells him that his goal is only to find his father and that he has no interest in finding the Grail . Kazim tells him that Henry is being held in Castle Brunwald on the Austrian @-@ German border . Marcus later reveals a map drawn by Henry of the route to the Grail , which begins in Alexandretta . Indy sends Marcus to İskenderun , the city built on the ruins of Alexandretta to rendezvous with their old friend Sallah , and he and Elsa head to Castle Brunwald . 
 At Castle Brunwald , Indy rescues Henry , but learns that Elsa and Donovan are actually working with the Nazis , and are using him to find the Grail for them . Meanwhile , Marcus is captured in Hatay , while waiting with Sallah for the Joneses . The Joneses escape from Castle Brunwald and recover the diary from Elsa at a Nazi book burning rally in Berlin . They board a Zeppelin to leave Germany , but the Zeppelin soon turns around and the Joneses escape in a parasite biplane . They crash while engaging in a dogfight with the Luftwaffe due to Henry 's accidentally shooting the plane 's tail off , but Henry redeems himself on the ground by alarming a flock of birds to take flight in front of the Luftwaffe fighter causing the pilot to crash . 
 The two meet up with Sallah in Hatay , where they learn of Marcus 's abduction . The Nazis are already moving toward the Grail 's location , using the map possessed by Marcus . In exchange for a Rolls @-@ Royce Phantom II , the Sultan of Hatay has given the Nazis full access to his equipment for the expedition , including a large tank . Indy , Henry , and Sallah find the Nazi expedition , which is ambushed by the Brotherhood . During the battle , Henry is captured by SS Colonel Ernst Vogel while attempting to rescue Marcus from the tank ; Kazim and his comrades are killed . The younger Jones pursues the tank on horseback and , with the aid of Sallah , saves Henry and Marcus . He is then caught up in a fight with Vogel , and barely escapes before the tank goes over a cliff , crushing Vogel to death . 
 Indy , Henry , Marcus , and Sallah catch up with the surviving Nazis , led by Donovan and Elsa , who have found the temple where the Grail is kept but are unable to pass through the three protective booby traps . Donovan mortally wounds Henry , forcing Indy to risk his life in the traps to find the Grail and use its healing power to save Henry . Using the information in the diary and followed by Donovan and Elsa , Indy safely overcomes the traps and reaches the Grail 's chamber , which is guarded by a knight . He has been kept alive for seven hundred years by the power of the Grail , which is hidden among dozens of false <unk> ; only the true Grail brings life , while a false one claims it . Donovan ages rapidly and decays into dust upon drinking from a false grail . Indy selects the true Grail , a simple clay cup , which the knight warns cannot be taken beyond the temple 's entrance . Indy fills the Grail with holy water and takes it to Henry , which heals him instantly . Elsa , disregarding the knight 's warning , then takes the Grail and attempts to leave with it . The temple begins to collapse and Elsa falls to her death trying to recover the Grail . Indy nearly suffers the same fate but Henry persuades him to let it go . The Joneses , Marcus , and Sallah escape the temple and ride off into the sunset . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones : The archaeologist adventurer who seeks to rescue his father and find the Holy Grail . Ford said he loved the idea of introducing Indiana 's father because it allowed him to explore another side to Indiana 's personality : " These are men who have never made any accommodation to each other . Indy behaves differently in his father 's presence . Who else would dare call Indy ' junior ' ? " River Phoenix as the 13 @-@ year @-@ old Indiana . Phoenix had portrayed Ford 's son in The Mosquito Coast ( 1986 ) . Ford recommended Phoenix for the part ; he said that of the young actors working at the time , Phoenix looked the most like him when he was around that age . 
 Sean Connery as Professor Henry Jones : Indiana 's father , a professor of Medieval literature who cared more about looking for the Grail than raising his son . Spielberg had Connery in mind when he suggested introducing Indiana 's father , though he did not tell Lucas at first . Consequently , Lucas wrote the role as " a crazy , eccentric " professor resembling Laurence Olivier , whose relationship with Indiana is " strict schoolmaster and student rather than a father and son " . Spielberg had been a fan of Connery 's work as James Bond and felt that no @-@ one else could perform the role as well . Spielberg biographer Joseph McBride wrote , " Connery was already the father of Indiana Jones since the series had sprung from the desire of Lucas and Spielberg to rival ( and outdo ) Connery 's James Bond movies . " Connery initially turned the role down as he is only twelve years older than Ford , but he relented . Connery — a student of history — began to reshape the character , and revisions were made to the script to address his concerns . " I wanted to play Henry Jones as a kind of Sir Richard [ Francis ] Burton , " Connery commented . " I was bound to have fun with the role of a gruff , Victorian Scottish father . " Connery believed Henry should be a match for his son , telling Spielberg that " whatever Indy 'd done my character has done and my character has done it better " . Connery signed to the film on March 25 , 1988 . He improvised the line , " She talks in her sleep " , which was left in because it made everyone laugh ; in Boam 's scripts , Henry telling Indiana that he slept with Elsa occurs <unk> Hyde @-@ White as Young Henry Jones , Sr. 
 Alison Doody as Dr. Elsa Schneider : An Austrian art professor who is in league with the Nazis . She seduces the Joneses to trick them . Doody was 21 when she auditioned and was one of the first actresses who met for the part . 
 Denholm Elliott as Dr. Marcus Brody : Indiana 's bumbling English colleague . Elliott returned after Spielberg sought to recapture the tone of Raiders of the Lost Ark ( 1981 ) , following the actor 's absence in the darker Temple of Doom ( 1984 ) . 
 John Rhys @-@ Davies as Sallah : A friend of Indiana and a professional excavator living in Cairo . Like Elliott 's , Rhys @-@ Davies ' return was an attempt to recapture the spirit of Raiders of the Lost Ark . 
 Julian Glover as Walter Donovan : An American businessman who sends the Joneses on their quest for the Holy Grail . Donovan works for the Nazis and desires immortality . Glover previously appeared as General <unk> in Lucas 's The Empire Strikes Back . He originally auditioned for the role of Vogel . Glover , who is English , adopted an American accent for the film , but was dissatisfied with the result . 
 Michael Byrne as Colonel Vogel : A brutal SS colonel . Byrne and Ford had previously starred in Force 10 from Navarone ( 1978 ) , in which they also played a German and an American . 
 Kevork <unk> as Kazim : The leader of the Brotherhood of the Cruciform Sword , an organization that protects the Holy Grail . <unk> had impressed Spielberg with his performance in Midnight Express ( 1978 ) and would have auditioned for the role of Sallah in Raiders of the Lost Ark had a traffic jam not delayed his meeting with the director . 
 Robert Eddison as the Grail Knight : The guardian of the Grail who drank from the cup of Christ during the Crusades and is immortal as long as he stays within the temple . Eddison was a stage and television veteran only appearing once before in film ( a supporting role in Peter Ustinov 's 1948 comedy Vice Versa ) . Glover recalled Eddison was excited and nervous for his film debut , often asking if he had performed correctly . 
 Michael Sheard ( uncredited ) as Adolf Hitler . Jones briefly encounters him at a book burning rally in Berlin . Sheard had already portrayed Hitler three times during his career and appeared as Admiral <unk> in The Empire Strikes Back . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Lucas and Spielberg had intended to make a trilogy of Indiana Jones films since Lucas had first pitched Raiders of the Lost Ark to Spielberg in 1977 . After the mixed critical and public reaction to Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , Spielberg decided to complete the trilogy to fulfill his promise to Lucas and " to apologize for the second one " . The pair had the intention of revitalizing the series by evoking the spirit and tone of Raiders of the Lost Ark . Throughout the film 's development and pre @-@ production , Spielberg admitted he was " consciously regressing " in making the film . Due to his commitment to the film , the director had to drop out of directing Big and Rain Man . 
 Lucas initially suggested making the film " a haunted mansion movie " , for which Romancing the Stone writer Diane Thomas wrote a script . Spielberg rejected the idea because of the similarity to Poltergeist , which he had co @-@ written and produced . Lucas first introduced the Holy Grail in an idea for the film 's prologue , which was to be set in Scotland . He intended the Grail to have a pagan basis , with the rest of the film revolving around a separate Christian artifact in Africa . Spielberg did not care for the Grail idea , which he found too esoteric , even after Lucas suggested giving it healing powers and the ability to grant immortality . In September 1984 , Lucas completed an eight @-@ page treatment titled Indiana Jones and the Monkey King , which he soon followed with an 11 @-@ page outline . The story saw Indiana battling a ghost in Scotland before finding the Fountain of Youth in Africa . 
 Chris Columbus — who had written the Spielberg @-@ produced Gremlins , The Goonies , and Young Sherlock Holmes — was hired to write the script . His first draft , dated May 3 , 1985 , changed the main plot device to a Garden of Immortal Peaches . It begins in 1937 , with Indiana battling the murderous ghost of Baron Seamus Seagrove III in Scotland . Indiana travels to Mozambique to aid Dr. Clare Clarke ( a Katharine Hepburn type according to Lucas ) , who has found a 200 @-@ year @-@ old pygmy . The pygmy is kidnapped by the Nazis during a boat chase , and Indiana , Clare and <unk> Brier — an old friend of Indiana — travel up the Zambezi river to rescue him . Indiana is killed in the climactic battle but is resurrected by the Monkey King . Other characters include a cannibalistic African tribe ; Nazi Sergeant <unk> , who has a mechanical arm ; Betsy , a stowaway student who is suicidally in love with Indiana ; and a pirate leader named <unk> ( described as a Toshiro Mifune type ) , who dies eating a peach because he is not pure of heart . 
 Columbus 's second draft , dated August 6 , 1985 , removed Betsy and featured Dash — an expatriate bar owner for whom the Nazis work — and the Monkey King as villains . The Monkey King forces Indiana and Dash to play chess with real people and disintegrates each person who is captured . Indiana subsequently battles the undead , destroys the Monkey King 's rod , and marries Clare . Location scouting commenced in Africa but Spielberg and Lucas abandoned Monkey King because of its negative depiction of African natives , and because the script was too unrealistic . Spielberg acknowledged that it made him " ... feel very old , too old to direct it . " Columbus 's script was leaked onto the Internet in 1997 , and many believed it was an early draft for the fourth film because it was mistakenly dated to 1995 . 
 Unsatisfied , Spielberg suggested introducing Indiana 's father , Henry Jones , Sr. Lucas was dubious , believing the Grail should be the story 's focus , but Spielberg convinced him that the father – son relationship would serve as a great metaphor in Indiana 's search for the artifact . Spielberg hired Menno Meyjes , who had worked on Spielberg 's The Color Purple and Empire of the Sun , to begin a new script on January 1 , 1986 . Meyjes completed his script ten months later . It depicted Indiana searching for his father in Montségur , where he meets a nun named Chantal . Indiana travels to Venice , takes the Orient Express to Istanbul , and continues by train to Petra , where he meets Sallah and reunites with his father . Together they find the grail . At the climax , a Nazi villain touches the Grail and explodes ; when Henry touches it , he ascends a stairway to Heaven . Chantal chooses to stay on Earth because of her love for Indiana . In a revised draft dated two months later , Indiana finds his father in Krak des Chevaliers , the Nazi leader is a woman named Greta von Grimm , and Indiana battles a demon at the Grail site , which he defeats with a dagger inscribed with " God is King " . The prologue in both drafts has Indiana in Mexico battling for possession of Montezuma 's death mask with a man who owns gorillas as pets . 
 Spielberg suggested <unk> writer Jeffrey Boam perform the next rewrite . Boam spent two weeks reworking the story with Lucas , which yielded a treatment that is largely similar to the final film . Boam told Lucas that Indiana should find his father in the middle of the story . " Given the fact that it 's the third film in the series , you couldn 't just end with them obtaining the object . That 's how the first two films ended , " he said , " So I thought , let them lose the Grail , and let the father – son relationship be the main point . It 's an archaeological search for Indy 's own identity and coming to accept his father is more what it 's about [ than the quest for the Grail ] . " Boam said he felt there was not enough character development in the previous films . In Boam 's first draft , dated September 1987 , the film is set in 1939 . The prologue has adult Indiana retrieving an Aztec relic for a museum curator in Mexico and features the circus train . Henry and Elsa ( who is described as having dark hair ) were searching for the Grail on behalf of the Chandler Foundation , before Henry went missing . The character of Kazim is here named Kemal , and is an agent of the Republic of Hatay , which seeks the grail for its own . Kemal shoots Henry and dies drinking from the wrong chalice . The Grail Knight battles Indiana on horseback , while Vogel is crushed by a boulder when stealing the Grail . 
 Boam 's February 23 , 1988 rewrite utilized many of Connery 's comic suggestions . It included the prologue that was eventually filmed ; Lucas had to convince Spielberg to show Indiana as a boy because of the mixed response to Empire of the Sun , which was about a young boy . Spielberg — who was later awarded the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award — had the idea of making Indiana a Boy Scout . Indiana 's mother , named Margaret in this version , dismisses Indiana when he returns home with the Cross of Coronado , while his father is on a long distance call . Walter Chandler of the Chandler Foundation features , but is not the main villain ; he plunges to his death in the tank . Elsa introduces Indiana and Brody to a large Venetian family that knows Henry . Leni Riefenstahl appears at the Nazi rally in Berlin . Vogel is beheaded by the traps guarding the Grail . Kemal tries to blow up the Grail Temple during a comic fight in which gunpowder is repeatedly lit and extinguished . Elsa shoots Henry , then dies drinking from the wrong Grail , and Indiana rescues his father from falling into the chasm while grasping for the Grail . Boam 's revision on March 1 showed Henry causing the seagulls to strike the plane , and has Henry saving Indiana at the end . 
 Between an undated " Amblin " revision and a rewrite by Tom Stoppard ( under the pen name Barry Watson ) dated May 8 , 1988 , further changes were made . Stoppard polished most of the dialogue , and created the " Panama Hat " character to link the prologue 's segments featuring the young and adult <unk> . The Venetian family is cut . Kemal is renamed Kazim and now wants to protect the grail rather than find it . Chandler is renamed Donovan . The scene of Brody being captured is added . Vogel now dies in the tank , while Donovan shoots Henry and then drinks from the false grail , and Elsa falls into the chasm . The Grail trials are expanded to include the stone @-@ stepping and leap of faith . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on May 16 , 1988 , in the <unk> Desert in Spain 's Almería province . Spielberg originally had planned the chase to be a short sequence shot over two days , but he drew up storyboards to make the scene an action @-@ packed centerpiece . Thinking he would not surpass the truck chase from Raiders of the Lost Ark ( because the truck was much faster than the tank ) , he felt this sequence should be more story @-@ based and needed to show Indiana and Henry helping each other . He later said he had more fun storyboarding the sequence than filming it . The second unit had begun filming two weeks before . After approximately ten days , the production moved to Bellas Artes to film the scenes set in the Sultan of Hatay 's palace . Cabo de Gata @-@ <unk> Natural Park was used for the road , tunnel and beach sequence in which birds strike the plane . The shoot 's Spanish portion wrapped on June 2 , 1988 , in <unk> , Granada , with filming of Brody 's capture at İskenderun train station . The filmmakers built a mosque near the station for atmosphere , rather than adding it as a visual effect . 
 Filming for the castle interiors took place in the United Kingdom from June 5 to 10 , 1988 , at Elstree Studios in Borehamwood , England . On June 16 Lawrence Hall , London , was used for the airport interiors . Filming returned to Elstree the next day to capture the motorcycle escape , continuing at the studio for interior scenes until July 18 . One day was spent at North Weald Airfield on June 29 to film Indiana leaving for Venice . Ford and Connery acted much of the Zeppelin table conversation without trousers on because of the overheated set . Spielberg , Marshall and Kennedy interrupted the shoot to make a plea to the Parliament of the United Kingdom to support the economically " depressed " British studios . July 20 – 22 was spent filming the temple interiors . The temple set , which took six weeks to build , was supported on 80 feet of hydraulics and ten gimbals for use during the earthquake scene . <unk> between takes took twenty minutes while the hydraulics were put to their starting positions and the cracks filled with plaster . The shot of the Grail falling to the temple floor — causing the first crack to appear — was attempted on the full @-@ size set , but proved too difficult . Instead , crews built a separate floor section that incorporated a pre @-@ scored crack sealed with plaster . It took several takes to throw the Grail from six feet onto the right part of the crack . July 25 – 26 was spent on night shoots at Stowe School , Stowe , Buckinghamshire , for the Nazi rally . 
 Filming resumed two days later at Elstree , where Spielberg swiftly filmed the library , Portuguese freighter , and catacombs sequences . The steamship fight in the prologue 's 1938 portion was filmed in three days on a sixty @-@ by @-@ forty @-@ feet deck built on gimbals at Elstree . A dozen dump tanks — each holding three hundred imperial gallons ( 360 U.S. gallons ; 3000 lb . ) of water — were used in the scene . Henry 's house was filmed at Mill Hill , London . Indiana and Kazim 's fight in Venice in front of a ship 's propeller was filmed in a water tank at Elstree . Spielberg used a long focus lens to make it appear the actors were closer to the propeller than they really were . Two days later , on August 4 , another portion of the boat chase using Hacker Craft sport boats , was filmed at Tilbury Docks in Essex . The shot of the boats passing between two ships was achieved by first cabling the ships off so they would be safe . The ships were moved together while the boats passed between , close enough that one of the boats scraped the sides of the ships . An empty speedboat containing dummies was launched from a floating platform between the ships amid fire and smoke that helped obscure the platform . The stunt was performed twice because the boat landed too short of the camera in the first attempt . The following day , filming in England wrapped at the Royal Masonic School in Rickmansworth , which doubled for Indiana 's college ( as it had in Raiders of the Lost Ark ) . 
 Shooting in Venice took place on August 8 . For scenes such as Indiana and Brody greeting Elsa , shots of the boat chase , and Kazim telling Indiana where his father is , Robert Watts gained control of the Grand Canal from 7 am to 1 pm , sealing off tourists for as long as possible . Cinematographer Douglas Slocombe positioned the camera to ensure no satellite dishes would be visible . San Barnaba di Venezia served as the library 's exterior . The next day , filming moved to the ancient city of Petra , Jordan , where Al <unk> ( The Treasury ) stood in for the temple housing the Grail . The cast and crew became guests of King Hussein and Queen Noor . The Treasury had previously appeared in Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger . The main cast completed their scenes that week , after 63 days of filming . 
 The second unit filmed part of the prologue 's 1912 segment from August 29 to September 3 . The main unit began two days later with the circus train sequence at Alamosa , Colorado , on the <unk> and Toltec Scenic Railroad . They filmed at <unk> Springs on September 7 , and then at Cortez on September 10 . From September 14 to 16 , filming of Indiana falling into the train carriages took place in Los Angeles . The production then moved to Utah 's Arches National Park to shoot more of the opening . A house in <unk> , Colorado was used for the Jones family home . The production had intended to film at Mesa Verde National Park , but Native American representatives had religious objections to its use . When Spielberg and editor Michael Kahn viewed a rough cut of the film in late 1988 , they felt it suffered from a lack of action . The motorcycle chase was shot during post @-@ production at Mount Tamalpais and Fairfax near Skywalker Ranch . The closing shot of Indiana , Henry , Sallah and Brody riding into the sunset was filmed in Texas in early 1989 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Mechanical effects supervisor George Gibbs said the film was the most difficult one of his career . He visited a museum to negotiate renting a small French World War I tank , but decided he wanted to make one . The tank was based on the Tank Mark VIII , which was 36 feet ( 11 m ) long and weighed 28 short tons ( 25 t ) . Gibbs built the tank over the framework of a 28 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 25 t ) excavator and added 7 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 6 @.@ 4 t ) tracks that were driven by two automatic hydraulic pumps , each connected to a Range Rover V8 engine . Gibbs built the tank from steel rather than aluminum or fiberglass because it would allow the realistically <unk> vehicle to endure the rocky surfaces . Unlike its historical counterpart , which had only the two side guns , the tank had a turret gun added as well . It took four months to build and was transported to Almería on a Short Belfast plane and then a low loader truck . 
 The tank broke down twice . The distributor 's rotor arm broke and a replacement had to be sourced from Madrid . Then two of the device 's valves used to cool the oil exploded , due to solder melting and mixing with the oil . It was very hot in the tank , despite the installation of ten fans , and the lack of suspension meant the driver was unable to stop shaking during filming breaks . The tank only moved at 10 to 12 miles per hour ( 16 to 19 km / h ) , which Vic Armstrong said made it difficult to film Indiana riding a horse against the tank while making it appear faster . A smaller section of the tank 's top made from aluminum and which used rubber tracks was used for close @-@ ups . It was built from a searchlight trailer , weighed eight tons , and was towed by a four @-@ wheel drive truck . It had safety nets on each end to prevent injury to those falling off . A quarter @-@ scale model by Gibbs was driven over a 50 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) cliff on location ; Industrial Light & Magic created further shots of the tank 's destruction with models and miniatures . 
 Michael Lantieri , mechanical effects supervisor for the 1912 scenes , noted the difficulty in shooting the train sequence . " You can 't just stop a train , " he said , " If it misses its mark , it takes blocks and blocks to stop it and back up . " Lantieri hid handles for the actors and stuntmen to grab onto when leaping from carriage to carriage . The carriage interiors shot at Universal Studios Hollywood were built on tubes that inflated and deflated to create a rocking motion . For the close @-@ up of the rhinoceros that strikes at ( and misses ) Indiana , a foam and fiberglass animatronic was made in London . When Spielberg decided he wanted it to move , the prop was sent to John Carl Buechler in Los Angeles , who <unk> it over three days to blink , snarl , snort and wiggle its ears . The giraffes were also created in London . Because steam locomotives are very loud , Lantieri 's crew would respond to first assistant director David Tomblin 's radioed directions by making the giraffes nod or shake their heads to his questions , which amused the crew . For the villains ' cars , Lantieri selected a 1914 Ford Model T , a 1919 Ford Model T truck and a 1916 Saxon Model 14 , fitting each with a Ford Pinto V6 engine . Sacks of dust were hung under the cars to create a <unk> environment . 
 Spielberg used doves for the seagulls that Henry scares into striking the German plane because the real gulls used in the first take did not fly . In December 1988 , Lucasfilm ordered 1 @,@ 000 disease @-@ free gray rats for the catacombs scenes from the company that supplied the snakes and bugs for the previous films . Within five months , 5 @,@ 000 rats had been bred for the sequence ; 1 @,@ 000 mechanical rats stood in for those that were set on fire . Several thousand snakes of five breeds — including a boa constrictor — were used for the train scene , in addition to rubber ones onto which Phoenix could fall . The snakes would slither from their crates , requiring the crew to dig through sawdust after filming to find and return them . Two lions were used , which became nervous because of the rocking motion and flickering lights . 
 Costume designer Anthony Powell found it a challenge to create Connery 's costume because the script required the character to wear the same clothes throughout . Powell thought about his own grandfather and incorporated tweed suits and fishing hats . Powell felt it necessary for Henry to wear glasses , but did not want to hide Connery 's eyes , so chose <unk> ones . He could not find any suitable , so he had them specially made . The Nazi costumes were genuine and were found in Eastern Europe by Powell 's co @-@ designer Joanna Johnston , to whom he gave research pictures and drawings for reference . The motorcycles used in the chase from the castle were a mixed bag : the scout model with sidecar in which Indy and Henry escape was an original Dnepr , complete with machine gun pintle on the sidecar , while the pursuing vehicles were more modern machines dressed up with equipment and logos to make them resemble German army models . Gibbs used Swiss Pilatus P @-@ 2 army training planes standing in for Messerschmitt Bf @-@ 109s . He built a device based on an internal combustion engine to simulate gunfire , which was safer and less expensive than firing blanks . Baking soda was applied to Connery to create Henry 's bullet wound . Vinegar was applied to create the foaming effect as the water from the Grail washes it away . At least one reproduction <unk> was used during filming despite the film being set two years prior to manufacture of said vehicles . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) built an eight @-@ foot foam model of the Zeppelin to complement shots of Ford and Connery climbing into the biplane . A biplane model with a two @-@ foot wingspan was used for the shot of the biplane detaching . Stop motion animation was used for the shot of the German fighter 's wings breaking off as it crashes through the tunnel . The tunnel was a 210 feet model that occupied 14 of ILM 's parking spaces for two months . It was built in eight @-@ foot sections , with hinges allowing each section to be opened to film through . Ford and Connery were filmed against bluescreen ; the sequence required their car to have a dirty windscreen , but to make the integration easier this was removed and later composited into the shot . Dust and shadows were animated onto shots of the plane miniature to make it appear as if it disturbed rocks and dirt before it exploded . Several hundred <unk> @-@ birds were used in the background shots of the seagulls striking the other plane ; for the closer shots , ILM dropped feather @-@ coated crosses onto the camera . These only looked convincing because the scene 's quick cuts merely required shapes that suggested gulls . ILM 's Wes Takahashi supervised the film 's effects sequences . 
 Spielberg devised the three trials that guard the Grail . For the first , the blades under which Indiana ducks like a penitent man were a mix of practical and miniature blades created by Gibbs and ILM . For the second trial , in which Indiana spells " <unk> " on stable stepping stones , it was intended to have a tarantula crawl up Indiana after he mistakenly steps on " J " . This was filmed and deemed unsatisfactory , so ILM filmed a stuntman hanging through a hole that appears in the floor , 30 feet above a cavern . As this was dark , it did not matter that the matte painting and models were rushed late in production . The third trial , the leap of faith that Indiana makes over an apparently impassable ravine after discovering a bridge hidden by forced perspective , was created with a model bridge and painted backgrounds . This was cheaper than building a full @-@ size set . A puppet of Ford was used to create a shadow on the 9 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) by 13 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) model because Ford had filmed the scene against bluescreen , which did not incorporate the shaft of light from the entrance . 
 Spielberg wanted Donovan 's death shown in one shot , so it would not look like an actor having makeup applied between takes . <unk> pads were applied to Julian Glover 's forehead and cheeks that made his eyes seem to recede during the character 's initial decomposition , as well as a mechanical wig that grew his hair . The shot of Donovan 's death was created over three months by morphing together three puppets of Donovan in separate stages of decay , a technique ILM mastered on Willow ( 1988 ) . A fourth puppet was used for the decaying clothes , because the puppet 's torso mechanics had been exposed . Complications arose because Alison Doody 's double had not been filmed for the scene 's latter two elements , so the background and hair from the first shot had to be used throughout , with the other faces mapped over it . Donovan 's skeleton was hung on wires like a marionette ; it required several takes to film it crashing against the wall because not all the pieces released upon impact . 
 Ben Burtt designed the sound effects . He recorded chickens for the sounds of the rats , and digitally manipulated the noise made by a Styrofoam cup for the castle fire . He rode in a biplane to record the sounds for the dogfight sequence , and visited the demolition of a wind turbine for the plane crashes . Burtt wanted an echoing gunshot for Donovan wounding Henry , so he fired a .357 Magnum in Skywalker Ranch 's underground car park , just as Lucas drove in . A rubber balloon was used for the earthquake tremors at the temple . The film was released in selected theaters in the 70 mm Full @-@ Field Sound format , which allowed sounds to not only move from side to side , but also from the theater 's front to its rear . 
 Matte paintings of the Austrian castle and German airport were based on real buildings ; the Austrian castle was a small West German castle that was made to look larger . Rain was created by filming granulated Borax soap against black at high speed . It was only lightly double exposed into the shots so it would not resemble snow . The lightning was animated . The airport used was at San Francisco 's Treasure Island , which already had appropriate art deco architecture . ILM added a control tower , Nazi banners , vintage automobiles and a sign stating " Berlin <unk> " . The establishing shot of the <unk> city at dusk was created by filming silhouetted cutouts that were backlit and obscured by smoke . Matte paintings were used for the sky and to give the appearance of fill light in the shadows and rim light on the edges of the buildings . 
 = = Themes = = 
 A son 's relationship with his estranged father is a common theme in Spielberg 's films , including E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial and Hook . 
 The film 's exploration of fathers and sons coupled with its use of religious imagery is comparable to two other 1989 films , Star Trek V : The Final Frontier and Field of Dreams . Writing for The New York Times , Caryn James felt the combination in these films reflected New Age concerns , where the worship of God was equated to searching for fathers . James felt that neither Indiana or his father is preoccupied with finding the Grail or defeating the evil Nazis , but that , rather , both seek professional respect for one another in their boys ' own adventure . James contrasted the temple 's biblically epic destruction with the more effective and quiet conversation between the Joneses at the film 's end . James noted that Indiana 's mother does not appear in the prologue , being portrayed as already having died before the film 's events began . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The 1912 prologue refers to events in the lives of Indiana 's creators . When Indiana cracks the bullwhip to defend himself against a lion , he accidentally lashes and scars his chin . Ford gained this scar in a car accident as a young man . Indiana taking his nickname from his pet Alaskan Malamute is a reference to the character being named after Lucas 's dog . The train carriage Indiana enters is named " Doctor Fantasy 's Magic Caboose " , which was the name producer Frank Marshall used when performing magic tricks . Spielberg suggested the idea , Marshall came up with the false @-@ bottomed box through which Indiana escapes , and production designer Elliott Scott suggested the trick be done in a single , uninterrupted shot . Spielberg intended the shot of Henry with his umbrella — after he causes the bird strike on the German plane — to evoke Ryan 's Daughter . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film 's teaser trailer debuted in November 1988 with <unk> and The Naked Gun . Rob MacGregor wrote the tie @-@ in novelization that was released in June 1989 ; it sold enough copies to be included on the New York Times Best Seller list . MacGregor went on to write the first six Indiana Jones prequel novels during the 1990s . Following the film 's release , Ford donated Indiana 's fedora and jacket to the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of American History . 
 No toys were made to promote the film ; Indiana Jones " never happened on the toy level " , said Larry <unk> , senior editor of the journal Children 's Business . Rather , Lucasfilm promoted Indiana as a lifestyle symbol , selling tie @-@ in fedoras , shirts , jackets and watches . Two video games based on the film were released by LucasArts in 1989 : Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade : The Graphic Adventure and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade : The Action Game . A third game was produced by Taito and released in 1991 for the Nintendo Entertainment System . Ryder Windham wrote another novelization , released in April 2008 by Scholastic , to coincide with the release of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull . Hasbro released toys based on The Last Crusade in July 2008 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was released in North America on May 24 , 1989 , in 2 @,@ 327 theaters , earning $ 29 @,@ 355 @,@ 021 in its opening weekend . This was the third @-@ highest opening weekend of 1989 , behind Ghostbusters II and Batman . Its opening day gross of $ 11 @,@ 181 @,@ 429 was the first time a film had made over $ 10 million on its first day . It broke the record for the best six @-@ day performance , with almost $ 47 million , added another record with $ 77 million after twelve days , and $ 100 million in nineteen days . It grossed $ 195 @.@ 7 million by the end of the year and $ 475 million worldwide by March 1990 . In France , the film broke a record by selling a million admissions within two and a half weeks . 
 The film eventually grossed $ 197 @,@ 171 @,@ 806 in North America and $ 277 million internationally , for a worldwide total of $ 474 @,@ 171 @,@ 806 . At the time of its release , the film was the 11th highest @-@ grossing film of all time . Despite competition from Batman , The Last Crusade became the highest @-@ grossing film worldwide in 1989 . In North America , Batman took top position . Behind Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and Raiders , The Last Crusade is the third @-@ highest grossing Indiana Jones film in North America , though it is also behind Temple of Doom when adjusting for inflation . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 49 million tickets in North America . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The film opened to mostly positive reviews . It was panned by Andrew Sarris in The New York Observer , David Denby in New York magazine , Stanley Kauffmann in The New Republic and Georgia Brown in The Village Voice . Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader called the film " soulless " . The Washington Post reviewed the film twice ; Hal Hinson 's review on the day of the film 's release was negative , describing it as " nearly all chases and dull exposition " . Although he praised Ford and Connery , he felt the film 's exploration of Indiana 's character took away his mystery and that Spielberg should not have tried to mature his storytelling . Two days later , Desson Thomson published a positive review praising the film 's adventure and action , as well as the father – son relationship 's thematic depth . Joseph McBride of Variety observed the " <unk> Nazi villains of Raiders have been replaced by more genuinely frightening Nazis led by Julian Glover and Michael Byrne , " and found the moment where Indiana meets Hitler " chilling " . In his biography of Spielberg , McBride added the film was less " racist " than its predecessors . 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said the film was " the wildest and wittiest Indy of them all " . Richard Corliss of Time and David Ansen of Newsweek praised it , as did Vincent Canby of The New York Times . " Though it seems to have the manner of some magically reconstituted B @-@ movie of an earlier era , The Last Crusade is an endearing original , " Canby wrote , deeming the revelation Indiana had a father he was not proud of to be a " comic surprise " . Canby believed that while the film did not match the previous two in its pacing , it still had " hilariously off @-@ the @-@ wall sequences " such as the circus train chase . He also said that Spielberg was maturing by focusing on the father – son relationship , a call echoed by McBride in Variety . Roger Ebert praised the scene depicting Indiana as a Boy Scout with the Cross of Coronado ; he compared it to the " style of illustration that appeared in the boys ' adventure magazines of the 1940s " , saying that Spielberg " must have been paging through his old issues of Boys ' Life magazine ... the feeling that you can stumble over astounding adventures just by going on a hike with your Scout troop . Spielberg lights the scene in the strong , basic colors of old pulp magazines . " The Hollywood Reporter felt Connery and Ford deserved Academy Award nominations . 
 The film was evaluated positively after its release . Internet reviewer James Berardinelli wrote that while the film did not reach the heights of Raiders of the Lost Ark , it " [ avoided ] the lows of The Temple of Doom . A fitting end to the original trilogy , Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade captures some of the sense of fun that infused the first movie while using the addition of Sean Connery to up the comedic ante and provide a father / son dynamic . " Neil Smith of the BBC praised the action , but said the drama and comedy between the Joneses was more memorable . He noted , " The emphasis on the Jones boys means Julian Glover 's venal villain and Alison Doody 's treacherous beauty are sidelined , while the climax [ becomes ] one booby @-@ trapped tomb too many . " Based on 55 reviews listed by Rotten Tomatoes , 88 % of critics praised the film , giving it an average score of 8 / 10 . Metacritic calculated an average rating of 65 / 100 , based on 14 reviews . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 The film won the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing ; it also received nominations for Best Original Score and Best Sound ( Ben Burtt , Gary Summers , Shawn Murphy and Tony Dawe ) , but lost to The Little Mermaid and Glory respectively . Sean Connery received a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor . Connery and the visual and sound effects teams were also nominated at the 43rd British Academy Film Awards . The film won the 1990 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , and was nominated for Best Motion Picture Drama at the Young Artist Awards . John Williams ' score won a BMI Award , and was nominated for a Grammy Award . 
 The prologue depicting Indiana in his youth inspired Lucas to create The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles television series , which featured Sean Patrick <unk> as the young adult Indiana and Corey Carrier as the 8- to 10 @-@ year @-@ old Indiana . The 13 @-@ year @-@ old incarnation played by Phoenix in the film was the focus of a Young Indiana Jones series of young adult novels that began in 1990 ; by the ninth novel , the series had become a tie @-@ in to the television show . German author Wolfgang <unk> revisited the 1912 prologue in one of his novels , in which Indiana encounters the lead grave robber — whom <unk> christens Jake — in 1943 . The film 's ending begins the 1995 comic series Indiana Jones and the Spear of Destiny , which moves forward to depict Indiana and his father searching for the Holy Lance in Ireland in 1945 . Spielberg intended to have Connery cameo as Henry in Kingdom of the Crystal Skull ( 2008 ) , but Connery turned it down as he had retired . 
 Petra 's use for the movie 's climatic scenes greatly contributed to its popularity as an international tourist destination . Before the film 's release , only a few thousand visitors per year made the trip ; since then it has grown to almost a million annually . Shops and hotels near the site play up the connection , and it is mentioned prominently in itineraries of locations used in the film series . Jordan 's tourism board mentions the connection on its website . In 2012 the satirical news site The Pan @-@ Arabia Enquirer ran a mock story claiming that the board had officially renamed Petra " That Place from Indiana Jones " to reflect how the world more commonly refers to it . 
 = SMS Wörth = 
 SMS Wörth ( " His Majesty 's Ship Wörth " ) was one of four German pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the Brandenburg class , built in the early 1890s . The class also included Brandenburg , Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm , and Weissenburg . The ships were the first ocean @-@ going battleships built by the Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . Wörth was laid down at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel in May 1890 . The ship was launched on 6 August 1892 and commissioned into the fleet on 31 October 1893 . Wörth and her three sisters were the only battleships of their time to carry six heavy guns rather than four . She was named for the Battle of Wörth fought during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 . 
 Wörth served in the German fleet for the first decade of her career , participating in the normal peacetime routine of training cruises and exercises . She took part in the German naval expedition to China in 1900 to suppress the Boxer Rebellion , though by the time the fleet arrived the siege of Peking had already been lifted , and Wörth saw little direct action in China . She was placed in reserve in 1906 as newer , more powerful vessels had supplanted the Brandenburg class as front @-@ line battleships . Obsolete by the start of World War I , Wörth and Brandenburg served in a limited capacity in the Imperial German Navy as coastal defense ships for the first two years of the war , though they did not see action . By 1916 , Wörth was reduced to a barracks ship , a role in which she served until the end of hostilities . Despite plans to convert her into a freighter after the war , Wörth was scrapped in the port of Danzig in 1919 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Wörth was 115 @.@ 7 m ( 379 ft 7 in ) long , with a beam of 19 @.@ 5 m ( 64 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 6 m ( 24 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 10 @,@ 013 t ( 9 @,@ 855 long tons ) as designed , and up to 10 @,@ 670 t ( 10 @,@ 500 long tons ) at full combat load . The ship was equipped with two sets of 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines that produced 10 @,@ 089 ihp ( 7 @,@ 523 kW ) and a top speed of 16 @.@ 9 knots ( 31 @.@ 3 km / h ; 19 @.@ 4 mph ) on trials ; steam was provided by twelve coal @-@ fired , transverse cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . She had a maximum range of 4 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 000 km ; 4 @,@ 900 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her crew numbered 38 officers and 530 enlisted men . 
 Wörth was armed with a main battery of six 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns of two types . The forward and rear turret guns were 40 calibers long , while the amidships guns were only 35 calibers ; this was necessary to allow them to train to either side of the ship . Her secondary armament initially consisted of seven 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , though an additional gun was added during the modernization in 1901 . She also carried eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) guns and six 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship was protected with compound armor . Her main belt armor was 400 millimeters ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) thick in the central section that protected the ammunition magazines and machinery spaces . The deck was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick . The main battery barbettes were protected with 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Construction to 1895 = = = 
 Wörth was ordered as battleship B , and was laid down at Germaniawerft in Kiel on 3 March 1890 . Initial work on the ship proceeded at the slowest pace of all four vessels in the class ; her hull was not launched until 6 August 1892 , more than eight months after the other three ships . Princess Viktoria , the sister of Kaiser Wilhelm II , christened the ship . Fitting @-@ out work proceeded quickly , and she was commissioned on 31 October 1893 , the first ship of the class to enter active duty . Extensive sea trials followed her commissioning and lasted until April 1894 . During her trials , she was briefly assigned to the maneuver squadron of the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) to replace her sister Brandenburg , which was damaged by a boiler pipe explosion . On 1 August 1894 , Wörth was assigned as the flagship of the German fleet for the annual autumn maneuvers , under the command of Admiral Max von der Goltz . Goltz came aboard the new battleship on 19 August with his staff , which included then @-@ Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Alfred von Tirpitz . Toward the end of the maneuvers , which took place in both the North and Baltic Seas , Kaiser Wilhelm II came aboard Wörth and reviewed a fleet parade on 21 September . 
 During this period , Wörth was commanded by Prince Heinrich , the younger brother of Wilhelm II ; the senior watch officer aboard the ship in 1894 was Franz von Hipper , who went on to command the German battlecruiser squadron during World War I and later the entire High Seas Fleet . On 1 November , Czar Alexander III of Russia died ; Wilhelm II initially planned to send his brother to St. Petersburg to represent Germany at the funeral aboard his flagship . But General Bernhard Franz Wilhelm von Werder suggested that sending a warship named for the Battle of Wörth of the still @-@ recent Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 would antagonize the French delegation and would be unwise , given the recently signed Franco @-@ Russian Alliance . Wilhelm II agreed , and so Prince Heinrich traveled to the funeral by train . After her sister Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm entered service , she replaced Wörth as the fleet flagship . Wörth was thereafter assigned to the I Division of the I Squadron , in turn replacing the old ironclad Deutschland . 
 Wörth and the rest of the squadron attended ceremonies for the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal at Kiel on 3 December 1894 . The squadron subsequently began a winter training cruise in the Baltic Sea ; this was the first such cruise by the German fleet . In previous years , the bulk of the fleet was deactivated for the winter months . The I Division anchored in Stockholm from 7 to 11 December , during the 300th anniversary of the birth of Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus . Further exercises were conducted in the Baltic before the ships had to put into their home ports for repairs . From 19 December to 27 March 1895 , Wörth returned to her old duty as fleet flagship while Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm was in dock for repairs . The ship was occupied with individual and divisional training in early 1895 . In May , more fleet maneuvers were carried out in the western Baltic , concluding with a visit by the fleet to Kirkwall in Orkney . The squadron returned to Kiel in early June , where preparations were underway for the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . Tactical exercises were carried out in Kiel Bay in the presence of foreign delegations to the opening ceremony . 
 On 1 July , the German fleet began a major cruise into the Atlantic ; on the return voyage in early August , the fleet stopped at the Isle of Wight for the Cowes Regatta . While there on 6 August , Wilhelm II held a remembrance ceremony for the 25th anniversary of Wörth 's namesake battle . This was sharply criticized in the British press . The fleet returned to Wilhelmshaven on 10 August and began preparations for the autumn maneuvers that would begin later that month . The first exercises began in the Helgoland Bight on 25 August . The fleet then steamed through the Skagerrak to the Baltic ; heavy storms caused significant damage to many of the ships and the torpedo boat S 41 capsized and sank in the storms — only three men were saved . The fleet stayed briefly in Kiel before resuming maneuvers , including live @-@ fire exercises , in the Kattegat and the Great Belt . The main maneuvers began on 7 September with a mock attack from Kiel toward the eastern Baltic . Subsequent maneuvers took place off the coast of Pomerania and in Danzig Bay . A fleet review for Wilhelm II off <unk> concluded the maneuvers on 14 September . 
 = = = 1896 – 1900 = = = 
 The year 1896 followed much the same pattern as the previous year . Individual ship training was conducted though April , followed by squadron training in the North Sea in late April and early May . This included a visit to the Dutch ports of Vlissingen and <unk> . Additional maneuvers , which lasted from the end of May to the end of July , took the squadron further north in the North Sea , frequently into Norwegian waters . The ships visited Bergen from 11 to 18 May . During the maneuvers , Wilhelm II and the Chinese viceroy Li Hongzhang observed a fleet review off Kiel . On 9 August , the training fleet assembled in Wilhelmshaven for the annual autumn fleet training . The following month , Czar Nicholas II of Russia visited the fleet in Kiel , boarding Wörth on 8 September . The ship won the Kaiser 's Schießpreis ( Shooting Prize ) for excellent gunnery in the I Squadron during 1896 . 
 Wörth and the rest of the fleet operated under the normal routine of individual and unit training in the first half of 1897 . The ship represented Germany during the Fleet Review for Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee in June 1897 . The typical routine was interrupted in early August when Wilhelm II and Augusta went to visit the Russian imperial court at Kronstadt ; both divisions of the I Squadron were sent to accompany the Kaiser . They returned to Neufahrwasser in Danzig on 15 August , where the rest of the fleet joined them for the annual autumn maneuvers . The maneuvers were completed by 22 September in Wilhelmshaven . In early December , the I Division conducted maneuvers in the Kattegat and the Skagerrak , though they were cut short due to shortages in officers and men . 
 The fleet followed the normal routine of individual and fleet training in 1898 without incident , though a voyage to the British Isles was also included . The fleet stopped in Queenstown , Greenock , and Kirkwall . The fleet assembled in Kiel on 14 August for the annual autumn exercises . The maneuvers included a mock blockade of the coast of Mecklenburg and a pitched battle with an " Eastern Fleet " in the Danzig Bay . While steaming back to Kiel , a severe storm hit the fleet , causing significant damage to many ships and sinking the torpedo boat S 58 . The fleet then transited the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal and continued maneuvers in the North Sea . Training finished on 17 September in Wilhelmshaven . In December , the I Division conducted artillery and torpedo training in Eckernförde Bay , followed by divisional training in the Kattegat and Skagerrak . During these maneuvers , the division visited <unk> , Sweden , from 9 to 13 December . After returning to Kiel , the ships of the I Division went into dock for their winter repairs . 
 On 25 November 1899 , Wörth was conducting gunnery training in Eckernförde Bay when she struck a rock . It tore a 22 ft ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) wide hole in the hull , flooding three of her watertight compartments . The ship was sent to Wilhelmshaven for repair work . Before repairs could be begun , about 500 t ( 490 long tons ) of coal had to be unloaded to lighten the ship . Temporary steel plates were riveted to cover the hole on the starboard side , while the hull plates on the port side had to be re @-@ riveted . The work lasted from December 1899 until February 1900 ; she was therefore unavailable for the normal winter cruise of the I Squadron . 
 = = = Boxer Rebellion = = = 
 During the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 , Chinese nationalists laid siege to the foreign embassies in Peking and murdered Baron Clemens von Ketteler , the German minister . The widespread violence against Westerners in China led to an alliance between Germany and seven other Great Powers : the United Kingdom , Italy , Russia , Austria @-@ Hungary , the United States , France , and Japan . Those soldiers who were in China at the time were too few in number to defeat the Boxers ; in Peking there was a force of slightly more than 400 officers and infantry from the armies of the eight European powers . At the time , the primary German military force in China was the East Asia Squadron , which consisted of the protected cruisers Kaiserin Augusta , Hansa , and Hertha , the small cruisers Irene and Gefion , and the gunboats Jaguar and Iltis . There was also a German 500 @-@ man detachment in Taku ; combined with the other nations ' units the force numbered some 2 @,@ 100 men . Led by the British Admiral Edward Seymour , these men attempted to reach Peking but were forced to stop in Tientsin due to heavy resistance . As a result , the Kaiser determined an expeditionary force would be sent to China to reinforce the East Asia Squadron . The expedition would include Wörth and her three sisters , six cruisers , ten freighters , three torpedo boats , and six regiments of marines , under the command of Generalfeldmarschall ( General Field Marshal ) Alfred von Waldersee . 
 On 7 July , Konteradmiral Richard von Geißler , the expeditionary force commander , reported that his ships were ready for the operation , and they left two days later . The four battleships and the aviso Hela transited the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal and stopped in Wilhelmshaven to rendezvous with the rest of the expeditionary force . On 11 July , the force steamed out of the Jade Bight , bound for China . They stopped to coal at Gibraltar on 17 – 18 July and passed through the Suez Canal on 26 – 27 July . More coal was taken on at Perim in the Red Sea , and on 2 August the fleet entered the Indian Ocean . On 10 August , the ships reached Colombo , Ceylon , and on 14 August they passed through the Strait of Malacca . They arrived in Singapore on 18 August and departed five days later , reaching Hong Kong on 28 August . Two days later , the expeditionary force stopped in the outer roadstead at Wusong , downriver from Shanghai . From there , Wörth was detached to cover the disembarkation of the German expeditionary corps outside the Taku Forts . 
 By the time the German fleet had arrived , the siege of Peking had already been lifted by forces from other members of the Eight @-@ Nation Alliance that had formed to deal with the Boxers . Wörth left Taku to coal at Tsingtau , the German naval base in China , and on 25 October returned to Wusong via Yantai . There , she joined the blockade of the Yangtze River . Since the situation had calmed , the four battleships were sent to Hong Kong or Nagasaki , Japan , in late 1900 and early 1901 for overhauls ; Wörth went to Nagasaki from 30 November to the end of December . She returned to Wusong on 27 December , where she remained until 18 February 1901 , when she moved to Tsingtau for division exercises and gunnery drills . Wörth and the rest of the fleet then stayed in Shanghai in April and May . 
 On 26 May , the German high command recalled the expeditionary force to Germany . The fleet took on supplies in Shanghai and departed Chinese waters on 1 June . The ships stopped in Singapore from 10 to 15 June and took on coal before proceeding to Colombo , where they stayed from 22 to 26 June . Steaming against the monsoons forced the fleet to stop in Mahé , Seychelles , to take on more coal . The ships then stopped for a day each to take on coal in Aden and Port Said . On 1 August they reached Cadiz , and then met with the I Division and steamed back to Germany together . They separated after reaching Helgoland , and on 11 August , after reaching the Jade roadstead , the ships of the expeditionary force were visited by Admiral von Koester , who was now the Inspector General of the Navy . The following day the expeditionary fleet was dissolved . In the end , the operation cost the German government more than 100 million marks . 
 = = = 1901 – 1914 = = = 
 Following her return from China , Wörth was taken into the drydocks at the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Dockyard ) in Wilhelmshaven for an overhaul that lasted from 14 to 17 August . She then joined the fleet for autumn maneuvers . In the meantime , Wörth and her sisters , which had been assigned to the I Division before their expedition to China , had been transferred to the II Division of the I Squadron following their return . On 24 November , Wörth was decommissioned for a major reconstruction at the Kaiserliche Werft in Wilhelmshaven ; she was the first member of her class to be modernized . During the modernization , a second conning tower was added in the aft superstructure , along with a gangway . Wörth and the other ships had their boilers replaced with newer models , and also had their superstructure amidships reduced . The work lasted until December 1903 . 
 After her modernization , Wörth returned to service on 27 September 1904 assigned to the II Squadron , where she replaced the old coastal defense ship Beowulf . She served briefly as the flagship of Konteradmiral Alfred <unk> from September until December , when she was replaced in that role by Braunschweig . On 16 February 1905 , Wörth ran aground in the Kieler <unk> . She was pulled free two days later after enough coal and ammunition were thrown overboard to lighten the ship . She then steamed into Kiel and entered drydock , where her bottom was found to be slightly dented . A second accident occurred on 5 July , when the torpedo boat S 124 ran across Wörth 's bow . The battleship could not turn in time and rammed the torpedo boat , damaging it severely . One of S 124 's boiler rooms flooded and the rush of steam from the boilers badly burned three men . 
 On 4 July 1906 , Wörth was transferred to the Reserve Formation of the North Sea . She initially served as the flagship of the unit , but on 1 October she was replaced by Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm . She was then decommissioned and her crew reduced to only a maintenance staff . Over the next eight years , she was reactivated only twice , from 2 August to 13 September in 1910 and from 31 July to 15 September the following year ; both periods were during the annual autumn maneuvers . She served with the III Squadron in both exercises , and was the flagship of the second command admiral for the squadron , Konteradmiral Heinrich Sass . She returned to reserve status on 15 September , and a month later was docked in the Kaiserliche Werft in Kiel to maintain her for future service . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 On 5 September 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I , Wörth was assigned to the V Battle Squadron under the command of Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Max von <unk> . The squadron was initially used for coastal defense in the North Sea . From 19 to 26 September , Wörth and the rest of the V Squadron went on a sortie into the eastern Baltic but encountered no Russian forces . The ships subsequently returned to the North Sea and resumed their guard duties . Wörth was briefly transferred to the VI Battle Squadron from 16 January to 25 February 1915 to strengthen the defenses of the Jade Bight and the mouth of the Weser . On 5 March , she was moved to Kiel , where her crew was reduced . After a short period of rest , her crew was restored and she and Brandenburg were transferred to Libau . She served as the flagship of Konteradmiral Alfred <unk> , the new commander of the V Squadron . In Libau , they were assigned as guard ships in the recently conquered Russian harbor . 
 The two old battleships were initially moored outside the harbor while it was cleared of wrecks . During this period , the ships prepared for an expected attack by the new Russian Gangut @-@ class battleships , but the assault did not materialize . On 12 July , the crews of both ships were reduced again . On 15 January 1916 , the V Squadron was disbanded and <unk> removed his flag from Wörth . She left Libau on 7 March and arrived in Neufahrwasser the following day . On 10 March she was decommissioned in Danzig to free her crew and guns for other uses . Some of her main battery guns were converted into " Kurfürst " railroad guns , though they were not ready for service until early 1918 . Wörth herself was employed as a barracks ship in Danzig until the end of the war in November 1918 . Both Wörth and Brandenburg were struck from the naval register on 13 May 1919 and sold for scrapping . The two ships were purchased by Norddeutsche Tiefbaugesellschaft ; Wörth was initially to be rebuilt into a freighter , but the planned reconstruction did not eventuate . Instead , Wörth was broken up for scrap in Danzig . 
 = Mutual Core = 
 " Mutual Core " is a song recorded by Icelandic singer Björk for her eighth studio album Biophilia ( 2011 ) . It was written and produced by Björk herself , while programming and beats were made in collaboration with Matthew Herbert and the English dubstep band 16bit . " Mutual Core " is an uptempo experimental song . Its music includes Pipe organ , electronica @-@ tinged sounds and features the Choir <unk> Nobili , the choir featured on Biophilia . The song 's lyrics are a metaphor for human relationships , compared to the structure of the Earth and Plate tectonics . The song was well received by contemporary music critics , who praised its production and beats , moreover appreciating Björk 's voice on the track . 
 As with all the songs on Biophilia , an app was made for the song , which features a video game in which the player have to move geological layers as an accordion to play chords . Though the song wasn 't released as a single , a music video was produced , directed by Andrew Thomas Huang . The video was critically applauded and received further attention when it got projected for one month in Times Square in 2013 , and then across the 7 continents . Björk promoted the song by performing it throughout her Biophilia Tour . 
 Three remixes by Matthew Herbert , 16bit and These New Puritans were released as part of Biophilia Remix Series . The Matthew Herbert 's and the These New Puritans remixes were later included on bastards ( 2012 ) . On July 2012 , the online music store Beatport announced a fan contest in which " Mutual Core " had to be remixed , to be released afterwards on a remix package . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the end of 2010 , Björk confirmed she was working on a new album . In an interview published on <unk> , the singer stated that the project was midway through the completion and that she hoped to go on tour before the end of 2011 . The project was <unk> in March 2011 , with the announcement of Björk performance at Manchester International Festival . The project , called Biophilia , comprises a series of live performances , a new website , a documentary and a series of apps , besides the release as a music album which is partly composed on an iPad . The Biophilia Tour was said to be touring eight cities for three years and to be including a series of workshops for children in collaboration with local schools . The first details about " Mutual Core " came regarding its app , which was described to allow users to " arrange geological layers to form chords " . 
 " Mutual Core " was written and produced by Björk , while the beat of the song was made in collaboration with Matthew Herbert and 16bit . The song was engineered by Damian Taylor and Sveinn Kjartansson , with mixing provided by Taylor and Björk . " Mutual Core " ' s lyrics were inspired by human relationships and by Björk 's family decisions , who had to decide where her daughter , <unk> , would go to school between New York City and Reykjavík . Björk felt that the song is " the most personal [ on the album ] for me " . David Fricke of Rolling Stone noted that " Björk likens the human emotions – love , physical obsession , changing moods , violent hurt – in songs such as " Mutual Core " , " Moon " and " Virus " to natural phenomena : earthquakes , volcanic eruptions , lunar phases and contagious disease " . 
 Three official remixes of the song have been released . The first one was released on Biophilia Remix Series VI on 25 June 2012 , and it is a remix by long time @-@ collaborator Matthew Herbert . Björk stated about Herbert 's remixes : " He has taken it full on and made it into his version but still true to the heart of the song and , more than once , improved it " . RJ <unk> of Rolling Stone commented that the remix " builds slowly with background bleeps and opaque textures before erupting into a cacophonous rumble " . The second one is a remix by 16bit , which was released as part of Biophilia Remix Series VII on July 9 , 2012 . This version had already been released as part of a promo for Icelandair flights , playing the song in flights to Iceland during Björk 's concert residency in Reykjavik in Summer 2011 . Other two remixes of " Crystalline " and " Sacrifice " were played . The last remix by These New Puritans has been on November 12 , 2012 on Biophilia Remix Series VIII . The remix includes samples from the Traditional composition " Funeral Song ( Solomon Islands 1978 ) " , as extracted from the album Spirit of Melanesia by David Fanshawe . On October 8 , 2012 , the tracklist for bastards was announced , and the Matthew Herbert 's and the These New Puritans remixes were included . On late July 2012 , Beatport announced a contest in which the participants had to remix " Mutual Core " . The winner would have their remix released on One Little Indian Records in a remix package to be sold on the website . The winner was announced on 18 September 2012 , as " <unk> " . This remix , later renamed " <unk> Crooks Remix " , was released on December 10 , 2012 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Mutual Core " is an uptempo experimental song , which displays elements from electro , techno , glitch , breakcore and ambient , and includes also a choral part during the chorus . The rhythm of the song can be roughly divided into two distinct parts : the verses , which feature moderately sparse electronic beats and a time signature of 5 / 4 , and the choruses , which display more upbeat sounds and a 2 / 4 time signature . According to Mark Diver of BBC Music during the shift from the verse and the chorus the song " slips from blissful ambience into bombastic electronic percussion , leaving the senses reeling , only to fade back into a comforting lilt " . 
 The instrumentation of the verses includes a pipe organ . Sound designer David Paterson described the way Björk wanted the music on " Mutual Core " : " Bjork described the sounds she wanted in a way that left it very open to interpretation . With the track " Mutual Core " , for example , she described how it was about magnetic attraction – which doesn ’ t really have a sound that springs to mind " . Luke Turner of NME noted that " [ Björk 's ] voice cracks against the increasing , insistent power of the electronic rhythms , as if recognising our human insignificance in the face of geology " , citing the verse " As fast as your fingernail grows / The Atlantic ridge drifts " as an example , and , on a similar note , Odile De Plas of Télérama found the singer 's voice " strong , acrobat , guttural and [ ... ] crystalline " . 
 The musical shift occurs when the singer pronounces the words " Core " , during which , as described by Nikki <unk> in her essay included in the Manual Edition of Biophilia , the " modality switches from minor to major " . The lecturer noted that " the close , dark sound of the verse is partly due to the minor mode which has a flattened third degree , compared to the brighter sound of the chorus in the major mode which has the " normal " third degree of the chord " . This part of the song uses a <unk> cadence , which involves a movement " from a chord built on the fourth degree of the scale to one built on the first degree of the scale " . The chorus of the song features a vocal crescendo performed by the choir , which juxtaposes with breakcore @-@ influenced beats , which display elements from dub . Chris Chafin of Capital compared the sound of the chorus to the work of The Chemical Brothers and stated that tracks like " Crystalline " and " Mutual Core " recall previous works from Björk 's discography , especially Post ( 1995 ) and Homogenic ( 1997 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was generally well received by music critics , who cited it as a highlight of the album . According to Mark Pytlik of Pitchfork , the song " may be the album ’ s best track overall " , citing " its satisfyingly filthy electro <unk> " , while giving the album an average review ; on a similar note , Arnold Pan of PopMatters defined the song as " the album ’ s most viscerally powerful number " citing that " that ’ s music that sounds just as at home in the sacred place of a vast cathedral as it is in the virtual vacuum of cyberspace " . Gareth James of Clash praised the album and stated that " when the machine @-@ gun beats do break through on " Mutual Core " , they ’ re augmented by a hymnal organ riff and a soaring , unprocessed and unleashed vocal which will leave you breathless " . 
 " Mutual Core " was described as " best " and " climactic " by Helen Brown of The Daily Telegraph , which elected Biophilia as the CD of the Week , and " literally volcanic " by Heather Phares of Allmusic . Jim Fusilli of The Wall Street Journal stated that the track is " earthbound " . According to the Daily Mirror review , the track " adds angry rebuke and glitchy distorted power chordings to the shimmering , ringing percussion and natural awe that feature on the astonishing tracks " Virus " and aptly named " Crystalline " " . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian praised the composition of the album and stated " There ’ s something audacious and impressive about the way " Hollow " attempts to strike a weird balance between menace and calm , the vocals as lulling as the staccato backing is unsettling . Or " Mutual Core " ’ s repeated shifts from a wheezing keyboard – it was doubtless built in a laboratory by the provost of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and professor Brian Cox , but it sounds like a 13th @-@ century portative organ – to electronic bombardment " . <unk> <unk> of Consequence of Sound analysed the use of Björk 's voice in the album , stating : 
 Her unique utility of the English language gives her words a quirky , idiosyncratic edge , allowing lines like “ if you forget my name , you ’ ll go astray / like a killer whale ” to ring somehow striking . Said <unk> and quirks are well intact here , as is evident in the asteroid @-@ bass volley of " Mutual Core " and lead single " Crystalline " ‘ s apocalyptical breakbeat coda . Biophilia ‘ s finest moments are its most subtly captivating , many of which are ( admittedly ) almost forgettable on first listen . The aforementioned " Mutual Core " and " Crystalline " can be assured a spot on any and all future Best of Björk compilations , compelling in how they blend archaic instrumentation with blistering electronica . 
 Despite this , some critics dubbed the song as " tedious " and " interesting but not surprising " . Andy Gill of The Independent gave a negative review of the album , praising only the choral elements , stating that : " they ’ re a constant delight as she reflects upon her desire for the " dangerous gifts " of elemental nature , the lightning @-@ flash of creative inspiration ( " Thunderbolt " ) ; muses about being a bead threaded upon a DNA chain ( " Hollow " ) ; explores the ethically neutral , natural attraction of parasite to host ( " Virus " ) ; admires the creative force of volcanic energy ( " Mutual Core " ) " . 
 = = App = = 
 As with all the songs on Biophilia , " Mutual Core " was released as an app for iPhone or iPad . " Mutual Core " app features a video game in which the player arranges geological layers in the same way as an accordion to play chords . During the verses , the player tries to unite the hemispheres , because the energy keeps them apart while during the chorus the app shifts to a cutaway of a planet , and the player can touch the layers of the planet 's interior to open it up and touch the core . The player may also change the resistance of the chords to increase the difficulty . The app was released on October 10 , 2011 , along with the rest of the apps from Biophilia . On January 17 , 2012 , Björk uploaded a video tutorial explaining the app on her official YouTube channel , commented also by Biophilia app designer Scott <unk> . As Björk explains on the video : 
 This app is called ' Mutual Core ' and it 's about taking the tectonic plates and pushing them together with effort until you create a mutual core beneath them . In musicology @-@ wise this is to teach you about chords , and you can use [ .. ] the tectonic plates , the strata inside them , and it sorta operates like accordion so you can change the chords and push them together and [ ... ] create a mutual core . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 Björk – creative director 
 John Simon , Jr . – creative director , software engineer 
 Credits taken from " Mutual Core " app . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and development = = = 
 A music video for the song was commissioned by the director of Los Angeles ' Museum of Contemporary Art ( MOCA ) , Jeffrey Deitch . The video was first revealed to be in the making in the September 2012 issue of Dazed & Confused , in an interview with Andrew Thomas Huang . Huang was revealed to be chosen as the director for the video by Björk herself . Huang said about the making process : 
 " There 's a lot of volcanic and earthy stuff in the video , we put Björk in quite a few uncomfortable set @-@ ups when we were filming , but she was game for anything . She was a lot of fun and just very warm and trusting . " 
 The director also hinted at a parallelism between the video and its short film Solipsist , which was released weeks before the shooting of " Mutual Core " video : " [ The song ] is a metaphor between earth ’ s crust and two people converging , and the effort that it takes , that was also what Solipsist was about , so working together made sense " . The video was shot in Reykjavík in over two days . The director wrote the initial treatment for the video after visiting museums in London . The video features a mix of CG pictures and real natural elements , gathered by the team from different location in Iceland . The floating rocks in the video are made from foam and covered in plaster , fossilized barnacles and various textiles , the rock 's tongues and the sand are computer animated ; for this reason , the post @-@ production lasted two months . Björk 's face motion was tracked in CG for the video , in which it appears to be melt in the rocks . Her costumes were inspired by Thai and Indonesian costumes , while the substance which resembles magma that she appears to spit in the video was a computer @-@ modified mixture of ketchup and cake batter . 
 A teaser trailer has been released on 5 November 2012 . The teaser shows Björk stuck in a bed of quicksand , wearing a blue wig . The video was premiered at an exclusive screening at the MOCA Grand Avenue on November 12 , 2012 . It was digitally released on November 13 , 2012 on MOCA YouTube 's channel , <unk> , as part of a series of music videos called ART + MUSIC which features collaborations between artists and musicians . The channel also posted a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video on the same day . The video features glimpses of filming and an interview with the director of the video , who explains the filming process . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the beginning of the video , soil crumbles down , as Björk appears , buried to her waist in the sand , wearing a golden dress ( by Michael van der Ham ) , a brooch on her shoulder designed by the singer herself and a blue wig , holding a rock . As she starts singing , she divides the rock into two pieces . As she waves the pieces , the sand around her stirs . She then lays the two pieces on the sand , and they become part of two rock sprites , that come out of the sand and start writhing around Björk , while strata emerges from them . In the end of the first verse , the strata of the two rocky sprites try to unite , as Björk grabs the sand and let it slips out from her fingers . During the second verse other rocks emerge from the sand and revolve around Björk , who dances in the sand . Other rocky sprites spring out of the new rocks and link to the main two , which are still spinning around the singer 's head . The two parts are irresistibly attracted to each other and try to unite as they are stroked by Björk . The strata of the rocks morph to form a face , similar to that of the singer . As the chorus begins , Björk disappears in the darkness . The two rocky parts , now united , start to <unk> themself , whilst various rocks on the sand start to erupt . Lava , magma , smoke and fire storm while Björk 's face appears in the lava . Every rock erupts noisily , causing a rain of volcanic ash . 
 The video shifts again to Björk buried in the sand under the rain of ashes . The two pieces of rock appear again , this time each one with a Björk @-@ shaped strata . The strata also sing parts of the song , and two arms come out from the floating rocks and their hands barely brush against each other . The rocks unite once again as the chorus begins for the second time . During this part of the video , images of Björk singing in a smoky setting alternate with more rocks uniting to the main two , while their Björk @-@ shaped strata secrete a substance similar to lava from their mouth . All the rocks are now united , forming a big volcano , whose crater is shaped like two opposite Björk @-@ shaped rocks . The volcano finally erupts in an explosion of magma , while a thunderstorm occurs in the background . The video ends as the volcano fades out and all that remains visible is ash and smoke . 
 = = = Reception and accolades = = = 
 The video was heavily praised by critics . Bob Boilen of What Matters commented that the video is " a bit weird and smartly done " . Tom Breihan of Stereogum stated that the video is " a beguilingly strange vision " and that " as the song unfolds , the images reach an explosive conclusion that resembles a fucked @-@ up metal album cover " , on a similar note , Gregory Adams of Exclaim ! cited the video as " groundbreaking " . A poster on The Huffington Post wrote that the video , which he billed as " hypnotic " , " takes viewers on a strange spirit quest gone awry " . Jonah Bayer of Myspace opined that " Björk is a true artist , and her new video for “ Mutual Core ” is ample evidence of that " . Likewise , Sam Byford of The Verge stated that " Björk has a history of stunning music videos , but she may have outdone herself with this latest effort " , while Gary Pini of Paper billed the singer as a " master of both art and music " . 
 Judy Berman from Flavorwire found the video " a precise yet still poetic evocation of the track " , while CraveOnline 's Johnny Firecloud opined that " In her new video for " Mutual Core " , Iceland 's queen of bizarre takes her latest single from Biophilia and turns it into an intimate hallucinatory mingling of the elements " . Chris Martins of Spin compared the video to the TV series Nova , stating that the video " might be the weirdest NOVA pilot ever created " , later adding that Björk " reinvents herself as the <unk> geology teacher the world 's ever seen " , an expression used also by io9 blogger George <unk> , who commented that " this stunning new video for " Mutual Core " makes us wish we had Björk for a geology teacher " . Brett Warner of Ology praised the director 's work stating that " director Andrew Thomas Huang 's gorgeous visuals will adeptly manage to both confuse the hell out of you and absolutely take your breath away " . Abdullah Saeed of The Atlantic compared the video to her previous works and commented : 
 Back when she first began experimenting with electronic producer Mark Bell on Homogenic , Cunningham style complemented her music perfectly for videos like " All is Full of Love " Now , a decade and a half later , her music explores biology , a discipline naturally interpreted by Huang ’ s visual sense . [ " Mutual Core " ] represents a new level of quality and ingenuity from Huang , who seems to be building on his now established visual style . 
 On 24 December 2012 , the video received two nominations at the 2012 <unk> Music Video Awards in the categories of Best Art Direction and Best Visual Effects . It went on to win the latter . The video was nominated for the Music Video of the Year category at the 19th Icelandic Music Awards , but lost to " Glow " by Retro <unk> . On 9 April 2013 , the video was nominated at the 2013 Webby Awards in the Online Music & Video — Music category . The video won the People 's Voice Webby in that category , as voted by the people on the internet , but lose the Webby bestowed by the International Academy of Digital Arts and Sciences to " <unk> <unk> " by Sigur Rós . The video received two nominations at the 2013 UK Music Video Awards for Best Visual Effects in a Video and Best Art Direction in a Video , winning none . However , Huang was nominated for his work in the video as Best New Director and went on to win the award . 
 = = = Global projections = = = 
 In March 2013 , an edited version of the video was shown every night as part of a synchronized program on over 15 of the largest digital signs in Times Square , three minutes before midnight , as part of the Midnight Moment , a presentation of the Times Square Advertising Coalition ( <unk> ) and Times Square Arts . This Midnight Moment presentation is part of the New York City launch of Streaming Museum ’ s Nordic Outbreak , an internationally touring exhibition of leading contemporary Nordic artists . Following the one @-@ month exhibition in Times Square , a series of public programs and exhibitions took place across the city through 6 April at Scandinavia House , One Dag <unk> Plaza , Manhattan Bridge Archway , Big Screen Plaza , Tisch School of the Arts , and an event in the Sky Room at the New Museum . On July 1 , 2013 , it was announced that the projections would go global , with planned projections to take place throughout the 7 continents , including a screening in the only cinema of Antarctica . Also on tour is a film by David Bates , Jr. that show the projection of the video across the billboards in Times Square . Commenting on the choice of bringing Björk 's video projection worldwide , Nina <unk> , founder and creative director of Streaming Museum , stated : 
 In the music video Mutual Core directed by Andrew Thomas Huang , Björk is organically part of nature and universe . The human connection to nature is a theme that underpins most of her artistic output . It ’ s particularly meaningful to bring Björk ’ s vision to 7 continents because of its relevance to all cultures . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 Credits taken from the official music video on YouTube . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Björk premiered Biophilia 's songs during the Manchester International Festival with a residency commissioned by the Festival itself . The singer played in a circular stage which included custom @-@ made instruments like computer @-@ controlled Pendulum Harps and a Tesla Coil , an instrument called <unk> , an hybrid between a gamelan and a celesta , and a pin Barrel organ called <unk> . The stage also included a circle of projection screens . During the " Mutual Core " performance , the screen projected images of moving tectonic plates , which Alan Pedder of the website <unk> likened to " Jóga " ' s music video , while the choir performed a sort of choreography , which included huddling at center stage during the verses and dancing during the chorus . The song was performed on every date of her Biophilia Tour . Her performance was well received by critics , which praised the whole show and project , which was called " ambitious " . While reviewing Björk 's show at the New York Hall of Science , Will Hermes of the website <unk> stated that " during ' Mutual Core ' , she sang of tectonic plates under a circle of projection screens illustrating the phenomena , and licked her lips after a line about how ' the Atlantic ridge drifts ' like she could feel that motion tingle beneath her skin " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Björk – vocals , songwriter , organ arrangement , beat , programming , choir arrangement , mixing , producer 
 16bit – beat , programming 
 Matthew Herbert – beat , programming 
 Damian Taylor – engineer , mixing 
 Sveinn Kjartansson – engineer 
 Credits adapted from Biophilia album liner notes . 
 = = Official versions = = 
 Digital download 
 " Mutual Core " – 5 : 06 
 Biophilia Remix Series VI 
 " Mutual Core " ( Matthew Herbert 's Teutonic Plates Mix ) – 5 : 10 
 Biophilia Remix Series VII 
 " Mutual Core " ( 16bit Remix ) – 5 : 22 
 Biophilia Remix Series VIII 
 " Mutual Core " ( These New Puritans Remix featuring Solomon Islands Song ) – 3 : 55 
 Beatport competition winner 
 " Mutual Core " ( <unk> Crooks Remix ) – 4 : 27 
 = Holden Commodore ( VE ) = 
 The Holden Commodore ( VE ) is a full @-@ size car that was produced by the Australian manufacturer Holden from 2006 to 2013 . It was the first iteration of the fourth and last generation of this Australian made model . Its range included the luxury variants , Holden Berlina ( VE ) and Holden Calais ( VE ) ; utility models were included as the Holden Ute ( VE ) . 
 As opposed to the VZ and all models previous which used Opel @-@ sourced platforms adapted both mechanically and in size for the local market , the whole @-@ new VE programme is the first Commodore to be developed exclusively by Holden in Australia . Despite its status as an all @-@ new model , engines — comprising the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre V6 and more powerful 6 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V8 — have been largely carried over from the VZ series . Innovative features to help minimise export redevelopment costs , such as a symmetrical centre console housing a flush @-@ fitting hand brake lever , facilitate the conversion to left @-@ hand drive . Internationally , the VE was badge engineered as the Chevrolet Lumina , Chevrolet Omega and Pontiac G8 . 
 Holden implemented a staged roll @-@ out of the VE variants , releasing the sedan first in July 2006 . Prior to this , Holden stated they would manufacture two parallel generations of Commodores until the new station wagon and utility body styles were launched . Variants by Holden 's performance vehicle partner , Holden Special Vehicles ( HSV ) , were released soon after the sedan 's debut alongside the long @-@ wheelbase WM Statesman / Caprice models . The VE Ute did not enter production until 2007 when it was accompanied by the previewing of a Sportwagon concept . The Sportwagon itself was subsequently introduced in July 2008 with the standard Commodore wheelbase instead of the extended wheelbase of previous Commodore wagons . 
 Updates to the VE have come in the form of model year ( MY ) changes from early 2007 onwards . Typically subtle in nature , these recurring changes have involved alterations to colours and trim , increased standard equipment , and a reduction in fuel consumption . More noteworthy adjustments have come in the form of a smaller 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V6 engine for entry @-@ level versions and " Series II " styling revisions in late 2010 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Official manufacture of the sedan began at Holden 's Elizabeth , South Australia production facility on 13 July 2006 . Three days later , Holden publicly revealed the car at the Melbourne Convention Centre , broadcast simultaneously via the Internet . The launch occurred alongside that of the flagship WM Statesman / Caprice . Previous to this , Holden announced that VE station wagon and utility variants would be postponed and the VZ equivalents would remain in production . Sales of the VE Ute commenced on 22 August 2007 . This was shortly followed by the unveiling of a Sportwagon concept , the production version of which was released in July 2008 . 
 = = = Sedan = = = 
 Holden 's designers and engineers began laying down the basics of a clean @-@ sheet Commodore sedan in 1999 . In the seven years of development , the car came to be Holden 's largest and most expensive project , representing an expenditure exceeding A $ 1 billion and 3 @.@ 4 million kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 million miles ) of testing . 
 In 1999 Peter Hughes , Holden 's manager of exterior design , produced a two @-@ dimensional image of a sketch drawn earlier by Michael Simcoe , Holden 's design director at the time . Known in house as the " Bill of Design " , the sketch formed the design basis for the production @-@ ready car . Various elements of the sketch were changed , including the rear tail lamps , the low @-@ profile side window cluster and the drawn out wheelbase , but the aggressive stance remained . 
 In 2004 , just two years before the release of the VE Commodore , Holden unveiled the Torana TT36 concept car at the Australian International Motor Show in Sydney . The TT36 served as a preview of the VE and allowed Holden to gauge public reaction to its styling . Much of the Torana 's styling drew on the essence of the VE 's design . Some production @-@ ready components even carried over from the TT36 including the steering wheel , the window and rear @-@ view mirror switch cluster and the handbrake lever . 
 Shortly after stylists penned the first design sketches , Holden engineers began work on developing the chassis . Opel , which had provided the basis for all previous Commodore generations , ceased production of their rear @-@ wheel drive Omega in 2003 . This meant that Holden had two options : to use another GM platform , or to develop an all @-@ new vehicle . GM 's new premium rear @-@ wheel drive Sigma platform was to see production in the 2002 Cadillac CTS . Holden 's engineers were offered this platform , but decided it was not appropriate . The Sigma platform 's double A @-@ arm front suspension and extensive use of aluminium were too costly for the VE 's market segment . The luggage compartment was deemed too small and the Sigma interior package could not be stretched sufficiently to become a family @-@ sized car . In particular , the rear @-@ seat shoulder width was too tight . These major drawbacks made Holden decide to develop an all new platform , known as the GM Zeta platform , on which a number of forthcoming GM vehicles will also be based . The Zeta suspension system comprises new double @-@ pivot MacPherson strut for the front and a four @-@ link independent rear setup . These replace the previous simple MacPherson strut design front and much criticised semi @-@ trailing arm rear suspension , for improved ride and handling . 
 Denny Mooney was appointed chairman of Holden on 1 January 2004 , by which time development of the VE Commodore was well underway . Key design and engineering work was being finalised , and investment was already being made in making the tooling with which to manufacture the car . One of Mooney 's priorities was to improve the perceived quality issues that surrounded the previous generations of Commodores . The interior quality benefited dramatically from this additional emphasis ; Mooney pushed for panel gaps to be reduced by a further 0 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) over previous targets . Smaller panel gaps are just one of the ways that Holden have developed the VE to pitch it against the European competitors . Through the use of advanced steels and intensive design , the body structure is 50 percent stiffer than the outgoing model , benefiting from noise and vibration reductions , handling and crash safety . However the new body has resulted in substantially increased weight over the outgoing model . 
 The development of the new car led Holden to redesign the Elizabeth plant in South Australia so that entire sections of the car can be assembled off the foremost production line . This new production method allows for complete sub @-@ sections like the engine and transmissions to be constructed seamlessly together on rigs that simplify production . This process is applied to the front @-@ end module of the VE Commodore , consisting of the headlights , bumpers , airbag sensors and other accessory components . It can be easily removed as one @-@ piece leading to lower repair costs and easier access to the engine bay . This design represents the first time such a method has been used within GM , and garnered the SAE Australasia 's 2006 Automotive Engineering Excellence Award . A modular design structure known within Holden as " Flex Vision " has been applied to the interior where fundamentally different components such as audio units and instrument clusters can be swapped out for the different Commodore variants , creating radically varied interior look and feel without much higher costs . The upshot of this is much greater differentiation between the variants than the outgoing model creating three distinct interior looks , dubbed : Functional , Performance and Luxury . The closely related long @-@ wheelbase WM Statesman / Caprice derivatives feature a fourth interior type referred to as Prestige . 
 Additional detail touches were added to the VE , such as a new four @-@ strut hinge system for the boot to replace space intrusive , much maligned " gooseneck " hinges as used on previous Commodores . High @-@ specification variants see expandable door pockets and a Saab @-@ like " blackout " feature which illuminates only the speedometer at night to enhance driver focus on the road . An innovative flush @-@ fitting handbrake set into a symmetrical centre console means the lever can be easily reversed to sit on the opposite side of console for left @-@ hand drive export markets , minimising redesign costs . 
 = = = Sportwagon = = = 
 Introduced in July 2008 , the A $ 110 million VE Sportwagon programme represented a departure from previous Commodore station wagons . Holden was concerned that the traditional wagon market was being severely eroded by growing sport utility vehicle ( SUV ) sales and over @-@ reliance on fleet purchasing . Up to 90 percent of VZ wagons were bought by fleet companies and Holden sought to attract more retail customers . The decision was made to develop a sportier , more stylish wagon as an alternative to SUVs . The Sportwagon , unlike the previous VZ wagon , which shared its long @-@ wheelbase with the Statesman / Caprice is built on the same short @-@ wheelbase platform as the sedan . This shift in thinking means cargo capacity is reduced from VZ 's 1 @,@ 402 litres ( 370 US gal ) to 895 litres ( 236 US gal ) but the sedan 's near 50 : 50 weight distribution is retained . The Sportwagon is styled with an aggressively sloping rear profile . To ensure the cargo opening is sufficiently large with such a profile , the tailgate hinges part way up the roof line . The design of the tailgate is compact enough to open in just 268 millimetres ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) of space , a publicised feature in Sportwagon television commercials . 
 Revisions were made to the suspension over the sedan 's setup . These included stiffer springs , anti @-@ roll bar changes and an additional ball @-@ joint in the rear suspension to handle the extra load . Weight increases by 91 kilograms ( 201 lb ) over the sedan . Aggressive pricing means Sportwagon variants of each specification level receive a A $ 1 @,@ 000 premium over the sedan and are cheaper than the outgoing VZ wagons . 
 = = = Ute = = = 
 2007 saw the launch of the VE Ute , a coupe utility based on the VE Commodore . It was unveiled to the media in August , with showroom sales began later in the month . This generation of the Holden Ute is aimed as a " lifestyle vehicle " , a shift from the traditional " workhorse " market . The VE series Ute was marketed as the Holden Ute rather than as the Holden Commodore Ute . 
 Omega : The base model , having similar standard features to the Commodore Omega sedan but can carry more than the SS @-@ V , SS and SV6 . It has the standard 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre V6 180 kW ( 241 hp ) and 330 N · m ( 243 lb · ft ) . The manual version of the Omega came with the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre High @-@ Output V6 with 195 kW ( 261 hp ) and 340 N · m ( 251 lb · ft ) but only until the mid @-@ 2009 MY10 update . 
 SV6 : A sportier version of the V6 Ute , the SV6 replaced the S @-@ pack from previous models . This has the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre High @-@ Output V6 with 195 kW ( 261 hp ) and 340 N · m ( 251 lb · ft ) . Which has been recently updated to 210 kW ( 282 hp ) and 350 N · m ( 258 lb · ft ) engine . 
 SS : The SS Ute is the basic V8 version with the same 6 @-@ litre V8 as the Commodore sedan with 270 kW ( 362 hp ) and 530 N · m ( 391 lb · ft ) . 
 SS @-@ V : A higher spec edition of the SS and based on the SS @-@ V Sedan , it has a 6 @-@ litre V8 with 270 kW ( 362 hp ) and 530 N · m ( 391 lb · ft ) . 
 SS @-@ V Redline ( Series II ) : A performance version of the SS @-@ V offering Brembo brakes , 19 @-@ inch Alloy wheels , FE3 Super Sports Performance Suspension and a tyre <unk> kit . 
 Unlike the previous VU – VZ generation , no double @-@ cab , cab @-@ chassis or AWD variants are offered . 
 = = Safety = = 
 Engine packaging became a contentious issue during development . Holden 's designers wanted the engine positioned well behind the front axle to allow short overhangs and an overall sportier appearance , whereas the crash engineers were concerned that this would reduce the body 's impact absorption in an accident . Negotiation between designers and crash engineers resulted in moving some of the engine components , including relocating the battery to the boot , freeing up valuable front @-@ end space . By having the engine moved back and further down , the VE Commodore also benefits from near perfect 50 : 50 weight distribution across all variants , leading to superior handling . Crash engineers introduced several other safety initiatives , including relocating the fuel tank in front of the rear @-@ axle line , instead of behind . A more crash @-@ resistant rear @-@ end was also seen as necessary . The design though had to incorporate a spacious boot and a spare @-@ wheel bay that could house the largest @-@ sized wheel to be fitted to the car . Crash test results from Australasian New Car Assessment Program ( ANCAP ) rate the VE lower in the offset frontal impact test than the previous generation Commodore . The overall crash score was marginally higher than the outgoing VZ , due to improvements in side impact protection giving a score of 27 @.@ 45 out of 37 or a four star rating out of a possible five . 
 Holden 's standardisation of six airbags in March 2008 for MY09 made the VE eligible for the ANCAP side pole test , yielding additional scoring points . The second stage of the VE 's safety rollout in October 2008 for MY09.5 included the addition of an energy absorbing steering column shroud and redesigned rear door latches across the VE range . The inclusion of a seat belt reminder on the Omega sedan yielded another point , thus allowing the Omega sedan to score five @-@ stars , or a score of 33 @.@ 45 when tested the following December . The Omega Sportwagon was the next model to be awarded the full five stars the following February , following the addition of a seat belt reminder in Sportwagon production . The remaining VE models , including the Ute and WM Statesman / Caprice , which had already received most of the safety upgrades , received the seat belt reminder as standard fitment as of MY10 production from August 2009 . As a result , all VE sedan and Sportwagon variants along with the extended length WM models received the five @-@ star rating . The VE Ute officially received the rating on 19 October 2009 , making the entire line @-@ up of Australian @-@ made Holdens five @-@ star ANCAP rated . 
 = = Powertrains = = 
 Holden , concerned about the risks of introducing a new platform and drivetrain at the same time , introduced the Australian @-@ built Alloytec V6 engine in the proven VZ model . This allowed time to address any issues or faults before fitting it to the VE . The original base V6 benefited from power increases over the VZ , with engine noise reduced by using new timing chains among other modifications . An updated version of the long @-@ serving four @-@ speed GM 4L60 @-@ E automatic transmission remained for this engine . Manual transmission options are the Aisin <unk> and Tremec T @-@ 56 six @-@ speeders . Two <unk> featuring Active Select ; the five @-@ speed GM <unk> @-@ E and six @-@ speed GM <unk> @-@ E were also offered . The latter was reserved exclusively for a modified L76 V8 engine , giving an extra 10 kilowatts ( 13 hp ) of power compared to the VZ . This new engine designated L98 does not readily support fuel @-@ saving Active Fuel Management technology , unlike the L76 . 
 In October 2006 , Holden introduced a bi @-@ fuel version of the Alloytec V6 , available to the Omega and Berlina . Able to run on both petrol and LPG , it features an advanced sequential vapour gas injection ( <unk> ) system and hardened valve seats to cope . The bi @-@ fuel V6 produces 5 kilowatts ( 7 hp ) and 5 newton metres ( 4 lb · ft ) less than the conventional V6 when run on LPG , for a total of 175 kilowatts ( 235 hp ) . Although LPG prices are lower , the engine uses a large 100 @-@ kilogram ( 220 lb ) cylindrical gas tank which causes decreased boot space and slightly increased fuel consumption . Holden was able to take advantage of a loophole in government legislation , allowing an A $ 2 @,@ 000 rebate on LPG installation because the unit is fitted post @-@ production by Holden 's customisation arm <unk> . Normally , people would only be entitled to a A $ 1 @,@ 000 rebate for new cars pre @-@ installed with LPG . Due to the possibility that these bi @-@ fuel Commodores may have been fitted with undersized O @-@ rings in the service valve hand tap , Holden issued a recall affecting the first 981 of these models on 10 April 2007 . There were also two VE recalls previous to this . The initial 16 October 2006 recall affecting 1 @,@ 521 V8 Commodore and WM Statesman / Caprice models involved a faulty fuel hose , causing a fuel smell to enter the cabin . A second 10 November 2006 recall affecting 12 @,@ 830 Commodores and WM models built prior to 11 September 2006 resulted from defective rear seat belt anchors . On 7 December 2007 , another recall was issued for over 86 @,@ 000 VE and WM V6 models . This was due to the possibility that one of the fuel lines in the engine compartment may have a rub condition with a fuel vapour hose clip , possibly causing a fuel smell to become evident . 
 For the 2008 Australian International Motor Show in Sydney , Holden announced the MY09.5 upgrade involving the standardisation of the " premium " Alloytec V6 across the Commodore range from 1 November 2008 , whereas previously it had been reserved for the SV6 and Calais . Omega and Berlina variants acquired variable valve timing , like the High Output engine , but not the " premium " dual exhaust system and the five @-@ speed automatic transmission . These changes result in the base petrol V6 producing 5 kilowatts ( 7 hp ) less power and 5 newton metres ( 4 lb · ft ) less torque than the engine it replaces . However , Omega and Berlina sedans benefit from a two percent fuel efficiency improvement , or four percent for wagons . Additionally , emissions have also been reduced allowing petrol @-@ powered variants to achieve Euro VI certification , a pending emission standard for European introduction in 2014 . These changes extend further than the petrol engine as bi @-@ fuel LPG variants benefit from an eight percent improvement in fuel economy when run on LPG . This reduced fuel consumption does however , come at a cost — LPG @-@ equipped models are rated at 318 newton metres ( 235 lb · ft ) , 7 newton metres ( 5 lb · ft ) less than before . 
 Also announced at the 2008 motor show was a version of the 6 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V8 engine fitted with Active Fuel Management ( AFM ) technology , known as the L76 . Originally omitted from the L98 V8 , AFM aids fuel consumption under light engine loads , although it is available only when paired with the automatic transmission and power output is reduced by 10 kilowatts ( 13 hp ) . The announcement of AFM coincided with the announcement of EcoLine , a badge highlighting Holden vehicles employing fuel saving technologies or those powered by fuels other than petrol . For the VE Commodore , both AFM and LPG @-@ powered versions fall under the EcoLine umbrella . On 7 April 2009 , Holden announced that dealerships were receiving their first deliveries of EcoLine @-@ branded models , including the new L76 V8s . 
 On 4 August 2009 , Holden announced the MY10 revisions to the VE and WM range to be released in September . For the VE Omega and Berlina , the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre Alloytec V6 has been downsized to 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litres , the lowest engine displacement of a Commodore since the straight @-@ six engine fitted to the 1986 VL series . This smaller capacity engine features Spark Ignition Direct Injection ( SIDI ) technology , and is officially claimed to reduce fuel consumption by up to 12 percent depending on the variant . Power increases to 190 kilowatts ( 250 hp ) , although torque is reduced to 290 newton metres ( 210 lbf · ft ) . Along with the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre engine , a 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre version of the same , producing 210 kilowatts ( 280 hp ) and 350 newton metres ( 260 lbf · ft ) , was also unveiled . Other than the manual transmission version of the SV6 , all SIDI V6 models are coupled to GM 's <unk> automatic and fall under Holden 's EcoLine banner . Benefits to fuel economy for the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre SIDI can also be attributed to an improved " deceleration fuel cut " system , which terminates the fuel supply during engine coasting ; a higher efficiency alternator and voltage regulator ; a 50 rpm lower idle speed ( to 550 rpm ) ; and a new " turbine damper " for the automatic transmission that works to suppress vibrations at low <unk> , thus enabling earlier <unk> . Omega versions of the Ute and all bi @-@ fuel versions retain the existing 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre and four @-@ speed automatic combination , although the LPG engine has been tweaked for further efficiency gains . 
 Further powertrain improvement came in September 2010 with the MY11 upgrades . Omega versions of the Ute were upgraded to the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre SIDI engine with six @-@ speed automatic transmission as used in the sedan and wagons versions . Holden also modified both the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V6 and 6 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V8 engines to accept E85 bio @-@ ethanol in addition to petrol . Holden claims that running either engine on E85 provides a sizeable increase in performance and reduces CO2 emissions between 20 and 40 percent , depending on the distance the fuel is transported from the production site to the filling station . E85 compatibility extended to the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre V6 as part of the MY12 update in September 2011 . 
 = = Models = = 
 = = = Commodore Omega = = = 
 Replacing the outgoing Commodore Executive and Acclaim ( nameplates introduced in 1983 and 1993 , respectively ) , the Omega offers a halfway point in terms of equipment levels . The most significant gain over the Executive is the electronic stability control system ( Bosch version 8 @.@ 0 ) now standard across the range . Like all VE models , the Omega uses a " space saver " spare tyre , which has come under scrutiny . The tyre can be driven for 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) at a maximum speed of 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) . Concerns have been raised by the public over its usefulness in remote Australian outback areas , far from any tyre repair centres and asserts that it is a cost @-@ cutting measure . Similar concerns have been raised in the media , although Holden maintains that this is a weight @-@ saving feature and allows for full @-@ size spare tyres to be purchased at an additional cost . Likewise , critics found the omission of standard air conditioning for the Omega model unforgivable , given both the overall hot Australian climate , and the cost of the car . This , however , was rectified in the MY09 upgrade of the Omega ( see below ) . 
 Holden have offered five limited edition models based on the Commodore Omega : 
 V @-@ Series : introduced in October 2006 , the Commodore V featured air conditioning , a sports @-@ oriented body kit including 17 @-@ inch alloy wheels , a rear spoiler and colour @-@ matched wing mirrors and exterior door handles . 
 Lumina : debuted in June 2007 with a luxury theme including the Berlina grille and the original Calais V seven @-@ spoke alloy wheels . Specified identically to the V @-@ Series with exception to the rear spoiler , the Lumina saw the addition of rear parking sensors and Bluetooth connectivity . 
 60th Anniversary : released on 1 May 2008 to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the 48 – 215 , Holden 's first vehicle . Aside from the unique 18 @-@ inch alloy wheels , leather seat inserts , and " 60th Anniversary " badging , the anniversary model is essentially identical to the Lumina in terms of both equipment and styling . 
 International : sedans and <unk> entered production in mid @-@ March 2009 . Internationals are appointed with launch VE Calais V alloy wheels , front foglamps , a six @-@ disc CD changer , leather upholstered trim and steering wheel , Bluetooth connectivity and rear park assist . Holden reintroduced the International in October 2009 . Offered in sedan and Sportwagon body styles , the second iteration was fitted with the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre SIDI V6 engine and six @-@ speed automatic transmission ; a 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre LPG Alloytec V6 engine with four @-@ speed automatic transmission option was available for the sedan only . Extra features include 18 @-@ inch alloy wheels , Berlina front grille , leather seat trim and steering wheel , Bluetooth connectivity and rear park assist for the sedan ( already standard on <unk> ) . 
 Z Series : released on 5 September 2012 as a special edition Commodore . It was released to help boot the slowing sales of the VE range and to help send off the last model VE 's before the current model VF was released . The Z Series combined luxury and sports features for great value . The models that had the Z badging were the Omega , SV6 , SS and SS V. Features included leather seat trim ( Omega and SSV ) , Bluetooth connect , rear parking sensors , rear parking camera , 18 " WM Caprice alloys ( Omega ) , rear lip spoiler , 19 ' alloys ( SV6 and SS ) . The Sedan and Sportwagon came as Z Series , SV6 Z Series , SS Z Series and SS V Z Series . The Ute came with all except for the Omega @-@ based Z Series model . 
 Equipe : The Equipe was a luxury special edition Commodore released in 2011 under the Series II badge . It was mostly based off the Berlina with majority of all the features been carried over . The car featured 18 " alloy rims , full leather interior , fog lamps , Berlina front grill and bumper , rear parking sensors , rear view camera and came as a Sedan or <unk> model . 
 = = = Commodore SV6 = = = 
 Building on the Omega , the SV6 is equipped with the more powerful High Output variant of the Alloytec V6 engine , coupled to a six @-@ speed manual or five @-@ speed automatic transmission . Air conditioning , a key feature missing on the launch Omega , came standard on the SV6 . A body kit and sports suspension similar to the V8 Commodore SS / SS V variants is also fitted . The SV6 sports the Performance interior look , characterised by an accentuated matte black centre console and red lighting , as opposed to the silver Functional @-@ style interior of the Omega . 
 = = = Commodore SS = = = 
 Offering similar equipment levels to the SV6 , the Commodore SS uses the 6 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V8 engine and T @-@ 56 six @-@ speed manual transmission . The SS is recognisable from its quad exhaust outlets in place of the SV6 dual outlets . The resulting specification level is much higher than the outgoing minimalist SV8 and only missing a few cosmetic touches of the previous flagship Commodore SS . Since its release , the SS has won two consecutive ( 2006 and 2007 ) Bang For Your Bucks awards , a Motor magazine initiative . The judges gave preference to the SS the second @-@ time @-@ round because " the VE Commodore SS really does represent the biggest bang you 'll ever get for your bucks like these . " 
 A more upmarket SS , the SS V @-@ Series represents the first time this type of naming has been applied to Holden products . The V @-@ Series naming is reminiscent of the V @-@ badging on selected Cadillac models , another member of the GM family . The badge design on the <unk> bears strong resemblance to the ones used by Cadillac . But whereas Cadillac uses it to signify high @-@ performance versions of its products , Holden V @-@ Series variants boast extra features . The V @-@ Series variants were introduced , largely due to a fully optioned Commodore SS in the VZ range being rather successful . The SS V offers extra luxuries at a similar price point to the preceding SS . Inside , it is recognisable by the metallic look pedals and instruments matched with the exterior colour . Additionally , the entire dashboard can be optioned in a range of loud colours : bright red , orange or black . The SS V exterior is equally adventurous , exhibiting five @-@ spoke 19 @-@ inch alloy wheels and the option of larger 20 @-@ inch wheels : the largest wheels ever fitted to a Holden car . 
 SS V 60th Anniversary : like the 60th Anniversary Omega @-@ based edition , the SS V pack launched on 1 May 2008 . Over the standard production SS V , the anniversary model added 10 @-@ spoke 20 @-@ inch alloy wheels , satellite navigation , rear parking sensors , a high @-@ mounted rear spoiler , chrome exterior door handle highlights and " 60th Anniversary " badging and floor mats . 
 SS V @-@ Series Special Edition : following the 2009 cancellation of Pontiac brand in North America , the Pontiac G8 front @-@ end fascia and other trimmings were fitted to approximately 1 @,@ 500 Commodore SS Vs . Unveiled at the 2009 Deniliquin ute muster on 2 October , sales began in November . Unlike the G8 which was only offered as a sedan , Holden issued utility , sedan and Sportwagon body variants of the Special Edition . Due to the popularity of the Pontiac @-@ inspired SS V , Holden announced on 14 January 2010 that production would be extended until March 2010 . 
 = = = Berlina = = = 
 Priced lower than the outgoing model , the second tier Berlina retains a similar amount of equipment . The exterior styling is similar to the Omega but gaining extra touches such as larger tail @-@ lights , front fog lamps and seven @-@ spoke 17 @-@ inch alloy wheels . It features the Luxury @-@ type interior with a large LCD centre display and is the only model in the VE range that features wood grain highlights . The VE series is the last one to feature this nameplate , first introduced in 1984 as a model variant and as a standalone nameplate in 1988 . 
 = = = Calais = = = 
 Like the Berlina , the Calais retains the features of the outgoing model but at a lower price point . Offering a blend of luxury and sporting character , it pairs the High Output Alloytec V6 engine of the SV6 with the five @-@ speed automatic transmission . Unlike the previous model Calais which featured a semi @-@ sport suspension setup known as <unk> , the VE shares the Commodore SS / SS V stiff sports suspension . Like the SS , an upscale V @-@ Series edition is available . Being the flagship of the Commodore range , it comes with everything the VE has to offer and serves as a stepping stone to the luxury long @-@ wheelbase Statesman / Caprice range based on the VE . The Calais ( as well as Berlina ) are the only models in the range to feature larger tail @-@ lights . 
 Calais V International : 
 Calais V 60th Anniversary : 
 = = HSV range ( E Series ) = = 
 The enhanced performance VE range sold by Holden Special Vehicles ( HSV ) is marketed as the E Series and it comprised the variants listed below . For the first time , in order to more greatly differentiate its products from the mainstream donor cars , HSV invested in revised <unk> ( chiefly , different front fender panels with dedicated air vent and different tail lights ) . E Series HSV vehicles have been the most successful and mass @-@ produced vehicles in HSV 's history . 
 = = = Clubsport = = = 
 The E Series Clubsport R8 takes its fundamental body structure from the mainstream VE Commodore . It is also the standard model in the HSV line @-@ up . With the deletion of lower lines of V8 HSV models the Clubsport slipped down to the entry level HSV V8 , on a par with the Manta of the VR @-@ VS @-@ VT series . As such the sales of E Series <unk> has been over shadowed by the sales of the E Series GTS . 
 The Original E @-@ Series Clubsport was released in September 2006 . The Clubsport had LED taillights and vertical front fender grilles only found on HSV E @-@ Series models . Cloth trim was standard on Clubsport models with leather being an option . 
 In September 2008 , the Clubsport R8 Tourer was released . The Tourer is a wagon version of the R8 , based on the Sportwagon . The two Clubsport models were powered by the 307 kW ( 417 PS ; 412 hp ) LS2 6 @.@ 0 L V8 and Tremec <unk> six @-@ speed manual gearbox , capable of doing 0 – 100 km / h in 5 @.@ 8 seconds with the manual gearbox and 5 @.@ 9 seconds when fitted with the auto transmission and having a top speed of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . From April 2008 , all HSV models use 6 @.@ 2 L LS3 V8s , instead of the previous LS2 . The LS3 powers the <unk> at 317 kW ( 431 PS ; 425 hp ) and 550 N · m ( 410 lb · ft ) . 
 The HSV E Series 2 range was released 2010 and was the most major update since the release of E Series <unk> . Prices on the E2 Clubsport models started at $ 65 @,@ 990 for the Clubsport R8 and $ 66 @,@ 990 for the Clubsport R8 Tourer . The range received many cosmetic changes with new front and rear bumpers , twin @-@ <unk> bonnet ( from the Pontiac G8 ) and a new range of wheel designs . The Series 2 has a very distinctive looking set of daytime running lights standard across the E2 range . The new engines is the range are the 325 kW ( 442 PS ; 436 hp ) 6 @.@ 2 L LS3 V8 used exclusively by the HSV GTS , with the rest of the E2 range being powered by an LS3 in 317 kW ( 431 PS ; 425 hp ) trim . The new engines have also improved fuel economy by 4 @.@ 2 % on the LS3 V8 . New is the intelligent launch controls , competition mode ESC and extended cruise control systems which are all standard for E2 models excluding intelligent launch control which is only available with a manual transmission . 
 HSV E Series 3 or E3 commenced sales in 2011 . Model changes for the E series 3 include an option for LPI system ( for an extra $ <unk> ) allowing the vehicle to run on LPG and unleaded petrol ; the LPI system is not available on the ClubSport R8 Tourer . Cosmetic changes include a new spoiler and revised exhaust tips . HSV E Series 3 models reach 0 @-@ <unk> in 5 @.@ 8 seconds . The HSV E Series 3 introduced the new HSV Enhanced Driver Interface ; it has the same interface as the Holden IQ ( found in VE Series II Commodores ) but with added function . The system allows users to access the car 's computer and monitor fuel consumption , stability , g @-@ force and vehicle dynamics . Other functions include data logging options , digital gauge displays , stopwatch , driver and racing options , along with controls for the Grange 's Bi @-@ Modal exhaust and Side Blind @-@ Zone Alert . The HSV Enhanced Driver Interface and satellite navigation is standard across the E series 3 range . 
 = = = = Vauxhall VXR = = = = 
 350 <unk> per year were scheduled for official importation into the UK , at a price of £ 35 @,@ 105 . The LS3 V8 is particularly popular among tuners in the USA , so performance parts are widely available . The most dramatic warranted upgrade is the £ 7 @,@ 000 supercharger kit , which ups power to 395 kW ( 537 PS ; 530 hp ) . Imports to the US were previously sold as Pontiac G8 , with V6 , L76 V8 , or an LS3 V8 engine in the GXP trim . The supercharged edition Bathurst VXR8 was reviewed on Top Gear , and its power @-@ lap time was 1 min 26 @.@ 3 seconds , a similar time to the old BMW M5 E60 . 
 In July 2010 , Autocar reported that , " VXR8 was quietly dropped from the price lists several months ago " after stocks ran out . However , a facelifted version based on the new HSV E3 GTS was released to the UK market in April 2011 at a price of around £ 49 @,@ 500 , almost £ 15 @,@ 000 more than the previous VXR8 , but significantly cheaper than most of its rivals , like the Mercedes <unk> AMG and BMW M5 . Vauxhall has offered the 2011 Clubsport to UK customers as a special order model . 
 = = = = CSV <unk> = = = = 
 In 2007 , the same model was exported to the Middle East badged as the CSV <unk> , albeit in left hand drive . In this instance , CSV stands for " Chevrolet Special Vehicles " , not to be confused with the unrelated , but also Holden Commodore @-@ based Corsa Specialised Vehicles ( CSV ) cars . 
 = = = GTS = = = 
 The fundamental underpinnings are based on the mainstream VE Commodore models of the same years . The car is powered by GM 's 6 @.@ 2 litre LS3 V8 engine , with a maximum power output of 442 PS ( 325 kW ) . Buyers have the option of a six @-@ speed manual transmission or six @-@ speed automatic transmission ; the manual is capable of reaching 0 – 100 km / h ( 0 – 62 mph ) in 5 @.@ 5 seconds and the automatic is capable of 0 – 100 km / h ( 0 – 62 mph ) in 5 @.@ 6 seconds . 
 E Series 1 
 The GTS has usually used a more powerful engine and robust drivetrain than other HSV models , however the E @-@ Series 1 GTS shared the <unk> LS2 V8 engine with 412 bhp ( 307 kW ) of power and 405 lb · ft ( 550 N · m ) of torque , with the cheaper Clubsport and the luxury Senator . The major difference between the E @-@ Series GTS and other HSV models in the range is the Magnetic Ride Control ( MRC , or " MagneRide " ) . MRC utilises <unk> dampers to improve the car 's handling and dynamics . In the GTS , the MRC can be switched between Performance and Track response modes at the touch of a button . MRC is not available on the Clubsport ; it is standard equipment of the Senator , but switches between " Luxury " and " Performance " , there is no " Track " mode like the GTS has . 
 HSV claims the braking performance of the GTS is better than some of the world 's leading sports cars , including the BMW M5 , Mercedes @-@ Benz AMG <unk> and Lamborghini Gallardo . The GTS can stop from 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) in just 36 metres , only 30 centimeters shy of a Porsche 997 . 
 E Series 2 
 Released in September 2009 , the E Series 2 HSV GTS incorporated a more powerful motor and drivetrain than other HSV models . It retains the same GM LS3 <unk> V8 engine but while the rest of the HSV range still have 317 kW or 425 bhp , the GTS engine is rated at ( 325 kW ) . Twin bonnet scoops have returned to this model from the styling of the Pontiac G8 . Other changes include the availability of launch control on manual versions , a recalibrated version of the magnetic ride control suspension with stiffer springs for the HSV GTS , wider wheels and a new high @-@ flow dual @-@ mode muffler system that produces a throatier roar under heavy acceleration . The E @-@ Series 2 stability control system also has a Competition setting which allows for more wheel slip for special track or motorsport applications . The cruise control brakes the car when it is travelling downhill to ensure its speed stays within one per cent of the set speed . This model has daytime running lights . 
 E Series 3 
 The E Series 3 was announced in September 2010 . It carried the same motor and drivetrain as before , and only minor changes to the exterior . In this series HSV focused on changes to the interior of the car as well as major upgrades to the computer systems and a new electronic interface called the HSV Enhanced Driver Interface . External changes included the shock wave exhaust tips and grilles and new HID Xenon adaptive projector headlamps . The control panel changes included a new ' Oracle Dash ' with upgraded trip computer , tire pressure monitors and fuel statistics ; the center console was reworked , introducing the Holden touchscreen IQ system and the HSV EDI performance data logging system ( similar to the Nissan GT @-@ R ) , which displays real @-@ time information on engine speed , brakes , gear shifts , g @-@ forces on the car , steering angle , fuel economy , stability control , Magnetic Ride Control suspension , car dynamics , Bi @-@ Modal Exhaust , battery voltage , oil pressure , power , torque , elevation , exhaust pressure , intake manifold pressure and air intake temp . The system includes preloaded race track locations , stop watches and track maps , satellite navigation , digital radio , Bluetooth , optional DVD player and ability to download data onto a PC using the <unk> i2 software . The E Series 3 introduced ( <unk> ) Side Blind Zone Alert which uses ultrasonic sensors to alert drivers of traffic obstructions in blind spots . Using the HSV EDI the driver can customize operation of the car by for example turning off stability control and controlling the Bi @-@ Modal Exhaust . The E Series 3 offered the option of HSV LPI ( Liquid Propane Injection ) , an LPG <unk> system which allows the use of liquid propane as an alternative fuel . The LPI is controlled by the car 's ECU and seamlessly changes from petrol to LPG when the engine has reached optimum temperature ( when maximum engine power is required , the system automatically switches back to petrol ) . 
 = = = Maloo = = = 
 The all @-@ new E Series Maloo utility was a late arrival , released in October 2007 , and only available as the Maloo R8 . The Chevrolet Corvette @-@ based 6 litre LS2 V8 was now tuned to deliver 307 kW ( 412 hp ) and 550 N · m ( 410 lb · ft ) . Later 2008 and onwards models saw the power output rise to 317 kW ( 425 hp ) with the adoption of a 6 @.@ 2 @-@ litre LS3 V8 engine . <unk> on the E Series include Electronic Stability Control , five @-@ star ANCAP rating , and linear control suspension . 
 In August 2009 , the facelifted E Series 2 was released which uses the same drivetrain as the W427 with an upgraded dual plate clutch not found on previous models . Late in the model run , HSV released the limited edition GXP sedan and Maloo GXP ute , being amalgams of HSV and Pontiac G8 / ST components . 
 A mildly cosmetically altered E Series 3 was released in September 2010 , and with it a special 20 years of Maloo edition limited to just 100 examples , featuring unique exterior equipment , including matte black ' Vector E ' vents on the front guards and bonnet , 20 @-@ inch GTS alloy wheels , bi @-@ modal exhaust system , Side Blind Zone Alert ( <unk> ) , and new hero colours , including ' Hazard ' yellow . The interior of the 20th anniversary Maloo features special leather upholstery , satellite navigation , Enhanced Driver Interface ( EDI ) , and a specific rear window decal and numbered build plate . Will be available in North America in July 2015 
 = = = Senator = = = 
 The E Series Senator Signature is based on the VE Commodore and was released in August 2006 with 307 kW ( 411 hp ) of power . It is a four @-@ door , 5 seat sedan , is rated to tow a maximum of 1 @,@ 600 kg ( 3 @,@ 527 lb ) and is fitted with automatic transmission and leather interior as standard . The development cost for the E Series Senator was more than the VT , VX , Y Series and the Z Series Senators combined . In general , the HSV Senator Signature is a significantly more upmarket form of the Holden Calais @-@ V , with a matching <unk> . 
 The E Series Senator is 4 @,@ 943 mm ( 194 @.@ 6 in ) long and 1 @,@ 899 mm ( 74 @.@ 8 in ) wide , and the stopping distance from 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) is about 36 metres . The Senator is equipped with 19 @-@ inch , 10 @-@ spoke chrome shadow alloy wheels . The cabin features carbon fibre and imitation metal highlights . For the first time there are no visible wood grain trims that have featured in previous models . The rear lights on the Senator are full LED and were repositioned , lowering them by 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) to help differentiate the car from its Holden donor , creating sporting flair yet keeping the luxury image . The development cost to redesign the rear taillights cost HSV $ 3 million . The designers of the Senator have also attempted to add a more of a luxury feel to the car instead of favouring the aggressive side . The entry level price for the Senator Signature is $ 76 @,@ 990 , down $ 4 @,@ 000 from the previous model . 
 Like the E @-@ series HSV GTS , the suspension is fitted with switchable Magnetic Ride Control ( MRC , or " MagneRide " ) offering Luxury or Performance modes . It does this by electrically adjusting the viscosity of the <unk> inside the shock absorbers , producing different damping levels . Magnetic Ride Control also enhances braking by preventing forward weight transfer when the car is under heavy braking . The MRC system development took three years and cost HSV more than $ 4 @.@ 5 million . 
 Standard gear includes climate control , Blaupunkt sound , cruise control , full trip computer , rear park assist , traction control system , Electronic Stability Control , power mirrors and windows . The oil , voltage and temperature gauges are now digital . The interior offers a choice of light urban beige , white or black for the colours . The carpets remain dark as in the Holden Calais V @-@ Series . The Senator Signature also offers a number of options such as a roof mounted DVD player , front park assist , rain sensing wipers and door entry lamps . Satellite navigation will become available as an option in the near future . 
 From April 2008 , the HSV Senator Signature was fitted with the 6 @.@ 2 @-@ litre Generation 4 alloy LS3 V8 that delivered 317 kW ( 425 hp ) at 6000 rpm and 550 N · m ( 406 lb · ft ) at 4400 rpm . It can go from 0 to 100 km / h ( 0 – 60 mph ) in around 5 seconds and has a limited top speed of 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) . From this MY09 model onwards , the Senator Signature was available with an optional 6 @-@ speed manual transmission . In early 2009 , HSV introduced a base model Senator at the Melbourne Motor Show . This special model was priced from $ 69 @,@ 990 ( RRP ) with just 30 manual and 59 auto examples produced . While it retained the look of the Signature model , it was essentially a ClubSport with a Senator body kit and did without many of the luxury features mentioned above as well as the MRC suspension , GTS @-@ style seating and shadow chrome finish on the wheels . 
 In October 2009 , HSV released their E2 model upgrades which introduced the " Shockwave " theme to the exterior of the Senator Signature . It was applied in a more subtle way than seen on the ClubSport , GTS and Maloo models with the front end receiving a new grille and some LED daytime running lights while the rear was fitted with the same style of lower body kit as the other sedan models . As with other models in the E2 range , the Senator Signature was available with the " SV Enhanced Options " bi @-@ modal exhaust system and the 20 " Pentagon wheel in place of a re @-@ designed 19 " wheel . There were no interior styling updates for the E2 model . 
 2010 saw the arrival of the E3 HSV range which brought with it a raft of interior changes shared with the VE Series II upgrade of HSV 's donor vehicle , the Holden Commodore , such as the new Holden iQ audio / infotainment system and safety features such as Side Blind zone alert . It also brought HSV 's Enhanced Driver Interface ( EDI ) system to the Senator , a system that constantly streams real @-@ time vehicle dynamics and performance information to the touch screen in the centre console . The exterior remained mostly unchanged from the E2 model apart from the move to a 20 " forged alloy that was available in Dark Stainless or Gloss Black . The LS3 was upgraded to 325 kW ( 436 hp ) with the fitment of the E2 GTS ' bi @-@ modal exhaust system . The E3 was also available with the upgraded 6 @-@ piston brakes from the GTS and had the option of a modern LPG fuel system called LPI ( Liquid Propane Injection ) to help reduce the running costs . 
 = = = Senator SV08 = = = 
 This was a limited edition of 50 vehicles released in late 2008 in the " MY09.5 " model year . The photo at the top of this page is a SV08 . It was released alongside the limited edition 40 Years GTS . It was primarily to commemorate 20 years since the release of the <unk> , one of the first vehicles released by the then new HSV outfit . There were 20 manuals ( the first of the general run HSV E Series to use the <unk> 6 speed manual that had only been used in the W427 prior – straight from the current Corvette ) and 30 autos . They were released in only 3 colours , Nitrate ( silver ) Sting ( red ) & Voodoo ( blue ) . It was also the first VE model Senator to be officially released with a manual . Equipment levels & drivetrain were identical to the Senator Signature of the time . Unique features of the SV08 are : SV08 badging , 20 " Pentagon wheels , lower body gloss black accenting ( ran along the doors at the same level of the black accenting on the front & rear ) , chrome mirror head & door handle accents , SV08 sill plates & SV08 build plate . 
 = = = W427 = = = 
 The HSV W427 is the limited edition flagship of the initial E Series range by automobile manufacturer Holden Special Vehicles , released in celebration of the company 's 20th anniversary in 2008 , but produced until 2009 . 
 The W427 is based on the Holden VE Commodore , but powered by the <unk> <unk> V8 . Power outputs are 510 PS ( 375 kW ; 503 bhp ) at 7000 rpm and 640 N · m ( 470 lb · ft ) at 5000 rpm , It features recalibrated Magnetic Ride Control ( MRC , or " MagneRide " ) and stiffer suspension settings than the HSV GTS , as well as a toughened 6 @-@ speed manual gearbox , a new exhaust system , larger 6 @-@ piston brakes , and strengthened limited @-@ slip differential . 
 The W427 's name is the result of a combination of factors . W is to honour the founder of HSV , Tom Walkinshaw . The 427 is simply the engine capacity in cubic inches , but it is also a nod to the HRT <unk> , which won the 2002 and 2003 Bathurst 24 Hour motor races . 
 Consumer interest for production of the W427 actually began with the still @-@ born HRT 427 Coupe of 2002 , based on the Holden Monaro . The original W427 concept car was produced in the same body colour as the very first HSV model , the VL Commodore SS Group A SV . 
 The production version HSV W427 sedan was announced in August 2008 and retailed for A $ 155 @,@ 500 ( EUR € <unk> ) without optional equipment . Additional cost options amounted to three items : Electric Glass <unk> , Satellite Navigation , and Rear Passenger Overhead DVD Player . Production was originally intended as a limited run of 427 cars . However , only 137 cars were built ( this number does not include the original concept car ) , sold only in Australia and New Zealand ( only three cars were exported to NZ ) . 
 Reportedly , Holden Special Vehicles offered the pre @-@ order of build no . 427 ( uniquely painted in " Panorama " silver ) to the Cairns Monaro collector Shawn Ryan , who purchased the 2002 HRT 427 coupe for $ 920 @,@ 000 in 2008 . The last W427 to be built was made to order in July 2009 , being build no . 137 in " Heron " whit · e , sold by <unk> HSV in Fremantle , Western Australia , and personally signed by Tom Walkinshaw . 
 The HSV W427 will be noted in TWR / HSV history as the only car to which Tom Walkinshaw ' personally ' attached his name . It was not the first Holden Commodore @-@ based vehicle to be powered by a <unk> <unk> V8 engine as that honour went to the more affordable Corsa Specialised Vehicles GTS . 
 Total production by colour option 
 * includes 2 Panorama ( silver metallic ) and 1 Lamborghini green ( metallic ) units . 
 = = Model year changes = = 
 Like the VZ model before it , Holden with the VE have continued to moderate the long @-@ standing tradition of implementing substantial updates marked by the frequent use of new model designations ( such and VT , VX , and VY ) successively interspersed with " Series II " and occasional " Series III " revisions . Holden have instead implemented a series of running changes over VE 's lifetime , signified by the model year ( MY ) : 
 <unk> : models came in April 2007 . The horizontal wood grain key line across the dash on the Berlina was replaced by a matte silver insert . Also , the recessed buttons on the Omega key fob were now raised and made of a more durable plastic . This did not affect the remaining variants , fitted with the " flip @-@ out " key fob from launch . 
 <unk> : changes from August 2007 coincided with launch of the VE Ute . 
 MY09 : models were launched on 15 March 2008 . Six airbags were made standard across the range — Omega and SV6 variants were previously fitted with two and four airbags respectively . Omega models also received standard fitment of air conditioning , 16 @-@ inch alloy wheels , body colour wing mirrors and door handles , and a new grille insert with chrome highlights . Revised alloy wheel designs were featured on the Calais ( seven @-@ spoke ) and Calais V ( 10 @-@ spoke ) . 
 MY09.5 : upgrades affected models ordered from 21 October 2008 and produced from November . Instrument cluster illumination was <unk> to white . The turn @-@ by @-@ turn navigation and Berlina V8 options were removed . Engine wise , the " premium " version of the Alloytec V6 was now fitted to the Omega and Berlina , bringing improved fuel consumption and a slight reduction in engine output ( see above ) . A range of safety upgrades were also introduced ( see above ) . Further MY09.5 changes were introduced in March 2009 . The space @-@ saver spare wheel were discontinued and replaced by two no @-@ cost options : either a lightweight tyre <unk> kit or a full @-@ size spare wheel ( previously an extra cost ) . Sportwagon variants of the Calais V and SS V receive an alloy spare wheel if the full @-@ size spare is chosen , while the remainder of the line @-@ up receives a steel wheel spare . March also signalled an opportunity for Holden to replace the dark @-@ grey horizontal dashboard strip and steering wheel spokes as used on the SV6 , SS and SS V to a matte silver type . The safety improvements made to the Omega sedan from October production onwards were also introduced for the Omega Sportwagon ( see above ) , and the " V @-@ Series " insignia used on SS V and Calais V models was removed , replaced by a single " SS V " or " Calais V " badge . 
 MY10 : versions of the VE were released in September 2009 . New 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre and 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre <unk> have been introduced , featuring Spark Ignition Direct Injection ( SIDI ) and coupled to a new six @-@ speed automatic transmission ( see above ) . These revised powertrains are marketed as part of Holden 's EcoLine range . Visually , all SIDI versions are distinguished by relocated and additional EcoLine badging . 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre versions now utilise twin exhaust outlets . Updated cars also gain a recalibrated suspension setup and an extra ball @-@ joint in the rear suspension ( previously introduced on the Sportwagon ) ; the result is increased tautness and improved handling in models fitted with 18 and 19 @-@ inch diameter wheels . These cars are also equipped with a larger 24 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 9 in ) rear stabiliser bar . Additional engine bay sound deadening and a new muffler have resulted in reduced noise , vibration , and harshness . Elsewhere , the fitment of lighter low rolling @-@ resistance tyres aids fuel consumption by minimising friction . 
 = = = Series II = = = 
 MY11 : revisions to the styling identify this update , marketed by Holden as the " Series II " . Announced on 31 August 2010 , and launched on 10 September , MY11 heralded styling changes across the range by way of new front fascias , the addition of aerodynamic lip detailing to the <unk> of sedans , and new alloy wheel designs on the Berlina specification and higher . Front @-@ end changes comprise partially reshaped headlamps , redesigned bumpers , and an enlarged grille with restyled inserts that differ throughout the model range . Inside , the interiors receive a redesigned centre console stack incorporating a new 6 @.@ 5 @-@ inch touchscreen , new dashboard , rearranged controls , reconfigured ventilation outlets , and updates to trimmings and illumination colours . SV6 , SS and SS V interiors are differentiated via the application of circular air vents . Standard on all models is the 6 @.@ 5 @-@ inch infotainment system developed primarily by Siemens <unk> . Dubbed " Holden @-@ iQ " , this integrates media playback and control functions . The iQ head unit replaces the previous mechanical CD stacker with a single slot and built in storage for approximately 15 CDs worth of music ( internal storage optional on the Omega ) . The system also features full iPod integration , USB and auxiliary input , and incorporates Bluetooth <unk> telephone compatibility and music streaming . On V @-@ Series specifications , iQ incorporates satellite navigation with live traffic updates , speed zone alerts and traffic camera notification . Sedans and wagons specified with navigation also receive a reversing camera . 
 In terms of powertrain , the MY11 brought flex @-@ fuel capability for the 3 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V6 and 6 @.@ 0 @-@ litre V8 , allowing them to run on E85 bio @-@ ethanol ( see above ) . With the MY11 update , Holden also introduced a new " Redline " sports package as an option on V @-@ Series models . The package includes lightweight , forged and polished 19 @-@ inch multi @-@ spoke alloy wheels from the Pontiac G8 GXP . Other Redline additions encompass four @-@ piston Brembo high @-@ performance brakes , stiffer " FE3 " suspension and chromed window surrounds for sedans , and the fitment of the tyre <unk> kit on the Redline Ute . 
 MY12 : Holden commenced production of the MY12 update Commodore on 6 September 2011 . This followed Holden 's 2 September announcement that mechanical changes would be limited to efficiency improvements and the implementation of E85 compatibility for the 3 @.@ 6 @-@ litre SIDI V6 . As part of the cosmetic update , the Omega gains new seven @-@ spoke 16 @-@ inch alloy wheels and chrome highlights for the lower outboard fascia inserts , while the Berlina receives new chrome highlighted <unk> surrounds . The Calais V adds a new boot lip spoiler , which will be available as an accessory for other MY12 sedans . SV6 and SS models score a new chrome @-@ highlighted lower <unk> and front grille surround , with V @-@ Series versions of the SS acquiring additional chrome @-@ accented lower outboard inserts . Redline editions of the SS V gain redesigned 19 @-@ inch wheels , red painted brake calipers , and the fitment of " FE3 " suspension is extended to the Sportwagon and Ute variants . 
 <unk> : 
 = = Production = = 
 At the time of launch in Australia , Ford 's BF Falcon directly competed with the VE Commodore . In November 2006 Toyota released their key Aurion model to the Australian market . The front @-@ wheel drive Mitsubishi 380 also indirectly competed with the Holden Commodore but has since been discontinued . 
 The VE Commodore was well received in the Australian market , where it has consistently outsold rivals in the large car segment . Sales at one point were nearly double that of its closest segment competitor , the Ford Falcon . However , this gap has narrowed since the release of a new Falcon FG model . VE 's position as Australia 's outright best selling car was challenged in 2007 and overtaken during some months in 2008 by the Toyota Corolla in the face of increasing petrol prices . However , the release of the Sportwagon in mid @-@ 2008 has helped to re @-@ establish its number one sales position by accounting for more than 30 percent of total Commodore sales . In 2007 the VE Commodore became the fifth Commodore model to receive the Wheels Car of the Year award . 
 The last VE produced was a Commodore SS V @-@ Series automatic sedan , pained Chlorophyll green and destined for a Northern Territory dealer . Since July 2006 , Holden produced more than 520 @,@ 000 units of which 350 @,@ 000 were sold in Australia . 
 = = = Exports = = = 
 The full Holden VE range was exported and sold to New Zealand , whereas in the Middle East and South Africa it was re @-@ branded as the Chevrolet Lumina . Sales of the Berlina began in 2007 for Brazilian market as the Chevrolet Omega . Pontiac in North America also imported Commodore sedans from 2008 through to 2009 as the G8 . The G8 's cessation was a consequence of GM 's Chapter 11 bankruptcy resulting in the demise of the Pontiac brand . Unlike the Chevrolet Lumina and Omega , the Pontiac received several unique features including a revised L76 engine with Active Fuel Management as opposed to the Commodore 's L98 , and appearance changes . 
 = = = Bitter Vero Sport = = = 
 In 2009 , the small @-@ scale German manufacturer , Bitter , which specializes in <unk> existing vehicles , unveiled its " Vero Sport " at the Geneva Motor Show . It was based on the Commodore SS and its production ended in 2012 . 
 = Nashville sit @-@ ins = 
 The Nashville sit @-@ ins , which lasted from February 13 to May 10 , 1960 , were part of a nonviolent direct action campaign to end racial segregation at lunch counters in downtown Nashville , Tennessee . The sit @-@ in campaign , coordinated by the Nashville Student Movement and Nashville Christian Leadership Council , was notable for its early success and emphasis on disciplined nonviolence . 
 Over the course of the campaign , sit @-@ ins were staged at numerous stores in Nashville 's central business district . Sit @-@ in participants , who consisted mainly of black college students , were often verbally or physically attacked by white onlookers . Despite their refusal to retaliate , over 150 students were eventually arrested for refusing to vacate store lunch counters when ordered to do so by police . At trial , the students were represented by a group of 13 lawyers , headed by Z. Alexander Looby . On April 19 , Looby 's home was bombed ; however , neither he nor his wife was injured . Later that day , nearly 4000 people marched to City Hall to confront Mayor Ben West about the escalating violence . When asked if he believed the lunch counters in Nashville should be desegregated , West agreed that they should . After subsequent negotiations between the store owners and protest leaders , an agreement was reached during the first week of May . On May 10 , six downtown stores began serving black customers at their lunch counters for the first time . 
 Although the initial campaign successfully desegregated downtown lunch counters , sit @-@ ins , pickets , and protests against other segregated facilities continued in Nashville until passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which ended overt , legally sanctioned segregation nationwide . Many of the organizers of the Nashville sit @-@ ins went on to become important leaders in the Civil Rights Movement . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 In 1896 , the United States Supreme Court decision Plessy v. Ferguson upheld the constitutionality of racial segregation under the doctrine of " separate but equal " . This decision led to the proliferation of Jim Crow laws throughout the United States . These laws mandated segregation in virtually all spheres of public life and allowed racial discrimination to flourish across the country , especially in the Southern United States . 
 In Nashville , like most Southern cities , African Americans were severely disadvantaged under the system of Jim Crow segregation . Besides being relegated to underfunded schools and barred from numerous public accommodations , African Americans had few prospects for skilled employment and were subject to constant discrimination from the white majority . 
 Although serious efforts were made to oppose Jim Crow laws in Nashville as early as 1905 , it was not until 1958 , with the formation of the Nashville Christian Leadership Council , that Nashville 's African American community would lay the foundation for dismantling racial segregation . 
 = = Precursors and organization = = 
 The Nashville Christian Leadership Council ( or NCLC ) , was founded by the Reverend Kelly Miller Smith , pastor of First Baptist Church , Capitol Hill . This organization was an affiliate of Martin Luther King , Jr . ' s Southern Christian Leadership Conference and was established to promote civil rights for African Americans through nonviolent civil disobedience . Smith believed that Americans would be more sympathetic to desegregation if African Americans obtained their rights through peaceful demonstration rather than through the judicial system . 
 From March 26 to March 28 , 1958 , the NCLC held the first of many workshops on using nonviolent tactics to challenge segregation . These workshops were led by James Lawson , who had studied the principles of nonviolent resistance while working as a missionary in India . The workshops were mainly attended by students from Fisk University , Tennessee A & I ( later Tennessee State University ) , American Baptist Theological Seminary ( later American Baptist College ) , and <unk> Medical College . Among those attending Lawson 's sessions were students who would become significant leaders in the Civil Rights Movement , among them : Marion Barry , James Bevel , Bernard Lafayette , John Lewis , Diane Nash , and C. T. Vivian . 
 During these workshops it was decided that the first target for the group 's actions would be downtown lunch counters . At the time , African Americans were allowed to shop in downtown stores but were not allowed to eat in the stores ' restaurants . The group felt that the lunch counters were a good objective because they were highly visible , easily accessible , and provided a stark example of the injustices black Southerners faced every day . 
 In late 1959 , James Lawson and other members of the NCLC 's projects committee met with department store owners Fred Harvey and John Sloan , and asked them to voluntarily serve African Americans at their lunch counters . Both men declined , saying that they would lose more business than they would gain . The students then began doing reconnaissance for sit @-@ in demonstrations . The first test took place at Harveys Department Store in downtown Nashville on November 28 , followed by the Cain @-@ Sloan store on December 5 . Small groups of students purchased items at the stores and then sat at their lunch counters and attempted to order food . Their goal was to try to sense the mood and degree of resistance in each store . Although they were refused service at both lunch counters , the reactions varied significantly . At Harveys , they received surprisingly polite responses , while at Cain @-@ Sloan they were treated with contempt . These reconnaissance actions were low @-@ key and neither of the city 's newspapers was notified of them . 
 = = Full @-@ scale demonstrations = = 
 Before the students in Nashville had a chance to formalize their plans , events elsewhere brought renewed urgency to the effort . During the first week of February 1960 , a small sit @-@ in demonstration in Greensboro , North Carolina grew into a significant protest with over eighty students participating by the third day . Although similar demonstrations had occurred previously in other cities , this was the first to attract substantial media attention and public notice . When Lawson 's group met the subsequent Friday night , about 500 new volunteers showed up to join the cause . Although Lawson and other adult organizers argued for delay , the student leaders insisted that the time had come for action . 
 The first large @-@ scale organized sit @-@ in was on Saturday , February 13 , 1960 . At about 12 : 30 pm , 124 students , most of them black , walked into the downtown Woolworths , S. H. Kress , and McClellan stores and asked to be served at the lunch counters . After the staff refused to serve them , they sat in the stores for two hours and then left without incident . 
 On the Monday following the first sit @-@ in , the Baptist Minister 's Conference of Nashville , representing 79 congregations , unanimously voted to support the student movement , thus throwing the weight of Nashville 's black religious community behind the students . Local religious leaders called on people of good will to boycott downtown merchants who practiced segregation . Nashville 's black community strongly supported the boycott , causing economic hardship for the merchants . 
 The second sit @-@ in occurred on Thursday , February 18 , when more than 200 students entered Woolworths , S. H. Kress , McClellan , and Grants . The lunch counters were immediately closed . The students remained for about half an hour and then left , again without incident . The third sit @-@ in occurred on February 20 when about 350 students entered the previous four stores and the downtown Walgreens drugstore . As the students sat at the counters , crowds of white youths gathered in several of the stores . Police kept a watchful eye on all five locations , but no incidents of violence occurred . The students remained for nearly three hours until adjourning to a mass meeting at the First Baptist Church . 
 Tensions mounted over the following week as sit @-@ in demonstrations spread to other cities and race riots broke out in nearby Chattanooga . On February 27 , the Nashville student activists held a fourth sit @-@ in at the Woolworths , McClellan , and Walgreens stores . Crowds of white youths again gathered in the stores to taunt and harass the demonstrators . This time , however , police were not present . Eventually , several of the sit @-@ in demonstrators were attacked by hecklers in the McClellan and Woolworths stores . Some were pulled from their seats and beaten , and one demonstrator was pushed down a flight of stairs . When police arrived , the white attackers fled and none were arrested . Police then ordered the demonstrators at all three locations to leave the stores . When the demonstrators refused to leave , they were arrested and loaded into police vehicles as onlookers applauded . Eighty @-@ one students were arrested and charged with loitering and disorderly conduct . 
 The arrests brought a surge of media coverage to the sit @-@ in campaign , including national television news coverage , front page stories in both of Nashville 's daily newspapers , and an Associated Press story . The students generally viewed any media coverage as helpful to their cause , especially when it illustrated their commitment to nonviolence . 
 Several other sit @-@ ins took place over the following two months , resulting in more arrests and further attacks against sit @-@ in participants . Over 150 students were arrested . Throughout the demonstrations , the student activists maintained a policy of disciplined nonviolence . Their written code of conduct became a model followed by demonstrators in other cities : 
 " Do not strike back or curse if abused . Do not laugh out . Do not hold conversations with the floor walker . Do not leave your seat until your leader has given you permission to do so . Do not block entrances to stores outside nor the aisles inside . Do show yourself courteous and friendly at all times . Do sit straight ; always face the counter . Do report all serious incidents to your leader . Do refer information seekers to your leader in a polite manner . Remember the teachings of Jesus , Gandhi , Martin Luther King . Love and nonviolence is the way . " 
 = = Trials and Lawson expulsion = = 
 The trials of the sit @-@ in participants attracted widespread interest throughout Nashville and the surrounding region . On February 29 , the first day of the trials , a crowd of more than 2000 people lined the streets surrounding the city courthouse to show their support for the defendants . A group of 13 lawyers , headed by Z. Alexander Looby , represented the students . Initially , the trial was presided over by City Judge Andrew J. Doyle . Doyle dismissed the loitering charges against the students and then stepped down from the bench , turning the trial over to Special City Judge John I. Harris . 
 Despite strong support from the black community , all the students who had been arrested were convicted of disorderly conduct and fined $ 50 . The students refused to pay the fines , however , and chose instead to serve thirty @-@ three days in the county workhouse . Diane Nash issued a statement on behalf of the students explaining the decision : " We feel that if we pay these fines we would be contributing to and supporting the injustice and immoral practices that have been performed in the arrest and conviction of the defendants . " 
 The same day the trials began , a group of black ministers , including James Lawson , met with Mayor Ben West to discuss the sit @-@ ins . Coverage of the meeting by the local press , including a scathing editorial in the Nashville Banner denouncing Lawson as a " flannel @-@ mouth agitator " , brought Lawson 's activities to the attention of Vanderbilt University where he was enrolled as a Divinity School student . When Lawson was confronted by Vanderbilt 's executive committee and told he would have to end his involvement with the sit @-@ ins , Lawson refused . He was immediately expelled from the university . 
 = = Biracial Committee = = 
 On March 3 , in an effort to defuse the racial tensions caused by the sit @-@ ins , Mayor West announced the formation of a Biracial Committee to seek a solution to the city 's racial strife . The committee included the presidents of two of the city 's black universities , but did not include any representatives from the student movement . The committee met several times over the next month and delivered its recommendations in a report on April 5 . The committee recommended to partially integrate the city 's lunch counters . Each store would have one section that was for whites only and another section for whites and blacks . This solution was rejected by the student leaders , who considered the recommendations to be morally unacceptable and based upon a policy of segregation . Less than a week after the Biracial Committee issued its report , the sit @-@ ins resumed and the boycott of downtown businesses was intensified . 
 = = Looby residence bombing = = 
 At 5 : 30 am on April 19 , dynamite was thrown through a front window of Z. Alexander Looby 's home in north Nashville , apparently in retaliation for his support of the demonstrators . Although the explosion almost destroyed the house , Looby and his wife , who were asleep in a back bedroom , were not injured . More than 140 windows in a nearby dormitory were broken by the blast . 
 Rather than discouraging the protesters , this event served as a catalyst for the movement . Within hours , news of the bombing had spread throughout the community . Around noon , nearly 4000 people marched silently to City Hall to confront the mayor . Mayor West met the marchers at the courthouse steps . Reverend C. T. Vivian read a prepared statement accusing the mayor of ignoring the moral issues involved in segregation and turning a blind eye to violence and injustice . Diane Nash then asked the mayor if he felt it was wrong to discriminate against a person based solely on their race or skin color . West answered that he agreed it was wrong . Nash then asked him if he believed that lunch counters in the city should be desegregated . West answered , " Yes " , then added , " That 's up to the store managers , of course . " 
 Coverage of this event varied significantly between Nashville 's two major newspapers . The Tennessean emphasized the mayor 's agreement that lunch counters should be desegregated , while the Nashville Banner emphasized the mayor 's statement that it was up to the city 's merchants to decide whether to desegregate . This was largely indicative of the two papers ' opposing stances on the issue . Regardless , the mayor 's response was later cited as an important turning point by both activists and Nashville business owners . 
 The day after the bombing Martin Luther King , Jr. came to Nashville to speak at Fisk University . During the speech , he praised the Nashville sit @-@ in movement as " the best organized and the most disciplined in the Southland . " He further stated that he came to Nashville " not to bring inspiration but to gain inspiration from the great movement that has taken place in this community . " 
 = = Desegregation = = 
 After weeks of secret negotiations between merchants and protest leaders , an agreement was finally reached during the first week of May . According to the agreement , small , selected groups of African Americans would order food at the downtown lunch counters on a day known in advance to the merchants . The merchants would prepare their employees for the event and instruct them to serve the customers without trouble . This arrangement would continue in a controlled manner for a couple of weeks and then all controls would be taken off , at which point the merchants and protest leaders would reconvene to evaluate the results . Also as part of the agreement , the media was to be informed of the settlement and requested to provide only accurate , non @-@ sensational coverage . 
 On May 10 , six downtown stores opened their lunch counters to black customers for the first time . The customers arrived in groups of two or three during the afternoon and were served without incident . At the same time , African Americans ended their six @-@ week @-@ old boycott of the downtown stores . The plan continued successfully and the lunch counters were integrated without any further incidents of violence . Nashville thus became the first major city in the South to begin desegregating its public facilities . 
 Although the end of the sit @-@ in campaign brought a brief respite for civil rights activists in Nashville , institutionalized racism remained a problem throughout the city . Over the next few years , further sit @-@ ins , pickets , and other actions would take place at restaurants , movie theaters , public swimming pools , and other segregated facilities across Nashville . These actions continued until Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which prohibited segregation in public places throughout the United States . In that year , many of the key figures of the sit @-@ ins , including James Lawson and Kelly Miller Smith , were interviewed by Robert Penn Warren for his book Who Speaks for the Negro ? , in which they reflected on their experiences . 
 = = Fiftieth anniversary = = 
 Several events were held during 2010 to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Nashville sit @-@ ins . 
 On January 20 , Vanderbilt University hosted a panel discussion entitled " Veterans of the Nashville Sit @-@ ins - The Struggle Continues " . The featured speakers were Kwame Leo Lillard and Matthew Walker , Jr . 
 Tennessee State Museum hosted an exhibition from February 4 to May 16 entitled " We Shall Not Be Moved : The 50th Anniversary of Tennessee 's Civil Rights Sit @-@ Ins " . 
 At Tennessee State University on February 10 , the 29th annual Conference on African American History and Culture held a special commemoration of the sit @-@ ins , with Diane Nash as the featured guest speaker . 
 On February 12 , Vanderbilt University hosted a panel discussion on media coverage of the Nashville sit @-@ ins . The featured speakers were James Lawson and John Seigenthaler . 
 The downtown Nashville library hosted a photography exhibit entitled " Visions & Voices : The Civil Rights Movement in Nashville & Tennessee " from February 9 to May 22 . 
 Author and commentator Juan Williams led a forum to discuss civil rights issues at the downtown Nashville library auditorium on February 13 . 
 = Cracker Barrel = 
 Cracker Barrel Old Country Store , Inc. is an American chain of combined restaurant and gift stores with a Southern country theme . The company was founded by Dan Evins in 1969 ; its first store was in Lebanon , Tennessee , which remains the company headquarters . The chain 's stores were at first positioned near Interstate highway exits in the Southeastern and Midwestern US , but it has expanded across the country during the 1990s and 2000s . As of September 18 , 2012 , the chain operates 630 stores in 42 states . 
 Cracker Barrel 's menu is based on traditional Southern cuisine , with appearance and decor designed to resemble an old @-@ fashioned general store . Each restaurant features a front porch lined with wooden rocking chairs , a stone fireplace , and decorative artifacts from the local area . Cracker Barrel is known for its partnerships with country music performers . It has received attention for its charitable activities , such as its assistance of victims of Hurricane Katrina and injured war veterans . 
 During the 1990s , the company was the subject of controversy for its official stance against gay and lesbian employees and for discriminatory practices against African American and female employees . A U.S. Department of Justice ( USDOJ ) investigation found that Cracker Barrel discriminated against minority customers ; patrons complained of racially segregated seating and service quality . In an agreement with the USDOJ , Cracker Barrel has implemented non @-@ discrimination policies and pledged to focus on improving minority representation and civic involvement , particularly in the black community . Company shareholders added sexual orientation to the company 's non @-@ discrimination policy in 2002 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First location and early company history = = = 
 Cracker Barrel was founded in 1969 by Dan Evins , a sales representative for Shell Oil , who developed the restaurant and gift store concept initially as a plan to improve gasoline sales . Designed to resemble the traditional country store that he remembered from his childhood , with a name chosen to give it a Southern country theme , Cracker Barrel was intended to attract the interest of highway travelers . The first restaurant was built close to Interstate 40 , in Lebanon , Tennessee . It opened in September 1969 , serving Southern cuisine including biscuits , grits , country ham , and turnip greens . 
 Evins incorporated Cracker Barrel in February 1970 , and soon opened more locations . In the early 1970s , the firm leased land on gasoline station sites near interstate highways to build restaurants . These early locations all featured gas pumps on @-@ site ; during gasoline shortages in the mid to late 1970s , the firm began to build restaurants without pumps . Into the early 1980s , the company reduced the number of gas stations on @-@ site , eventually phasing them out altogether as the company focused on its restaurant and gift sales revenues . Cracker Barrel became a publicly traded company in 1981 to raise funds for further expansion . It floated more than half a million shares , raising $ 4 @.@ 6 million . Following the initial public offering , Cracker Barrel grew at a rate of around 20 percent per year ; by 1987 , the company had become a chain of more than 50 units in eight states , with annual net sales of almost $ 81 million . 
 = = = New markets and refocus = = = 
 The company grew consistently through the 1980s and 1990s , attaining a $ 1 billion market value by 1992 . In 1993 , the chain 's revenue was nearly twice that of any other family restaurant . 
 In 1994 , the chain tested a carry @-@ out @-@ only store , Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Corner Market , in suburban residential neighborhoods . In addition , it expanded into new markets through the establishment of more traditional Cracker Barrel locations , the majority of them outside the South , and tested alterations to its menus to adapt to new regions . The chain added regional dishes to its menus , including eggs and salsa in Texas and Reuben sandwiches in New York , but continued to offer its original menu items in all restaurants . 
 By September 1997 , Cracker Barrel had 314 restaurants , and aimed to increase the number of stores by approximately 50 per year over the following five years . The firm closed its Corner Market operations in 1997 , and refocused on its restaurant and gift @-@ store locations . Its then president , Ron Magruder , stated that the chain was concentrating on strengthening its core theme , offering traditional foods and retail in a country @-@ store setting , with good service and country music . The chain opened its first restaurant and gift store not located near a highway in 1998 , in Dothan , Alabama . In the 2000s , in the wake of incidents including charges of racial discrimination and controversy over its policy of firing gay employees , the firm launched a series of promotional activities including a nationwide book drive and a sweepstakes with trips to the Country Music Association Awards and rocking chairs among the prizes . 
 = = = Recent operations = = = 
 The number of combined restaurants and stores owned by Cracker Barrel increased between 1997 and 2000 , to more than 420 locations . In 2000 and 2001 , the company addressed staffing and infrastructure issues related to this rapid growth by implementing a more rigorous recruitment strategy and introducing new technology , including an order @-@ placement system . From the late 1990s to the mid @-@ 2000s , the company focused on opening new locations in residential areas to attract local residents and workers as customers . It updated its marketing in 2006 to encourage new customers , changing the design of its highway billboard advertisements to include images of menu items . Previously the signs had featured only the company 's logo . By 2011 , Cracker Barrel had opened more than 600 restaurants in 42 states . It was announced on January 17 , 2012 , that company founder Dan Evins had died of bladder cancer . 
 = = Restaurants = = 
 = = = Food and gift shop = = = 
 As a Southern @-@ themed chain , Cracker Barrel serves traditional Southern comfort food often described as " down @-@ home " country cooking , and sells gift items including simple toys representative of the 1950s and 1960s , toy vehicles , puzzles and <unk> . Also sold are country music CDs , DVDs of early classic television , cookbooks , baking mixes , kitchen novelty decor , and early classic brands of candy and snack foods . Breakfast is served all day , and there are two menus : one for breakfast , the other for lunch and dinner . Since the first restaurant opened , the menu has featured Southern specialties , including biscuits , fried chicken , and catfish ; seasonal and regional menu items were added during the 1980s and 1990s . In 2007 , Cracker Barrel announced plans to remove artificial trans fats from its menu items . 
 = = = Locations , service , and decor = = = 
 For much of its early history , Cracker Barrel decided to locate its restaurants along the Interstate Highway System , and the majority of its restaurants remain close to interstate and other highways . Cracker Barrel is known for the loyalty of its customers , particularly travelers who are likely to spend more at restaurants than locals . 
 The locations are themed around the idea of a traditional Southern U.S. general store . Items used to decorate each store are authentic artifacts , including everyday objects from the early 1900s and after . Each restaurant features a front porch lined with wooden rocking chairs , a wooden peg solitaire game on every table , and a stone fireplace with a deer head displayed above the mantel . In fact , each location has five common items : a shotgun , a <unk> , a deer head , a telephone and a traffic light . The peg games have been present in Cracker Barrel since the opening of the first store , and continue to be produced by the same family in Lebanon , Tennessee . The decor at each location typically includes artifacts related to the local history of the area , including antique household tools , old wall calendars and advertising posters , and antique photographs ; these are centrally stored in a warehouse in Tennessee , where they are cataloged and stockpiled for future use by individual store locations . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Destinations magazine has presented the chain with awards for best chain restaurant , and in 2010 and 2011 the Zagat survey named it the " Best Breakfast " . The chain was selected by the Outdoor Advertising Association of America as the 2011 <unk> Hall of Fame Award recipient for its long @-@ standing use of outdoor advertising . It was also named the " Best Family Dining " restaurant by a nationwide " Choice in Chains " consumer poll in Restaurants & Institutions magazine for 19 consecutive years . 
 = = Corporate overview = = 
 = = = Investment and business model = = = 
 Cracker Barrel restaurants are aimed at the family and casual dining market as well as retail sales . The chain also advertises to people traveling on the interstate highways , as the majority of its locations are close to highway exits . The company has promoted its cost controls to investors . The company has stated its goal to keep employee turnover low , to provide better trained staff . Since the 1980s , the firm has offered a formal training program with benefits for progressing through it to all of its employees . 
 The board of directors of Cracker Barrel has repeatedly been at odds with the largest shareholder , Biglari Holdings Inc .. The owner of Biglari Holdings , Sardar Biglari , controls a 19 @.@ 9 % share of the company , just short of the 20 % needed to trigger a shareholder rights plan , more commonly termed a " poison pill " . The poison pill was adopted after Biglari Holdings sought approval to purchase a 49 @.@ 99 % share of the company and join the board of directors . 
 Biglari Holdings purchased shares of Cracker Barrel in 2011 , and has been often critical of the transparency to shareholders , overspending on advertising , lack of customer value , capital funds mismanagement , and not maximizing shareholder value . Biglari has requested to be on the board of directors three times , and has been denied each time by a vote of shareholders . Biglari Holdings has also put forward a request for a one time $ 20 / share dividend to address perceived overly conservative capitalization , which was also rejected by shareholders . Cracker Barrel has responded by claiming Biglari has a " hidden agenda " and a conflict of interest by holding shares in other restaurant chains such as Steak ' n Shake . 
 = = = Community involvement = = = 
 Cracker Barrel has supported a wide range of charities through one @-@ off donations , promotional events , and partnerships with charitable organizations . The chain has supported charities and causes in communities where its restaurants are located , including the Gulf Coast after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and Nashville after severe flooding in 2010 . In the same year Cracker Barrel established Cracker Barrel Cares Inc . , an employee @-@ funded non @-@ profit organization that provides support to Cracker Barrel employees . Cracker Barrel has also formed a partnership with the Wounded Warrior Project , a charity for injured veterans . In attempts to rebuild its image after several race @-@ related controversies , the firm has provided a scholarship through the National Black MBA Association , and job skills programs and sponsorships with 100 Black Men of America and the Restaurant and Lodging Association . 
 Cracker Barrel sponsored the NASCAR Atlanta 500 race at Atlanta Motor Speedway from 1999 to 2001 and the Grand Ole Opry from 2004 to 2009 . The company was the first presenting sponsor of the Grand Ole Opry . This sponsorship allowed the company to make connections within the Nashville music industry , following which it entered into partnership with a number of country music performers . The chain has established partnerships with artists including Alison Krauss , Charlie Daniels , Josh Turner , Kenny Rogers , Dolly Parton , Alan Jackson , and Alabama , to offer CD releases and merchandise . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = LGBT policies = = = 
 In early 1991 , an intra @-@ company memo called for employees to be dismissed if they did not display " normal heterosexual values " . According to news reports , at least 11 employees were fired under the policy on a store @-@ by @-@ store basis from locations in Georgia and other states . After demonstrations by gay rights groups , the company ended its policy in March 1991 and stated it would not discriminate based on sexual orientation . The company 's founder , Dan Evins , subsequently described the policy as a mistake . From 1992 onward , the New York City Employees Retirement System , then a major shareholder , put forward proposals to add sexual orientation to the company 's non @-@ discrimination policy . An early proposal in 1993 was defeated , with 77 percent against and only 14 percent in support , along with 9 percent abstaining . It was not until 2002 that the proposals were successful ; 58 percent of company shareholders voted in favor of the addition . 
 Cracker Barrel achieved the lowest score ( 15 out of 100 ) of all rated food and beverage companies in the Human Rights Campaign 's 2008 Corporate Equality Index , a measure of LGBT workplace equality . Their score for 2011 had increased to a 55 . The 2011 survey noted that the firm had established a non @-@ discrimination policy and had introduced diversity training that included training related to sexual orientation . However , the company 's score for 2013 dropped to a 35 out of 100 , not having obtained the points related to non @-@ discrimination toward gender identity and health benefits for partners of LGBT employees and transgender @-@ inclusive benefits . 
 On December 20 , 2013 , Cracker Barrel announced it would no longer sell certain Duck Dynasty products which it was " concerned might offend some of [ its ] guests " after Phil Robertson , a star of the reality TV show , remarked in a GQ interview 
 Don 't be deceived . Neither the adulterers , the idolaters , the male prostitutes , the homosexual offenders , the greedy , the drunkards , the <unk> , the swindlers — they won 't inherit the kingdom of God . Don 't deceive yourself . It 's not right . 
 <unk> Dynasty 's Phil Robertson 
 Robertson also made " comments likening homosexuality to terrorism and bestiality " in the interview , and expressed views about race which attracted criticism . On December 22 , less than two days after pulling the products from its shelves , Cracker Barrel reversed its position after protests from customers . 
 = = = <unk> and gender @-@ based discrimination lawsuits = = = 
 In July 1999 , a discrimination lawsuit was filed against Cracker Barrel by a group of former employees , who claimed that the company had discriminated against them on the grounds of race . In December 2001 , twenty @-@ one of the restaurant 's customers , represented by the same attorneys , filed a separate lawsuit , alleging racial discrimination in its treatment of guests . Regarding both accusations , Cracker Barrel officials disputed the claims and stated that the company was committed to fair treatment of its employees and customers . 
 In 2004 , an investigation by the U.S. Justice Department found evidence that Cracker Barrel had been segregating customer seating by race ; seating or serving white customers before seating or serving black customers ; providing inferior service to black customers , and allowing white servers to refuse to serve black customers . The Justice Department determined that the firm had violated Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The company was required to sign a five @-@ year agreement to introduce " effective nondiscrimination policies and procedures . " The terms included new equal opportunity training ; the creation of a new system to log , investigate , and resolve complaints of discrimination ; and the publicizing of its non @-@ discrimination policies . They were required to hire an outside auditor to ensure compliance with the terms of the settlement . 
 In 2006 , Cracker Barrel paid a $ 2 million settlement to end a lawsuit alleging race and sexual harassment at three Illinois restaurants . Cracker Barrel stores subsequently began displaying a sign in the front foyer explaining the company 's non @-@ discrimination policy , and added to its website and menu the policy and details on how to make a complaint . 
 Since the early 2000s , Cracker Barrel has provided training and resources to minority employees , to improve its image on diversity . These efforts involved outreach to minority employees , along with testing a training plan to help employees whose first language is Spanish to learn English . As of 2002 , minorities made up 23 percent of the company 's employees , including over 11 percent of its management and executives . 
 Cracker Barrel is on the Corporate Advisory Board for the Texas Conference of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) , and is a corporate sponsor of the NAACP Leadership 500 Summit . The company has been praised for its gender diversity , particularly on its board of directors , which includes three women out of eleven total board members . Its chief executive officer ( CEO ) , Sandra Cochran , is the second woman in Tennessee to hold that office in a publicly traded company . 
 = = Licensed products = = 
 In November 2012 , Cracker Barrel licensed its name to Smithfield Foods ' John Morrell Division in a deal to create a line of meat products to be sold in super markets and through other retail channels . 
 In response to this turn of events , Kraft Foods filed a trademark @-@ infringement lawsuit in February 2013 . Kraft has sold cheese in retail stores under their Cracker Barrel brand since 1954 . The corporation said that Cracker Barrel stores have not made significant sales of retail food products beyond their restaurant menu , and asked that the Smithfield Foods deal be nullified by the U.S. District Court in the Northern District of Illinois . 
 = Gary Gygax = 
 Ernest Gary Gygax ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ) ( July 27 , 1938 – March 4 , 2008 ) was an American game designer and author best known for co @-@ creating with Dave Arneson the pioneering role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) . Gygax has been described as the father of D & D. 
 In the 1960s , Gygax created an organization of wargaming clubs and founded the Gen Con gaming convention . In 1971 , he helped develop Chainmail , a miniatures wargame based on medieval warfare . He co @-@ founded the company Tactical Studies Rules ( TSR , Inc . ) with childhood friend Don Kaye in 1973 . The following year , he and Arneson created D & D , which expanded on Gygax 's Chainmail and included elements of the fantasy stories he loved as a child . In the same year , he founded The Dragon , a magazine based around the new game . In 1977 , Gygax began work on a more comprehensive version of the game , called Advanced Dungeons & Dragons . Gygax designed numerous manuals for the game system , as well as several pre @-@ packaged adventures called " modules " that gave a person running a D & D game ( the " Dungeon Master " ) a rough script and ideas on how to run a particular gaming scenario . In 1983 , he worked to license the D & D product line into the successful D & D cartoon series . 
 After leaving TSR in 1985 over issues with its new majority owner , Gygax continued to create role @-@ playing game titles independently , beginning with the multi @-@ genre Dangerous Journeys in 1992 . He designed another gaming system called Lejendary Adventure , released in 1999 . In 2005 , Gygax was involved in the Castles & Crusades role @-@ playing game , which was conceived as a hybrid between the third edition of D & D and the original version of the game conceived by Gygax . 
 Gygax was married twice and had six children . In 2004 , Gygax suffered two strokes , narrowly avoided a subsequent heart attack , and was then diagnosed with an abdominal aortic aneurysm , from which he died in March 2008 . 
 = = Early life and inspiration = = 
 Gary Gygax was born in Chicago near Wrigley Field on July 27 , 1938 . He was the son of Almina <unk> ( Burdick ) and Swiss immigrant and Chicago Symphony Orchestra violinist Ernst Gygax . Gygax spent his early childhood in Chicago , but in 1946 he was involved in a brawl with a large group of boys , and his father decided to move the family to Lake Geneva , Wisconsin , where Gary 's mother 's family had settled in the early 19th century . 
 During his childhood and teen years , he developed a love of games and an appreciation for fantasy and science fiction literature . When he was five , he played card games such as <unk> and then board games such as chess . At the age of ten , he and his friends played the sort of games that eventually came to be called " live action role @-@ playing games " with one of them acting as a referee . His father introduced him to science fiction and fantasy through pulp novels . His interest in games , combined with an appreciation of history , eventually led Gygax to begin playing miniature war games in 1953 with his best friend Don Kaye . As teenagers Gygax and Kaye designed their own miniatures rules for toy soldiers with a large collection of 54 mm and 70 mm figures , where they used " <unk> " ( small firecrackers ) to simulate explosions . 
 Gygax dropped out of high school in his junior year and worked at odd jobs for a while , but he moved back to Chicago at age 19 to attend night classes in junior college . He also took anthropology classes at University of Chicago . The following year he married Mary Jo Powell . Their marriage produced five children : Ernest ( " Ernie " ) , <unk> ( " Luke " ) , Heidi , Cindy , and Elise . Gygax continued his night @-@ school classes and made the college Dean 's List . At the urging of his professors , he applied to the University of Chicago and was admitted . However , because he was married , he decided to take a full @-@ time job in insurance instead . 
 By December 1958 , the game Gettysburg from the Avalon Hill company had particularly captured Gygax 's attention . It was also from Avalon Hill that he ordered the first blank hexagon mapping sheets that were available , which he then employed to design his own games . Gygax became active in fandom and became involved in play @-@ by @-@ mail Diplomacy games , for which he designed his own variants . By 1966 he was active in the wargame hobby and was writing many magazine articles on the subject . Gygax learned about H. G. Wells ' Little Wars book for play of military miniatures wargames and Fletcher Pratt 's Naval <unk> book . Gygax later looked for innovative ways to generate random numbers , and he used not only common , six @-@ sided dice , but dice of all five platonic solid shapes , which he discovered in a school supply catalog . 
 In 1967 , he and his family moved back to Lake Geneva . Except for a few months he would spend in Clinton , Wisconsin , following his divorce , and his time in Hollywood while he was the head of TSR 's entertainment division , Lake Geneva would be his home for the rest of his life . 
 = = Wargames = = 
 During the 1960s , Gygax worked as an insurance underwriter for the Firemen 's Fund in Chicago . In 1967 , Gygax co @-@ founded the International Federation of Wargamers ( IFW ) with Bill Speer and Scott Duncan . The IFW grew rapidly , especially by assimilating several pre @-@ existing wargaming clubs , and aimed to promote interest in wargames of all periods . It provided a forum for wargamers , via its newsletters and societies , which enabled them to form local groups and share rules . In 1967 , Gygax organized a 20 @-@ person gaming meet in the basement of his home ; this event would later be referred to as " Gen Con 0 " . In 1968 , Gygax rented Lake Geneva 's vine @-@ covered Horticultural Hall for US $ 50 to hold the first Lake Geneva Convention , also known as the Gen Con gaming convention for short . Gen Con is now one of North America 's largest annual hobby @-@ game gatherings . Gygax met Dave Arneson , the future co @-@ creator of D & D , at the second Gen Con in August 1969 . 
 I 'm very fond of the Medieval period , the Dark Ages in particular . We started playing in the period because I had found appropriate miniatures . I started devising rules where what the plastic figure was wearing was what he had . If he had a shield and no armor , then he just has a shield . Shields and half @-@ armor 
 = half @-@ armor rules ; full @-@ armor figure = 
 full armor rules . I did rules for weapons as well . 
 Together with Don Kaye , Mike Reese , and Leon Tucker , Gygax created a military miniatures society called Lake Geneva Tactical Studies Association ( <unk> ) in 1970 , with its first headquarters in Gygax 's basement . Shortly thereafter in 1970 , Robert Kuntz and Gygax founded the Castle & Crusade Society of the IFW . Late in October 1970 , Gygax lost his job at the insurance company and then became a shoe repairman , which gave him more time for pursuing his interest in game development . In 1971 , he began working as editor @-@ in @-@ chief at Guidon Games , a publisher of wargames , for which he produced the board games Alexander the Great and Dunkirk : The Battle of France . Early that same year , Gygax published Chainmail , a miniatures wargame that simulated medieval @-@ era tactical combat , which he had originally written with hobby @-@ shop owner Jeff Perren . The Chainmail medieval miniatures rules were originally published in the Castle & Crusade Society 's fanzine The Domesday Book . Guidon Games hired Gygax to produce a " <unk> with Miniatures " series of games , and a new edition of Chainmail ( 1971 ) was the first book in the series . Gygax also collaborated on <unk> ( WWII to c . 1965 , with Mike Reese & Leon Tucker ) and with Dave Arneson on the Napoleonic naval wargame Don 't Give Up the Ship ! 
 The first edition of Chainmail included a fantasy supplement to the rules . These comprised a system for warriors , wizards , and various monsters of non @-@ human races drawn from the works of J. R. R. Tolkien and other sources . For wizards , Gygax included six spells that could be used to affect a battle , plus two " missiles " ( fire ball and lightning bolt ) . Dave Arneson adopted the Chainmail rules for his fantasy Blackmoor campaign . While visiting Lake Geneva in 1972 , Arneson ran his fantasy game using the new rules , and Gygax immediately saw the potential of role @-@ playing games . 
 Gygax and Arneson collaborated on " The Fantasy Game " , the role @-@ playing game which later became Dungeons & Dragons , basing their work on Arneson 's modified version of Chainmail for his Blackmoor campaign . Several aspects of the system governing magic in the game were inspired by The Dying Earth stories of fantasy author Jack Vance ( notably the fact that magic @-@ users in the game forget the spells that they have learned immediately upon casting them , and must re @-@ study them in order to cast them again ) , and the system as a whole drew upon the work of authors such as Robert E. Howard , L. Sprague de Camp , Michael Moorcock , Roger Zelazny , Poul Anderson , Tolkien , Bram Stoker , and others . In 1972 , Gygax and Arneson mailed the first 50 @-@ page copy of their Dungeons & Dragons rulebook to interested parties , which was followed by a second 150 @-@ page amateur edition of the rules that they mailed the next year . In 1973 , Gygax attempted to publish the game through Avalon Hill , who turned down his offer . Gygax 's D & D group had started off with himself , Ernie Gygax , Don Kaye , Rob Kuntz , and Terry Kuntz in 1972 ; the group had grown to a dozen players in 1973 , and by 1974 it sometimes included over 20 people , with Rob Kuntz becoming the co @-@ dungeon @-@ master of Gygax 's " Greyhawk " game so that each of them could referee groups of only a dozen players . 
 = = TSR = = 
 Gygax left Guidon Games in 1973 and , with Don Kaye as a partner , founded the publishing company Tactical Studies Rules ( later known as TSR , Inc . ) in October . The two men each invested US $ 1 @,@ 000 in the venture — Kaye had borrowed US $ 1 @,@ 000 on a life insurance policy — in order to finance the start @-@ up of TSR . However , this did not give them enough capital to publish the rules for Dungeons & Dragons , and they worried that other companies would be able to publish similar projects first . The two convinced acquaintance Brian Blume to join TSR in December 1973 as an equal one @-@ third partner . This brought the financing that enabled them to publish D & D. Gygax worked on rules for more miniatures and tabletop battle games , including Cavaliers and Roundheads ( English Civil War , with Jeff Perren ) , Classic Warfare ( Ancient Period : 1500 BC to 500 AD ) , and Warriors of Mars . 
 D & D appeared in 1973 at <unk> , and pre @-@ release copies of the game were in circulation by the end of the year . The first commercial version of D & D was released by TSR in January 1974 as a boxed set . A hand @-@ assembled print run of 1 @,@ 000 copies , put together in Gygax 's home , sold out in less than a year . In the same year , Gygax created the magazine The Strategic Review with himself as editor , and then he hired Tim Kask to assist in the transition of this magazine into the fantasy periodical The Dragon , with Gygax as writer , columnist , and publisher ( from 1978 to 1981 ) . The Dragon debuted in June 1976 , and Gygax commented on its success years later : " When I decided that The Strategic Review was not the right vehicle , hired Tim Kask as a magazine editor for Tactical Studies Rules , and named the new publication he was to produce The Dragon , I thought we would eventually have a great periodical to serve gaming enthusiasts worldwide ... At no time did I ever contemplate so great a success or so long a lifespan . " Gygax wrote the supplements Greyhawk , Eldritch Wizardry , and Swords & Spells for the original D & D game . With Brian Blume , Gygax also designed the wild west @-@ oriented role @-@ playing game Boot Hill in 1975 . The Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set ( released in 1977 ) was a variation of the original D & D geared towards younger players and edited by J. Eric Holmes . 
 In 1975 , Gygax and Kaye were only 36 years old , and Kaye had not made any specific provision in his will regarding his one @-@ third share of the company , when he unexpectedly died of a heart attack in January 1975 . His share of TSR passed to his wife , a woman whom Gygax characterized as " less than personable ... After Don died she dumped all the Tactical Studies Rules materials off on my front porch . It would have been impossible to manage a business with her involved as a partner . " TSR relocated from Kaye 's dining room to Gygax 's basement . Neither Gygax nor Blume had the money to buy the shares owned by Kaye 's wife , and Blume persuaded Gygax to allow his father , Melvin Blume , to buy the shares and take Kaye 's place as an equal partner . In July 1975 , Gygax and Brian Blume officially formed TSR Hobbies Inc . , a new company controlled by Gygax , Brian Blume , and Melvin Blume . Gygax originally held 60 % ownership of this new TSR , but as part of the reorganization the new partners had to buy out Kaye 's widow and pay other fees , and Gygax was unable to contribute a fair share of these costs . His ownership eventually dropped to 30 % of the company , leaving him a minority stockholder . Gygax was hired on as TSR 's first full @-@ time employee in mid @-@ 1975 . In 1976 , TSR moved out of Gygax 's house into its first professional home , known as " The Dungeon Hobby Shop " . 
 = = = Advanced Dungeons & Dragons = = = 
 In 1977 , a new version of D & D , Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) , was first published . The Monster Manual , released later that year , became the first supplemental rule book of the new system , and many more followed . The AD & D rules were not compatible with those of D & D , and as a result , D & D and AD & D became distinct product lines . Splitting the game lines created a rift between Gygax and Arneson as Gygax claimed AD & D was his own property and Arneson was due no royalties from it ; in 1979 , Arneson filed a lawsuit against TSR as a result , which was settled in March 1981 with the ruling that Arneson was not due compensation for the AD & D game . 
 Gygax wrote the AD & D hardcovers Players Handbook , Dungeon Masters Guide , Monster Manual , Monster Manual II , Unearthed Arcana , and Oriental Adventures . Gygax also wrote or co @-@ wrote numerous AD & D and basic D & D adventure modules , including The Keep on the Borderlands , Tomb of Horrors , Expedition to the Barrier Peaks , The Temple of Elemental Evil , The Forgotten Temple of Tharizdun , <unk> 's Fantastic Adventure , Isle of the Ape , and all seven of the modules later combined into Queen of the Spiders . In 1980 , Gygax 's long @-@ time campaign setting of Greyhawk was published in the form of the World of Greyhawk Fantasy World Setting folio , which was expanded in 1983 into the World of Greyhawk Fantasy Game Setting boxed set . Sales of the D & D game reached US $ 8 @.@ 5 million in 1980 . Gygax also provided assistance on the Gamma World science fantasy role @-@ playing game in 1981 and co @-@ authored the Gamma World adventure Legion of Gold . 
 In 1979 , a Michigan State University student , James Dallas Egbert III , allegedly disappeared into the school 's steam tunnels while playing a live @-@ action version of D & D. As a result , negative mainstream media attention focused on D & D as the cause . In 1982 , Patricia Pulling 's son killed himself . Blaming D & D for her son 's suicide , Pulling formed an organization named <unk> ( Bothered About Dungeons & Dragons ) to attack the game and the company that produced it . Gygax defended the game on a segment of 60 Minutes , which aired in 1985 . When death threats started arriving at the TSR office , Gygax hired a bodyguard . In 1982 , however , TSR 's annual D & D sales increased to US $ 16 million , and in January 1983 , The New York Times speculated that D & D might become " the great game of the 1980s " in the same manner that Monopoly was emblematic of the Great Depression . 
 In the early 1980s , Gygax and Mary Jo divorced , and he moved to Clinton , Wisconsin , for a short time . 
 Brian Blume persuaded Gygax to allow his brother , Kevin Blume , to purchase the shares from their father Melvin . This gave the Blume brothers a controlling interest at TSR , Inc . By 1981 , Brian Blume was increasingly unhappy with Gygax 's conservative approach to the business , so using their greater stock ownership , the Blume brothers effectively took control of TSR ; in 1982 , Gygax was forced to step down as CEO and was replaced by Kevin Blume and then forced out to the west coast to deal with potential TV and movie opportunities . After TSR was split into TSR , Inc . , and TSR Entertainment , Inc . , in 1983 , Gygax became the President and the Chairman of the board of directors of TSR , Inc . , and the President of TSR Entertainment , Inc . As part of TSR Entertainment , Inc . , which was later known as Dungeons & Dragons Entertainment Corp. , Gygax went to Hollywood , where he became co @-@ producer of the licensed D & D cartoon series for CBS . The series led its time slot for two years . 
 One of Gygax 's creations during this time was <unk> , a three @-@ dimensional fantasy chess variant , published in Dragon No. 100 ( August 1985 ) . It is played on three <unk> boards stacked on top of each other – the top board represents the sky , the middle is the ground , and the bottom is the underworld . The pieces are characters and monsters inspired by the D & D setting : King , Mage , Paladin , Cleric , Dragon , Griffin , Oliphant , Hero , Thief , Elemental , Basilisk , Unicorn , Dwarf , Sylph , and Warrior . 
 = = = Leaving TSR = = = 
 During his time in Hollywood , Gygax left the day @-@ to @-@ day operations of TSR to his fellow board members , Kevin and Brian Blume . In 1984 , he discovered that TSR had run into serious financial difficulties . By the time he came back to Wisconsin in 1984 , the company was US $ 1 @.@ 5 million in debt . At this point , he hired Lorraine Williams to manage the company . He engineered the removal of Kevin Blume as CEO in 1984 , but the Blume brothers subsequently sold their majority shares in the company to Lorraine Williams . By this time , it was evident that Gygax and Williams had differing visions of the future of TSR , and Gygax took TSR to court in a bid to block the <unk> ' sale of their shares to Williams , but he lost . In October 1985 , TSR 's board of directors removed Gygax as the company 's President and chairman of the board . He remained on the board as a Director and made no further contributions to the company 's creative efforts . Sales of D & D reached US $ 29 million by 1985 , but Gygax , seeing his future at TSR as untenable , left the company on December 31 , 1985 . 
 I was pretty much boxed out of the running of the company because the two guys , who between them had a controlling interest , thought they could run the company better than I could . I was set up because I could manage . In 1982 nobody on the West Coast would deal with TSR , but they had me start a new corporation called " Dungeons and Dragons Entertainment . " It took a long time and a lot of hard work to get to be recognized as someone who was for real and not just a civilian , shall we say , in entertainment . Eventually , though , we got the cartoon show going ( on CBS ) and I had a number of other projects in the works . While I was out there , though , I heard that the company was in severe financial difficulties and one of the guys , the one I was partnered with , was shopping it on the street in New York . I came back and discovered a number of gross <unk> in all areas of the company . The bank was <unk> and we were a million and a half in debt . We eventually got that straightened out , but I kind of got one of my partners kicked out of office . [ Kevin Blume , who was removed as TSR CEO in 1984 . ] Then my partners , in retribution for that , sold his shares to someone else [ Lorraine Williams ] . I tried to block it in court , but in the ensuing legal struggle the judge ruled against me . I lost control of the company , and it was then at that point I just decided to sell out . 
 Before leaving TSR , Gygax had authored two novels for TSR 's Greyhawk Adventures series featuring Gord the Rogue : Saga of Old City ( the first Greyhawk novel ) and Artifact of Evil . By the terms of his settlement with TSR , Gygax kept the rights to Gord the Rogue as well as all D & D characters whose names were anagrams or plays on his own name ( for example , <unk> and Zagyg ) . However , he lost the rights to all his other work , including the World of Greyhawk and the names of all the characters he had ever used in TSR material , such as <unk> , <unk> , and Tenser . In October 1986 , Gygax resigned all positions with TSR , Inc . , and he settled his disputes with TSR in December 1986 . 
 = = After TSR = = 
 = = = 1985 – 89 = = = 
 Immediately after leaving TSR , Gygax helped form the company New Infinities Productions , Inc . Wargamer and accountant Forrest Baker had worked as a consultant for TSR during 1984 and 1985 , and wrote up a business plan that convinced Gygax to try again with the business side of roleplaying ; New Infinities was the results , with Baker as CEO and Gygax as Chairman of the Board . In October 1986 , the company was publicly announced . Frank Mentzer and Kim Mohan were design executives and with Gygax formed the creative committee . Before a single product was released , Baker disappeared when his promised outside investment of one to two million dollars failed to come through . Gygax had retained the rights to Gord the Rogue as part of his severance agreement with TSR , so he licensed Greyhawk from TSR and started writing new novels beginning with Sea of Death ( 1987 ) ; Gygax 's Gord novels were the main things keeping New Infinities in business . Gygax 's first role @-@ playing game work for New Infinities ( with Mohan and Mentzer ) was the science fiction @-@ themed Cyborg Commando , which was published in 1987 . Gygax announced in 1988 in a company newsletter that he and Kuntz were working on a new fantasy RPG , and that the company 's " Fantasy Master " line would detail the Castle and City of Greyhawk as they had originally envisioned them , now called " Castle <unk> " . Gygax and Kuntz 's new game would be called " Infinite Adventures " , and was envisioned as a <unk> RPG supported by different gamebooks for different genres . However , New Infinities ' investors forced the company into bankruptcy , and the company was dissolved in 1989 . 
 From 1986 to 1988 , Gygax continued to write a few more Gord the Rogue novels , which were published by New Infinities Productions : Sea of Death ( 1987 ) , City of Hawks ( 1987 ) , and Come Endless Darkness ( 1988 ) . However , by 1988 , Gygax was not happy with the new direction in which TSR was taking " his " world of Greyhawk . In a literary declaration that his old world was dead , and wanting to make a clean break with all things Greyhawk , Gygax destroyed his version of <unk> in the final Gord the Rogue novel , Dance of Demons . During this time , Gygax also worked with Flint Dille on the <unk> the Barbarian books , as well as Role @-@ Playing Mastery and its sequel , Master of the Game . Gygax also wrote a number of published short stories . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 Game Designers ' Workshop saw an opportunity in the game Gygax had been developing , so they began working with him on what was called " The Carpenter Project " in 1992 . <unk> planned a multimedia blitz where Roc would do fiction publication while JVC would produce a computer game ; JVC did not like the name , so they suggested calling the game " Dangerous Dimensions " . The name was changed to Dangerous Journeys in response to a threat of a lawsuit from TSR , that the " DD " abbreviation would be too similar to " D & D " . Gygax authored all of the products for Dangerous Journeys , including Mythus , Mythus Magick , and Mythus Bestiary . When the product was released by Game Designers ' Workshop , TSR immediately sued for copyright infringement . The suit was eventually settled out of court , with TSR buying the complete rights to the Dangerous Journeys system from New Infinities and then permanently shelving the entire project . 
 In the 1990s , Gygax wrote three more novels , released under publisher Penguin / Roc and later reprinted by Paizo Publishing : The Anubis Murders , The Samarkand Solution , and Death in Delhi . Paizo Publishing also printed Infernal Sorceress , Gygax 's " lost " novel . During 1994 , he was the primary author for six issues of the entire 64 @-@ page Mythic Masters ( <unk> ) magazine . 
 In 1995 , he began work on a new computer role @-@ playing game . He called this game Lejendary Adventures , and it was a game system intended to support multiple genres ; when releasing the game for computers did not work out , he instead designed it as a tabletop game . Christopher Clark of Inner City Games Designs approached Gygax in 1997 to suggest that they produce some adventures to sell in game stores , as TSR had largely stopped production due to severe financial problems ; the result was a pair of fantasy adventures published by Inner City Games : A Challenge of Arms ( 1998 ) and The Ritual of the Golden Eyes ( 1999 ) . Gygax introduced some investors to Clark 's publication setup , and although they were not willing to fund Legendary Adventures , Clark put together a business plan that would allow Clark and Gygax to publish the books themselves by forming a partnership called Hekaforge Productions . Gygax was thus able to return to writing role @-@ playing games in 1999 with Lejendary Adventures . The game was published as a three @-@ volume set : The Lejendary Rules for All Players ( 1999 ) , <unk> Master 's Lore ( 2000 ) and Beasts of <unk> ( 2000 ) . Peter Adkison of Wizards of the Coast was able to write Gygax a cheque and clarify some issues of ownership regarding D & D ; Gygax did not write any new supplements or books for TSR but he did contribute an " Up on a Soapbox " column from Dragon # 268 ( January , 2000 ) to Dragon # 320 ( June , 2004 ) . He also contributed the preface to the 1998 adventure Return to the Tomb of Horrors . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Gygax lent his voice to cartoons and video games in his later life , including providing the voice for his cartoon self in the episode " Anthology of Interest I " of the TV show Futurama which aired in 2000 . Gygax also performed voiceover narration as a guest Dungeon Master in the <unk> 's Tomb quest series of the massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons Online : Stormreach . 
 Gygax also worked on a number of releases with the d20 System under the Open Game License . These included the generic adventure module A Challenge of Arms ; The Weyland Smith & Company Giant Fun Catalog , a book of " joke " magic items ; and The Slayer 's Guide to Dragons sourcebooks . 
 Gygax offered to Stephen Chenault and Davis Chenault of Troll Lord Games to write books for Troll Lord , and on June 11 , 2001 Troll Lord announced this fact . On October 9 , 2001 , Necromancer Games announced that they would be publishing a d20 version of Necropolis , an adventure originally planned by Gygax for New Infinities Productions and later printed in 1992 as a Mythus adventure by <unk> ; Necromancer took a year to produce Gary Gygax 's Necropolis ( 2002 ) , and he did not do any more work with them . Gygax 's early work for Troll Lord included a series of hardcover books that eventually came to be called " Gygax Fantasy Worlds " , which included The <unk> Crew ( 2002 ) , a look at the roguish underworld , and World Builder ( 2003 ) and Living Fantasy ( 2003 ) , generic game design books usable in many different settings ; after the first four books in the series , Gygax dropped back to an <unk> role , though they still carried his name as part of the series logo . Troll Lord also published a few adventures as a result of their partnership with Gygax , including The Hermit ( 2002 ) an adventure intended for d20 and also for Lejendary Adventures . By 2002 , Gygax had given Christopher Clark an encyclopaedic 72 @,@ 000 @-@ word text describing the Lejendary Earth ; Clark split the manuscript up into five books and expanded it , with each of the final books coming to about 128 @,@ 000 words , which gave Hekaforge a third Lejendary Adventures line , to supplement the core rules and adventures , and managed to publish the first two of those Lejendary Earth sourcebooks : Gazetteer ( 2002 ) and Noble Kings and Great Lands ( 2003 ) . By 2003 Hekaforge was having financial difficulties that led Clark to ask Troll Lord Games to become an " angel " investor by publishing new Lejendary Adventures books . Gygax was the editor @-@ in @-@ chief for Troll Lord Games ' series of fantasy reference books , <unk> Fantasy Worlds . After Gygax 's stroke in 2004 , he was never able to commit the same time or effort to writing that he had previously , and beginning with Gary Gygax 's Extraordinary Book of Names ( 2004 ) , the <unk> Fantasy Worlds series was only overseen by him , and after that , the line only lasted two more years , through the publication of Gary Gygax 's Cosmos Builder ( 2006 ) . As a result of their agreement with Hekaforge , Troll Lord was able to publish about a dozen additional Lejendary Adventures books from 2005 – 2008 . 
 In 2003 , Gygax announced that he was working with Rob Kuntz to publish the original and previously unpublished details of Castle Greyhawk and the City of Greyhawk in 6 volumes , although the project would use the rules for Castles and Crusades rather than D & D. Since Wizards of the Coast , which had bought TSR in 1997 , still owned the rights to the name " Greyhawk " , Gygax changed the name of Castle Greyhawk to " Castle Zagyg " , a reverse homophone of his own name . Gygax also changed the name of the nearby city to " Yggsburgh " , a play on his initials " <unk> " 
 This project proved to be much more work than Gygax and Kuntz had envisioned . By the time Gygax and Kuntz had stopped working on their original home campaign , the castle dungeons had encompassed 50 levels of cunningly complex passages and thousands of rooms and traps . This , plus plans for the city of Yggsburgh and encounter areas outside the castle and city , would clearly be too much to fit into the proposed 6 volumes . Gygax decided he would compress the castle dungeons into 13 levels , the size of his original Castle Greyhawk in 1973 by amalgamating the best of what could be gleaned from binders and boxes of old notes . However , neither Gygax nor Kuntz had kept careful or comprehensive plans . Because they had often made up details of play sessions on the spot , they usually just scribbled a quick map as they played , with cursory notes about monsters , treasures , and traps . These sketchy maps contained just enough detail that the two could ensure their independent work would dovetail . All of these old notes had to be deciphered , 25 @-@ year @-@ old memories dredged up as to what had happened in each room , and a decision made whether to keep or discard each new piece . Recreating the city too would be a challenge . Although Gygax still had his old maps of the original city , all of his previously published work on the city was owned by WotC , so he would have to create most of the city from scratch while still maintaining the " look and feel " of his original . 
 Even this slow and laborious process came to a complete halt in April 2004 when Gygax suffered a serious stroke . Production came to a halt due in part to Gygax 's health , so Gygax put together a team of people to continue with the creation of Zagyg background material . Although he returned to his keyboard after a seven @-@ month convalescence , his output was reduced from 14 @-@ hour work days to only one or two hours per day . Kuntz had to withdraw due to other projects , but he continued to work on an adventure module that would be published at the same time as the first book . Under these circumstances , work on the Castle Zagyg project continued even more slowly . The Castle Zagyg line kicked off with <unk> : Castle Zagyg Part I : Yggsburgh ( 2005 ) , a 256 @-@ page book . This 256 @-@ page hardcover book contained details of Gygax 's original city , its personalities and politics , and over 30 encounters outside the city . Later that year , Troll Lord Games also published Castle Zagyg : Dark Chateau ( 2005 ) , the adventure module written for the Yggsburgh setting by Rob Kuntz . Jeff <unk> helped with the creation of the dungeon , eventually resulting in publication of the limited edition <unk> : The East Marks Gazetteer ( 2007 ) . 
 Book catalogs published in 2005 indicated several more volumes in the series would follow shortly , but it wasn 't until 2008 that the second volume , Castle Zagyg : The Upper Works , appeared . Troll Lord Games revealed in 2006 that they now had the rights to Gygax 's Gord the Rogue novels , to be a fourth Gary Gygax product line ; the first , Tale of Old City ( 2008 ) , would be one of Troll Lord 's final Gygax publications . <unk> : The Upper Works ( 2008 ) was to have been the first of three massive boxes entirely detailing the dungeons beneath Castle Zagyg . The Upper Works described details of the castle above ground , acting as a teaser for the volumes concerning the actual dungeons that would follow . However , Gygax died in March 2008 before any further books were published . Three months after his death , Gygax Games – a new company formed by Gary 's widow , Gail – pulled all of the Gygax licenses from Troll Lord ; and also from Hekaforge . Gygax Games took over the Castle Zagyg project , where it continues to be under further development . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 From an early age , Gygax hunted and was a target @-@ shooter with both bow and gun . He was also an avid gun collector , and at various times owned a variety of rifles , shotguns , and handguns . 
 Gygax married his first wife , Mary Jo Powell , in 1958 . By 1961 , they had two children who would later assist with play @-@ testing D & D. Gygax and Mary Jo had three more children before separating in March 1983 . In August 1986 , Gygax 's sixth and last child , Alexander , was born to Gail Carpenter . Gygax married Carpenter , his second wife , on August 15 , 1987 , the same day as his parents ' 50th wedding anniversary . By 2005 , Gygax had seven grandchildren . 
 Gygax described himself as a Christian , but for much of his life had been reluctant to discuss his beliefs , citing fears that he would hurt the reputation of Christianity because of his connection to the moral panic that some people associated with D & D as a reason for not having been more vocal about his faith . 
 Gygax went into semi @-@ retirement after suffering strokes on April 1 and May 4 , 2004 , and almost suffered a heart attack after receiving incorrect medication to prevent further strokes . He had been a lifelong cigarette smoker but switched to cigars after his strokes . In late 2005 , he was diagnosed with an inoperable abdominal aortic aneurysm . Despite his reduced workload , Gygax continued to be active in the gaming community and regularly contributed to discussion forums on gaming websites such as <unk> and EN World . 
 Gygax died the morning of March 4 , 2008 , at his home in Lake Geneva at age 69 . 
 I would like the world to remember me as the guy who really enjoyed playing games and sharing his knowledge and his fun pastimes with everybody else . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 As the " father of role @-@ playing games " , Gygax received many awards , honors , and tributes related to gaming : 
 He was inducted into the Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts & Design Origins Award Hall of Fame in 1980 . 
 Sync magazine named Gygax number one on the list of " The 50 Biggest Nerds of All Time " . 
 SFX magazine listed him as number 37 on the list of the " 50 Greatest SF Pioneers " . 
 In 1999 Pyramid magazine named Gygax as one of " The Millennium 's Most Influential Persons " " in the realm of adventure gaming . " 
 Gygax was tied with J. R. R. Tolkien for number 18 on GameSpy 's " 30 Most Influential People in Gaming " . 
 Numerous names in D & D , such as Zagyg , Ring of <unk> , and <unk> , are anagrams or alterations of Gygax 's name . 
 A strain of bacteria was named in honor of Gygax , " <unk> <unk> sp nov <unk> " . 
 Blizzard Entertainment dedicated the 2 @.@ 4 @.@ 0 patch of World of Warcraft , " Fury of the <unk> " , to Gygax . 
 Electronic Arts dedicated Publish 51 in Ultima Online to Gygax . This included a new room in the dungeon Doom containing a special encounter and unique decorations . 
 Turbine , Inc . , included two tributes in the Dungeons & Dragons Online : Stormreach Module 7 , released June 3 , 2008 . 
 A new area in the Dungeons & Dragons Online region " <unk> 's Graveyard " , which contains a memorial marker and a new unique item ( Voice of the Master , which improves the wearer 's experience awards ) . 
 Stephen Colbert , an avid D & D gamer in his youth , dedicated the last part of the March 5 , 2008 , episode of The Colbert Report to Gygax . 
 Gygax was commemorated in a number of webcomics , including xkcd 's comic No. 393 " Ultimate Game " , Penny Arcade 's " Bordering on the Semi @-@ <unk> " , Dork Tower 's " Thanks for the <unk> Rules " , Order of the Stick No. 536 " A Brief Tribute " , <unk> 's cartoon for March 9 , 2008 , GU Comics ' " The Journey 's End " , and the Unspeakable Vault . 
 The 2008 film Futurama : Bender 's Game contained a post @-@ closing @-@ credits title card paying tribute to Gygax and a clip of him from the episode " Anthology of Interest " saying , " Anyone want to play Dungeons and Dragons for the next quadrillion years ? " Many people involved in the show , including David X. Cohen , were D & D fans and played the game during production of the show . 
 He was honored as a " famous game designer " by being featured on the king of spades in Flying Buffalo 's 2008 Famous Game Designers Playing Card Deck . 
 Gygax 's voice appears as his 8 @-@ bit self on Code Monkeys . 
 All three D & D 4th edition core rulebooks are also " dedicated to the memory of E. Gary Gygax . " 
 Gygax and his love of gaming are celebrated at Gary Con , a Lake Geneva gaming convention hosted annually by family members and fans as a tribute . 
 Gail Gygax , the widow of Gary Gygax , has been raising funds to construct a memorial in her late husband 's honor by establishing the nonprofit 501 ( c ) 3 Gygax Memorial Fund . As of January 2010 , plans were to secure a location on the lakefront in Lake Geneva , Wisconsin . As of March 28 , 2011 the City Council of Lake Geneva , Wisconsin approved Gail Gygax 's application for a site of memorial in <unk> Park . The statue monument will include " a castle turret with a bust on top and possibly have a dragon wrapped around the turret . " 
 I played Dungeons & Dragons as a kid . A lot of us did , actually , a lot of writers I know did . In the bars late at night at literary festivals , sometimes the conversation will get around to — with sort of a huddle of us in the corner , saying , ‘ So , did you play Dungeons & Dragons ? ’ And it ’ s amazing how many say yes . So Gary Gygax has a lot to answer for . There ’ s probably a PhD thesis out there , in the realms of possible PhD theses that someone could write somewhere , on Gary Gygax ’ s influence on the 20th century novel . Because it would not be negligible . 
 = Avery Homestead = 
 The Avery Homestead is a two @-@ story Colonial @-@ style home in Ledyard , Connecticut that was built circa 1696 . Evidence suggests that the house may have begun as a single @-@ story , one @-@ room house and later expanded to a two @-@ story , two @-@ room house by 1726 . The house underwent major additions and renovations by Theophilus Avery and later his grandson , Theophilus Avery . In the mid @-@ 1950s , Amos Avery began a decade @-@ long restoration effort to return the house to its 18th @-@ century appearance . The Avery Homestead is historically significant as a well @-@ preserved example of an 18th @-@ century farmhouse with fine craftsmanship . The home is also historically important because more than twelve generations of the Avery family have resided there over the course of three centuries . The Avery Homestead was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1992 . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The Avery Homestead is located on the west side of Ledyard , Connecticut and faces south on Avery Hill Road . The house overlooks 100 acres ( 40 @.@ 46 hectares ) of stone @-@ walled pasture land that extends south to <unk> Wharf Road . The two @-@ story house has a shed to the immediate east and a two @-@ story barn to the southeast . Past the barn is a farm pond that is located in a small valley formed by Billings @-@ Avery Brook . The brook extends west for a mile ( about 1 @.@ 6 km ) before joining the Thames River . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Avery Homestead is a two @-@ story Colonial @-@ style house that is believed to have been originally constructed around 1696 . The main block of the house is built in the double cube of the Georgian style . It is unknown if the house originally began as a one @-@ room one @-@ story house with the original structure having been on the current east @-@ end of the main block . The expansion and alteration of houses in this way was common in Ledyard and tool markings and different fenestration patterns are supporting evidence for this theory . The strongest evidence is the <unk> marks found on the chimney girts in the hall and parlor , exposed framing and sheathing has markings consistent with a water @-@ powered up @-@ and @-@ down saw . It is certain that the house had achieved its two @-@ story and two @-@ room appearance by 1726 due to its parlor being used as a meeting room for church services . Further evidence in the construction of the fireplace flues which indicates that the main block of the house was completed prior to the American Revolution . Around 1780 , the main house was extended by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in the rear during a two @-@ story addition that gives the house a slight saltbox appearance . This changes were made while under the ownership of Theophilus Avery . Around 1870 , under the ownership Theophilus Avery 's grandson , also Theophilus Avery , the original kitchen ell was removed from the building and became a separate building to the east of the house . The new and present ell that was constructed served as an open shed until 1965 when it was converted to a shop and office . 
 The framing of the house is unusual because it has " longitudinal summer beams extending from the end girts to the chimney girts in both the hall and the parlor . Corner and intermediate posts are flared in <unk> pattern . The walls are sheathed with vertical planking except in the attic gables , where the planks are laid horizontally , alternating the taper . Framing is cased in the parlor and exposed in the hall , where the summers are <unk> and roughly chamfered . " The attic construction is conventional with equally spaced rafters that have mortise and tenon joints at the ridge . This type of construction indicates that the conventional principal rafter or <unk> framing may not have been used in Ledyard during that time . 
 The low granite block foundation of the house is more exposed on the west side of the house , allowing for a full @-@ height door exiting from the cellar . The stone stack supports four fireplaces that each support the hall , hall chamber , parlor and the cellar . Also there is a smoke chamber in the stack in the attic . The original kitchen , now in the hall , features a large fireplace with bake oven in the rear wall of the firebox . The attic once housed a large loom that was later moved down to the west side of the cellar . Amos G. Avery , who owned and restored the house prior to its 1992 National Register of Historic Places listing , removed a 1871 Victorian balustrade on the front staircase installed by the second Theophilus Avery . 
 The main barn is oriented on a north – south axis and has a conventional bent framing and sheathed with vertical boards . It is believed that the addition of a cupola with a hip roof may have been a later addition to the barn . Photos dating from 1870 confirm its age , but the date of construction for the barn cannot be determined , but it may date from the 18th century . The former ell of the house was converted in a shed and dates to around 1780 . 
 = = Owners = = 
 More than twelve generations of the Avery family have resided in the Avery Homestead . The original house was constructed about 1696 by William Morgan , around the time of his marriage to Margaret Avery . The two were descendents of James Morgan and James Avery respectively . The house passed to Deacon William Morgan Jr. who used the house to conduct church services from 1726 , when North Groton became a separate parish , and lasted until the completion of a meetinghouse . Deacon William Morgan Jr. sold the house to John Wood in 1745 . Nine years would pass before it would be reacquired by the Avery family in 1754 . Theophilus Avery , the first , owned the house from 1757 to 1798 . The second Theophilus Avery possessed the house from 1852 to 1880 . Amos G. Avery acquired the house in 1946 from his father . 
 In 1970 , Amos Avery donated 100 acres of land to the Mashantucket Land Trust and kept the surrounding 40 acres . Amos Avery also restored the house to a " more or less " 18th @-@ century appearance through a decade @-@ long restoration effort . The restoration effort began in the mid @-@ 1950s when he poked a hole in the ceiling and felt the molding , spurring his desire to see what was underneath . The ceiling was removed and the room was restored and then it moved to the next room . Avery removed plaster off the fireplaces , replaced the wide floor boards and replicated the wainscotting . Upon Amos Avery 's death in July 1998 , aged 96 , the house passed to his oldest son Edward . Many historical artifacts were put up for auction , including 12 wicker baskets of Mohegan or Pequot origin , which were bid on by the Mashantucket Pequot Museum . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Avery Homestead is historically significant as a " rare survival of a late @-@ seventeenth and early eighteenth @-@ century farmstead , a significance enhanced by the exceptional integrity of its rural setting . The picturesque interrelationship of the house , farmyard , and outbuildings , which is set off by the broad sweep of the associated pasture and crop land , is especially evocative of eighteenth @-@ century <unk> . " Believed to be the oldest building in Ledyard , the Avery Homestead is marked by its fine craftsmanship and state of preservation . The Avery Homestead is also historically important due to its ties to the Avery family . The Avery family has owned the house for three centuries save for a brief nine @-@ year period , from 1745 to 1754 . The Avery Homestead was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1992 . 
 = = Plaque = = 
 A historical plaque awarded to Avery indicates that it is the oldest house in Ledyard and states its date from 1720 , but evidence suggests it to be older . This plaque was part of a statewide funded campaign by the State of Connecticut for the 350th anniversary of the state 's founding . Disagreements over the program were widespread due to the difficulty in dating the homes by craftsmanship and the lack of documentation to prove it . Ledyard recognized the Avery Homestead because of the documentation possessed by Amos G. Avery . 
 = Yours ( song ) = 
 " Yours " is a song recorded by contemporary Christian singer and songwriter Steven Curtis Chapman . Written by Chapman and Jonas <unk> and produced by Chapman and Matt <unk> , it was included as the fourth track on Chapman 's 2007 studio album This Moment ; a radio edit of the song containing a new verse was released as the third single from the album . 
 The album version of " Yours " received a positive reception from critics and Chapman has performed the song on his concert tours . The radio version of the song has been included on several compilation albums and peaked inside the top ten on the US Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts ; it also topped the Radio & Records Soft AC / INSPO chart , becoming Chapman 's 45th career number @-@ one single . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Yours " was written by Chapman and Jonas <unk> , and it was produced by Chapman and Bronlewee . It was mixed by F. Reid Shippen and mastered by Ted Jensen . The fourth verse included on the new verse version on the song was recorded , edited , and produced on July 15 , 2008 in Nashville , Tennessee by Bronlewee ; it was engineered by Reid Shippen . 
 " Yours " is a pop song with a length of six minutes and thirty @-@ nine seconds . It is set in common time in the key of F major and has a tempo of 100 beats per minute . Chapman 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of C4 to the high note of G5 . The radio edit of the song has a length of four minutes and fifty seconds and contains a new verse ( I ’ ve walked the valley of death ’ s shadow / So deep and dark that I could barely breathe / I ’ ve had to let go of more than I could bear / And questioned everything that I believe / But still even here / in this great darkness / A comfort and hope come breaking through / As I can say in life or death / God we belong to you ) which Chapman wrote in the weeks following the death of his daughter Maria , who had died on May 21 , 2008 after having been accidentally hit by a car driven by her brother . Lyrically , the song describes the omnipotence of God and how " God owns everything and is ever present in every place " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album version of " Yours " received a positive reception from music critics . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout commented that the song is " a simplistic but effective admission of God 's omnipotence " . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today compared it to Chapman 's " big pop anthems like ' Speechless ' of ' For the Sake of the Call ' " , regarding the song as " a personable yet worshipful declaration of God 's dominion over the earth " . Deborah Evans @-@ Price of CCM Magazine regarded the song as a " stirring reminder of God 's power and presence in every situation " . 
 = = Release and chart performance = = 
 " Yours " was included as the fourth track on Chapman 's 2007 studio album This Moment . The new verse version of " Yours " was released to radio on August 1 , 2008 . It debuted at No. 29 on the US Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart for the chart week of August 30 , 2008 . It advanced to No. 23 in its second chart week and to No. 18 in its fifth chart week . In its sixth chart week , " Yours " advanced to No. 15 , and in its sixteenth week it advanced to No. 9 . In its eighteenth chart week , it advanced to its peak position of No. 7 . In total , " Yours " spent twenty @-@ four weeks on the Hot Christian Songs chart . It also peaked at No. 5 on the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and at No. 5 on the Radio & Records Christian AC chart . On the Radio & Records Soft AC / INSPO chart , " Yours " peaked at No. 1 , becoming Chapman 's 45th career number @-@ one single . 
 = = Live performances and other uses = = 
 Steven Curtis Chapman has performed " Yours " on his concert tours . At a concert on April 4 , 2009 in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania , Chapman performed the song as the second of his opening setlist . At a concert on November 21 , 2010 in Joppa , Maryland , Chapman performed " Yours " after telling the audience the story of how he was inspired to write the song ; he also included the additional verse he wrote following the death of his daughter . At a concert in Lancaster , Pennsylvania on October 6 , 2011 , Chapman performed the song as part of his setlist . Before playing the fourth verse of the song , Chapman stopped to discuss going through his daughter 's death . 
 " Yours " has been included on several compilation albums , including WOW Hits 2010 and Discover : Steven Curtis Chapman . An acoustic version of the song has been included on the Special Edition of This Moment and the compilation album Acoustic Playlist : Bold . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital Single 
 " Yours " ( New Verse ) – 4 : 50 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end = = = 
 = = Radio adds and release history = = 
 = Chicago Board of Trade Building = 
 The Chicago Board of Trade Building is a skyscraper located in Chicago , Illinois , United States . It stands at 141 W. Jackson Boulevard at the foot of the LaSalle Street canyon , in the Loop community area in Cook County . Built in 1930 and first designated a Chicago Landmark on May 4 , 1977 , the building was listed as a National Historic Landmark on June 2 , 1978 . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 16 , 1978 . Originally built for the Chicago Board of Trade ( CBOT ) , it is now the primary trading venue for the derivatives exchange , the CME Group , formed in 2007 by the merger of the CBOT and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange . In 2012 , the CME Group sold the CBOT Building to a consortium of real estate investors , including <unk> Properties LLC and <unk> Real Estate Company . 
 The 141 W. Jackson address hosted the former tallest building in Chicago designed by William W. Boyington before the current Holabird & Root structure , which held the same title for over 35 years until being surpassed in 1965 by the Richard J. Daley Center . The current structure is known for its art deco architecture , sculptures and large @-@ scale stone carving , as well as large trading floors . An aluminum , three @-@ story art deco statue of Ceres , goddess of agriculture ( particularly grain ) , caps the building . The building is a popular sightseeing attraction and location for shooting movies , and its owners and management have won awards for efforts to preserve the building and for office management . 
 = = Early history = = 
 = = = Early locations = = = 
 On April 3 , 1848 , the Board of Trade opened for business at 101 South Water Street . When 122 members were added in 1856 , it was moved to the corner of South Water and LaSalle Streets . After another temporary relocation west on South Water Street in 1860 , the first permanent home was established within the Chamber of Commerce Building on the corner of LaSalle and Washington Streets in 1865 . In 1871 , the Great Chicago Fire destroyed this building . The exchange temporarily reopened two weeks after the fire in a 90 feet ( 27 m ) wooden building known as " the Wigwam " at the intersection of Washington and Market Streets , before reclaiming its home in a new building constructed at the Chamber of Commerce site one year later . 
 = = = Permanent home = = = 
 In 1882 construction began of the CBOT 's new home , which opened at the current location on May 1 , 1885 . The building was designed by William W. Boyington , best known today for his work on the Chicago Water Tower . It faced Jackson Street with 180 ft ( 55 m ) feet of frontage , and was built from structural steel and granite taken from the Fox Island quarry near <unk> , Maine . With a rear of enameled brick , it was 10 stories tall and featured a tower 320 ft ( 98 m ) tall containing a large clock and 4 @,@ 500 pounds ( 2 @,@ 000 kg ; 320 st ) bell , topped by a 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) copper weather vane in the shape of a ship . The interiors were finished in mahogany and frescoed . Construction cost $ 1 @.@ 8 million ( about 47 million in 2016 terms ) . With four elevators and a great hall measuring 152 ft × 161 ft ( 46 m × 49 m ) and 80 ft ( 24 m ) high decorated by a stained @-@ glass skylight and ornate stone balusters , it was the first commercial building in Chicago to have electric lighting . It was also the first building in the city to exceed 300 ft ( 91 m ) in height and at the time was the tallest building in Chicago . The building 's formal dedication ceremonies , which were described by a contemporary as " brilliant and imposing " , took place on April 29 , 1885 and were attended by over four thousand persons including dignitaries from around the world . 
 The building attracted tourists , visitors , and protesters . The inaugural banquet for the building opening was marched on by a sizable column of Chicago labor activists , under the International Working People 's Association banner and led by Albert Parsons , Lucy Parsons , and Lizzie Holmes . " The building , on which two million dollars had been lavished in the midst of an economic depression , was denounced by the anarchists as ... the crowning symbol of all that was hateful in the private property system . " . The procession were cheered by thousands of spectators . Their access to the Board of Trade was blocked by a phalanx of police , first at Jackson , then at LaSalle , finally coming to within a half @-@ block of the building , " bathed in a sea of electric light only recently installed for the occasion . " 
 Viewing galleries were opened to the public for the first time in honor of the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition . 
 In 1895 , the clock tower was removed and the " tallest building in Chicago " record was then held by the 302 ft ( 92 m ) tall Masonic Temple Building . Built on caissons surrounded by muck , the trading house was rendered structurally unsound in the 1920s when construction began across the street on the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago . The 1885 building was subsequently demolished in 1929 , and the exchange temporarily moved to Van Buren and Clark while a new building was constructed at the LaSalle and Jackson site . 
 The 1885 allegorical architectural sculptures of 35 ft ( 11 m ) Industry and Agriculture , two figures of a four @-@ piece set , were removed from the original building and now stand in a nearby pedestrian plaza . 
 = = 1930 building = = 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 In 1925 , the Chicago Board of Trade commissioned Holabird & Root to design the current building . The general contractors <unk> & Harris built it for $ 11 @.@ 3 million , although the reported twenty @-@ year mortgage value was $ 12 million ( $ 12 million in 1925 equates to about 160 million in 2016 dollars ) . Clad in gray Indiana limestone , topped with a copper pyramid roof , and standing on a site running 174 ft ( 53 m ) east – west on Jackson Boulevard and 240 ft ( 73 m ) north – south on LaSalle Street , the 605 ft ( 184 m ) tall art deco @-@ styled building opened on June 9 , 1930 . It serves as the southern border for the skyscrapers hugging LaSalle Street and is taller than surrounding structures for several blocks . The Chicago Board of Trade has operated continuously on its fourth floor since the 1930 opening , dedicating 19 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m2 ) to what was then the world 's largest trading floor . 
 The advent of steel frame structural systems allowed completely vertical construction ; but as with many skyscrapers of the era , the exterior was designed with multiple setbacks at increasing heights , which served to allow additional light into the ever @-@ deepening concrete valleys in urban cores . At night , the setbacks are upwardly lit by floodlights , further emphasizing the structure 's vertical elements . The night illumination design was a common contemporary Chicago architectural theme , seen also in the Wrigley Building , the Jewelers Building , the Palmolive Building , the LaSalle @-@ Wacker Building , and the Tribune Tower . 
 Interior decoration includes polished surfaces throughout , the use of black and white marble , prominent vertical hallway trim , and an open three @-@ story lobby which at the time of opening housed the world 's largest light fixture . Though One LaSalle Street had five more floors , the CBOT building was the first in Chicago to exceed a height of 600 ft ( 180 m ) . After surpassing the Chicago Temple Building , it was the tallest in Chicago until the Daley Center was completed in 1965 . Known for its work on the Brooklyn Bridge , the family @-@ operated factory of John A. Roebling supplied all of the cables used in the building 's 23 Otis elevators . Beneath the main trading floor over 2 @,@ 700 miles ( 4 @,@ 300 km ) of telephone and telegraph wires were once hidden . No less than 150 @,@ 000 miles ( 240 @,@ 000 km ) of wires ( considered possibly the most direct long @-@ distance wire from any building ) once ran from the room . Although the building was commissioned for the Chicago Board of Trade , its first tenant was the Quaker Oats Company , which moved in on May 1 , 1930 . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Sculptural work by Alvin Meyer , the one @-@ time head of Holabird & Root 's sculpture department , is prominent on the building 's façade , and represents the trading activities within . On each side of the 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) diameter clock facing LaSalle Street are hooded figures , a Babylonian holding grain and a Native American holding corn . Similar figures are repeated at the uppermost corners of the central tower , just below the sloping roof . About 30 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) above street level , representations of bulls protrude directly from the limestone cladding on the building 's north side and to a lesser degree on the east side , a reference to a bull market . 
 The central structure is capped by a 6 @,@ 500 pound , 31 ft ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) tall aluminum statue by sculptor John H. Storrs of the Roman goddess of grain , Ceres , holding a sheaf of wheat in the left hand and a bag of corn in the right hand , as a nod to the exchange 's heritage as a commodities market . This statue was assembled from 40 pieces . 
 Commissioned in 1930 but removed from the agricultural trading room in 1973 and stored until 1982 , John W. Norton 's three @-@ story mural of Ceres shown bare @-@ breasted in a field of grain underwent extensive restoration in Spring Grove , Illinois by Louis Pomerantz before being displayed in the atrium of the 1980s addition . 
 = = = Trading floor = = = 
 According to the June 16 , 1930 issue of Time magazine , visitors carrying ripened wheat heads stared in curiosity at the six @-@ story tall trading room directly above the lobby and behind the large windows below the clock facing LaSalle Street . At the center of the room , Time reported on the items being traded in " pits " organized based on commodities type with pits names such as the corn pit , soybean pit or wheat pit . The individual pits are raised octagonal structures where open outcry trading occurs . Steps up the outside of each octagon provide an amphitheater atmosphere , and enable a large number of traders to see each other and communicate during trading hours . With early versions dating back to 1870 , this type of trading pit was patented in 1878 . 
 The trading area is surrounded by desks allowing workers to support transactions . In the early days , the desks served as a relay point between the pits and those wishing to buy or sell . When trade orders and information began to be communicated by telegraph , Morse code operators were employed , later replaced by phone operators . In the late 20th century , electric display boards lined the walls of the trading hall and the advent of electronic trading resulted in computers being placed on desktops . 
 Subsequent additions to the Board of Trade Building moved the agricultural and financial trading floors out of the original trading room and into new spaces in the additions to the building 's rear in the 1980s . In 2004 the historic 1930 trading floor , already substantially altered ( and unused for more than two years ) , was demolished and its pits filled with concrete . It was renovated in a modern style and now is leased to a privately owned options trading firm . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 In 1980 , the owners added a 275 ft ( 84 m ) 23 @-@ story expansion to the south side of the building . It was topped by an octagonal ornament shaped similarly to the terraced trading pits and was designed in a postmodern style by Helmut Jahn . Colored black and silver , with a sunlit atrium on the 12th floor facing the south wall of the older structure , the annex provided a four @-@ story granite lined agricultural trading floor , then the world 's largest at 32 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 970 m2 ) . Even as the Sydney Futures Exchange and other markets were ceasing outcry trading , Mayor Richard M. Daley led the groundbreaking on January 17 , 1995 , for additional expansion into a five @-@ story building to the east designed by architects Fujikawa Johnson and structural engineers TT @-@ <unk> . When opened in 1997 , the $ 175 million structure would add 60 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 570 m2 ) of trading space and for a period again would house the world 's largest trading floor . It was nicknamed the " Arboretum " by some in reference to expansion supporter CBOT Chairman Patrick H. Arbor . The expansion included price boards 600 feet ( 183 m ) long and supported 12 @,@ 000 computers , 6 @,@ 000 voice devices , and 2 @,@ 000 video devices requiring 27 @,@ 000 miles ( 43 @,@ 500 km ) of cable . 
 Collectively , the trading floors now encompass approximately 115 @,@ 150 square feet ( 10 @,@ 700 m2 ) . The logo of the CBOT represents a trading pit , and appears prominently on stonework facing Clark Street and on street @-@ level barriers at the service entrance on Van Buren Street . The addition has a twelve @-@ story atrium and melds historical and contemporary design with art deco references such as setbacks , central tower , symmetrical projecting wings , pyramidal roof and abstract cascade and scallop lobby design . Between the original and new buildings , where there was formerly a street , a wide street @-@ level walkway connects the plaza on LaSalle Street to Van Buren Street in what would ordinarily be the building 's first floor . Passing over the Van Buren Street elevated tracks , a green glass @-@ enclosed steel @-@ frame bridge connects the lower southwest corner of the 23 story addition to the Chicago Board Options Exchange ( although this bridge was closed to pedestrian traffic in the wake of the September 11 , 2001 attacks for security reasons ) . 
 = = = Renovation = = = 
 In 2005 , the building underwent an extensive $ 20 million renovation directed by Chicago architect <unk> <unk> , whose restoration work included Loop landmarks the Rookery Building and Reliance Building . The project included restoration of the main lobby to emphasize the design features of the art deco era , elevator modernization , façade renovation and cleaning , and the continued renovation of upper floor corridors and hallways . Though impractically small for modern use , mailboxes in the lobby were restored to their original condition to follow the theme of vertical lines found throughout the complex . An improved electrical infrastructure , with ten main feeds from seven different Commonwealth Edison electrical substations , was added in addition to redundant cooling systems and upgraded telecommunications capabilities . 
 When the old CBOT building was demolished in 1929 , two 4 @.@ 5 short tons ( 4 @.@ 0 long tons ; 4 @.@ 1 t ) 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) tall gray granite statues of classically styled goddesses ( pictured above ) were moved from the second floor ledge above the main entrance into the gardens of the 500 acre ( 2 km ² ) estate of Arthur W. <unk> , a wheat and cotton speculator who went bankrupt during the Great Depression . One goddess represents agriculture and is shown standing with wheat and leaning on a cornucopia . The other represents industry and appears with the bow of a ship and an anvil . 
 The statues were found in 1978 near Glen Ellyn , Illinois by the Forest Preserve District of DuPage County , on land acquired from <unk> 's estate . After being displayed in a parking lot at <unk> Forest Preserve for several years , both were returned to the CBOT building 's plaza and rededicated on June 9 , 2005 . 
 = = Later history = = 
 = = = Surroundings = = = 
 The LaSalle Street canyon is home to other historic buildings including the Rookery Building , a National Historic Landmark considered to be the oldest standing high @-@ rise . A 1907 renovation included a lobby remodeled by Frank Lloyd Wright in the Prairie School style . The name rookery comes from the previous building on the property which became home to many birds , especially pigeons . The nearby Reliance Building was the first skyscraper to have large plate glass windows comprise the majority of its surface area , and One North LaSalle was for some time one of Chicago 's tallest buildings . Both the Reliance Building and One North LaSalle are on the National Register of Historic Places . Since 1853 , the governments of Chicago and Cook County have shared three different buildings at the north end of the canyon . The current Chicago City Hall , built in a Classical Revival style , was designed to symbolize the strength , dignity , and vigor of the government . Completed in 2001 , an award winning green roof was incorporated into the structure . All of the structures are designated as Chicago Landmarks . 
 Other nearby buildings of note include the Continental Commercial National Bank , now called 208 South LaSalle Street , which broke records in 1911 as the city 's most expensive development , with a cost exceeding $ 10 million . The Rand @-@ McNally Building that had served as the headquarters of the World 's Columbian Exposition was demolished to accommodate the structure . The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago , at 230 South LaSalle Street , was built in a Greco @-@ Roman style and contained the largest vaults in the world and one of the first building @-@ wide wired communication systems . Both the Federal Reserve Bank and 208 South LaSalle demonstrate the popularity of neoclassical architecture during the late 19th and early 20th centuries and were meant to project a sense of financial security . 
 One mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Lake Michigan and in the southwest corner of the Loop , the building is near two elevated stations of the Chicago ' L ' . The Quincy station is one block to the west and the LaSalle / <unk> station is between the CBOT and the Chicago Stock Exchange ; both stations are served by the Orange , Purple , Pink , and Brown Lines . Additionally , Blue Line service is provided at the Jackson and LaSalle stations , each two blocks away . Union Station stands five blocks to the west on Jackson Boulevard , providing terminal service for Amtrak and select service for Metra . Additional Metra service is provided at the LaSalle Street Station , two blocks due south . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In September 2011 , the intersection of LaSalle Street and Jackson Boulevard in front of the building became the headquarters for the Occupy Chicago protest movement . On April 23 , 2013 , the CME Group sold the north and south towers of the building at 141 W. Jackson Blvd. for $ 151 @.@ 5 Million to a joint venture between <unk> Properties LLC and <unk> Real Estate Co . The CME will retain ownership of the smaller east building at 333 S. LaSalle St. CME signed a 15 @-@ year lease for the 150 @,@ 000 square @-@ feet it occupies in the two towers . 
 = = = Tenants = = = 
 The CME Group occupies 33 percent of available space , while financial and trading concerns occupy 54 percent of the three @-@ building complex . In addition to Ceres Cafe on the first floor of the lobby , other businesses provide banking , insurance , travel services , beauty services , and healthcare . Some business have been in the building for over 40 years , and throughout its history , commodities speculators , such as " Prince of the Pit " Richard Dennis , have maintained offices in the building . In 2007 , the U.S. Futures Exchange , a competitor of the CBOT formerly known as <unk> US , announced a move from the Sears Tower into the 14th floor of the CBOT building . 
 = = = Visitors = = = 
 The CBOT building has been the site of a number of visits by dignitaries , including the Prince of Wales in October 1977 . In 1991 , George H. W. Bush became the first President of the United States to visit the Exchange , where he delivered a speech from the soybean pit regarding the importance of agriculture to the American economy . A visit from former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev followed on May 7 , 1992 . In 2006 , former US President Jimmy Carter and wife Rosalyn toured the CBOT while campaigning for their son Jack 's run for a U.S. Senate seat from Nevada . During the 1996 Democratic National Convention , US Vice President Al Gore was hosted at the Exchange 's Democratic Senatorial Campaign reception . When US President George W. Bush toured the agricultural trading floor on January 6 , 2006 , he was hailed from the corn trading pit with " Hook ' em , Horns ! " , a reference to his adopted home state of Texas . Interest groups such as the Chicago Architecture Foundation provide scheduled tours showcasing the architecture and selected portions of the trading operations . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 1985 : the 23 @-@ story addition won the Best Structure Award from the Structural Engineers Association of Illinois . 
 2006 : the building was awarded the Landmarks Illinois ' annual Real Estate and Building Industries Council award for its preservation efforts . 
 2006 : the Building Owners and Managers Association of Chicago presented the CBOT building with The Office Building of the Year award recognizing the high quality of office space and excellence in management of the building . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The 1885 building and trading pits were prominently featured in The Pit , the second novel by Frank Norris in The Epic of the Wheat trilogy . Life on the trading floor of the Chicago Board of Trade is detailed in the nonfiction book Leg the Spread by Cari Lynn ( 2004 ) . 
 Trading operations have been used as scenes in movies such as Ferris Bueller 's Day Off , and the streetscape in the LaSalle Street canyon is used in the movies The Untouchables , Road to Perdition , and Transformers : Dark of the Moon . 
 In Batman Begins , the Board of Trade Building represents the headquarters of Wayne Enterprises , but in the 2008 sequel , The Dark Knight , Wayne Enterprises was represented by the Richard J. Daley Center . The building itself appears in The Dark Knight . 
 While maintaining studios in the building for many years , <unk> @-@ TV broadcast the Stock Market Observer , a daily seven @-@ hour live business television news program that is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records for the show telecast the most hours . Additionally , the station broadcasts First Business with news of the Chicago Board of Trade . Former <unk> @-@ AM radio personality Don Cornelius began the popular dance show Soul Train in a cramped studio on the 43rd floor in 1970 . When Cornelius moved the show to Los Angeles a year later , his assistant , Clinton Ghent took over the local show until it ended in 1976 . Prior to Soul Train , shows filmed in the building were Kiddie A Go @-@ Go , a dance show aimed at the pre @-@ teen market which premiered in 1965 and Red Hot and Blues , a teen dance show hosted by local DJ Big Bill Hill which premiered in 1967 . More recently , the building 's interior and exterior portrayed the offices of the Daily Planet newspaper in the 2013 Superman reboot film , Man of Steel . 
 Although depicted with the tower in a Rand McNally map from 1893 , later lithographs of the first 141 Jackson Street location display a red @-@ roofed building without a tower . Memorabilia of the current building is abundant , with postcards of panoramic scenes from LaSalle Street , the clock , and lighted upper decks having been produced for decades . In views from the Museum Campus , the building 's crown is framed by the middle floors of the taller Sears Tower in the background . Photographer Andreas Gursky has used the location for still life prints such as 1997 's Chicago Board of Trade , I and 1999 's Chicago Board of Trade , II . A photograph of the exterior , from the Museum series by Thomas Struth , is in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City . An often @-@ reproduced painting by Leslie Ragan for the New York Central Railroad depicts streamliner locomotives idling at LaSalle Street Station with the Board of Trade Building looming prominently in the background . 
 At 1211 North LaSalle Street on the city 's Near North Side , a 16 @-@ story apartment hotel built in 1929 and converted into an apartment building in 1981 was used by muralist Richard Haas for trompe @-@ l 'œil murals in homage to Chicago School architecture . One of the building 's sides features the Chicago Board of Trade Building , intended as a reflection of the actual building two miles ( 3 km ) south . 
 = = Position in Chicago 's skyline = = 
 = Isopoda = 
 Isopoda is an order of crustaceans which includes woodlice and their relatives . Isopods live in the sea , in fresh water , or on land , and most are small greyish or whitish animals with rigid , segmented exoskeletons . They have two pairs of antennae , seven pairs of jointed limbs on the thorax , and five pairs of branching appendages on the abdomen that are used in respiration . Females brood their young in a pouch under their thorax . Isopods have various feeding methods : some eat dead or decaying plant and animal matter , others are grazers or strain food particles from the water around them , a few are predators , and some are internal or external parasites , mostly of fishes . Aquatic species mostly live on the seabed or bottom of freshwater bodies of water , but some more derived taxa can swim for a short distance . Terrestrial forms move around by crawling and tend to be found in cool , moist places . Some species are able to roll themselves into a ball to conserve moisture or as a defence mechanism . 
 There are over 10 @,@ 000 species of isopod worldwide with around 4 @,@ 500 species found in marine environments , mostly on the seabed , 500 species in fresh water and another 5 @,@ 000 species on land . The order is divided into eleven suborders . The fossil record of isopods dates back to the Carboniferous period ( in the Pennsylvanian epoch ) , at least 300 million years ago , when isopods lived in shallow seas . The name Isopoda is derived from the Greek roots <unk> ( <unk> , meaning " same " ) and πούς ( <unk> , pous , meaning " foot " ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Classified within the arthropods , isopods have a chitinous exoskeleton and jointed limbs . Isopods are typically flattened dorsoventrally ( broader than they are deep ) , although many species deviate from this rule , particularly parasitic forms , and those living in the deep sea or in ground water habitats . Their colour may vary , from grey to white , or in some cases red , green , or brown . Isopods vary in size , ranging from some <unk> species of just 0 @.@ 3 mm to the deep sea <unk> spp. of nearly 50 cm ( 20 in ) . Isopods lack an obvious carapace ( shell ) , which is reduced to a " cephalic shield " covering only the head . This means that the gill @-@ like structures , which in other related groups are protected by the carapace , are instead found on specialised limbs on the abdomen . The dorsal ( upper ) surface of the animal is covered by a series of overlapping , articulated plates which give protection while also providing flexibility . The isopod body plan consists of a head ( cephalon ) , a thorax ( pereon ) with eight segments ( pereonites ) , and an abdomen ( <unk> ) with six segments ( <unk> ) , some of which may be fused . The head is fused with the first segment of the thorax to form the cephalon . There are two pairs of unbranched antennae , the first pair being vestigial in land @-@ dwelling species . The eyes are compound and <unk> and the mouthparts include a pair of maxillipeds and a pair of mandibles ( jaws ) with palps ( segmented appendages with sensory functions ) and <unk> <unk> ( spine @-@ like movable appendages ) . 
 The seven free segments of the thorax each bear a pair of unbranched pereopods ( limbs ) . In most species these are used for locomotion and are of much the same size , morphology and orientation , giving the order its name " Isopoda " , from the Greek equal foot . In a few species , the front pair are modified into gnathopods with clawed , gripping terminal segments . The pereopods are not used in respiration , as are the equivalent limbs in amphipods , but the coxae ( first segments ) are fused to the tergites ( dorsal plates ) to form <unk> ( side plates ) . In mature females , some or all of the limbs have appendages known as oostegites which fold underneath the thorax and form a brood chamber for the eggs . In males , the gonopores ( genital openings ) are on the ventral surface of segment eight and in the females , they are in a similar position on segment six . 
 One or more of the abdominal segments , starting with the sixth segment , is fused to the telson ( terminal section ) to form a rigid pleotelson . The first five abdominal segments each bear a pair of biramous ( branching in two ) pleopods ( lamellar structures which serve the function of gas exchange , and in aquatic species serve as gills and propulsion ) , and the last segment bears a pair of biramous uropods ( posterior limbs ) . In males , the second pair of pleopods , and sometimes the first also , are modified for use in transferring sperm . The endopods ( inner branches of the pleopods ) are modified into structures with thin , permeable cuticles ( flexible outer coverings ) which act as gills for gas exchange . In some terrestrial isopods , these resemble lungs . 
 = = Diversity and classification = = 
 Isopods belong to the larger group Peracarida , which are united by the presence of a special chamber under the thorax for brooding eggs . They have a cosmopolitan distribution and over 10 @,@ 000 species of isopod , classified into 11 suborders , have been described worldwide . Around 4 @,@ 500 species are found in marine environments , mostly on the sea floor . Some 500 species are found in fresh water and another 5 @,@ 000 species are the terrestrial woodlice that form the suborder Oniscidea . In the deep sea , members of the suborder Asellota predominate , to the near exclusion of all other isopods , having undergone a large adaptive radiation in that environment . The largest isopod is in the genus <unk> and some large species are fished commercially for human food in Mexico , Japan and Hawaii . 
 A number of isopod groups have evolved a parasitic lifestyle , particularly as external parasites of fish . They can damage or kill their hosts and can cause significant economic loss to commercial fisheries . In reef aquariums , parasitic isopods can become a pest , endangering the fish and possibly injuring the aquarium keeper . Some members of the family <unk> suck the blood of fish , and others , in the family <unk> , consume the blood , fins , tail and flesh and can kill the fish in the process . 
 The World Marine , Freshwater and Terrestrial <unk> Crustaceans database subdivides the order into eleven suborders : 
 Asellota – The suborder containing the majority of freshwater isopod species , found in both surface and subterranean waters , along with some deepwater marine species . 
 <unk> – A small suborder consisting of two marine species in the family <unk> and one freshwater species in the family <unk> which is found in subterranean locations . 
 <unk> – Chiefly marine isopods with over 2 @,@ 700 species . Members are mostly carnivorous or parasitic . Includes the family <unk> , the juveniles of which are parasitic on fishes . The previously recognised suborder <unk> is included as two superfamilies within this suborder and <unk> now includes part of the formerly recognised suborder Flabellifera . 
 <unk> – Mainly tropical isopods , some of which are herbivorous . 
 <unk> – Tiny , worm @-@ like isopods that live between particles on the bed of freshwater and shallow marine habitats . 
 Oniscidea – Semi @-@ terrestrial and terrestrial isopods fully adapted for life on land . There are over 4 @,@ 000 species of woodlice inhabiting forests , mountains , deserts and the littoral zone . 
 <unk> – A single marine species , <unk> remex , which warrants its own suborder because of its unique characteristics . 
 <unk> – Small suborder of freshwater isopods resembling amphipods , limited to South Africa , India , Australia and New Zealand . 
 <unk> – Benthic isopods mostly from the southern hemisphere with respiratory pleopods inside a branchial chamber . This suborder now includes part of the formerly recognised suborder Flabellifera . 
 <unk> – Freshwater isopods in a " relictual environment " . 
 <unk> – A large group of benthic , marine isopods with respiratory pleopods inside a branchial chamber under the abdomen . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Isopods first appeared in the fossil record during the Carboniferous period of the Paleozoic some 300 million years ago . They were primitive , short @-@ tailed members of the suborder <unk> . At that time , <unk> were marine organisms with a cosmopolitan distribution . Nowadays , the members of this formerly widespread suborder form relic populations in freshwater environments in South Africa , India and Oceania , the greatest number of species being in Tasmania . Other primitive , short @-@ tailed suborders include Asellota , <unk> , <unk> and the terrestrial Oniscidea . 
 The short @-@ tailed isopods have a short pleotelson and terminal , stylus @-@ like uropods and have a sedentary lifestyle on or under the sediment on the seabed . The long @-@ tailed isopods by contrast have a long pleotelson and broad lateral uropods which can be used in swimming . They are much more active and can launch themselves off the seabed and swim for short distances . The more advanced long @-@ tailed isopods are mostly endemic to the southern hemisphere and may have radiated on the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana soon after it broke away from Laurasia some 200 million years ago . The short @-@ tailed forms may have been driven from the shallow seas in which they lived by increased predatory pressure from marine fish , their main predators . The development of the long @-@ tailed forms may also have provided competition that helped force the short @-@ tailed forms into refugia . The latter are now restricted to environments such as the deep sea , freshwater , groundwater and dry land . Isopods in the suborder Asellota are by far the most species @-@ rich group of deep sea isopods . 
 = = Locomotion = = 
 Unlike the amphipods , marine and freshwater isopods are entirely benthic . This gives them little chance to disperse to new regions and may explain why so many species are endemic to restricted ranges . Crawling is the primary means of locomotion , and some species bore into the seabed , the ground or timber structures . Some members of the Flabellifera can swim to a limited extent and have their front three pairs of pleopods modified for this purpose , with their respiratory structures limited to the hind pleopods . Most terrestrial species are slow @-@ moving and conceal themselves under objects or hide in crevices or under bark . The semi @-@ terrestrial sea slaters ( <unk> spp . ) can run rapidly on land and many terrestrial species can roll themselves into a ball when threatened , a feature that has evolved independently in different groups and also in the marine <unk> . 
 = = Feeding and nutrition = = 
 Isopods have a simple gut which lacks a midgut section ; instead there are caeca connected to the back of the stomach in which absorption takes place . Food is sucked into the oesophagus , a process enhanced in the blood @-@ sucking parasitic species , and passed by peristalsis into the stomach , where the material is processed and filtered . The structure of the stomach varies , but in many species there is a dorsal groove into which indigestible material is channelled and a ventral part connected to the caeca where intracellular digestion and absorption take place . Indigestible material passes on through the hindgut and is eliminated through the anus which is located on the pleotelson . 
 Isopods are detritivores and browsers , carnivores ( including predators and scavengers ) , parasites , and filter feeders , and may occupy one or more of these feeding niches . Only aquatic and marine species are known to be parasites or filter feeders . Some exhibit <unk> and will also consume their own fecal pellets . Terrestrial species are in general herbivorous , with woodlice feeding on moss , bark , algae , fungi and decaying material . In marine isopods that feed on wood , cellulose is digested by enzymes secreted in the caeca . <unk> <unk> , for example , bores into wood and additionally feeds on the mycelia of fungi attacking the timber , thus increasing the nitrogen in its diet . Land @-@ based wood @-@ borers mostly house symbiotic bacteria in the hindgut which aid in digesting cellulose . There are numerous adaptations to this simple gut , but these are mostly correlated with diet rather than by taxonomic group . 
 Parasitic species are mostly external parasites of fish or crustaceans and feed on blood . The larvae of the <unk> family and adult <unk> have piercing and sucking mouthparts and clawed limbs adapted for clinging onto their hosts . In general , isopod parasites have diverse lifestyles and include <unk> elegans , found in the gill chambers of crabs ; <unk> <unk> , attached to the abdomen of hermit crabs ; <unk> equitans living inside the barnacle Balanus <unk> ; <unk> , living inside ostracods and free @-@ living isopods ; <unk> , living in the gill chambers or on the carapace of shrimps and crabs and causing a characteristic bulge which is even recognisable in some fossil crustaceans ; and <unk> living inside some species of crab and shrimp . <unk> exigua is a parasite of the spotted rose snapper Lutjanus <unk> in the Gulf of California ; it causes the tongue of the fish to atrophy and takes its place in what is believed to be the first instance discovered of a parasite functionally replacing a host structure in animals . 
 = = Reproduction and development = = 
 In most species , the sexes are separate and there is little sexual dimorphism , but a few species are hermaphroditic and some parasitic forms show large differences between the sexes . Some <unk> are protandrous hermaphrodites , starting life as males and later changing sex , and some <unk> are the reverse , being protogynous hermaphrodites that are born female . Some <unk> males are sessile and live with a group of females . Males have a pair of penises , which may be fused in some species . The sperm is transferred to the female by the modified second pleopod which receives it from the penis and which is then inserted into a female gonopore . The sperm is stored in a special receptacle , a swelling on the oviduct close to the gonopore . Fertilisation only takes place when the eggs are shed soon after a moult , at which time a connection is established between the semen receptacle and the oviduct . 
 The eggs , which may number up to several hundred , are brooded by the female in the marsupium , a chamber formed by flat plates known as oostegites under the thorax . This is filled with water even in terrestrial species . The eggs hatch as <unk> , a post @-@ larval stage which resembles the adult except for the absence of the last pair of pereopods . The lack of a swimming phase in the life cycle is a limiting factor in isopod dispersal , and may be responsible for the high levels of endemism in the order . As adults , isopods differ from other crustaceans in that moulting occurs in two stages known as " biphasic moulting " . First they shed the exoskeleton from the posterior part of their body and later shed the anterior part . The giant Antarctic isopod <unk> antarcticus is an exception to this and moults in a single process . 
 = = Terrestrial isopods = = 
 The majority of crustaceans are aquatic and the isopods are one of the few groups of which some members now live on land . The only other crustaceans which include a small number of terrestrial species are amphipods ( like sandhoppers ) and decapods ( crabs , shrimp , etc . ) . Terrestrial isopods play an important role in many tropical and temperate ecosystems by aiding in the decomposition of plant material through mechanical and chemical means , and by enhancing the activity of microbes . Macro @-@ detritivores , including terrestrial isopods , are absent from arctic and sub @-@ arctic regions , but have the potential to expand their range with increased temperatures in high latitudes . 
 The woodlice , suborder Oniscidea , are the most successful group of terrestrial crustaceans and show various adaptations for life on land . They are subject to evaporation , especially from their ventral area , and as they do not have a waxy cuticle , they need to conserve water , often living in a humid environment and sheltering under stones , bark , debris or leaf litter . Desert species are usually nocturnal , spending the day in an underground burrow and emerging at night . Moisture is obtained through food sources or by drinking , and some species can form their paired <unk> appendages into a tube and funnel water from dewdrops onto their pleopods . In many taxa , the respiratory structures on the endopods are internal , with a spiracle and <unk> , which resemble lungs . In others , the <unk> is folded inside the adjoining <unk> ( outer branch of the pleopod ) . Both these arrangements help to prevent evaporation from the respiratory surfaces . 
 Many species can roll themselves into a ball , a behaviour used in defence that also conserves moisture . Members of the families <unk> and <unk> , commonly known as rock lice or sea slaters , are the least specialised of the woodlice for life on land . They inhabit the splash zone on rocky shores , jetties and pilings , may hide under debris washed up on the shore and can swim if immersed in water . 
 = O @-@ Bahn Busway = 
 The O @-@ Bahn Busway is a guided busway that is part of the bus rapid transit system servicing the northeastern suburbs of Adelaide , South Australia . The O @-@ Bahn system was conceived by Daimler @-@ Benz to enable buses to avoid traffic congestion by sharing tram tunnels in the German city of Essen . 
 Adelaide 's O @-@ Bahn was introduced in 1986 to service the city 's rapidly expanding north @-@ eastern suburbs , replacing an earlier plan for a tramway extension . The O @-@ Bahn busway provides specially built track , combining elements of both bus and rail systems . Adelaide 's track is 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) long and includes three interchanges : Klemzig , Paradise and Tea Tree Plaza Interchange in Modbury . Interchanges allow buses to enter and exit the busway and to continue on suburban routes , avoiding the need for passengers to transfer to another bus to continue their journey . Buses travel at a maximum speed of 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) , and the busway is capable of carrying 18 @,@ 000 passengers an hour from Adelaide city centre to Tea Tree Plaza in 15 minutes . As of 2015 , the busway carries approximately 31 @,@ 000 people per weekday . 
 A contract has been let for an extension at the city end that will reduce the number of congested intersections buses must traverse to enter the Adelaide city centre ; this is due to open in 2017 . The development of the O @-@ Bahn busway led to the development of the Torrens Linear Park from a run @-@ down urban drain into an attractive public open space . It has also triggered urban development around the north @-@ eastern terminus at Modbury . 
 = = Track = = 
 The O @-@ Bahn track is made of concrete ; it is elevated above ground because of the poor quality of alluvial soils along the River Torrens , which frequently move due to their high level of plasticity . Concrete pylons were cast into the ground to ensure stability , to a depth of up to four metres . On top of the pylons are concrete sleepers on which the track runs . 5 @,@ 600 pylons were drilled in place to support 5 @,@ 600 sleepers and 4 @,@ 200 prefabricated L @-@ shaped track pieces , sited at 12 @-@ metre ( 40 @-@ ft ) intervals . The width of both tracks , sitting on the sleepers , is 6 @.@ 2 metres ( 20 ft ) . The O @-@ Bahn 's concrete tracks were narrower and lighter than those of the initially proposed light rail development , and put less stress on the land . The concrete components were precast and then laid onto piers . 
 At the city end , the O @-@ Bahn begins at Hackney Road , opposite the East Parklands , where it enters a 60 @-@ metre tunnel at a speed limited to 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) , due to the tight initial corner , ensuring that the rear tyres ( especially trailer tyres of articulated buses ) do not ' scrub ' against the track . Speed is gradually increased to 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) for most of the trip to Klemzig Interchange . Once en route to Paradise Interchange , the speed limit was up to 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) , but has been limited to 85 km / h ( 55 mph ) since late 2012 . On some sections 115 km / h ( 70 mph ) was achieved in tests . The average service speed including stops is about 60 km / h ( 35 mph ) . On entering interchanges the O @-@ Bahn ends and the speed limit is 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) . In the interchange area , the speed limit is 20 km / h ( 10 mph ) . The O @-@ Bahn is officially considered a road , due to a court ruling in the early years of the system 's operation . This ruling permits the South Australia Police to install speed cameras and fine speeding drivers . 
 Cars entering the O @-@ Bahn are deterred by a large number of signs at entrance points and a " sump buster " device that rips out a car 's sump ( oil pan ) if it gets onto the track . An average of four cars per year enter the O @-@ Bahn and must be removed by crane . 
 = = Buses = = 
 The first buses to enter service on the O @-@ Bahn were 41 rigid and 51 articulated Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> . These were modified for O @-@ Bahn use by Mitsubishi Motors ' Clovelly Park plant before being bodied by Pressed Metal Corporation South Australia . The cost was included in the original $ 98 million budget . Modified MAN <unk> and <unk> were later purchased . 
 With the Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> approaching their 25 @-@ year age limit , tenders were called in 2007 for replacements . The new buses were Scania <unk> / <unk> rigid and Scania <unk> articulated buses bodied by Custom Coaches . As of April 2015 , these along with one MAN <unk> , and one Mercedes @-@ Benz <unk> make up the fleet . 
 In the case of breakdowns , a specially designed vehicle nicknamed ' Dumbo ' is used to tow buses from the O @-@ Bahn . In the early stages of design it was intended that all buses would have towing ability ; however , this was soundly rejected by the drivers ' union and ' Dumbo ' was purchased . If a tyre blows during a trip the guide @-@ wheel prevents the bus from erratic movement , and a smaller aluminium inner tyre allows the bus to be driven to the nearest station at 40 km / h ( 25 mph ) . 
 The guide @-@ wheel , which protrudes just ahead of the front wheels , is the most important part of the bus when travelling on the O @-@ Bahn . It is connected directly to the steering mechanism , and steers the bus by running along the raised edge of the track . While it is not strictly necessary for drivers to hold the steering wheel when travelling on the O @-@ Bahn because of the guide @-@ wheel , safety procedures require the driver to be alert to their circumstances at all times . A rumble strip before stations is a reminder that they need to resume control . The guide @-@ wheel is the most delicate part of the system and is designed to snap off upon sharp impact ; before the O @-@ Bahn was in place , a number of buses were fitted with guide @-@ wheels for their ordinary routes to test their durability . Drivers were forced to be more cautious on their normal trips after numerous guide @-@ wheel @-@ to @-@ kerb impacts . 
 Services are operated by Light @-@ City Buses under contract to Adelaide Metro . As of 2015 , the busway carries approximately 31 @,@ 000 people per weekday . 
 = = Interchanges = = 
 Klemzig Interchange is the first station , three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 8 mi ) from the city centre in the suburb of Klemzig . It was built as a connector to the city loop ' Circle Line ' bus service , which followed the Adelaide outer ring route . Many bus services bypass Klemzig and the station has limited capacity . It contains a Park & Ride carpark with 450 spaces . 
 Paradise Interchange is the second station , six kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from the city centre , in the suburb of Paradise . The terminus before the completion of Stage 2 , it is now served by buses from suburban streets , and has a total of 875 <unk> spaces in two areas . 
