 Tea Tree Plaza Interchange is the terminus , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the city centre , in Modbury . Adjacent to the Westfield Tea Tree Plaza , it is the largest O @-@ Bahn station . Bus services from this interchange connect to areas as far away as Elizabeth and service the Golden Grove area . It has 700 <unk> spaces , after a multiple level carpark was built during a redevelopment in 2013 . 
 = = Route = = 
 Most O @-@ Bahn bus routes travel through the Adelaide city centre along Grenfell Street , left onto East Terrace , right onto Rundle Road through the Adelaide park lands to the north of Rymill Park , then left onto <unk> Terrace , which changes name to Hackney Road at the next major intersection . The Adelaide Botanic Garden is then on the left , followed by Botanic Park before the road crosses a bridge over the River Torrens . Soon after here , the two carriageways of the city ring route separate and swing to the northwest past North Adelaide , and the northbound entrance to the O @-@ Bahn busway leaves the right hand side of the surface road and dips under the southbound carriageway to join the inbound track , both heading northeast . 
 The busway follows roughly the Torrens River valley , but with smoother curves . This means that it crosses the river quite often , with either a park or a few houses on a point surrounded by the river and busway . This occurs a total of eight times before the busway reaches Klemzig Interchange on the north side of the river . The busway crosses the river again soon after Klemzig and passes Lochiel Park and part of the suburbs of Campbelltown and Paradise to its north between the busway and the river before reaching Paradise Interchange . 
 After Paradise Interchange , the busway passes under Darley Road , then over the Torrens for the last time . The terrain becomes steeper as the busway proceeds up along the outflow creek and past the northwestern side of the Hope Valley Reservoir . It proceeds north under Grand Junction Road , then swings east and north again to enter the eastern side of the Tea Tree Plaza shopping centre precinct , where the guided busway ends at Tea Tree Plaza Interchange . Most buses continue on normal roads to service suburbs further afield . 
 All listed routes connect Adelaide City Centre to the named endpoint , but service different suburbs between the O @-@ Bahn interchange and that endpoint . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The greater Adelaide area experienced significant growth during and after the Second World War . Between 1944 and 1965 , the area 's population doubled , and the number of private motor vehicle registrations increased 43 @-@ fold . In 1955 the state government under Premier Sir Thomas Playford established a Town Planning Committee and commissioned a coordinated plan to guide the future development of Adelaide . The resulting 300 @-@ page study , " Report on the Metropolitan Area of Adelaide 1962 " , laid out a 30 @-@ year development plan , including a proposed 98 kilometres ( 61 mi ) of improved roadways . Shortly before leaving office in 1965 , Playford commissioned a detailed study focusing on the recommended transportation improvements . 
 In 1968 the government received the " Metropolitan Adelaide Transport Study " . The MATS plan envisaged a 156 @-@ kilometre ( 97 mi ) network of 10 freeways crossing the metropolitan area , a rapid rail network , and an underground city loop railway . MATS drew massive public opposition , as it called for the acquisition of thousands of properties and would effectively supplant a number of suburbs that were to become the sites of interchanges . Arguments broke out in Parliament , and widespread images of gridlock in overseas freeway networks contributed to the furore . Nonetheless , in early 1969 Premier Steele Hall approved implementation of the plan in a modified format , and the government began to purchase property along the proposed corridors . In mid @-@ 1969 , faced with ongoing opposition , the state abandoned plans for 2 of the 10 proposed freeways . Hall was voted out of office in 1970 , and the new government under Premier Don Dunstan passed a 10 @-@ year moratorium on freeway development , effectively shelving MATS . The already @-@ acquired corridors were retained for potential future use . 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , transportation had become a problem in the north @-@ east suburbs . The population of the Tea Tree Gully region had increased from 2 @,@ 500 in 1954 to 35 @,@ 000 by 1971 . A corridor of land along the River Torrens from Adelaide to Modbury , originally purchased for the Modbury Freeway proposed under the MATS plan , was the subject of a new proposal in 1973 when the State Director @-@ General of Transport suggested building a heavy rail line that would connect the suburb to the Adelaide railway system . A subsequent study , the " North East Adelaide Public Transport Review " ( <unk> ) , considered heavy rail , light rail , busways , and freeways , ultimately concluding that a light rail line or busway would be most viable . The state government decided on a light rail proposal to extend the historic Glenelg Tram . The new route was to continue along King William Street beyond what was then the terminus in Victoria Square and weave through the Adelaide Park Lands to the Modbury corridor . The light rail system would connect with feeder buses at stations along the length of the corridor to transfer passengers to suburban routes . New light rail vehicles were to be bought to replace the ageing 1929 H class trams . 
 Public opposition to the project was broad . The Adelaide City Council objected to the plan on the basis that it would interfere with the well @-@ designed layout of the city proper . In response , the government altered the plan to redirect the line underneath the city , at a considerable increase in cost . Residents in inner @-@ city suburbs such as St Peters were concerned about the noise of the light rail vehicles , and protested against any disruption of the Torrens Gorge in the Modbury corridor . Test drilling commenced for the tunnel , but the entire light rail project was halted in 1980 after Premier David Tonkin appointed Michael Wilson , an opponent of the plan , as Transport Minister . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In search of a replacement for the light rail project , the new Government sent experts to examine an innovative guided bus system being developed in West Germany by Daimler @-@ Benz . From the German Omnibus ( bus ) and Bahn ( railway , as in S @-@ Bahn and U @-@ Bahn ) , the O @-@ Bahn system was developed for use in tram tunnels in Essen . After extensive consultations with German authorities , State Transport Authority engineers decided the O @-@ Bahn could be used . The system was seen as far superior to previous proposals ; it used less land , made less noise , was faster and cost less . In addition , its unique feature of a non @-@ transfer service direct from suburban streets to the city centre made it more attractive . Plans were drawn up for a length of 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) : initially only three kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) were to be constructed as O @-@ Bahn , with the rest being conventional busway . However , safety concerns and public opposition led to O @-@ Bahn being used for the entire length . Construction began in 1983 for the first section to Paradise Interchange . Another change of Government in 1982 resulted in uncertainty over the future of the project . The John Bannon Government , after consultations , decided to continue with Stage 1 ( City to Paradise ) and in 1986 proceeded with Stage 2 ( Paradise to Tea Tree Plaza ) . The cost of the project was A $ 98 million , including the buses . 
 The O @-@ Bahn had more than 4 million passenger trips in the year after completion of Stage 1 in 1986 , with a 30 % increase the following year . When the completed O @-@ Bahn was opened on 20 August 1989 , passenger numbers rose another 17 % . The Adelaide public transport system was privatised in the 1990s and overall patronage across all systems ( bus , rail and tram ) dropped 25 % . The exception to this was the O @-@ Bahn with no decrease , and there were 19 @,@ 500 passenger trips daily in 1996 ( 7 @.@ 13 million a year ) . As of 2015 , the busway carries approximately 31 @,@ 000 people per weekday . 
 = = = Expansion proposals = = = 
 There have been a number of proposals to extend the O @-@ Bahn to Golden Grove or build other routes , however none have progressed beyond consultation . An extension to Golden Grove would require the acquisition of extensive tracts of private property , due to the absence of an available corridor . Population increase in the area is negligible , although sprawl continues from Tea Tree Plaza Interchange for another eight kilometres to the Adelaide Hills . The current route was built with an allowance for a station at Grand Junction Road but it has not been built . 
 A southern O @-@ Bahn proposal attracted the most attention and has been the subject of various studies and Parliamentary Committees as to its viability since 1996 . The rail route through Adelaide 's far south is off @-@ centre , without the large catchment area of a more central transport route . An O @-@ Bahn running direct through the region would be able to take advantage of an already large population and the continuing growth in the area . 
 One suggested route for an O @-@ Bahn was for an alignment adjacent to the <unk> Centre railway line from the city to the <unk> railway line . The O @-@ Bahn would end there , with buses continuing on the Southern Expressway through the far south . Construction of this O @-@ Bahn would require moving the railway track slightly to fit the O @-@ Bahn alongside . In addition , Emerson Crossing and the Goodwood tram overpass would require alteration . The estimated cost of construction , $ 182 million , was considered too expensive , and the proposal was suspended in 2001 . Since then , the Government has focused on road upgrades and an inner @-@ city light rail extension . 
 There was a 2009 plan that bus routes serving the O @-@ Bahn would be enhanced from Hackney Road along Grenfell and Currie Streets and extended to West Terrace on the far side of the CBD along dedicated bus lanes . However , the Federal Government announced in January 2011 , as part of its response to the 2010 – 11 Queensland floods , that the extension would be cancelled " as a result of a significant scope reduction of the original project , resulting in only limited transport benefits " . 
 = = O @-@ Bahn City Access Project = = 
 In 2015 , the Department of Planning , Transport and Infrastructure announced a $ 160 million proposed O @-@ Bahn City Access Project . The existing entry / exit at Hackney Road will be retained , but upgraded bus @-@ only lanes on Hackney Road will lead to a new tunnel portal with bus guide rails commencing near the Adelaide Botanic Garden . The tunnel will pass under the Botanic Road intersection , then curve to the west under Rundle Park , Rundle Road and surface in Rymill Park leading to a redesigned intersection at Grenfell Street and East Terrace . Construction was anticipated to start in late 2015 with the project completed in 2017 . The contract to complete the detailed design and construct the tunnel was let to McConnell Dowell in October 2015 . SAGE Automation will provide expertise in the mechanical and electrical aspects of the tunnel including ventilation and safety systems . Construction started in March 2016 with removal of the median strip and preparation of central bus lanes . It is still expected to be completed by the end of 2017 . 
 = = Effects on local development = = 
 The O @-@ Bahn has caused a clustering of commercial and community development near the Tea Tree Plaza Interchange , as service @-@ providing organisations and businesses have sought to exploit the area 's easy accessibility to public transport and the city centre . Market imperatives have also been aided by the zoning of the land around the area as commercial rather than residential . The area around Tea Tree Plaza is one of five designated regional centres within the Adelaide metropolis . 
 According to Robert <unk> , the O @-@ Bahn has " accelerated the conversion of Tea Tree Gully from a somewhat sterile new town designed around a regional shopping mall to an emerging urban village featuring a wide range of land uses " . The large Modbury Hospital is adjacent to the interchange , and the Torrens Valley campus of TAFE was built directly to the east of the busway after it opened . One government high school , three primary schools , one Christian school and three retirement villages are within a kilometre of the interchange . In contrast , there has been opposition to the area surrounding Klemzig Interchange and Paradise Interchange being used for any purpose other than low @-@ density housing and no transit @-@ oriented development has occurred . 
 = = Environment = = 
 The construction of the O @-@ Bahn , rather than the previously proposed Modbury Freeway , was motivated by a desire to reduce car dependency . $ 6 million was used for the redevelopment of the Torrens Gorge , in which the Torrens Linear Park was created . About 150 @,@ 000 trees , plants and shrubs were planted alongside the track for aesthetic , environmental and noise @-@ reduction purposes ; planting was completed in 1997 . Walking trails and cycling paths were built along the park to encourage public use . Torrens Linear Park rejuvenated the river , which had deteriorated to the extent of being a de facto " urban drain , littered with rubbish and inaccessible to the public " . Arising from environmental considerations , the O @-@ Bahn is carbon @-@ neutral due to the absorption of carbon dioxide by the trees alongside it . The track itself is situated in a valley due to it being near a riverbed and the elevation was further lowered by digging further depressions in order to reduce the noise impact on adjacent dwellings . 
 The original buses ran on diesel fuel , but the system allows for buses that run on alternative energy sources . Biodiesel fuel and natural gas have been trialled , and 20 % of the Adelaide bus fleet uses compressed natural gas , 48 % <unk> and 32 % B5 biodiesel blends . The design of the O @-@ Bahn allows for the installation of overhead wires for trolleybuses . 
 = Ray Harvey = 
 Raymond Harvey ( born 3 January 1926 ) is a former Australian first @-@ class cricketer who played for Victoria in the 1940s and 1950s . He was the brother of Australian Test batsmen Merv and Neil and first @-@ class cricketer and umpire Mick Harvey . Ray Harvey was an attacking and talented batsman but failed to reach international standards and only managed to hold down a regular position in the Victorian team in two seasons in the 1950s . This failure to match the standards set by his Test @-@ capped brothers was often attributed to a lack of single @-@ mindedness and hunger . 
 Harvey was born into a working @-@ class , devoutly Methodist family . His father was a keen amateur cricketer and an instilled a love of the game in his six sons , all of whom played for Fitzroy in Victorian Premier Cricket . Harvey made his first class debut in the middle of the 1947 – 48 season , and played his first two matches for Victoria alongside his more decorated brothers Merv and Neil . However , he performed poorly and did not play a match in the following summer and for the two subsequent seasons , he played in only three games but contributed little to his team 's cause . In 1951 – 52 he made five appearances , gaining selection only when Victoria 's Test players were busy representing Australia . The following season , he gained selection for the last three matches and broke through for his maiden first @-@ class century , having never previously passed 50 . 
 Having broken through at the end of the preceding summer , Harvey played his first full season for Victoria in 1953 – 54 , despite the availability of the Test players for the whole campaign . He scored two centuries and five half centuries against full strength teams from other states and was rewarded with selection in Lindsay Hassett 's testimonial match , which was effectively a Test trial match . Harvey ended the season with 699 runs at a batting average of 49 @.@ 92 . At the start of the following season , Harvey was included in an Australian XI for a match against the touring England cricket team for a Test trial match . However , rain curtailed the match and turned the playing surface into a sticky wicket hostile to batting . Harvey made only seven in his only innings . He played in all of Victoria 's matches for the season , despite a form slump — he scored only 206 runs at 18 @.@ 72 . He was then overlooked for state selection until 1958 – 59 , when he regained his position late in the season and made 97 and 86 in consecutive innings . However , the following season , he made only sporadic appearances despite the absence of the Test players overseas and aggregated only 133 runs at 16 @.@ 62 in four matches and he was never selected for Victoria again . He shone mainly for Fitzroy in Victorian Premier Cricket , scoring 19 centuries and 9 @,@ 146 runs in first @-@ grade competition , both of which are still club records . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Ray Harvey 's father , Horace " Horry " Harvey moved to Broken Hill , New South Wales where he worked for BHP driving horse @-@ drawn trailers . In 1914 , he married Elsie May Bitmead and their first two children , daughter Rita and son Mervyn , were born in the mining town . The family relocated to Newcastle , a mining town and harbour in New South Wales and had two more sons , " Mick " and Harold there . In 1926 , the Harveys shifted to the inner @-@ Melbourne suburb of Fitzroy , a staunchly working @-@ class , industrial area . During their relocation , Ray was born in Sydney . Horace secured a job at the confectionery company Life Savers ( Australasia ) Ltd. located next door to their house at 198 Argyle Street . The 19th century two @-@ storey house was owned by the firm and was used as lodgings for the workers ' families . It no longer exists , having been demolished to make way for a textile factory . The two youngest sons Neil and Brian were born in Fitzroy . 
 The Cornish @-@ descended Horry raised his family as strict Methodists , disallowing gambling , alcohol , tobacco and profanity in his household . An ardent cricketer during his years in New South Wales , he was good enough to hit 196 runs during a match in Newcastle , and he encouraged his children to play sport . He himself played for the Rita Social Club after moving to Fitzroy , while his wife kept score . 
 As recreational facilities and grass ovals were sparse in densely populated Fitzroy , the boys took to playing cricket in a cobblestone laneway between their terraced house . Here they played cricket with a tennis ball , homemade cricket bat and a kerosene tin for a wicket . They were usually joined by other local children , two of whom became elite sportsmen : Allan Ruthven ( an Australian rules footballer ) and Harold Shillinglaw ( both an Australian rules footballer and first @-@ class cricketer ) — the group also played Australian rules football , kicking around rolled up cardboard and newspaper . Much of the batting skill displayed by the Harvey brothers has been attributed to these games played on the unpredictable bounce of the bumpy laneway . The surface also had a V @-@ shaped slope inwards towards the centre of the lane , causing balls to deviate sideways after bouncing . As the laneway meant that the playing area was long and narrow , the young boys also had to learn to play the ball straight in accordance with orthodox cricket technique . The Harveys played another form of cricket in their concreted backyard using a marble instead of a ball that sharpened their reflexes , and a miniature bat . All were right @-@ handed batsmen with the exception of Neil . 
 All of the children attended the nearby George Street State School and one by one the brothers joined the Fitzroy Cricket Club as they reached their early teens . The club had a program whereby they gave a medal for every local school to award to the best cricketer in their ranks in that year . The successful student would then be given access to all of the club 's facilities . All of the Harvey brothers were recipients were of this medal . At Fitzroy , they came under the influence of former Victorian all @-@ rounder Arthur Liddicut and the club 's veteran captain Joe Plant . The Harveys had no formal coaching , and their father , although a regular presence at the club , chose to stay in the background as their respective careers developed . Horace did not advise his sons on how to bat , allowing them to formulate their own style and technique . According to the Harvey brothers , it was their mother who was vocal and extroverted , in contrast to their reserved father . The boys who failed to score runs were given kitchen duty and according to them , their parents never showed favouritism . 
 During the winter , they played baseball for the Fitzroy Baseball Club , often competing in matches played as curtain raisers to the elite Australian rules football competition , the Victorian Football League . In 1948 , Harvey was selected at short stop in the 1948 All @-@ Australian baseball team . Saturday night entertainment for the family typically consisted of dinner after the day ’ s cricket matches for Fitzroy and Plant , Liddicut and other club personnel were often invited . Under the influence of cricketing mentors Plant and Liddicut , the boys were taught to adopt an aggressive approach , using fast feet movement to attack spin bowling in particular . Harvey made his First XI debut for Fitzroy in 1941 – 42 . In 1943 – 44 , he scored a club record of 817 First XI runs in a season . In 1942 – 43 , Neil was promoted to Fitzroy 's First XI , joining Merv , Mick and Ray . During that season , the family held down the first four batting positions for Fitzroy ; Merv and Mick opened the batting and Ray and Neil came in after them . Ray continued to play for Fitzroy over the next two decades when he was not required by Victoria . Outside cricket , Harvey was an electrical fitter and he worked for the Metropolitan Tramways Board . He and his wife Lorna and settled in the inner @-@ northern suburb of Reservoir . 
 = = First @-@ class beginnings = = 
 Mid way through the 1947 – 48 season , Harvey was called into the Victorian team for the Sheffield Shield match against New South Wales and made his debut alongside Merv and Neil , who were already established players . Merv opened , while Neil and Ray batted at Nos. 4 and 7 respectively . Victoria batted first and the brothers again did not form any partnerships as they were always out before the next sibling came in to bat . Ray came in at 5 / 208 to make 43 . Victoria ended with 331 and the Harvey brothers had scored almost half the runs . New South Wales were forced to follow on and Victoria were set 51 for victory . After the fall of Fred Freer at 1 / 24 , captain Lindsay Hassett elevated Ray to No. 3 , allowing two Harveys to bat together for the first time at first @-@ class level . Ray and Merv put on an unbeaten partnership of 27 to take Victoria to a nine @-@ wicket win . Merv and Ray ended unbeaten on 12 and 22 respectively . 
 The three brothers played together in the next match against Western Australia . Merv captained the team as Hassett was away on Test duty . Victoria batted first and Ray made only 1 . In the second innings , Ray 15 , not batting with his brothers in a drawn match . 
 The brotherly trio was broken up for the match against Queensland , as Neil was selected for the Australian team . In his only innings , Ray scored 48 and appeared set for his maiden first @-@ class half @-@ century before being run out in a drawn match . He bowled eight overs for the season , conceding 32 runs without taking a wicket . Merv dropped after this match , and Ray made 9 and 15 alongside Neil in the next fixture against New South Wales , a six @-@ wicket win . Ray played in the next match against Tasmania with none of his brothers alongside him , as Neil was again busy with the national team . Ray made two in his only innings in a ten @-@ wicket win . Despite his run of low scores , he was retained as Neil and the other Test players returned ; he made 25 and 10 as Victoria lost by four wickets in their final match of the season against South Australia . Ray ended his debut first @-@ class season with 190 runs at a batting average of 21 @.@ 11 with a best score of 48 . 
 = = Fringe Victorian player = = 
 After a poor debut season for Victoria , Harvey did not gain first @-@ class selection in 1948 – 49 and vacancies were hard to come by as the season was purely domestic with no touring Test team , so all of Australia 's international representatives were available for the whole season . Harvey was selected for a Second XI match against New South Wales but failed to make an impact , scoring two runs in each innings as the Victorians completed a 195 @-@ run win . Harvey took the wicket of H Hinman in the first innings , ending with 1 / 24 from four overs . 
 The following season , 1949 – 50 , with the Australian Test team in South Africa for the whole of the southern hemisphere summer , Victoria lost batsmen Lindsay Hassett , Sam Loxton and Neil Harvey . Despite the extra vacancies , Ray was only selected for one match , against Tasmania , making 9 and 45 in a four @-@ wicket win . This was effectively a second @-@ choice Victorian team as the leading players were involved in a Shield match against New South Wales at the same time . 
 Harvey 's 1950 – 51 season was similarly unproductive , with the Test players back in Australia for a home series against England . He was only selected for the two first class matches against Tasmania , was even less successful . In the first match , he made a duck in the first innings , before coming to the crease at the end of the run @-@ chase and being yet to score as a nine wicket win was completed . In the next match he made 0 and 9 , as Victoria scraped home for a nine run win , despite Harvey conceding 20 runs from four wicketless overs . He ended the first class season with 9 runs at 3 @.@ 00 . In a Second XI fixture against New South Wales , he made 61 before being bowled by Alan Davidson . In the first innings he delivered one over and was attacked heavily , conceding 23 runs . In the second innings , he bowled 13 overs and took 1 / 49 as New South Wales ended 24 runs short of making Victoria bat again with three wickets in hand when the match ended in a draw . 
 In 1951 – 52 , Harvey was in and out of the team on a regular basis as the Test players were periodically available for Victorian duty between the international matches . With the Test players away for the first two Sheffield Shield matches , Harvey played in both fixtures . He made only 28 in the first match , an innings win over Western Australia . He also took two catches . In the next match against South Australia , he made 47 out of Victoria 's 281 and took his first wickets at first @-@ class level , dismissing century @-@ maker Ernest England and tail @-@ ender Geff Noblet and ending with 2 / 29 and two catches as Victoria conceded a 240 @-@ run first innings lead . He then made 18 as his team collapsed for 101 to lose by an innings . Harvey was then dropped for the next three matches , as the Test players , including his younger brother Neil , returned . With a Test match in progress at the same time , he was recalled for the home match against Queensland but made only 35 and 14 as Victoria collapsed in the second innings to be 9 / 147 , holding on for a draw with one wicket in hand . Harvey bowled seven overs in the match and conceded 0 / 51 . He was immediately dropped again when the Test players returned , before being recalled for the away match against Queensland when the national representatives were again unavailable . Harvey then made 31 and 1 in a narrow 18 @-@ run loss . Having made only 21 of Victoria 's 647 in the next match against Tasmania , he was dropped for the final Shield match when the Test players returned . Harvey ended the season with 195 runs at 24 @.@ 37 ; he reached 14 in all but one of his eight innings but was unable to convert his starts into large scores , with a highest innings of 47 . 
 Harvey was unable to gain selection during the 1952 – 53 season until late in the season , at the end of January . In his first match of the summer against New South Wales , he made 42 and 36 , but was unable to convert his starts into large scores in a drawn match . The next match against the touring South Africans proceeded similarly . In a drawn encounter , Harvey made 47 in the first innings and was unbeaten on 5 in the run @-@ chase when time ran out . In the final match of the season , against Western Australia , Harvey broke through for his maiden first @-@ class century , scoring 121 in an innings victory over Western Australia . It was also his first score of 50 or more at first @-@ class level . He took seven catches in his three matches and ended the season with 251 runs at 62 @.@ 75 , and took a total of 0 / 43 from 15 overs . 
 = = Peak years and pushing for national selection = = 
 Having broken through for his first century at the end of the previous season , Harvey played consistently in 1953 – 54 , and was selected for each of Victoria 's matches for the season for the first time . He did so despite the fact that there were no Tests scheduled for the Australian season , meaning that the international representatives would be available for all of Victoria 's matches . Ray and Neil played together in every match of the summer . In the opening match of the season against Queensland , Ray Harvey made 82 and 8 in a 254 @-@ run win . He followed this with 2 and 91 in the next match against New South Wales over the Christmas holiday period . Harvey was one of the few batsmen to make an impact in the second innings , as the New South Wales bowlers , including the likes of Keith Miller , Ray Lindwall , Richie Benaud and Davidson , all members of Australia 's Test bowling attack , dismissed Victoria for only 222 to set up a nine @-@ wicket win . A week later , he started the new year by scoring 110 as Victoria batted first and took a 117 @-@ run first innings lead against South Australia . He made only 10 in the second innings but his state completed a 290 @-@ run win nonetheless . 
 Harvey was then rewarded with selection in a testimonial match for retiring Australian captain Lindsay Hassett . Typically , such matches involved the best players in Australia divided into two teams , and Harvey played for Arthur Morris 's XI against Hassett 's outfit . Harvey scored 69 and 17 as his team completed a 121 @-@ run win . He also bowled three overs in total , but was unsuccessful , conceding 27 runs as the opposition batsmen attacked him . Harvey then made 50 and 19 in a drawn match again Queensland . 
 Harvey played a key part in Victoria 's win over New South Wales away at the SCG . Having taken two catches as the hosts batted first , he made 61 as the visitors made 234 to take a 52 @-@ run first innings lead . After taking another <unk> the second innings , he then made an unbeaten 106 to guide the Victorians to their target of 268 with five wickets in hand . Harvey 's run @-@ scoring tapered away in the last two matches of the season ; he made 74 runs in three innings in the match . Nevertheless , he ended the season with 699 runs at 49 @.@ 92 ; he had made the same amount of runs in his first six first @-@ class seasons since his debut in 1947 – 48 . As a result of his performances in this season , he was hailed as the best batsman outside the Australian Test team . 
 Harvey 's performances were rewarded with selection for an Australian XI in a tour match against the England cricket team at the start of the 1954 – 55 season . However , the match was curtailed by rain and Harvey was not able to exhibit his talents on a sticky wicket highly difficult for batting . Listed at No. 4 , Harvey came in after the dismissal of his brother and made seven in his only innings . As a result Ray was not chosen for the Test team alongside his brother during the season . 
 This was the start of a poor season for Harvey as he managed a top @-@ score of only 44 in 11 innings for the summer , passing 20 on only four occasions and ending with 206 runs at 18 @.@ 72 . Despite this , the Victorian selectors persisted with him for every match of the season . 
 = = Final seasons = = 
 Harvey was overlooked for selection for entirety of the 1955 – 56 season . After four years out of first @-@ class cricket , Harvey earned a recall in the latter half of the 1958 – 59 season for a match against Queensland . He made only 21 in the first innings and was unbeaten on 17 when time ran out in the second innings . He was retained for the match against South Australia the following week and scored 97 in an innings win . In the subsequent fixture against New South Wales , who were in the process of completing a sixth consecutive Shield title , Harvey faced a full @-@ strength team with Australia 's two leading Test bowlers Benaud and Davidson . He made 86 in the first innings but managed only 6 in the second before being removed by Benaud , as the Victorians ended 37 runs short of victory with five wickets in hand when time ran out . Harvey made six in his only innings in the last match of the season against Queensland . He ended the season with 233 runs at 46 @.@ 60 . 
 In 1959 – 60 , the Test team toured the Indian subcontinent during the Australian summer , opening up more vacancies in the Sheffield Shield . Harvey was given a recall in December 1959 . However , he was not successful and failed to convert his starts into substantial scores , making 8 , 36 , 12 , 25 , 22 and 20 in three matches . In the last of these matches , he took his career @-@ best bowling figures of 3 / 26 , in the first innings against South Australia . He dismissed the top @-@ scorer John <unk> for 176 and his other victims were Michael <unk> and Peter <unk> . This allowed Victoria to take first innings points and eventually complete a six @-@ wicket win . This meant that all of Harvey 's five wickets as first @-@ class level came against South Australia . Harvey 's first @-@ class career ended with the following match against New South Wales . He made 1 and 9 , and conceded 26 runs from three wicketless overs , and was dropped , having made only 133 runs at 16 @.@ 62 for the season . 
 In 1960 – 61 , Harvey played a final First XI season for Fitzroy . His Fitzroy first @-@ grade records for the most career runs and centuries , and the most runs in a season , still stand , and he managed a double @-@ century for the club against University . He ended his first @-@ grade career with 19 centuries and 9 @,@ 146 runs at an average of 36 @.@ 15 from 247 matches . 
 = = Style = = 
 Harvey was an attacking and free @-@ flowing batsman but he was not a prolific scorer , which was attributed by observers to a lack of single @-@ mindedness required to succeed at the top level . Neil said that Ray 's footwork was suspect and that the stronger bowlers in domestic cricket were able to exploit this . Neil said that if Ray had been able to rectify his weakness , then he could have become a Test player for Australia . Australian captain Bill Lawry said that Harvey was one of the two best district cricketers he had faced . Aside from his batting , Harvey was an occasional leg spinner , and was known for his fielding ability . 
 = Typhoon Billie ( 1959 ) = 
 Typhoon Billie was the first typhoon officially monitored by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . The storm brought floods to several East Asian countries in July 1959 . Billie developed from a tropical disturbance west of Kiribati on July 12 . Situated within favorable conditions , the system quickly reached tropical storm intensity before strengthening further to typhoon status a day after formation . Intensification continued until Billie reached its peak intensity on July 14 east of Taiwan with maximum sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 970 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 64 inHg ) . Slight weakening occurred before the typhoon made landfall on Zhejiang in China on July 16 . After tracking inland , Billie curved northward and moved over the Yellow Sea before making a final landfall on North Korea on July 17 ; the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone shortly afterwards before dissipating over the Sea of Japan a day later . 
 The rainbands of Billie brought severe flooding to the Philippines and Japan even while the typhoon 's center was well removed from those locations . In the Philippines , one person was killed , and the flood damage totaled US $ 500 @,@ 000 . Floods were particularly destructive in Japan , where they destroyed 603 homes in the western portion of the country . <unk> of crops were inundated by the floodwaters , and 44 people were killed . Extensive flooding occurred in Taiwan and China , and seven deaths occurred in the former . In Busan , South Korea , Billie 's effects forced the evacuation of thousands of people through tight corridors from a stadium , causing the indirect deaths of 61 people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Beginning on July 9 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began dispatching aircraft reconnaissance to investigate an area of thunderstorms between Yap State and Koror that had potential to develop into a tropical cyclone . Tracking westward , there were few signs of organization or intensification until July 12 , when recon found a closed atmospheric circulation within the disturbance , signifying that a tropical depression had developed ; JTWC bulletins and warnings commenced accordingly . Upon development , observations indicated that the system was quickly developing in favorable conditions , with initial reconnaissance flights finding a loose eye measuring 160 km ( 100 mi ) in diameter shortly after classification as a tropical depression . Twelve hours later , the JTWC upgraded the cyclone to tropical storm status , assigning the name Billie . 
 At 1200 UTC on July 13 , the JTWC upgraded Billie further to typhoon status , making Billie the first tropical cyclone to be monitored by the JTWC since its inception earlier in 1959 . Now tracking steadily towards the northwest , the typhoon reached its peak intensity at 1200 UTC the next day with maximum sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) according to the JTWC and a minimum barometric pressure assessed by the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) at 970 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 64 inHg ) . By this time Billie 's eye had shrunk to a size roughly 50 km ( 30 mi ) in diameter . At 0900 UTC on July 15 , Billie passed just 30 km ( 20 mi ) north of Taiwan ; fifteen hours later the typhoon made landfall north of Fuzhou , China in Zhejiang with winds estimated at 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . 
 Upon tracking inland on July 16 , interaction with China 's mountainous terrain disrupted the organization of Billie , weakening it down to tropical storm intensity . However , the tropical cyclone 's stint over land was short @-@ lived as the system quickly curved northward into the Yellow Sea by July 17 . Despite moving back over water , Billie continued to weaken , and made landfall on the western coast of North Korea with winds of 75 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Over the Korean peninsula , Billie began to intake cold air from a polar front , enabling the system to transition into an extratropical cyclone by 1800 UTC that day . These remnants tracked eastward across the Sea of Japan before they were last noted just off of Hokkaido on July 18 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As Billie tracked to the east of the Philippines , the outer rainbands of the tropical cyclone produced heavy rainfall to the archipelago , the Ryukyu Islands , and the main islands of Japan . In the Philippines , the rains triggered floods that led to the death of one person and US $ 500 @,@ 000 in damage . About 100 people were displaced on the islands due to the rainfall . The Japanese freighter <unk> Maru was grounded on a reef off of Ishigaki Island due to the rough surf and winds caused by the passing typhoon , necessitating a rescue operation by three United States Navy ships . On the island , 16 homes were destroyed and 49 were heavily damaged . Inundation of crops was prevalent . Flooding from Billie was highly destructive in areas of Japan west of the Chūbu region , destroying 603 homes and inundating 77 @,@ 288 others . Roughly 325 km2 ( 125 mi2 ) of farmland was impacted by the rains . Across Japan , 44 people were killed and 77 were injured . 
 In northern Taiwan , Billie caused widespread flash flooding , displacing thousands of people and resulting in extensive damage . Approximately one @-@ third of Taipei was inundated by floodwaters , and hospital patients were forced to evacuate to Okinawa after a Military Assistance Advisory Group compound was impacted by the heavy rains . Over 10 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless in Taipei alone after the city 's shanty @-@ type dwellings along with well @-@ built residences were destroyed . In total , the effects of Billie in Taiwan killed seven people . Extensive flooding also occurred in nearby eastern China , inundating rice fields . In order to avoid the storm , thousands of fishermen sought shelter in local harbors . Cleanup and relief operations quickly ensued following the storm 's passage . 
 Storms accompanying Billie and its remnants brought heavy rains and strong winds to South Korea , knocking out police telephone lines in Busan . The sudden onslaught of these storms caused a stampede of roughly 70 @,@ 000 people out of a stadium , resulting in the indirect deaths of 68 people , including 51 children . Around 125 people were injured and 40 were hospitalized after the mass evacuation . 
 = The Boat Race 1946 = 
 The 92nd Boat Race took place on 30 March 1946 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames in London . In a race umpired by former Cambridge rower Kenneth Payne , Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 19 minutes 54 seconds . The victory took the overall record in the event to 48 – 43 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1939 race by four lengths , and led overall with 48 victories to Oxford 's 42 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . No races were conducted between 1940 and 1945 as a result of the Second World War . 
 Oxford were coached by R. E. Eason ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1924 race ) , D. T. Raikes ( who represented Oxford in the 1920 , 1921 and 1922 races ) , Peter Haig Thomas ( a four @-@ time Light Blue between 1902 and 1905 , who had also coached Cambridge nine times between 1924 and 1934 ) and G. L. Thomson . Cambridge 's coaches were B. C. Johnstone , Sidney Swann ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the four races from 1911 to 1914 , and coached them in the 1920 , 1921 and 1922 races ) and Claude Waterhouse Hearn Taylor ( who rowed for Cambridge three times between 1901 and 1903 , and coached them in the 1904 race ) . The race was umpired by the former British Olympian Kenneth Payne , who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races . 
 During the build @-@ up to the race , Cambridge suffered misfortune in particular with regard to their number four . M. A. Nicholson , the first choice , was taken ill and was replaced by P. A. G. Dewar . Just two days later Dewar was forced to leave the boat suffering with blood poisoning from a septic boil . D. J. D. Perrins was Cambridge 's third and final choice . With a week to go , the Light Blue coach Thomson stated " we took a day off yesterday because some of the crew were feeling off @-@ colour ... they appear to be suffering from some internal trouble " . The rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian noted that the Light Blues were " not quite fast enough and are not particularly well together " yet showed promise . He also noted that while Oxford had improved considerably , Cambridge would most likely start as favourites . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 7 lb ( 79 @.@ 2 kg ) , 8 @.@ 75 pounds ( 4 @.@ 0 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . As the event was forced to take a hiatus between 1940 and 1945 as a result of the Second World War , none of the rowers had participated in the Boat Race prior this year . Three of the Cambridge crew were registered as non @-@ British : J. G. Gosse was Australian , P. L. P. <unk> was Canadian and stroke J. H. Neame was American . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Umpire Payne started the race " in perfect conditions of a south @-@ easterly breeze and with sun shining through a light mist " at 11 a.m in front of " a vast crowd , fully up to pre @-@ war standards " . Followed by six launches and a helicopter overhead , Oxford led from the start , and were half a length clear of the Light Blues by the time they passed Craven Steps . Marginally out @-@ rating Cambridge , Oxford passed the Mile Post two and a half lengths ahead and allowed their stroke rate to drop , still maintaining their lead at Hammersmith Bridge . Cambridge spurted at The Doves pub and reduced the deficit marginally but by HMS Stork , the Light Blues were visibly tired and allowed Oxford to draw away once more . 
 Leading by three lengths at Chiswick Steps , Oxford reduced their stroke rate to " little more than a paddle " , yet still passed below Barnes Bridge with the same advantage . The Dark Blues passed the finishing post three lengths ahead in a time of 19 minutes 54 seconds . The victory , Oxford 's third in the last four races , took the overall record in the event to 48 – 43 in Cambridge 's favour . The special correspondent writing in The Times stated that Oxford won " in faultless style and without ever looking anything but an assured winning crew . " It was reported in the Dundee Evening Telegraph that Oxford 's win was " a triumph of team @-@ work over individualism " . Hugh Dalton , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , announced that the race had made £ 700 from Purchase Tax . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Floyd in New England = 
 The effects of Hurricane Floyd in New England stretched across the region from Connecticut to Maine and included two casualties . Floyd , once a large and powerful hurricane , made landfall in North Carolina and weakened as it tracked northward along the U.S. East Coast . By September 17 , 1999 , the storm , downgraded in strength to a tropical storm , was situated over New England . It produced heavy rainfall and gusty winds throughout the entire region , leading to widespread downing of trees and extensive power outages before it moved away later that day . In Danbury , Connecticut , Floyd triggered severe flooding , considered the worst in 40 years , that damaged hundreds of homes . Precipitation in some areas amounted to 10 in ( 250 mm ) , with wind gusts approaching hurricane force in Massachusetts . 
 = = Background = = 
 Floyd 's origins are traced back to a westward @-@ moving tropical wave that developed into a tropical depression on September 7 , 1999 , while centered 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . The system moved west @-@ northwestward , and intensified into a tropical storm on September 8 . Continuing to intensify , Floyd attained hurricane strength on September 10 . The hurricane ultimately peaked as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale as it struck the Bahamas . The storm turned northwestward and soon northward , brushing the coast of Florida and the southeast United States . On September 16 , Floyd made landfall as a Category 2 hurricane in North Carolina , and moved northeastward along the Eastern Seaboard . It passed through the Mid @-@ Atlantic States as it deteriorated into a tropical storm , and lost its tropical identity over southern Maine . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On September 15 , an existing tropical storm watch was extended northward to the Merrimack River in Massachusetts . The next day , a tropical storm warning was extended northward to Plymouth , Massachusetts , but was soon replaced by a hurricane warning . The watch stretching to the Merrimack River was then replaced by a warning . By 0900 UTC on September 17 , all tropical cyclone advisories were lifted . In Connecticut , utility companies readied supplies and emergency crews in advance of the hurricane . In Massachusetts and Rhode Island , with the anticipation of heavy rains , the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) prepared to send eight teams into the field to take measurements along 30 rivers . Rhode Island Governor Lincoln Almond advised residents to prepare for the storm 's onslaught . The storm disrupted many residents ' travel plans in the state , while people evacuated from certain coastal communities . The threat of Hurricane Floyd forced schools , malls , and the University of Massachusetts Amherst to close . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Southern New England = = = 
 In Connecticut , the storm caused one casualty : a man drowned after boating in the swollen Quinnipiac River . The storm caused extensive flooding and serious damage . Wind gusts exceeding 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , combined with the saturated ground , brought down many trees and triggered severe power outages in the area . As Floyd tracked up the Connecticut River Valley towards Massachusetts , it dropped heavy precipitation . The heaviest rainfall occurred in a southwest – northeast orientated swath from northern New Jersey to southwestern Connecticut , including southeastern New York . At the Danbury Airport , 11 @.@ 13 in ( 283 mm ) of rain was reported . Rainfall rates of 1 to 2 in ( 25 to 51 mm ) per hour occurred at Bethel and Danbury . Numerous rivers overflowed ; for example , the Still River and its tributaries triggered severe flooding . The worst of the flooding — considered the worst in 40 years — took place at Danbury . Hundreds of homes , two car dealerships , several roads , and other structures were damaged there . At Greentree Motors , all 200 vehicles were declared a total loss . Parts of the city were submerged with 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water . However , throughout the state , roads were closed and basements were inundated . The flooding inflicted at least $ 1 @.@ 3 million in monetary damage within Fairfield County . Portions of the state were declared a federal disaster area . 
 Floyd brought intense winds and heavy rain to Rhode Island . The strongest winds were confined to Washington and Providence counties . The winds brought down numerous trees , tree limbs and power lines . Rainfall typically ranged from 2 to 5 in ( 51 to 127 mm ) , with a report of 7 @.@ 12 in ( 181 mm ) at North Smithfield , Rhode Island . The Pawtuxet River reached flood stage on September 16 , and crested the next day . Although it surpassed its banks , no flood damage was reported . The storm 's effects in the state were mostly minor . 
 In Massachusetts , the storm produced wind gusts of 60 to 70 mph ( 97 to 113 km / h ) , reaching 76 mph ( 122 km / h ) at the New Bedford Hurricane Barrier . The strongest winds were concentrated over two sections of the state — the western mountains terrain and Cape Cod . The winds brought down trees and power lines in these areas , particularly around Pittsfield . In terms of rainfall , the storm dropped 6 to 10 in ( 150 to 250 mm ) in many locations . The heavy precipitation caused rivers to swell , and in some cases flow over their banks . Storm surge at the Fox Point Hurricane Barrier reached 4 @.@ 2 ft ( 1 @.@ 3 m ) . 
 = = = Northern New England = = = 
 By September 17 , Floyd was located over southwestern Maine , dropping heavy rains . The entire state received precipitation , with the highest totals confined to southern areas . The National Weather Service issued a flood watch for two @-@ thirds of the state . The storm was described as " tame " , and damage was generally minor . In much of Androscoggin County , rainfall amounted to between 7 and 8 in ( 180 and 200 mm ) ; Poland reported 8 @.@ 72 in ( 221 mm ) . Several rivers approached or exceeded flood stage due to rainfall from Floyd and Hurricane Dennis less than a week earlier , causing minor flooding . Floyd helped to alleviate drought conditions in Maine . Some roads in susceptible areas were submerged , and a few basements were flooded . Wind gusts of 30 to 40 mph ( 48 to 64 km / h ) blew down trees and snapped branches , especially in the area surrounding Baxter State Park . Around 15 @,@ 000 residents were affected by power outages as a result . Following the event , five counties — Androscoggin , Cumberland , Kennebec Oxford , and Somerset — were declared disaster areas , making federal aid available to those areas . 
 Rainfall in New Hampshire generally ranged from 4 to 7 in ( 100 to 180 mm ) , although a few higher totals were recorded . At Mount Washington , 9 @.@ 54 in ( 242 mm ) of precipitation fell . The rainfall swelled rivers , pushing them above flood stage ; the Saco River at Conway crested at 15 @.@ 56 ft ( 4 @.@ 74 m ) , surpassing the 9 @-@ ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) flood stage . Along the Saco and <unk> rivers , minor flooding took place , though only in low @-@ lying terrain . Strong winds also impacted the state , with gusts often exceeding 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The winds brought down several small trees in Jaffrey , and triggered power outages that affected 10 @,@ 000 residents . A federal disaster area was declared in the state . 
 In Vermont , for the first time in years , the Tunbridge World 's Fair was canceled due to the storm . One woman sustained injuries after a tree crashed on her vehicle . Floyd produced high winds and heavy rain throughout the state , leading to widespread downed trees and powerlines . Thousands of residents in the state lost power after 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) winds impacted the area . Rainfall totals of 3 to 6 in ( 76 to 152 mm ) were common , although there were localized higher reports . The rainfall was offset by persistent drought conditions , however . Numerous tributaries overflowed their banks , and significant flooding was reported . In <unk> , part of U.S. Route 5 was washed away . Some schools were closed and events canceled in the region . The downed trees caused structural damage , blocked roadways , and affected hiking trails . The high winds also damaged buildings and some apple orchards , Waves of 8 to 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) occurred on Lake Champlain , damaging numerous watercraft along the shore . The hurricane caused one death . Most of Vermont was declared a disaster area after the storm . 
 = Large Black pig = 
 The Large Black , occasionally called the Devon , Cornwall Black or <unk> , is a breed of domestic pig native to Great Britain , particularly Devon , Cornwall and Essex . The Large Black is accurately named , as it is a large swine breed and is the only British pig that is entirely black . It is a hardy and docile pig , with Large Black sows known for having large litters . The breed 's foraging ability make it particularly useful for extensive farming , while a poor candidate for intensive farming . 
 The Large Black combined local black pig breeds from the West Country and the East of England . With the founding of a breed association in 1898 or 1899 , variations between the types from the two areas decreased . The Large Black was popular in the early 1900s and was exported to many areas of the world . Population numbers declined after the Second World War as farmers turned to breeds more suitable to intensive pig farming , and by the 1960s the breed was almost extinct . Numbers have slowly risen , but it is still considered vulnerable by the Rare Breeds Survival Trust , the American Livestock Breeds Conservancy , and Rare Breeds Canada . 
 = = History = = 
 The Large Black resulted from the amalgamation of black pigs from two geographically separate areas , Devon and Cornwall in the south @-@ west of England , and Essex , Suffolk and Kent in the east . The pigs from eastern England , mainly Essex , were influenced by importations from China in the late 18th century , while those from Devon and Cornwall were probably more closely related to the pigs in mainland Europe , particularly France . The Devon pigs were originally selected for " the length of their bodies , ears , noses , tail and hair , the longer the better , without reference to quality or substance " , but selective breeding brought improvements to the breed , and by 1850 the type was small @-@ boned and thick @-@ bodied , with good conformation and constitution . Alternative origins proposed for the black colour of the breed are black Guinea hogs imported from Africa ( similar to the Guinea Hog of the US ) or from Neapolitan pigs . 
 During the late 19th century , the Large Black grew in popularity . A breed association , the Large Black Pig Society , was formed in 1898 or 1899 , in Ipswich , Suffolk . A trademark , consisting of the letters LBP within a shield , was registered in 1902 . 
 The Herd Book of Large Black Pigs was first published in 1899 . In it the large black pigs of Devon and Cornwall were combined under one name with the remnants of the smaller Black Essex , Black Suffolk or Small Black , and other black East Anglian breeds whose numbers had fallen below sustainable levels . There were considerable variations between the types in the two areas , but breeding stock was exchanged between them and by 1913 " general uniformity " had been achieved . 
 = = = 1920s to modern times = = = 
 In 1919 a Large Black sow was Supreme Champion at Smithfield , and at the Royal Show that year 121 Large Blacks were entered , more than any other breed . Popularity of the breed peaked in the 1920s , however , and after World War II , population numbers declined as farmers began to favour pig breeds that would do well in intensive indoor farming . The breed association was merged with the National Pig Breeders Association ( later the British Pig Association ) in 1949 . 
 In 1955 the Howitt report on the development of pig production in the United Kingdom was published . Its main conclusions were that UK pig farms were poorly placed to compete with European producers , that the diversity of local breeds in the UK was an obstacle to progress , and that British pig farmers should focus on three breeds only : the Welsh , the British <unk> , and the Large White . The report initiated a period of decline in all other British pig breeds , including the Large Black . By the time the Rare Breeds Survival Trust was founded 1973 , numbers of all traditional pig breeds were dangerously low , and many of them were extinct . The Large Black was placed on the Trust 's endangered list . 
 = = = In other countries = = = 
 By 1913 , Large Black had by then spread throughout most of Britain , and had been exported to most of mainland Europe and to North and South America , Africa and Oceania . The first exports to Australia were in 1902 or 1903 , with the Large Black being chosen over the Berkshire pig because of their ability to thrive in hot weather , their foraging abilities and their fecundity . By 1930 , Large Blacks represented only 1 percent of Australia pig population , and were raised mainly by breeders in Victoria , South Australia and Tasmania . The breed population continued to hover around 1 percent of the total population , with a slight increase after World War II and a decrease to almost zero new registrations in the 1980s . The first exports to the US were in the 1920s , but the population in that country dwindled to the point where imports were again necessary in 1985 . Today , small herds can be found in the US that descend from the pigs imported in 1985 and 1990 , and there are also herds in Canada , Australia , and South Africa . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Large Black is a long , deep @-@ bodied pig , well known for its hardiness and suitability for extensive farming . Large Blacks are best suited for pasture @-@ based farming due to their strong foraging and grazing ability , which efficiently converts poor quality feed into meat . It is the only pig breed in Britain to be all black , and this helps protect the pig from sunburn in sunny climates . <unk> , the Large Black is a very docile breed which is easily contained by fencing . This is partly because its large , drooping ears obscure its vision , although they also help to protect the face and eyes while the animal is foraging , especially when rooting in dirt . 
 The breed is also known for its long periods of fertility and strong maternal instincts . <unk> give birth to a large litter of 8 – 10 piglets , but some sows have been known to have litters of up to 13 piglets . Also of note is the Large Black sow listed in the Guinness Book of Records for having produced 26 litters between 1940 and 1952 – the largest number of litters ever recorded for a pig . Boars weigh 700 to 800 pounds ( 320 to 360 kg ) and sows around 600 to 700 pounds ( 270 to 320 kg ) , although obesity in sows sometimes results in cystic ovaries and a loss of fertility . The breed has become larger over the years ; in the early 1900s , weights averaged 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) for sows and larger for boars . 
 At its peak of popularity , the Large Black was used mainly for meat production , especially bacon . The meat from the Large Black is known for its lean quality and flavour without an excess of back fat , but for commercial production it was often crossed with the Yorkshire and Middle White pigs , producing a vigorous hybrid that was well regarded by farmers . However , today commercial processors do not favour the black skin of the purebred Large Black . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 In 1954 there were <unk> Large Black pigs recorded , 269 licensed boars and 1926 registered sows , representing approximately 3 @.@ 4 % of the UK pig population of about 65 @,@ 000 . At the end of 2011 there were 421 Large Black pigs ( 86 boars and 335 sows ) registered , a small increase over the 2010 figure of 405 ( 65 boars , 340 sows ) . The Large Black is the rarest historic pig breed in Britain , although numbers are slowly on the rise due to an increase in demand for meat from traditional pig breeds . In 2011 it was classified as " vulnerable " on the watchlist of the Rare Breeds Survival Trust , meaning that there are believed to be between 200 and 300 breeding females . The British Pig Association currently recognizes 6 boar lines and 24 sow lines within the breed . 
 In 2004 the Rare Breeds Trust of Australia listed the status of the Large Black as " critical " , meaning that sow registrations in the Australian Pure Bred Pig Herd Book of the Australian Pig Breeders Association were fewer than 30 per year . 
 The American Livestock Breeds Conservancy estimated the Large Black population of the United States at 300 breeding hogs in 2008 , and lists its status as " critical " , which means that fewer than 200 animals are registered each year in the United States , and there are estimated to be fewer than 2 @,@ 000 worldwide . The US population of Large Black pigs stood at around 300 as of 2008 . Besides conservation for the sake of genetic diversity in livestock , the breed is also coming to be seen as a good option for fulfilling the needs of an increasing number of consumers interested in pasture @-@ raised pork . Rare Breeds Canada identified the single remaining Canadian herd in 1997 , and has since included the breed on its conservation watchlist as " endangered " , with fewer than 500 of the animals in that country . 
 = The Smeezingtons = 
 The Smeezingtons are a songwriting and record producing team , consisting of Bruno Mars ( born October 8 , 1985 ) , Philip Lawrence ( born July 17 , 1980 ) and Ari Levine ( born May 4 , 1984 ) . The Smeezingtons were established in Los Angeles , California . Their production and writing services have been increasingly in demand since 2009 . 
 The Smeezingtons broke into the American recording industry in 2010 , crafting songs for a diverse roster of talent , with the release of the Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 single , " Nothin ' On You " , produced and co @-@ written by the team and performed by rapper B.o.B and singer Bruno Mars . They also produced and co @-@ wrote with singer Cee @-@ Lo Green his single " Fuck You " , which topped the UK singles chart and peaked at No.2 in Hot 100 . Throughout their career they have been noted for their extensive work with Bruno Mars ( one of the elements ) , writing and producing two consecutive Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 singles with the singer in 2010 and other two consecutive Billboard Hot 100 No. 1 singles in 2013 . 
 The team has worked with various artists and received mainstream awards including the ASCAP Pop Music Awards for Songwriters Ari Levine accolade at the 2011 ASCAP / PRS Awards and the 2011 ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Music Awards for " Nothin ' On You " as the Top Rap Song . They have been nominated at the 2011 Grammy Awards and at the 2012 Grammy Awards for Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical . In 2011 , The Smeezingtons were awarded the title of ' Biggest Songwriters of 2010 ' by Music Week . In 2013 , they were ranked # 5 Top <unk> among 35 by Hollywood Reporter magazine and Billboard ranked them # 3 among the " Top 10 Producers in Music " . In the same year , Billboard , considered Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence and Ari Levine the sixth , seventh and eighth best songwriters of 2013 , respectively . " Locked Out of Heaven " has been nominated for four 2014 Grammys including Song of the Year and Record of the Year . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Formation and early works = = = 
 The Smeezingtons formed in 2009 . They are a songwriting @-@ producing trio based in Los Angeles , California , and they consist of Bruno Mars , Philip Lawrence , and Ari Levine . Before they first met , Lawrence , after finishing college , did some theater and also worked in Disney World in Florida for seven years . He said that upon moving to Los Angeles he was " holding down these random telemarketing jobs to keep the lights on " . After Mars graduated in Hawaii he moved to L.A. , and there he found that he could only pay rent by DJing . Before they met each other , " a lot of time was wasted working with random producers bouncing around from studio to studio but never getting anything done . " 
 When Lawrence was first asked to meet Mars he was reluctant to do so , since it would cost him everything he had to go there . Keith Harris , drummer for The Black Eyed Peas , told him , " Whatever it costs you to get out here , I ’ ll reimburse you . " Lawrence responded , " Just give me five dollars back for the bus . " They started working together and writing songs together for Mars to perform , but they received many rejections from labels . The duo considered moving back to their home cities . However , in that week , they got a call from Brandon Creed ( Mars ' manager ) who was A & Ring a reunited Menudo who needed songs . He liked their song " Lost " , which was written for Mars . At first Mars and Lawrence didn ’ t want to give it up , so he offered $ 20 @,@ 000 for it . They were so surprised that they said " You can have that one and whatever else you need ! " It was that call that saved them , allowing them to stay in L.A. a little bit longer . Afterwards they were asked by Aaron @-@ Bay Schuck ( Mars ' A & R ) to help write Flo @-@ Rida 's number one single " Right Round " . 
 In 2008 , Lawrence was a Los Angeles artist , Mars a struggling singer @-@ songwriter , and Levine was a producer looking to work with new songwriters . Lawrence was the first guest at Levine 's studio ( Levcon Studios ) ; they had previously worked together after being introduced by a mutual friend . One day Mars and Lawrence were sitting in the car with no money in their pockets when they decided to try producing for themselves and enlisted the help of Levine who contributed his equipment and expertise in drum programming , sampling and other electronic sounds that dominate . Lawrence is responsible for connecting Levine and Mars . After creating the team , they worked over 10 hours every day for two years . 
 They ventured into the U.S. market , mostly writing songs for R & B @-@ pop performers . They were given the chance of working with less successful acts such as Mike Posner , Cobra Starship , Chad Hugo , and Lupe Fiasco . On the other hand , they were able to create songs for the likes of Flo Rida , Lil Wayne , Wiz Khalifa and Cee @-@ Lo Green . One of their first successful productions was the single " Get Sexy " , performed by Sugababes , which peaked at No. 2 in the United Kingdom in 2010 . 
 This success was followed with Matisyahu ’ s song " One Day " , which was chosen as NBC ’ s 2010 Winter Olympics theme song . The team has also collaborated with Somali @-@ Canadian artist K 'naan . Three songs from his fourth album , Troubadour , were produced in Levcon studios . This album 's most successful song , " Wavin ' Flag " , was released throughout Europe and the US and became the theme song for the 2010 FIFA World Cup , giving the trio attention from the worldwide music industry . At this time they called the team The Smeezingtons . 
 In 2009 , The Smeezingtons settled in Hollywood . A year later , they started to work on Bruno Mars ' debut album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans writing and producing all the songs . They spawned the number one worldwide singles " Just the Way You Are " , " Grenade " , and " The Lazy Song " . The first two of those topped the Billboard Hot 100 and ushered The Smeezingtons into American pop songwriting and production . They funneled lessons learned through label meetings and early hits into Mars ' solo work . 
 = = = Notable collaborations = = = 
 The Smeezingtons quickly landed the singles " Nothin ' on You " for American rapper B.o.B 's 2010 album B.o.B Presents : The Adventures of Bobby Ray , which topped the Billboard Hot 100 and featured Mars . " Fuck You " , a single by American singer Cee @-@ Lo Green , became another successful single for The Smeezingtons , reaching No. 1 in the United Kingdom , the Dutch charts and No. 2 in the United States , in 2011 . 
 In 2010 , the crew was also responsible for the single " Billionaire " , recorded by American rapper Travie McCoy and featuring Mars . In the same year , The Smeezingtons produced the four songs for Mars ' first EP It 's Better If You Don 't Understand . All the songs were later included on his debut solo album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans . The Smeezingtons produced and co @-@ wrote all the songs on that album , and among those songs are the singles " Just the Way You Are " and " Grenade " , both of which reached No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 In 2011 , The Smeezingtons received nominations in more than 5 categories for the 2011 Grammy Awards , including Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical . They won their first Grammy in the same show in the Best Male Pop Vocal Performance category for " Just The Way You Are " , performed by Bruno Mars . With the team 's contributions to music , Ari Levine ( from The Smeezingtons ) received one award at the ASCAP Pop Music Awards for Songwriters for the singles for " Billionaire , " " Just the Way You Are " and " Nothin ' On You " . The team also earned the ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Music Awards for the song " Nothin ' on You " as Top Rap Song . 
 In 2011 , " The Lazy Song " , a single by Mars , became another successful song for The Smeezingtons , reaching No. 1 in the United Kingdom and a top 10 in other countries . The single " Lighters " , a duet between Bad Meets Evil and singer Bruno Mars , became a top 5 in U.S. and reached the top ten in United Kingdom . The Smeezingtons produced the single " It Will Rain " for The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 1 . The song peaked at No. 4 at Billboard Hot 100 , becoming a success worldwide . They also worked with Snoop Dogg and Wiz Khalifa on the lead single " Young , Wild & Free " for the movie Mac & Devin Go to High School . That song was included in the soundtrack and featured Mars ' vocals . The single peaked at # 7 in US . 
 At the 2012 Grammy Awards they were nominated in five categories , including Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical , due to the team involvement in Mars ' second album , Unorthodox Jukebox . Regarding this nominations at the Grammy 's , Levine is still surprised : " To be nominated for a Grammy before you ’ re 30 — you don ’ t expect that , ever " . They were responsible for the singles " Locked Out of Heaven " and " When I Was Your Man " . 
 In 2013 , " Young , Wild & Free " was nominated for Best Rap Song at the 2013 Grammy Awards . They will continue provide the springboard for Mars ' international @-@ chart @-@ topping solo success as an artist . They are responsible for producing , writing and recording songs for him . 
 In 2014 , Mars said that he was no longer interested in churning out songs for other artists , he explained " There 's a piece of me that 's no longer there , which was basically let me write a song and then sell it . That was back in the day when I was struggling and hustling to pay rent . I was selling songs for 250 bucks . " Despite this , they have produced a song for Adele 's third studio album 25 , entitled " All I Ask " . 
 = = = Other ventures = = = 
 The <unk> team says they hope to eventually move from for @-@ hire work to development of new artists . Meanwhile , their Levcon Studios is open to all , from country musicians to rappers . " I don 't think you can name an artist that we don 't want to work with , " Mars said . 
 The Levcon studios are located in Los Angeles , and are co @-@ owned by Ari Levine and his brother and manager , Josh Levine . They are used by The Smeezingtons and have been described as a " tiny Hollywood studio " with a " whiteboard hanging on the wall " . It is adorned with many " doodles " , including a picture of Alf and a joking note that producer @-@ engineer Ari Levine " hangs out with Jamaican drug lords on the reg . " Lawrence says " we always find that we still do our best work in our little shack of a studio ... That ’ s where we find our magic . " 
 = = Influences and style = = 
 Lawrence and Mars came from musical families . Lawrence grew up listening to " everything " while Mars was exposed to a diverse mix of reggae , rock , hip hop and R & B. Their interest in music started in a very young age ; Lawrence started to perform when he was four years old , and Mars started to perform when he was three years old and performed on a more regular basis with his family band by the age of four . In an article by American Songwriter , Lawrence cites acts such as Billy Joel , Elton John and Seal as his biggest influences and inspirations . He was raised listening to acts as Isley Brothers , The Eagles , Led Zeppelin , Stevie Wonder and Billy Joel . Mars , at an early stage of his life , was influenced by R & B artists such as Keith Sweat , Jodeci and R. Kelly , as well as 1950s rock ' n ' roll and Motown . Later , in high school , he began listening to classic rock groups such as The Police , Led Zeppelin and the Beatles . His influences include Billy Joel , Elton John , Prince , The Police , Michael Jackson , Little Richard , and Bob Marley . Mars has stated " Ari turned out to be the secret ingredient to what me and Phil were doing , " explaining , " I 'm used to live stuff . So you give me a studio with a bunch of live instruments , I can do it . But radio 's not playing that stuff . " The three also share a love for producers The Neptunes and Timbaland , the hip @-@ hop song makers of their youth , who influenced them in their throwback sounds . The three admitted their musical influences also comes from The Beatles , Police , Motown , Earth Wind & Fire , Michael Jackson and Disco . 
 In their usual production style , The Smeezingtons start their songs as a cathartic freestyle jams . Lawrence has said , " We 'll go into the studio , and [ Mars will ] start playing the piano and I 'll start freestyling or vice versa . We 're heavily influenced by the ' 80s [ sound ] . Lawrence sees himself and Mars as " melody guys " ; he completed the idea by stating " That 's kind of our main focus , to have really good , memorable melodies . " They can also start their songs production with a " Levine beat , a Mars guitar melody or a lyric snippet from Lawrence . They shoot down each other 's bad ideas and encourage the good ones in " a melting pot of trial and error " " , according to Lawrence . This production formula allowed the team to work with an assortment of artists from various genres . 
 The team explained their songwriting creation at an " I Create Music Expo " by suggesting that every song should be like a " three @-@ minute movie " and that every song needs to have a conflict to make it interesting . Mars criticised " hit songwriters " by saying : " I liked hearing that from these hit songwriters , because it seems like many times songwriters are more interested in just finishing a song than really taking the time to make a good song a hit song " . 
 The team utilizes the talents of each of its members . Lawrence is usually the primary worker on the lyrics and melodies , Levine benefits the team with his skill and knowledge as a recording @-@ engineer , and Mars fulfils various roles and also provides much of the group 's energy . " Nine times out of 10 , Bruno will be on the piano , singing something , " Levine says . " I ’ ll have a beat going , and Philip will be figuring out lyrics and melody . Whatever sparks something , we just try not to mess it up . " 
 Philip Lawrence notes " we all have a little bit of OCD " and Mars acknowledges he sometimes has trouble letting his songs go . Mars is an obsessively detail @-@ oriented musician . " Every day we hear a song that we produced on the radio , me and Ari call each other up at 2 o 'clock in the morning : ' We should have left that snare in . ' ' We should 've took that snare out , ' " Mars said . " It 's just a sickness that we have . " 
 It has been noticed that " Anyone could see that they are really great friends and their genuine connection is what translates into the music they create together . " After working with The Smeezingtons on Unorthodox Jukebox , Jeff Bhasker admitted that " One of their great talents is that they have this fun , light vibe in the studio " , something that enables anyone " to be free so that you can let that primal emotion come out without being embarrassed . Then they polish afterward " . Mark Ronson concurred adding that the key is on Mars ' charisma , which he has had since he began impersonating Elvis . Ronson concluded , " Everything Bruno adds is what takes it into superstardom " . 
 Mars says that the trust that he , Levine and Lawrence have built in seven years of working together is essential . He added " I may say , ' Yo , I like this song , ' but if Ari or Phil say it 's the corniest shit they 've ever heard , I trust them . And the other way around . We all know when we 're onto something ... We also know when something 's not jelling . And that 's the thing you pray you will always have . You can 't believe that everything you do is hot . " Nevertheless , Levine points to the musical influences the three of them share completing his idea " It 's about finding ways to mix the classic we all love with modern songs . That 's why people connect to the music on multiple levels : It 's familiar @-@ sounding but new @-@ classic songwriting and instrumentation with a little twist " . 
 = = Production equipment = = 
 The Smeezingtons use an Akai <unk> , Roland <unk> S88 , V ‑ Synth GT , a regular V ‑ Synth , Korg R3 , <unk> , Novation <unk> , Dave Smith <unk> , and two Access Virus TI 's to produce music . Ari Levine stated that he rarely uses MPC , Storm Drum or Addictive Drums as software . In August 2012 , the team purchased a Korg keyboard . 
 While recording , they use a Yamaha 02R , Pro Tools HD , a Manley Langevin Dual Vocal Combo as pre / compressor / EQ , a Neumann U87 , and Event <unk> speakers with an 18 ‑ inch Mackie . Levine explained that the acoustics and vocals are all recorded with the 87 and the Manley , the basses and electric guitars via DI , adding that " the acoustic guitar that we use is a $ 150 cheap Fender " . He runs most of the keyboards and the MPC through the 02R , and uses a Mackie Big Knobs as an interface . He often uses Pro Tools . Despite MIDI being already incorporated in Pro Tools , he doesn 't use it extensively . " We ’ re not making dance songs , so we don ’ t need the synths to do all kinds of crazy stuff . And I fairly quickly render MIDI tracks to audio in Pro Tools " . In 2011 he was thinking about purchasing a Minimoog . 
 Levine confessed that he doesn 't use any hardware and rarely uses plugins . He says " my favourites are the <unk> FilterBank for my EQ , the Waves <unk> and Renaissance Compressor as my compressors , the [ Waves limiter ] L2 , and my favourite reverb is [ Avid ’ s venerable plug ‑ in ] D ‑ Verb . I also use [ Line 6 ] Echo Farm , Sound Toys <unk> , and , well that ’ s pretty much it . I have many plug @-@ ins , but I don 't really use them . " He said " I ’ ve tried convolution reverbs , but they don ’ t really work . They sound cheap . " However , he also stated that the Avid Reverb One sounded substantially better than <unk> to him . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Smeezingtons ' works have received critical acclaim from mainstream publications . From the The New York Times , reviewer Jon Caramanica , wrote that The Smeezingtons " [ Ha ] ve got a firm grip on the full spectrum of black pop , and white pop as well " . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times wrote that The Smeezingtons " [ are ] making some of the most cohesive yet expansive pop music today ... incredibly well @-@ versed in the language of American music and the ways in which it can still be stretched and molded " . In an <unk> , before Mars played at the Super Bowl Half @-@ time show , Idolator critic Kathy Iandoli praised The Smeezingtons ' work , in the single by Sugababes " Get Sexy " , calling them " a crew of talented fellas " . Erik Adams , music critic , of The A.V. Club , criticized the production team by saying " If The Smeezingtons want to keep synthesizing yesterday ’ s favorites into today ’ s hits ... I could find it within myself to stomach Mars on more than one night of the year " , referring to " their work on Cee @-@ Lo ’ s " Fuck You " " as proof . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 = A Town Where You Live = 
 A Town Where You Live ( Japanese : 君のいる町 , Hepburn : Kimi no Iru Machi ) is a manga series by Kouji Seo . It was serialized in Kodansha 's Weekly Shōnen Magazine between May 2008 and February 2014 . The series was licensed for Crunchyroll Manga in October 2013 . The plot follows the daily life of Haruto Kirishima as he becomes enamored with Yuzuki Eba . 
 A story arc from A Town Where You Live was adapted into an original video animation called A Town Where You Live : Twilight Intersection by Tatsunoko Production . Gonzo later adapted the series into an anime under its manga name ; Gonzo 's anime resulted in a radio program , drama CD and an image song . Reception towards the manga was mixed with reviewers praising the plot for its realism or panning it as predictable and cliché . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Years prior , Haruto Kirishima befriends Yuzuki Eba and asks her to return to his hometown , Shōbara , Hiroshima , if she is ever <unk> 23 In the present , Yuzuki transfers to Shōbara due to her estrangement with her step @-@ <unk> 29 She helps Haruto develop a friendship with Nanami Kanzaki , but Haruto ultimately falls in love with <unk> 39 He helps Yuzuki reconcile with her family which encourages her to return to Tokyo.Ch. 50 The two begin a long @-@ distance relationship until Yuzuki suddenly cuts all ties with him.Ch. 70 Haruto transfers to Tokyo and learns Yuzuki has begun dating Kyousuke Kazama out of sympathy for his terminal <unk> 92 In response , Haruto declares he will take Yuzuki back prompting Kyousuke to take a risky surgery in order to compete for Yuzuki 's love <unk> 98 Following Kyousuke 's death , Haruto and Yuzuki stop seeing each other out of <unk> 100 
 Two years later , Haruto has been dating Asuka Mishima . When he reunites with Yuzuki , the two realize they still love each <unk> 137 Haruto ends his relationship with Asuka in order to be with Yuzuki which causes their friends to ostracize <unk> 141 When Yuzuki 's father objects to their relationship and attempts to relocate her , she begins living with Haruto ; Ch . 160 the two eventually earn her father 's <unk> 164 After reconciling with their friends and graduating from university , Haruto takes a job that relocates him to <unk> 246 Unable to sustain their relationship , the two break up ; Ch . 256 two years later , Haruto is transferred back to Tokyo and reunites with Yuzuki , who had been waiting for his <unk> 260 The two are married shortly <unk> 261 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Haruto Kirishima ( <unk> <unk> , Kirishima Haruto ) 
 Haruto is a high school student in Shōbara , Hiroshima . He has an earnest personality and chastises others when they are in the wrong . Because he often cooks for his family and friends , Haruto is skilled at cooking and considers it as a possible career . His older sister <unk> . 19 lives in Tokyo in the dorm room next to the <unk> from <unk> 80 He has a long @-@ time crush on classmate Nanami Kanzaki , but his feelings shift towards Yuzuki as the series progresses . At the end of the series , he marries Yuzuki , has a son named Daiki , and opens up his own <unk> 261 In both Tatsunko Production 's and Gonzo 's anime , he is voiced by Yoshimasa Hosoya . 
 Yuzuki Eba ( <unk> <unk> , Eba Yuzuki ) 
 Years prior to the series , Yuzuki attends a summer festival in Shōbara where she befriends Haruto . There , Haruto tells her to return if she is ever <unk> 23 Since then , she grew fond of Haruto and plans to visit him one <unk> 162 After her father 's remarriage , Yuzuki feels estranged by her family and decides to attend school in <unk> 29 Due to Haruto 's intervention , Yuzuki is able to mend her relationship with her step @-@ family , prompting her to return to Tokyo.Ch. 50 There , the terminally ill Kyousuke Kazama asks Yuzuki to be his girlfriend for the remainder of his <unk> 92 Following Kyousuke 's death , Yuzuki decides to stop seeing Haruto out of <unk> 100 Reunited two years later , the two reaffirm their love , and begin dating . At the end of the series , she married Haruto and they have a son named <unk> 141 In both Tatsunko Production 's and Gonzo 's anime , she is voiced by Megumi Nakajima . 
 Hiroshima characters 
 Takashi Yura ( <unk> <unk> , Yura Takashi ) is Haruto 's childhood friend . He is unpopular with women and faces rejection <unk> 79 In college , he begins dating Kiyomi Asakura , Ch . 166 whom he later marries when she becomes <unk> 225 In both Tatsunko Production 's and Gonzo 's anime , he is voiced by Toshiki Masuda . 
 Akari Kaga ( <unk> 月 , Kaga Akari ) is Haruto and Takashi 's childhood friend . She is half Russian and half Japanese which gives her blond hair and blue <unk> 78 @.@ 5 After her father becomes ill , Akari drops out of university and returns to Hiroshima for <unk> 187 She marries Nanami 's brother Narumi , but beforehand , confesses her love to Haruto one last time to settle her feelings for him.Ch. 219 In both Tatsunko Production 's and Gonzo 's anime , she is voiced by Nana Kouno . 
 Nanami Kanzaki ( <unk> <unk> , Kanzaki Nanami ) is Haruto 's classmate since middle school . She has an older brother named Narumi . Due to Yuzuki 's efforts , Haruto is able to become close with Nanami and earns her affection . However , she postpones and rejects Haruto 's confession as she sees Haruto 's love towards <unk> 39 At Seijo University , she eventually dates another <unk> 208 In Tatsunko Production 's anime , she is voiced by Saori Hayami . In Gonzo 's anime , she is voiced by Yuki Takao . 
 Shiho Amagi ( <unk> <unk> , Amagi Shiho ) is a girl Haruto meets during his summer job in a <unk> 63 She aspires to be a chef and is highly skilled and devoted to that profession ; because of this , she is strict towards her co @-@ workers . Three years later , she runs her own restaurant in Tokyo where Haruto works during his university <unk> 190 
 Tokyo characters 
 Rin Eba ( <unk> <unk> , Eba Rin ) is Yuzuki 's step @-@ sister . She has a mischievous personality and enjoys flirting with <unk> 124 After learning that Haruto and Yuzuki had sex , she realizes that she loves Haruto and feels saddened by this <unk> 202 In both Tatsunko Production 's and Gonzo 's anime , she is voiced by Saki Fujita . 
 Asuka Mishima ( <unk> <unk> , Mishima Asuka ) is Haruto 's neighbor and classmate after his transfer to Tokyo.Ch. 81 Following Kyousuke 's death and Haruto and Yuzuki 's decision to stop seeing each other , she and Haruto begin <unk> 106 At the end of the series , she is a pitcher on Japan 's national baseball <unk> 261 In Gonzo 's anime , she is voiced by Ayane Sakura . 
 Kyousuke Kazama ( <unk> <unk> , Kazama Kyōsuke ) is Yuzuki 's senior at school and becomes friends with Haruto . He uses his terminal illness to make Yuzuki his <unk> 92 Upon learning about Yuzuki 's relationship with Haruto , Kyousuke decides to undergo a risky surgery to cure his ailment and to win Yuzuki 's love fairly ; the surgery results in his <unk> 100 In Gonzo 's anime series , he is voiced by Daisuke Ono . 
 Mina Nagoshi ( <unk> <unk> , Nagoshi Mina ) is Haruto 's high school classmate in Tokyo . Learning that Mina has tickets for an event at Yuzuki 's school , Haruto accompanies her which causes her to believe they are on a <unk> 85 She reappears as a member of the college circle that Haruto <unk> 180 There , she comes to believe she and Haruto are a couple again ; Ch . 181 she later ends this supposed relationship to be with another <unk> 243 She appears in Gonzo 's anime and is voiced by Sayuri Yahagi . 
 Kiyomi Asakura ( <unk> <unk> , Asakura Kiyomi ) is Kyousuke Kazama 's childhood <unk> 95 She originally despises Yuzuki for her relationship with Kyousuke , and works with Haruto to try to split them apart . She confesses her love to Kyousuke before he undergoes his <unk> 99 She begins dating Takashi and the two marry when she becomes <unk> 225 She appears in Gonzo 's anime and is voiced by Aya Endo . 
 Shiori Amaya ( <unk> <unk> , Amaya Shiori ) is a business student at Seijo University . She stages an incriminating situation in order to blackmail Haruto into taking class notes for <unk> 112 Despite her family 's opposition , she decides to pursue her dream as a manga <unk> 113 
 Miyu Hoshina ( <unk> <unk> , Hoshina Miyu ) is Haruto 's neighbor during his university years . She does not have friends at the university and , because she has gone to an all @-@ girls high school , has <unk> 148 After interacting with Haruto and Yuzuki , she becomes more social and studies <unk> 222 
 <unk> Miyanaga ( <unk> <unk> , Miyanaga <unk> ) is Yuzuki 's student from her cram school job . She develops a crush on Haruto and decides to pursue him.Ch. 177 When she becomes a high school student , she moves into Miyu 's old <unk> 230 
 = = Release = = 
 A Town Where You Live is authored by Kouji Seo . It was first announced for serialization in Kodansha 's Weekly Shōnen Magazine , issue 24 , 2008 . It premiered in Weekly Shōnen Magazine in issue 26 of 2008 which was released on May 28 . The final chapter was released in issue 11 of 2014 which was released on February 12 . Seo stated he wanted to create a love story set in his hometown as the inspiration to the series and that some of his characters were inspired by his friends . On October 30 , 2013 , Crunchyroll Manga was launched and included A Town Where You Live in its library with English translation by Abby <unk> ; The series has also been published in languages such as French and Chinese . Kouji Seo created a guide book titled A Town Where You Live Official Guidebook Love Navi : Love Navigation ! which was released on August 16 , 2013 . 
 = = Anime adaptations = = 
 = = = Tatsunoko Production = = = 
 A Town Where You Live : Twilight Intersection ( 君のいる町 ～ <unk> ～ , Kimi no Iru Machi <unk> <unk> ) is a two episode original video animation series produced by Tatsunoko Production in collaboration with the city , Shōbara . Yasuhiro <unk> and Hiroshi Kobayashi were the directors with script by Momoko Murakami and music by Keiichi Oku . The series ' theme song was <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ? , lit . " Twilight Intersection " ) by <unk> Mano ; the theme song was later released as a CD single by Hello ! Project . The episodes were bundled with the limited edition manga volume 17 and 18 ; they were released on March 16 and June 15 , 2012 respectively . The series covers Haruto Kirishima 's class trip to Tokyo as he separates from his classmates to search for Yuzuki Eba . 
 = = = Gonzo = = = 
 A Town Where You Live was made into an anime series by Gonzo . <unk> Yamauchi was the director with script by Reiko Yoshida and music by Keiichi Oku . It was first announced in Weekly Shōnen Magazine , issue 15 , 2013 . To promote the show , a radio program consisting of the anime 's voice cast was broadcast on Nippon Cultural Broadcasting between July 6 and July 27 , 2013 . The anime premiered on TX Network between July 13 and September 28 , 2013 . It was also broadcast on Hiroshima Home Television and AT @-@ X and was made available for streaming on networks such as Niconico and Bandai Channel . The series uses four theme songs : The opening theme is Sentimental Love ( <unk> , <unk> Rabu ) by <unk> . The first ending theme is Kimi no Iru Machi ( 君のいる町 ? , lit . " A Town Where You Live " ) which was used for the first six episodes while its alternate version , Answer Songs was used for the final episode ; the song was done by Yoshimasa Hosoya . The remaining episodes ' ending theme was Dear Friend by Daisuke Ono . Sentimental Love was released as a CD single by A @-@ Sketch while Kimi no Iru Machi and Dear Friend were released by Universal Music Group . Right Stuf Inc . ' s Nozomi Entertainment announced an English subtitled release for North America in July 2015 . 
 Gonzo also produced two original video animation episodes which are bundled with the limited editions of manga volume 26 and 27 . Gonzo 's anime resulted in a drama CD and an image song release . 
 = = = = Episode list = = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 In Japan , A Town Where You Live manga volumes frequently appeared on weekly sales charts during their week of release . Jason Thompson praised A Town Where You Live 's serious , mature tone and wrote that the audiences will either like the series for its realism or criticize it as slow and mundane . Manga @-@ News praised the series ' introduction for being more realistic than the author 's previous work , Suzuka , and the plot which was described as eventful . In later volumes , Manga @-@ News criticized the plot for being predictable , encompassing cliché aspects of the genre , and for dragging its story . They also panned the characters ' behavior , calling it implausible and inconsistent . Manga @-@ News returned to positive reviews during the volumes involving Kyousuke Kazama ; they praised the story arc for introducing a new setting , for breaking away from the usual classicism , and for surprising the readers for the first time in the series . Following this , Manga @-@ News returned to negative reviews , echoing their previous points . AnimeLand had similar reactions . Initially , they were positive , praising the realistic protagonist , but further reviews repeated Manga @-@ News ' criticisms . 
 = = Japanese notes and terminology = = 
 = Banksia paludosa = 
 Banksia paludosa , commonly known as the marsh or swamp banksia , is a species of shrub in the plant genus Banksia . It is native to New South Wales , Australia , where it is found between Sydney and Batemans Bay , with an isolated population further south around Eden . There are two recognised subspecies , the nominate of which is a spreading shrub to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) in height , and subsp. astrolux is a taller shrub to 5 m ( 16 ft ) high found only in Nattai National Park . 
 Native mammals , such as the brown antechinus and sugar glider , are important pollinators of B. paludosa . Several species of honeyeaters visit the flower spikes , as do ants and the European honey bee . The response to bushfire depends on the subspecies ; subspecies paludosa regenerates from underground lignotubers , while plants of subspecies astrolux are killed by fire and regenerate from large stores of seed which have been held in cones in the plant canopy . B. paludosa is sometimes seen in cultivation , with dwarf forms being registered and sold . 
 = = Description = = 
 The two subspecies of Banksia paludosa are identical in foliage and flower , and differ only on their size , habit , and response to bushfire . Banksia paludosa subspecies paludosa is most commonly encountered as a spreading multistemmed shrub generally under 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) high , or rarely 2 m ( 7 ft ) . In heathland habitats such as Nadgee or Barren Grounds Nature Reserves , it may not exceed 1 m ( 3 ft ) in height . At an exposed area such as Green Cape , it is reduced further to a 30 cm ( 12 in ) prostrate shrub . This subspecies has a woody base , known as a lignotuber , which begins developing in the first year of life . Banksia paludosa subspecies astrolux is a more open non @-@ lignotuberous shrub which reaches 5 m ( 16 ft ) high . 
 The bark and foliage is rough and covered in multiplication signs , although the new growth is covered in fine hair . The stems are generally less than 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in diameter , and may be red or yellow when young . The leaves are alternate or whorled along the stems , and <unk> to egg @-@ shaped ( lanceolate to obovate ) in shape . They measure 4 – 13 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 2 in ) long and 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide . The leaf margins are entire or have occasional serrations . The leaf undersurface is white , with a midrib . Flowering occurs over autumn and winter ( April to July ) and the flower spikes , known as inflorescences , arise from stems that are three or more years old . Cylindrical in shape , they are composed of a central woody spike or axis from which a large number of compact floral units arise perpendicularly to it , and are generally 3 @.@ 2 – 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) wide and 7 – 13 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 5 @.@ 2 in ) high . The individual flowers are more openly spaced than those of other banksias , and this is especially evident in late bud . This , coupled with the tall thin shape of the flower spike , makes the species quite distinctive . The flower spikes are pale- to golden brown in bud , and open to a more gold colour after anthesis . Variations are seen , one form having a grey limb in bud , and plants with particularly tall flower spikes have been recorded near Huskisson at Jervis Bay . As with most banksias , in anthesis the opening of the individual buds proceeds up the flower spike from the base to the top ( acropetal ) . The process from bud to the finishing of flowering takes six to eight weeks . 
 As they age , the flower spikes fade to grey , with the old flowers remaining for years . Up to 60 woody follicles develop on each spike , known in this stage an as infructescence . Narrow and elliptic , they measure 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 7 in ) long , 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 0 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) high , and 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) wide . Some follicles open spontaneously , but most remain closed until burnt by bushfire . Each follicle contains one or two fertile seeds , between which lies a woody dark brown separator of similar shape to the seeds . Measuring 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 7 in ) in length , the seed is obovate , and composed of a dark brown 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) wide membranous " wing " and sickle @-@ shaped ( falcate ) seed proper which measures 0 @.@ 8 – 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) long by 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) wide . The seed surface can be smooth or covered in tiny ridges , and often glistens . The resulting seedling first grows two asymmetrical obovate cotyledon leaves measuring 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long by 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 in ) wide , which may remain for several months as several more leaves appear . The first pairs of leaves are oppositely arranged on the stem , have 3 – 4 " teeth " on their margins , and are narrowly obovate in shape . They are around 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) , and each following pair of leaves is slightly larger . 
 The cotyledons of Banksia paludosa , B. marginata and B. integrifolia are very similar in appearance . The <unk> of larger shrubs of both Banksia paludosa subspecies resemble those of Banksia conferta subsp. penicillata , but the latter has a wider inflorescence , and the buds are more crowded in appearance on the inflorescence before anthesis . Banksia paludosa also bears a superficial resemblance to B. oblongifolia , but the latter has a prominent midrib on the leaf underside , the new growth is covered in rusty fur , and the old spikes are bare of flowers . The latter grows on dryer rocky soils while the former grows in wetter sandy soils . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Banksia paludosa was first described by Robert Brown in his 1810 On the Proteaceae of Jussieu , and named Banksia paludosa . In 1870 , George Bentham demoted it to a variety of B. integrifolia ( Coast Banksia ) , but in 1981 Alex George restored it to species rank . Its specific epithet is derived from the Latin noun <unk> " marsh " , but is somewhat misleading , as it more often grows on sandstone ridges and heathland . Its common names , marsh banksia and swamp banksia , echo its scientific name . 
 = = = Placement within Banksia = = = 
 The current taxonomic arrangement of the genus Banksia is based on botanist Alex George 's 1999 monograph for the Flora of Australia book series . In this arrangement , B. paludosa is placed in Banksia subgenus Banksia , because its inflorescences take the form of Banksia 's characteristic flower spikes , section Banksia because of its straight styles , and series Salicinae because its inflorescences are cylindrical . In a morphological cladistic analysis published in 1994 , Kevin Thiele placed it in the newly described subseries Integrifoliae , within the series Salicinae . However , this subgrouping of the Salicinae was not supported by George . 
 B. paludosa 's placement within Banksia may be summarised as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Isostylis 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Oncostylis 
 Section Coccinea 
 Section Banksia 
 Series Grandes 
 Series Banksia 
 Series Crocinae 
 Series Prostratae 
 Series Cyrtostylis 
 Series Tetragonae 
 Series Bauerinae 
 Series Quercinae 
 Series Salicinae 
 B. dentata – B. aquilonia – B. integrifolia – B. plagiocarpa – B. oblongifolia – B. robur – B. conferta – B. paludosa – B. marginata – B. canei – B. saxicola 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast and co @-@ authors have been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae , which then comprised genera Banksia and Dryandra . Their analyses suggest a phylogeny that differs greatly from George 's taxonomic arrangement . Banksia paludosa resolves as the closest relative , or " sister " , to the three subspecies of B. integrifolia . In 2007 , Mast and Thiele rearranged the genus Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and published B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; thus B. subg . Banksia was redefined as encompassing taxa lacking spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , B. paludosa is placed in B. subg . Spathulatae . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Two subspecies are recognised . The more widespread subspecies paludosa is a lignotuberous shrub to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) high , while subspecies astrolux , a rare plant known only from the Starlight Trail in Nattai National Park , is a non @-@ lignotuberous shrub which reaches 5 m ( 16 ft ) high . The latter was first recorded by contributors Brian Walters and Kevin Mills for The Banksia Atlas mapping project in the mid @-@ 1980s . They initially thought the plants were Banksia conferta subsp. penicillata until they observed the flower spikes typical of B. paludosa . The subspecies was initially termed the Nattai River form of B. paludosa , until it was formally named by George , who coined its species name from the Ancient Greek aster " star " and Latin lux " light " , a translation of the place it was found . 
 Hybrids with Banksia marginata and B. integrifolia have been recorded at Nadgee Nature Reserve , where all three species occur . A study of an area of extensive hybridization between B. robur and B. oblongifolia at Barren Grounds Nature Reserve revealed some plants with morphology suggestive of B. paludosa in their parentage , and requiring further investigation . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Both subspecies of Banksia paludosa are endemic to New South Wales . The nominate subspecies paludosa is found from Glen Davis through to the Sydney region and then south to Ulladulla on the South Coast , with a separate population in the vicinity of Eden just north of the Victorian border . It occurs inland as far as <unk> on the Southern Tablelands . It was collected in 1966 from Hat Head on the Mid North Coast by Lawrie Johnson , but has not been found there since despite field work in the area . This record aside , the northernmost historical coastal record is from what is now Centennial Park and La Perouse in Sydney 's eastern suburbs , where it is now locally vanished . Subspecies astrolux is restricted to Nattai National Park in the Southern Highlands . 
 Both subspecies grow in nutrient @-@ poor well @-@ drained sandstone soils , in open woodland with trees such as Sydney peppermint ( Eucalyptus piperita ) , silvertop ash ( E. sieberi ) , grey gum ( E. punctata ) , narrow @-@ leaved stringybark ( E. sparsifolia ) , red bloodwood ( Corymbia gummifera ) and smooth @-@ barked apple ( Angophora costata ) , and in heathland with species such as dwarf banksia ( Banksia oblongifolia ) , coral heath ( Epacris microphylla ) , and dagger hakea ( Hakea teretifolia ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Banksia paludosa subspecies paludosa is a slow @-@ growing shrub which regenerates from bushfire by resprouting from its lignotuber . After fire , plants take around three years to flower significantly , but are flowering well by five years afterwards . <unk> numbers dwindle by fourteen years post bushfire . Plants are estimated to live to around 60 years of age . Seedlings also appear from seed dispersed after bushfire . All banksias have developed proteoid or cluster roots in response to the nutrient @-@ poor conditions of Australian soils ( particularly lacking in phosphorus ) . 
 The flower spikes of B. paludosa are unable to self @-@ pollinate and require pollinators to set seed . A 1988 isozyme study showed very high rates of outcrossing ; pollen from one plant is well @-@ mixed among other plants in the locale . <unk> mammals are important pollinators in heathland habitat , with the brown antechinus ( Antechinus <unk> ) a frequent visitor to flower spikes . The sugar glider ( Petaurus breviceps ) is another mammal pollinator . Bird species that have been observed foraging and feeding at the flowers include the red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ( Lichenostomus chrysops ) , white @-@ eared honeyeater ( L. leucotis ) , crescent honeyeater ( Phylidonyris pyrrhoptera ) , New Holland honeyeater ( P. novaehollandiae ) , and eastern spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus tenuirostris ) . Insects recorded visiting flower spikes include the European honey bee and ants . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia paludosa was first introduced into cultivation in England in 1805 . The species was grown at Kew , Cambridge Botanic Gardens , Woburn Abbey , Loddiges nursery in Hackney , John Miller 's nursery in Bristol and George Hibbert 's garden at Clapham Common . It was also grown in the Villa San Donato in Italy , in the collection of Anatoly Nikolaievich Demidov , 1st Prince of San Donato . 
 B. paludosa is cultivated in Australian gardens , and does best with a sunny aspect and good drainage , in soils with a pH from 5 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 5 . Slow growing , it flowers in 6 to 10 years from seed . It can be propagated by seed , which take around two weeks to germinate , or cutting . Low growing coastal ( dwarf ) forms which grow to 60 cm ( 2 ft ) are also commercially available , and should be propagated by cutting to preserve features . Noting the flower spikes to be " rather dull " , plant author John Wrigley has described the species as " not a spectacular garden plant " , although its foliage has been described as " attractive " . A form from Jervis Bay with large orange flower spikes was deemed by amateur botanist and banksia enthusiast Alf Salkin to have horticultural potential . 
 = Jules Bianchi = 
 Jules Lucien André Bianchi ( 3 August 1989 – 17 July 2015 ) was a French motor racing driver who drove for the Marussia F1 Team in the FIA Formula One World Championship . 
 Bianchi had previously raced in Formula Renault 3 @.@ 5 , GP2 and Formula Three and was a Ferrari Driver Academy member . He entered Formula One as a practice driver in 2012 for Sahara Force India . In 2013 , he made his debut driving for Marussia , finishing 15th in his opening race in Australia and ended the season in 19th position without scoring any points . His best result that year was 13th at the Malaysian Grand Prix . In October 2013 , the team confirmed that he would drive for the team the following season . In the 2014 season , he scored both his and the Marussia 's first points in Formula One at the Monaco Grand Prix . 
 On 5 October 2014 , during the Japanese Grand Prix , Bianchi lost control of his Marussia in very wet conditions and collided with a recovery vehicle , suffering a diffuse axonal injury . He underwent emergency surgery and was placed into an induced coma , and remained comatose until his death on 17 July 2015 . Bianchi is the first Formula One driver killed as a result of an accident during a race event since Ayrton Senna at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jules Bianchi was born in Nice , France , to Philippe and Christine Bianchi . He had two siblings , brother Tom and sister Mélanie , and had been in a long @-@ term relationship with French girlfriend , Camille Marchetti . In later times , media reports also referred to a German girlfriend , Gina , who had moved to Nice . 
 Bianchi was the grandson of Mauro Bianchi , who competed in GT racing during the 1960s and three non @-@ championship Formula One Grands Prix in 1961 . He was also the grandnephew of Lucien , who competed in 19 Formula One Grands Prix between 1959 and 1968 and won the 1968 24 Hours of Le Mans , before dying during Le Mans testing the following year . 
 His favourite racing driver was Michael Schumacher . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Bianchi 's exposure to motorsport started at around 3 years of age through karting and was facilitated by the fact that his father owned a kart track . Since age 17 , Bianchi was professionally managed by Nicolas Todt . 
 = = = Formula Renault 2 @.@ 0 = = = 
 In 2007 , Bianchi left karting and raced in French Formula Renault 2 @.@ 0 for SG Formula , where he finished as champion with five wins . He also competed in the Formula Renault Eurocup where he had one pole position and one fastest lap in three races . 
 = = = Formula 3 Euro = = = 
 In late 2007 , Bianchi signed with ART Grand Prix to compete in the Formula 3 Euro Series . 
 In 2008 Bianchi won the Masters of Formula 3 at Zolder , and also finished third in the 2008 Formula 3 Euro Series season . 
 Bianchi continued in the F3 <unk> in 2009 , leading ART 's line @-@ up along with rookie team @-@ mates Valtteri Bottas , Esteban Gutiérrez and Adrien Tambay . With eight wins , Bianchi sealed the title with a round to spare , at Dijon @-@ <unk> . He then added a ninth win at the final round at Hockenheim . He also drove in the Formula Renault 3 @.@ 5 Series at Monaco , after SG Formula acquired the cars formerly run by Kurt <unk> . 
 = = = GP2 = = = 
 Bianchi drove for ART in the subsequent GP2 Asia season and the 2010 GP2 season . He competed in three of the four rounds of the GP2 Asia championship . In the main series , Bianchi took two pole positions and a number of points positions before he was injured in a first @-@ lap crash at the Hungaroring . In the feature race , he spun into the path of the field exiting the first corner , and was struck head @-@ on by Ho @-@ Pin Tung , sustaining a fractured second lumbar vertebra in the process . Bianchi was fourth in the drivers ' championship at the time of his injury . Despite initial pessimistic assessments of the severity of his injury , he recovered to take part in the next round of the championship . 
 Bianchi remained with ART for 2011 , and was partnered by 2010 GP3 Series champion Esteban Gutiérrez . He starred in the first two rounds of the 2011 GP2 Asia Series , holding off Romain Grosjean for victory in the feature race and gaining fourth in the sprint race , but he was later penalised . He finished runner @-@ up to Grosjean in the drivers ' championship . In the main series , Bianchi finished third in the championship , behind Grosjean and Luca <unk> . 
 = = = Formula Renault 3 @.@ 5 = = = 
 Bianchi opted to switch to the Formula Renault 3 @.@ 5 Series for 2012 , following his one @-@ off appearance in the category in 2009 . He signed for the Tech 1 Racing team , and was partnered with Kevin <unk> , and later with Daniel Abt . He finished second in the title race , narrowly losing out to Robin <unk> at the final round . 
 = = Formula One career = = 
 = = = Ferrari and Sahara Force India ( test roles ) = = = 
 In August 2009 , Bianchi was linked by the BBC and various other media sources to the second Ferrari Formula One seat occupied by Luca Badoer during Felipe Massa 's absence . Bianchi tested for Ferrari at the young drivers test at Circuito de Jerez for two of the three days , over 1 – 2 December 2009 . The other drivers tested on 3 December included Daniel <unk> , Marco Zipoli and Pablo Sánchez López as the top three finishers in the 2009 Italian Formula Three Championship . Bianchi 's performance in this test led to him becoming the first recruit of the Ferrari Driver Academy and signing up to a long @-@ term deal to remain at the team 's disposal . 
 On 11 November 2010 he was confirmed by Ferrari as the team 's test and reserve driver for the 2011 season , replacing Luca Badoer , Giancarlo Fisichella and Marc Gené , as well as confirming he would test for the team during the young driver test in Abu Dhabi over 16 – 17 November . Bianchi carried on his GP2 racing , as Formula 1 allows test and reserve drivers to race in parallel in other competitions . On 13 September 2011 , Bianchi tested for Ferrari at Fiorano , as part of the Ferrari Driver Academy , with fellow academy member and Sauber F1 driver Sergio Pérez . Bianchi completed 70 laps and recorded a quickest lap time of 1 : 00 @.@ 213 . For the 2012 season , Ferrari loaned him to the Sahara Force India team , for whom he drove in nine Friday free practice sessions over the course of the year as the outfit 's test and reserve driver . 
 = = = Marussia F1 = = = 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 On 1 March 2013 , Marussia announced that Bianchi was to replace Luiz Razia as a race driver after Razia 's contract was terminated , due to sponsorship issues . Bianchi qualified 19th for the Australian Grand Prix , out @-@ qualifying team @-@ mate Max Chilton by three @-@ quarters of a second . Bianchi overtook Pastor Maldonado , and Daniel Ricciardo on the first lap and he eventually finished 15th on his debut . He was 19th on the grid again in Malaysia , 0 @.@ 3 seconds away from Q2 . Bianchi fell behind the Caterhams at the start of the race , but moved up the order after the pit stops , eventually going on to finish 13th , ahead of his teammate , and both Caterhams . As of the Hungarian Grand Prix , Bianchi had beaten his teammate in all qualifying sessions and all races that both of them had finished . In the Japanese Grand Prix he and Charles Pic of Caterham were given ten @-@ place grid penalties for receiving three reprimands over the season , and at the race , his race ended early after a collision with <unk> van der Garde . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 In October 2013 , Marussia confirmed that Bianchi would stay at the team for the following season . After starting off the season with struggles in Australia , in which he was not classified , Bianchi overcame the odds to score his – and his team 's – first World Championship points by finishing ninth at the Monaco Grand Prix . 
 Out of the nine races which Bianchi and Chilton completed without retiring , during the 2014 season , he was the quicker driver in eight of them , establishing his status as the first driver . Chilton retired twice , and Bianchi five times , with three of Bianchi 's retirements being mechanical failures . 
 Days before his fatal accident , Bianchi declared himself " ready " to step into the Scuderia Ferrari race seat should the team need him amid the looming departure of Fernando Alonso . 
 = = 2014 Suzuka accident = = 
 The 2014 Japanese Grand Prix was held on 5 October , under intermittent heavy rainfall caused by the approaching Typhoon Phanfone and in fading daylight . 
 On lap 43 of the race , Bianchi lost control of his car and veered right towards the run @-@ off area on the outside of the Dunlop Curve ( turn seven ) of the Suzuka Circuit . He collided with the rear of a tractor crane tending to the removal of Adrian Sutil 's Sauber after Sutil had spun out of control and crashed in the same area a lap before . Spectators ' video footage and photographs of the accident revealed that the left side of Bianchi 's Marussia car was extensively damaged and the roll bar destroyed as it slid under the tractor crane . The impact was such that the tractor crane was partially jolted off the ground causing Sutil 's Sauber , which was suspended in the air by the crane , to fall back to the ground . The race was stopped and Lewis Hamilton was declared the winner . 
 Bianchi was reported as being unconscious after not responding to either a team radio call or marshals . He was treated at the crash site before being taken by ambulance to the circuit 's medical centre . Since transport by helicopter was not possible due to the specific injuries sustained , Bianchi was further transported by ambulance , for 32 minutes under police escort . The destination was the nearest hospital , Mie Prefectural General Medical Center in Yokkaichi , which was some 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) away from the Suzuka circuit . Initial reports by his father , Philippe , to television channel France 3 , were that Bianchi was in critical condition with a head injury and was undergoing an operation to reduce severe bruising to his head . The FIA subsequently said that CT scans showed Bianchi suffered a " severe head injury " in the crash , and that he would be admitted to intensive care following surgery . 
 Among his first hospital visitors immediately after the Grand Prix were Marussia 's CEO Graeme Lowdon and team principal John Booth ( the latter staying by Bianchi 's side even after the inaugural Russian Grand Prix ) , as well as Ferrari 's team principal Marco <unk> and Formula One driver , Felipe Massa . 
 On 6 October , Pastor Maldonado and the manager and assistant manager he shared with Bianchi — namely , Nicolas Todt and Alessandro <unk> <unk> , respectively — also visited the hospital . Bianchi 's parents arrived later that day and were joined , three days later , by their other children , Mélanie and Tom , as well as Jules ' best friend , Lorenz Leclerc . The family released a statement the next day , expressing appreciation for the outpouring of support from the public and for the presence of professor Gerard <unk> , president of the FIA Medical Commission , and professor Alessandro <unk> , neurosurgeon of the Sapienza University of Rome , who travelled to Japan at the request of Scuderia Ferrari . They also provided a medical update , confirming that the injury suffered was a diffuse axonal injury and that Bianchi was in a critical but stable condition . 
 Initial media reports in October 2014 — said to be based on information obtained from Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) documents — claimed that the speed at the moment of loss of control was recorded at 212 km / h ( 132 mph ) and that the impact generated 92 g0 ( 900 m / s2 ) . This data had been sourced from Bianchi 's g @-@ sensors in his earplugs , however , it was understood that these slipped out at a crucial moment . 
 Subsequent calculations in July 2015 indicated a peak of 254 g0 ( 2 @,@ 490 m / s2 ) and data from the FIA 's World Accident Database ( <unk> ) — which sources information from racing accidents worldwide — also indicate Bianchi impact occurred 2 @.@ 61 seconds after the loss of control , at a speed of 123 km / h ( 76 mph ) and at an angle of 55 degrees . According to Andy Mellor , Vice President of the FIA Safety Commission , this is the equivalent of dropping a " car 48 meters to the ground without a crumple zone " . 
 = = = Team and driver reactions = = = 
 At the inaugural Russian Grand Prix , one week after the accident , Marussia originally registered Alexander Rossi in place of the hospitalised Bianchi , before finally deciding to field only a single car driven by Chilton . 
 There were several tributes at the race to show support for Bianchi : 
 Marussia adopted a " # JB17 " livery on the cockpit sides of its <unk> car ( which continued to be used in the subsequent year ) . 
 Every driver wore a sticker on his helmet saying " Tous avec Jules # 17 " ( " We 're all with Jules # 17 " ) , being an idea championed by fellow French driver , Jean @-@ Éric Vergne . 
 The drivers held a one @-@ minute silence in honour of Bianchi just before the race . 
 The race winner , Lewis Hamilton , dedicated his win to Bianchi . 
 The day after the Japanese Grand Prix , then @-@ outgoing Ferrari president , Luca di Montezemolo , disclosed to the media that Bianchi had been poised to become the third Ferrari driver in 2015 in the event that the championship moved to three car teams , as had widely been speculated at the time . 
 Following the Russian Grand Prix , Marussia 's CEO Graeme Lowdon confirmed that the team would return to a two @-@ car operation for the remainder of the season , however , the team entered administration prior to the next race , the United States Grand Prix . The team 's financial backer , Andrei <unk> , later revealed that Bianchi 's crash was a key factor in the Russian 's decision to end his financial support of the team and quit Formula One . 
 After the 2015 Australian Grand Prix in March , John Booth , now team principal of the newly established Manor Marussia F1 team , paid tribute to Bianchi 's point performance at the 2014 Monaco Grand Prix since the prize money won enabled the team to stay in Formula One . In addition , coinciding with the 2015 Monaco Grand Prix , Manor Marussia continued to show support for Bianchi with special red wristbands inscribed with " Monaco 2014 <unk> JB17 " . 
 = = = FIA reaction and investigation = = = 
 Following Bianchi 's accident , the FIA began an investigation and also considered appropriate changes to safety procedures , such as those at the Brazilian Grand Prix , where the location of a tractor crane serving the Senna S chicane was altered . 
 The FIA released its initial findings at a special conference held during the inaugural Russian Grand Prix on the Saturday after the Japanese Grand Prix weekend . Among other things , it was revealed that Bianchi had slowed down at Suzuka 's Turn 7 but without disclosing by what margin or the speed of impact , and that the journey to the hospital by ambulance took only an extra 37 minutes relative to the helicopter , without any adverse effects on Bianchi 's condition . 
 Further , the FIA confirmed ongoing research into closed cockpits for Formula One cars , the possibility of fitting protective skirting to all recovery vehicles as well as ways to slow down cars in crash zones more effectively than double yellow flags . With respect to the latter , the FIA moved to quickly consider the introduction of a virtual safety car – or <unk> system – which was then tested during the season 's final three Grands Prix in the United States , Brazil and Abu Dhabi – based on a Le Mans racing " slow zone " arrangement that does not neutralise race proceedings as much as safety car periods . 
 The following week , the FIA reportedly emailed all teams to request that they retain any information related to Bianchi 's Suzuka accident , for exclusive use by an accident panel established by the FIA to investigate Bianchi 's accident . 
 One week later the FIA announced a review panel to investigate the cause of the accident , which was made up of former drivers and team principals , and published its findings four weeks later . The report found that there was no single cause of Bianchi 's accident . Instead , the contributing factors were found to include track conditions , car speed and the presence of a recovery vehicle on the circuit . The report also made several suggestions to improve safety when recovering stricken vehicles — which were subsequently introduced for the 2015 season — before concluding that it would not have been possible to mitigate Bianchi 's injuries through changes to the cockpit design . The report also revealed that the fail @-@ safe for the car 's brake @-@ by @-@ wire system had failed . Despite this , Marussia was not found to be responsible for the accident . 
 For the 2015 season , on safety grounds , the FIA also implemented measures to alter the start time of certain Grands Prix by requiring that it is not less than four hours before either sunset or dusk , except in the case of official night races . 
 In July 2015 , Peter Wright , the Chairman of the FIA Safety Commission was quoted as saying that a closed cockpit would not have averted Bianchi 's head injuries , while the Vice President , Andy Mellow , also confirmed that attaching impact protection to recovery vehicles was not a feasible solution . 
 = = = Medical treatment and updates = = = 
 The first family update following Bianchi 's emergency surgery was made by his father in the week beginning 13 October 2014 . Bianchi was reported to be in a " desperate " condition , with doctors describing his survival as a miracle . Even so , the father openly stated that he drew hope from Michael Schumacher waking from his coma . Marussia also issued regular updates on Bianchi 's condition while rejecting initial speculation about their role in the accident . 
 While hospitalised in Yokkaichi , Bianchi remained in a critical but stable condition , and required a medical ventilator . He was taken out of his artificial coma in November 2014 and began breathing unaided , making his relocation to France for admission at the Centre <unk> Universitaire de Nice ( <unk> ) , possible . There , Bianchi remained unconscious and in a critical condition but more accessible to his family for their daily vigil . On 13 July 2015 , Bianchi 's father publicly conceded becoming " less optimistic " as a consequence of no significant progress and the lapse of time since the accident . 
 = = Death = = 
 Bianchi died on 17 July 2015 , aged 25 , from injuries sustained at the time of his accident in Suzuka nine months prior . His death made him the first Formula One driver to be killed by injuries sustained during a Grand Prix since Ayrton Senna in 1994 . 
 In their official statement , Bianchi 's family said : 
 It is with deep sadness that the parents of Jules Bianchi , Philippe and Christine , his brother Tom and sister Mélanie , wish to make it known that Jules passed away last night at the Centre <unk> Universitaire in Nice . Jules fought to the end , as he has always done , but yesterday his battle ended . We feel an immense and indescribable pain . 
 The funeral service was held at the Nice Cathedral , on 21 July 2015 . He lies at rest in his native city . Many prominent driver figures attended Bianchi 's funeral , such as Alexander Wurz , Esteban Gutiérrez , Allan McNish , Alexander Rossi , Lewis Hamilton , Nico Rosberg , Jenson Button , Sebastian Vettel , Jean @-@ Éric Vergne , Marcus Ericsson , Roberto Merhi , Adrian Sutil , Valtteri Bottas , Pastor Maldonado , Pedro de la Rosa , Romain Grosjean , Daniel Ricciardo , Felipe Massa , Alain Prost , Nico Hülkenberg , Olivier Panis , Daniil Kvyat and Max Chilton . 
 In May 2016 it was announced that Bianchi 's family plans to take legal action against the FIA , Bianchi 's Marussia team and Bernie Ecclestone 's Formula One Group . 
 = = = Tributes = = = 
 Widespread tributes followed from fellow past and present drivers , Bernie Ecclestone , French president François Hollande , and other sport personalities . The Manor Marussia team also published a statement on their Facebook page describing Bianchi as , among other things , " a magnificent human being " and a " shining talent " . 
 The Grand Prix Drivers ' Association announced that it felt a responsibility " to never relent in improving safety " . FIA President Jean Todt also announced that race number 17 would be retired from the list of those available for Formula One drivers , as a mark of respect . 
 In paying his respects , di Montezemolo also stated that , thanks to GP2 experience and fine performance with Marussia and in test sessions , Bianchi was the racing driver that Scuderia Ferrari had chosen for the future even being described as a would @-@ be replacement for Kimi Räikkönen . 
 Chilton dedicated his maiden Indy Lights pole position and race win , which he scored on the same weekend as Bianchi 's death , to his former Marussia teammate . 
 A minute 's silence was observed on the grid before the start of the 2015 Hungarian Grand Prix in Bianchi 's honour and in the presence of his family surrounded by current drivers . Commemorative stickers on helmets and cars were other tributes at that race . Race winner , Sebastian Vettel of Ferrari , dedicated his maiden Hungarian win to Bianchi and his family , acknowledging that the Frenchman would have been part of the team in future . Daniil Kvyat too dedicated his maiden podium finish as did third @-@ placed finisher , Daniel Ricciardo . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In December 2015 , Bianchi 's father announced plans to create a foundation in his son 's honour to uncover and nurture young drivers throughout their career . The initiative involves exhibiting Jules Bianchi ’ s memorabilia ( from go @-@ karts and single @-@ seaters to personal pictures and videos ) and merchandising with JB17 branding , sponsoring opportunities and events . Among the supporters is Prince Albert of Monaco , where the foundation is based . 
 = = Racing record = = 
 = = = Career summary = = = 
 † Bianchi was a guest driver , therefore ineligible to score points . 
 = = = Complete Formula 3 Euro Series results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete Formula Renault 3 @.@ 5 Series results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete GP2 results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = = Complete GP2 Asia Series results = = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap ) 
 = = = Complete Formula One results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicates fastest lap ) 
 † Driver did not finish the Grand Prix , but was classified as he completed over 90 % of the race distance . 
 = Lakeshore East = 
 Lakeshore East is a master @-@ planned mixed use urban development being built by the Magellan Development Group in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . It is located in the northeastern part of the Loop , which , along with Illinois Center , is called the Near East Side . The development is bordered by Wacker Drive to the north , Columbus Drive to the west , Lake Shore Drive to the east , and East Randolph Street to the south . Skidmore , Owings & Merrill created the master plan for the area . The development , which had been scheduled for completion in 2011 , is now set for completion in 2013 . Although the majority of the buildings in the neighborhood will be 21st century constructions resulting from the master plan , some of the current buildings were built as early as the 1960s and 1970s decades . Thus , the term " Lakeshore East " refers only to the components of the new master plan , while the term New Eastside refers to the greater neighborhood surrounding Lakeshore East that extends westward to Michigan Avenue . However , there is little distinction between buildings in the masterplan and other buildings in the region because the pre @-@ existing buildings are referred to as being located in the Lakeshore East area . 
 Lakeshore East features several of the tallest buildings in Chicago and may include a few of the tallest buildings in the United States . The overall planned development , the park , and several of the individual buildings have won awards for architecture and / or urban planning . The buildings are planned for various types of residential use ( condominiums , apartments , or hotels ) . Due to the neighborhood 's proximity to both Lake Michigan to the east and the Chicago River to the north , many of the buildings are named with aquatic or nautical themes . As of August 2008 , 1 @,@ 500 condominiums have been sold and 1 @,@ 200 apartments have been completed . 
 = = History = = 
 Previous to this urban development , the Lakeshore East area had been used by Illinois Central Railroad yards . After World War II , the railroads sold airspace rights north of Randolph Street . For several years after the rail yards were vacated , the site was used as a 9 @-@ hole golf course . Pete Dye designed the course , known as Metro Golf at Illinois Center , which was completed in 1994 and closed in 2001 . The area was originally planned for development as part of the Illinois Center , and one of the challenges to the new development was to integrate itself into the inherited triple @-@ level street system while creating a visually appealing and pedestrian friendly neighborhood . The solution was to stagger ground @-@ level amenities and building entrances from the upper level at the perimeter to the lower level at the interior . Thus the multilevel street grid is utilized around the edges , with large parking structures in the podiums , while a large park at the lowest level forms the core of the development . 
 The following buildings pre @-@ existed the 21st century master plan for the neighborhood : Blue Cross Blue Shield Tower , Three Illinois Center , Swissôtel Chicago , Buckingham Plaza , The <unk> , North Harbor Tower , 400 East Randolph Street Condominiums and Harbor Point . A 27 @-@ floor vertical expansion of the Blue Cross Blue Shield Tower was completed in 2010 . When Harbor Point and 400 East Randolph were built , Lake Shore Drive ran through this neighborhood to the west of these buildings , but it has since been rerouted to the east of these buildings . 
 The Chicago Pedway , which has existed since 1951 , connects to public and private buildings , Chicago Transit Authority stations and Metra commuter rail facilities . The 4 , 6 and 60 CTA bus routes run along the borders of the Lakeshore East area , and the 60 makes a turnaround within it on Harbor Drive . The pedway has been a controversy for Lakeshore East residents since they were promised a fully linked pedway to Buckingham Plaza and North Harbor Tower in the early 1990s as part of the construction plans . The archives available on the <unk> website show numerous plans and unfulfilled promise regarding connecting the Pedway to most of the New Eastside . 
 = = Overview = = 
 This $ 4 billion lifestyle center spans 28 acres ( 0 @.@ 044 sq mi ; 0 @.@ 113 km2 ) , and will include 4 @,@ 950 residences , 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 square feet ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) of gross commercial space , 1 @,@ 500 hotel rooms , 770 @,@ 000 square feet ( 72 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space and a planned elementary school surrounding a magnificent 6 @-@ acre ( 24 @,@ 000 m2 ) botanical park . The plan , which had Adrian Smith as the design partner , calls for fourteen high @-@ rise condominiums and two commercial <unk> superstructures . Lakeshore East is within walking distance to the Chicago River , Lake Michigan , DuSable Harbor , Michigan Avenue , Grant Park , and Millennium Park . 
 The park , named Lakeshore East Park , opened in 2005 and is supported by a mixture of public funds from the Chicago Park District and private funds from the neighboring Lakeshore East condominium buildings . It is the city 's first and currently only free wireless park . The park features several fountains . 
 The Lancaster ( completed in 2005 ) was Lakeshore East 's first new completed building . The Shoreham ( 2005 ) was Lakeshore East 's first completed apartment building . 340 on the Park ( 2007 ) was briefly the tallest all @-@ residential building in Chicago , but was surpassed by One Museum Park . Aqua ( 2009 ) is the first skyscraper in Chicago to combine condominium residences , luxury rentals , deluxe hotel and retail spaces in the same structure and it is believed to be the tallest building in the United States designed by a female @-@ run architectural firm . The development has its own village center , named Village Market Center , which includes a full service supermarket . The other buildings completed in the first phase of development were The Regatta ( 2007 ) , The Chandler ( 2008 ) and The Tides ( 2008 ) as well as the Benton Place <unk> townhouses ( 2009 ) . 
 In 2011 , construction began on Coast at Lakeshore East . Lease occupancies began in February 2013 . 
 Lakeshore East is a venture of Magellan Development Group LLC , a recently formed corporate partnership culminating a long @-@ term collaboration between Magellan Development Group and <unk> Residential & Development . 
 All of the buildings in Lakeshore East are luxury condos and high @-@ end apartment highrises . Many of them are named with an aquatic theme . In addition to the luxury skyscrapers , the development will include 24 ultra @-@ luxury town homes in the $ 2 million price range . 
 = = Awards = = 
 The master plan won the 2002 American Institute of Architects National Honor Award for Regional and Urban Design . The park was honored as the Best New Park in Chicago by Chicago magazine and the city ’ s Best New Open Space by the Friends of Downtown . The master plan , the park and several individual buildings have won numerous other awards . 
 In 2008 , the International Real Estate Federation declared the Lakeshore East master plan the recipient of the FIABCI Prix D <unk> international award . Lakeshore was the only United States winner for international design excellence . 
 = = Building construction = = 
 = Walt Disney = 
 Walter Elias " Walt " Disney ( / <unk> / ; December 5 , 1901 – December 15 , 1966 ) was an American entrepreneur , animator , voice actor and film producer . A pioneer of the American animation industry , he introduced several developments in the production of cartoons . As a film producer he received 22 Academy Awards from 59 nominations and has won more individual Oscars than anyone else . He was presented with two Golden Globe Special Achievement Awards and one Emmy Award , among other honors . Several of his films are included in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress . 
 Born in Chicago in 1901 , Disney developed an early interest in drawing . He took art classes as a boy and got a job as a commercial illustrator at the age of 18 . He moved to Hollywood in the early 1920s and set up the Disney Brothers Studio ( later The Walt Disney Company ) with his brother Roy . With Ub Iwerks , Walt developed the character Mickey Mouse in 1928 , his first highly popular success ; he also provided the voice for his creation in the early years . As the studio grew , Disney became more adventurous , introducing synchronized sound , full @-@ color three @-@ strip Technicolor , feature @-@ length cartoons and technical developments in cameras . The results , seen in features such as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) , Fantasia , Pinocchio ( both 1940 ) , Dumbo ( 1941 ) and Bambi ( 1942 ) , furthered the development of animated film . New animated and live @-@ action films followed after World War II , including the critically successful Cinderella ( 1950 ) and Mary Poppins ( 1964 ) , the second of which received five Academy Awards . 
 In the 1950s , Disney expanded into the amusement park industry , and in 1955 he opened Disneyland . To fund the project he diversified into television programs , such as Walt Disney 's Disneyland and The Mickey Mouse Club ; he was also involved in planning the 1959 Moscow Fair and the 1960 Winter Olympics . In 1965 he began development of another theme park , Disney World ( now Walt Disney World ) , the heart of which was to be a new type of city , the " Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow " ( EPCOT ) . Disney was a heavy smoker throughout his life , and died of lung cancer in December 1966 before the park or city was completed . 
 Disney was a shy , self @-@ deprecating and insecure man in private but adopted a warm and outgoing public persona . However he had high standards and high expectations of those with whom he worked . Although there have been accusations that he was racist or anti @-@ Semitic , they have been contradicted by many who knew him . His reputation changed in the years after his death , from a purveyor of homely patriotic values to a representative of American imperialism . He nevertheless remains an important figure in the history of animation and in the cultural history of the United States , where he is considered a national cultural icon . His film work continues to be shown and adapted ; his studio maintains high standards in its production of popular entertainment , and the Disney amusement parks have grown in size and number to attract visitors in several countries . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1901 – 20 = = = 
 Walt Disney was born on December 5 , 1901 , at 1249 Tripp Avenue , in Chicago 's Hermosa neighborhood . He was the fourth son of Elias Disney ‍ — ‌ born in the Province of Canada to Irish parents ‍ — ‌ and Flora ( née Call ) , an American of German and English descent . Aside from Disney , Elias and Call 's sons were Herbert , Raymond and Roy ; the couple had a fifth child , Ruth , in December 1903 . In 1906 , when Disney was four , the family moved to a farm in Marceline , Missouri , where his uncle Robert had just purchased land . In Marceline , Disney developed his interest in drawing when he was paid to draw the horse of a retired neighborhood doctor . Elias was a subscriber to the Appeal to Reason newspaper , and Disney practiced drawing by copying the front @-@ page cartoons of Ryan Walker . Disney also began to develop an ability to work with watercolors and crayons . He lived near the Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railway line and became enamored of trains . He and his younger sister Ruth started school at the same time at the Park School in Marceline in late 1909 . 
 In 1911 , the Disneys moved to Kansas City , Missouri . There , Disney attended the Benton Grammar School , where he met fellow @-@ student Walter Pfeiffer , who came from a family of theatre fans and introduced Disney to the world of vaudeville and motion pictures . Before long , he was spending more time at the <unk> ' house than at home . Elias had purchased a newspaper delivery route for The Kansas City Star and Kansas City Times . Disney and his brother Roy woke up at 4 : 30 every morning to deliver the Times before school and repeated the round for the evening Star after school . The schedule was exhausting , and Disney often received poor grades after falling asleep in class , but he continued his paper route for more than six years . He attended Saturday courses at the Kansas City Art Institute and also took a correspondence course in cartooning . 
 In 1917 , Elias bought stock in a Chicago jelly producer , the O @-@ Zell Company , and moved back to the city with his family . Disney enrolled at McKinley High School and became the cartoonist of the school newspaper , drawing patriotic pictures about World War I ; he also took night courses at the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts . In mid @-@ 1918 , Disney attempted to join the United States Army to fight against the Germans , but he was rejected for being too young . After forging the date of birth on his birth certificate , he joined the Red Cross in September 1918 as an ambulance driver . He was shipped to France but arrived in November , after the armistice . He drew cartoons on the side of his ambulance for decoration and had some of his work published in the army newspaper Stars and Stripes . Disney returned to Kansas City in October 1919 , where he worked as an apprentice artist at the <unk> @-@ Rubin Commercial Art Studio . There , he drew commercial illustrations for advertising , theater programs and catalogs . He also befriended fellow artist Ub Iwerks . 
 = = = Early career : 1920 – 28 = = = 
 In January 1920 , as <unk> @-@ Rubin 's revenue declined after Christmas , Disney and Iwerks were laid off . They started their own business , the short @-@ lived Iwerks @-@ Disney Commercial Artists . Failing to attract many customers , Disney and Iwerks agreed that Disney should leave temporarily to earn money at the Kansas City Film Ad Company , run by A. V. <unk> ; the following month Iwerks , who was not able to run their business alone , also joined . The company produced commercials using the cutout animation technique . Disney became interested in animation , although he preferred drawn cartoons such as Mutt and Jeff and Koko the Clown . With the assistance of a borrowed book on animation and a camera , he began experimenting at home . He came to the conclusion that cel animation was more promising than the cutout method . Unable to persuade <unk> to try cel animation at the company , Disney opened a new business with a co @-@ worker from the Film Ad Co , Fred Harman . Their main client was the local Newman Theater , and the short cartoons they produced were sold as " Newman 's Laugh @-@ O @-@ Grams " . Disney studied Paul Terry 's Aesop 's Fables as a model , and the first six " Laugh @-@ O @-@ Grams " were modernized fairy tales . 
 In May 1921 , the success of the " Laugh @-@ O @-@ Grams " led to the establishment of Laugh @-@ O @-@ Gram Studio , for which he hired more animators , including Fred Harman 's brother Hugh , Rudolf Ising and Iwerks . The Laugh @-@ O @-@ Grams cartoons did not provide enough income to keep the company solvent , so Disney started production of Alice 's Wonderland ‍ — ‌ based on Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ‍ — ‌ which combined live action with animation ; he cast Virginia Davis in the title role . The result , a 12 @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ minute , one @-@ reel film , was completed too late to save Laugh @-@ O @-@ Gram Studio , which went into bankruptcy in 1923 . 
 Disney moved to Hollywood in July 1923 . Although New York was the center of the cartoon industry , he was attracted to Los Angeles because his brother Roy was convalescing from tuberculosis there . Disney 's efforts to sell Alice 's Wonderland were in vain until he heard from New York film distributor Margaret J. Winkler . She was losing the rights to both the Out of the Inkwell and Felix the Cat cartoons , and needed a new series . In October they signed a contract for six Alice comedies , with an option for two further series of six episodes each . Disney and his brother Roy formed the Disney Brothers Studio ‍ — ‌ which later became The Walt Disney Company ‍ — ‌ to produce the films ; they persuaded Davis and her family to relocate to Hollywood to continue production , with Davis on contract at $ 100 a month . In July 1924 Disney also hired Iwerks , persuading him to relocate to Hollywood from Kansas City . 
 Early in 1925 , Disney hired an ink artist , Lillian Bounds . They married in July of that year . The marriage was generally happy , according to Lillian , although according to Disney 's biographer Neal Gabler she did not " accept Walt 's decisions meekly or his status unquestionably , and she admitted that he was always telling people ' how henpecked he is ' . " Lillian had little interest in films or the Hollywood social scene and she was , in the words of the historian Steven Watts , " content with household management and providing support for her husband " . Their marriage produced two daughters , Diane ( born December 1933 ) and Sharon ( adopted in December 1936 , born six weeks previously ) . Within the family , neither Disney nor his wife hid the fact Sharon had been adopted , although they became annoyed if people outside the family raised the point . The Disneys were careful to keep their daughters out of the public eye as much as possible , particularly in the light of the Lindbergh kidnapping ; Disney took steps to ensure his daughters were not photographed by the press . 
 By 1926 Winkler 's role in the distribution of the Alice series had been handed over to her husband , the film producer Charles Mintz , although the relationship between him and Disney was sometimes strained . The series ran until July 1927 , by which time Disney had begun to tire of it and wanted to move away from the mixed format to all animation . After Mintz requested new material to distribute through Universal Pictures , Disney and Iwerks created Oswald the Lucky Rabbit , a character Disney wanted to be " peppy , alert , saucy and venturesome , keeping him also neat and trim " . 
 In February 1928 , Disney hoped to negotiate a larger fee for producing the Oswald series , but found Mintz wanting to reduce the payments . Mintz had also persuaded many of the artists involved to work directly for him , including Harman , Ising , Carman Maxwell and <unk> <unk> . Disney also found out that Universal owned the intellectual property rights to Oswald . Mintz threatened to start his own studio and produce the series himself if Disney refused to accept the reductions . Disney declined Mintz 's ultimatum and lost most of his animation staff , except Iwerks , who chose to remain with him . 
 = = = Creation of Mickey Mouse to the first Academy Awards : 1928 – 33 = = = 
 To replace Oswald , Disney and Iwerks developed Mickey Mouse , possibly inspired by a pet mouse that Disney had adopted while working in his Laugh @-@ O @-@ Gram studio , although the origins of the character are unclear . Disney 's original choice of name was Mortimer Mouse , but Lillian thought it too pompous , and suggested Mickey instead . Iwerks revised Disney 's provisional sketches to make the character easier to animate , and Disney provided Mickey 's voice until 1947 . In the words of one Disney employee , " Ub designed Mickey 's physical appearance , but Walt gave him his soul . " 
 Mickey Mouse first appeared in May 1928 as a single test screening of the short Plane Crazy , but it , and the second feature , The Gallopin ' Gaucho , failed to find a distributor . Following the 1927 sensation The Jazz Singer , Disney used synchronized sound on the third short , Steamboat Willie , to create the first sound cartoon . After the animation was complete , Disney signed a contract with the former executive of Universal Pictures , Pat Powers , to use the " Powers Cinephone " recording system ; Cinephone became the new distributor for Disney 's early sound cartoons , which soon became popular . 
 To improve the quality of the music , Disney hired the professional composer and arranger Carl Stalling , on whose suggestion the Silly Symphony series was developed , providing stories through the use of music ; the first in the series , The Skeleton Dance ( 1929 ) , was drawn and animated entirely by Iwerks . Also hired at this time were several local artists , some of whom stayed with the company as core animators ; the group later became known as the Nine Old Men . Both the Mickey Mouse and Silly Symphonies series were successful , but Disney and his brother felt they were not receiving their rightful share of profits from Powers . In 1930 , Disney tried to trim costs from the process by urging Iwerks to abandon the practice of animating every separate cel in favor of the more efficient technique of drawing key poses and letting lower @-@ paid assistants sketch the in @-@ between poses . Disney asked Powers for an increase in payments for the cartoons . Powers refused and signed Iwerks to work for him ; Stalling resigned shortly afterwards , thinking that without Iwerks , the Disney Studio would close . Disney had a nervous breakdown in October 1931 ‍ — ‌ which he blamed on the machinations of Powers and his own overwork ‍ — ‌ so he and Lillian took an extended holiday to Cuba and a cruise to Panama to recover . 
 With the loss of Powers as distributor , Disney studios signed a contract with Columbia Pictures to distribute the Mickey Mouse cartoons , which became increasingly popular , including internationally . Disney , always keen to embrace new technology , filmed Flowers and Trees ( 1932 ) in full @-@ color three @-@ strip Technicolor ; he was also able to negotiate a deal giving him the sole right to use the three @-@ strip process until August 31 , 1935 . All subsequent Silly Symphony cartoons were in color . Flowers and Trees was popular with audiences and won the Academy Award for best Short Subject ( Cartoon ) at the 1932 ceremony . Disney had been nominated for another film in that category , Mickey 's Orphans , and received an Honorary Award " for the creation of Mickey Mouse " . 
 In 1933 , Disney produced The Three Little Pigs , a film described by the media historian Adrian Danks as " the most successful short animation of all time " . The film won Disney another Academy Award in the Short Subject ( Cartoon ) category . The film 's success led to a further increase in the studio 's staff , which numbered nearly 200 by the end of the year . Disney realized the importance of telling emotionally gripping stories that would interest the audience , and he invested in a " story department " separate from the animators , with storyboard artists who would detail the plots of Disney 's films . 
 = = = Golden age of animation : 1934 – 41 = = = 
 By 1934 , Disney had become dissatisfied with producing formulaic cartoon shorts , and began a four @-@ year production of a feature @-@ length cartoon , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , based on the fairy tale . When news leaked out about the project , many in the film industry predicted it would bankrupt the company ; industry insiders nicknamed it " Disney 's Folly " . The film , which was the first animated feature made in full color and sound , cost $ 1 @.@ 5 million to produce ‍ — ‌ three times over budget . To ensure the animation was as realistic as possible , Disney sent his animators on courses at the Chouinard Art Institute ; he brought animals into the studio and hired actors so that the animators could study realistic movement . To portray the changing perspective of the background as a camera moved through a scene , Disney 's animators developed a multiplane camera which allowed drawings on pieces of glass to be set at various distances from the camera , creating an illusion of depth . The glass could be moved to create the impression of a camera passing through the scene . The first work created on the camera ‍ — ‌ a Silly Symphony called " The Old Mill " ( 1937 ) ‍ — ‌ won the Academy Award for Animated Short Film because of its impressive visual power . Although Snow White had been largely finished by the time the multiplane camera had been completed , Disney ordered some scenes be re @-@ drawn to use the new effects . 
 Snow White premiered in December 1937 to high praise from critics and audiences . The film became the most successful motion picture of 1938 and by May 1939 its total gross of $ 6 @.@ 5 million made it the most successful sound film made to that date . Disney won another Honorary Academy Award , which consisted of one full @-@ sized and seven miniature Oscar statuettes . The success of Snow White heralded one of the most productive eras for the studio ; the Walt Disney Family Museum calls the following years " the ' Golden Age of Animation ' " . With work on Snow White finished , the studio began producing Pinocchio in early 1938 and Fantasia in November of the same year . Both films were released in 1940 , and neither performed well at the box office ‍ — ‌ partly because revenues from Europe had dropped following the start of World War II in 1939 . The studio made a loss on both pictures and was deeply in debt by the end of February 1941 . 
 In response to the financial crisis , Disney and his brother Roy started the company 's first public stock offering in 1940 , and implemented heavy salary cuts . The latter measure , and Disney 's sometimes high @-@ handed and insensitive manner of dealing with staff , led to a 1941 animators ' strike which lasted five weeks . While a federal mediator from the National Labor Relations Board negotiated with the two sides , Disney accepted an offer from the Office of the Coordinator of Inter @-@ American Affairs to make a goodwill trip to South America , ensuring he was absent during a resolution he knew would be unfavorable to the studio . As a result of the strike ‍ — ‌ and the financial state of the company ‍ — ‌ several animators left the studio , and Disney 's relationship with other members of staff was permanently strained as a result . The strike temporarily interrupted the studio 's next production , Dumbo ( 1941 ) , which Disney produced in a simple and inexpensive manner ; the film received a positive reaction from audiences and critics alike . 
 = = = World War II and beyond : 1941 – 50 = = = 
 Shortly after the release of Dumbo in October 1941 , the U.S. entered World War II . Disney formed the Walt Disney Training Films Unit within the company to produce instruction films for the military such as Four Methods of Flush Riveting and Aircraft Production Methods . Disney also met with Henry Morgenthau , Jr . , the Secretary of the Treasury , and agreed to produce short Donald Duck cartoons to promote war bonds . Disney also produced several propaganda productions , including shorts such as Der Fuehrer 's Face ‍ — ‌ which won an Academy Award ‍ — ‌ and the 1943 feature film Victory Through Air Power . 
 The military films generated only enough revenue to cover costs , and the feature film Bambi ‍ — ‌ which had been in production since 1937 ‍ — ‌ underperformed on its release in April 1942 , and lost $ 200 @,@ 000 at the box office . On top of the low earnings from Pinocchio and Fantasia , the company had debts of $ 4 million with the Bank of America in 1944 . At a meeting with Bank of America executives to discuss the future of the company , the bank 's chairman and founder , Amadeo Giannini , told his executives , " I 've been watching the Disneys ' pictures quite closely because I knew we were lending them money far above the financial risk . ... They 're good this year , they 're good next year , and they 're good the year after . ... You have to relax and give them time to market their product . " Disney 's production of short films decreased in the late 1940s , coinciding with increasing competition in the animation market from Warner Bros. and Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer . Roy Disney , for financial reasons , suggested more combined animation and live @-@ action productions . In 1948 , Disney initiated a series of popular live @-@ action nature films , titled True @-@ Life Adventures , with Seal Island the first ; the film won the Academy Award in the Best Short Subject ( Two @-@ Reel ) category . 
 Disney grew more politically conservative as he got older . A Democratic Party supporter until the 1940 presidential election , when he switched allegiance to the Republicans , he became a generous donor to Thomas E. Dewey 's 1944 bid for the presidency . In 1946 he was a founding member of the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals , an organization who stated they " <unk> [ ed ] in , and like , the American Way of Life ... we find ourselves in sharp revolt against a rising tide of Communism , Fascism and kindred beliefs , that seek by subversive means to undermine and change this way of life " . In 1947 , during the Second Red Scare , Disney testified before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) , where he branded Herbert Sorrell , David <unk> and William Pomerance , former animators and labor union organizers , as Communist agitators ; Disney stated that the 1941 strike led by them was part of an organized Communist effort to gain influence in Hollywood . 
 In 1949 , Disney and his family moved to a new home in the Holmby Hills district of Los Angeles . With the help of his friends Ward and Betty Kimball , who already had their own backyard railroad , Disney developed blueprints and immediately set to work on creating a miniature live steam railroad for his backyard . The name of the railroad , Carolwood Pacific Railroad , came from his home 's location on Carolwood Drive . The miniature working steam locomotive was built by Disney Studios engineer Roger E. <unk> , and Disney named it Lilly Belle after his wife ; after three years Disney ordered it into storage due to a series of accidents involving his guests . 
 = = = Theme parks , television and other interests : 1950 – 66 = = = 
 In early 1950 , Disney produced Cinderella , his studio 's first animated feature in eight years . It was popular with critics and theater audiences . Costing $ 2 @.@ 2 million to produce , it earned nearly $ 8 million in its first year . Disney was less involved than he had been with previous pictures because of his involvement in his first entirely live @-@ action feature , Treasure Island ( 1950 ) , which was shot in Britain , as was The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men ( 1952 ) . Other all @-@ live @-@ action features followed , many of which had patriotic themes . He continued to produce full @-@ length animated features too , including Alice in Wonderland ( 1951 ) and Peter Pan ( 1953 ) . From the early to mid @-@ 1950s , Disney began to devote less attention to the animation department , entrusting most of its operations to his key animators , the Nine Old Men , although he was always present at story meetings . Instead , he started concentrating on other ventures . 
 For several years Disney had been considering building a theme park . When he visited Griffith Park in Los Angeles with his daughters , he wanted to be in a clean , unspoiled park , where both children and their parents could have fun . He visited the Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen , Denmark , and was heavily influenced by the cleanliness and layout of the park . In March 1952 he received zoning permission to build a theme park in Burbank , near the Disney studios . This site proved too small , and a larger plot in Anaheim , 35 miles ( 56 km ) south of the studio , was purchased . To distance the project from the studio ‍ — ‌ which might attract the criticism of shareholders ‍ — ‌ Disney formed <unk> Enterprises ( now Walt Disney Imagineering ) and used his own money to fund a group of designers and animators to work on the plans ; those involved became known as " Imagineers " . After obtaining bank funding he invited other stockholders , American Broadcasting @-@ Paramount Theatres ‍ — ‌ part of American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) ‍ — ‌ and Western Printing and <unk> Company . In mid @-@ 1954 , Disney sent his Imagineers to every amusement park in the U.S. to analyze what worked and what pitfalls or problems there were in the various locations and incorporated their findings into his design . Construction work started in July 1954 , and Disneyland opened in July 1955 ; the opening ceremony was broadcast on ABC , which reached 70 million viewers . The park was designed as a series of themed lands , linked by the central Main Street , U.S.A. ‍ — ‌ a replica of the main street in his hometown of Marceline . The connected themed areas were Adventureland , <unk> , Fantasyland and Tomorrowland . The park also contained the narrow gauge Disneyland Railroad that linked the lands ; around the outside of the park was a high berm to separate the park from the outside world . An editorial in The New York Times considered that Disney had " tastefully combined some of the pleasant things of yesterday with fantasy and dreams of tomorrow " . Although there were early minor problems with the park , it was a success , and after a month 's operation , Disneyland was receiving over 20 @,@ 000 visitors a day ; by the end of its first year , it attracted 3 @.@ 6 million guests . 
 The money from ABC was contingent on Disney television programs . The studio had been involved in a successful television special on Christmas Day 1950 about the making of Alice in Wonderland . Roy believed the program added millions to the box office takings . In a March 1951 letter to shareholders , he wrote that " television can be a most powerful selling aid for us , as well as a source of revenue . It will probably be on this premise that we enter television when we do " . In 1954 , after the Disneyland funding had been agreed , ABC broadcast Walt Disney 's Disneyland , an anthology consisting of animated cartoons , live @-@ action features and other material from the studio 's library . The show was successful in terms of ratings and profits , earning an audience share of over 50 % . In April 1955 , Newsweek called the series an " American institution " . ABC was pleased with the ratings , leading to Disney 's first daily television program , The Mickey Mouse Club , a variety show catering specifically to children . The program was accompanied by merchandising through various companies ( Western Printing , for example , had been producing coloring books and comics for over 20 years , and produced several items connected to the show ) . One of the segments of Disneyland consisted of the five @-@ part miniseries Davy Crockett which , according to Gabler , " became an overnight sensation " . The show 's theme song , " The Ballad of Davy Crockett " , became internationally popular , and ten million records were sold . As a result , Disney formed his own record production and distribution entity , Disneyland Records . 
 As well as the construction of Disneyland , Disney worked on other projects away from the studio . He was consultant to the 1959 American National Exhibition in Moscow ; Disney Studios ' contribution was America the Beautiful , a 19 @-@ minute film in the 360 @-@ degree <unk> theater that was one of the most popular attractions . The following year he acted as the chairman of the Pageantry Committee for the 1960 Winter Olympics at Squaw Valley , California , where he designed the opening , closing and medal ceremonies . 
 Despite the demands wrought by non @-@ studio projects , Disney continued to work on film and television projects . In 1955 he was involved in " Man in Space " , an episode of the Disneyland series , which was made in collaboration with NASA rocket designer Wernher von Braun . Disney also oversaw aspects of the full @-@ length features Lady and the Tramp ( the first animated film in CinemaScope ) in 1955 , Sleeping Beauty ( the first animated film in Technirama 70 mm film ) in 1959 , One Hundred and One Dalmatians ( the first animated feature film to use Xerox cels ) in 1961 and The Sword in the Stone in 1963 . 
 In 1964 , Disney produced Mary Poppins , based on the book series by P. L. Travers ; he had been trying to acquire the rights to the story since the 1940s . It became the most successful Disney film of the 1960s , although Travers disliked the film intensely and regretted having sold the rights . The same year he also became involved in plans to expand the California Institute of the Arts ( colloquially called CalArts ) , and had an architect draw up blueprints for a new building . 
 Disney provided four exhibits for the 1964 New York World 's Fair , for which he obtained funding from selected corporate sponsors . For PepsiCo , who planned to tribute UNICEF , Disney developed It 's a Small World , a boat ride with audio @-@ animatronic dolls depicting children of the world ; Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln contained an animatronic Abraham Lincoln giving excerpts from his speeches ; Carousel of Progress promoted the importance of electricity ; and Ford 's Magic Skyway portrayed the progress of mankind . Elements of all four exhibits ‍ — ‌ principally concepts and technology ‍ — ‌ were re @-@ installed in Disneyland , although It 's a Small World is the ride that most closely resembles the original . 
 During the early to mid @-@ 1960s , Disney developed plans for a ski resort in Mineral King , a glacial valley in California 's Sierra Nevada . He hired experts such as the renowned Olympic ski coach and ski @-@ area designer Willy Schaeffler . With income from Disneyland accounting for an increasing proportion of the studio 's income , Disney continued to look for venues for other attractions . In late 1965 , he announced plans to develop another theme park to be called " Disney World " ( now Walt Disney World ) , a few miles southwest of Orlando , Florida . Disney World was to include the " Magic Kingdom " ‍ — ‌ a larger and more elaborate version of Disneyland ‍ — ‌ plus golf courses and resort hotels . The heart of Disney World was to be the " Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow " ( EPCOT ) , which he described as : 
 an experimental prototype community of tomorrow that will take its cue from the new ideas and new technologies that are now emerging from the creative centers of American industry . It will be a community of tomorrow that will never be completed , but will always be introducing and testing and demonstrating new materials and systems . And EPCOT will always be a showcase to the world for the ingenuity and imagination of American free enterprise . 
 During 1966 , Disney cultivated businesses willing to sponsor EPCOT . He increased his involvement in the studio 's films , and was heavily involved in the story development of The Jungle Book , the live @-@ action musical feature The Happiest Millionaire ( both 1967 ) and the animated short Winnie the Pooh and the <unk> Day . 
 = = = Illness , death and aftermath = = = 
 Disney had been a heavy smoker since World War I. He did not use cigarettes with filters , and had smoked a pipe as a young man . In November 1966 , he was diagnosed with lung cancer and treated with cobalt therapy . On November 30 he felt unwell and was taken to St. Joseph Hospital where , on December 15 , ten days after his 65th birthday , he died of circulatory collapse caused by lung cancer . Disney 's remains were cremated two days later , and his ashes interred at the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale , California . 
 His estate included a 14 percent holding in Walt Disney Productions worth $ 20 million . He left 45 percent of his estate to his wife and children ‍ — ‌ much in a family trust ‍ — ‌ and 10 percent to his sister , nieces and nephews . The remaining 45 percent went into a charitable trust , 95 percent of which was designated for CalArts , to build a new campus ( a figure of around $ 15 million ) ; he also donated 38 acres ( 0 @.@ 154 km2 ) of the Golden Oaks ranch in Valencia for construction of that school . The university moved there in November 1971 . 
 The release of The Jungle Book and The Happiest Millionaire in 1967 raised the total number of feature films that Disney had been involved in to 81 . When Winnie the Pooh and the <unk> Day was released in 1968 , it earned Disney an Academy Award in the Short Subject ( Cartoon ) category , awarded posthumously . After Disney 's death , his studios continued to produce live @-@ action films prolifically but largely abandoned animation until the late 1980s , after which there was what The New York Times describes as the " Disney Renaissance " that began with The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . Disney 's companies continue to produce successful film , television and stage entertainment . 
 Disney 's plans for the futuristic city of EPCOT did not come to fruition . After Disney 's death , his brother Roy deferred his retirement to take full control of the Disney companies . He changed the focus of the project from a town to an attraction . At the inauguration in 1971 , Roy dedicated Walt Disney World to his brother . Walt Disney World expanded with the opening of Epcot Center in 1982 ; Walt Disney 's vision of a functional city was replaced by a park more akin to a permanent world 's fair . In 2009 , the Walt Disney Family Museum , designed by Disney 's daughter Diane and her son Walter E. D. Miller , opened in the Presidio of San Francisco . Thousands of artifacts from Disney 's life and career are on display , including numerous awards that he received . In 2014 , the Disney theme parks around the world hosted approximately 134 million guests . 
 Disney has been portrayed numerous times in fictional works . H. G. Wells references Disney in his 1938 novel The Holy Terror , in which World Dictator Rud fears that Donald Duck is meant to lampoon the dictator . Disney was portrayed by Len Cariou in the 1995 made @-@ for @-@ TV film A Dream Is a Wish Your Heart Makes : The Annette Funicello Story , and by Tom Hanks in the 2013 film Saving Mr. Banks . In 2001 , the German author Peter Stephan Jungk published Der König von Amerika ( trans : The King of America ) , a fictional work of Disney 's later years that re @-@ images him as a power @-@ hungry racist . The composer Philip Glass later adapted the book into the opera The Perfect American ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Disney received 59 Academy Award nominations , including 22 awards : both totals are records . He was nominated for three Golden Globe Awards , but did not win , but he was presented with two Special Achievement Awards ‍ — ‌ for Bambi ( 1942 ) and The Living Desert ( 1953 ) ‍ — ‌ and the Cecil B. DeMille Award . He also received four Emmy Award nominations , winning once , for Best Producer for the Disneyland television series . Several of his films are included in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " : Steamboat Willie , The Three Little Pigs , Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs , Fantasia , Pinocchio , Bambi and Mary Poppins . In 1998 , the American Film Institute published a list of the 100 greatest American films , according to industry experts ; the list included Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( at number 49 ) , and Fantasia ( at 58 ) . 
 In February 1960 , Disney was inducted to the Hollywood Walk of Fame with two stars , one for motion pictures and the other for his television work ; Mickey Mouse was given his own star for motion pictures in 1978 . Disney was also inducted into the Television Hall of Fame in 1986 , the California Hall of Fame in December 2006 , and was the inaugural recipient of a star on the Anaheim walk of stars in 2014 . 
 The Walt Disney Family Museum records that he " along with members of his staff , received more than 950 honors and citations from throughout the world " . He was made a Chevalier in the French Légion d 'honneur in 1935 , and in 1952 he was awarded the country 's highest artistic decoration , the Officer d <unk> . Other national awards include Thailand 's Order of the Crown ; Brazil 's Order of the Southern Cross and Mexico 's Order of the Aztec Eagle . In the United States , he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom on September 14 , 1964 and , in 1969 , he was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal . He received the Showman of the World Award from the National Association of Theatre Owners , and , in 1955 , the National Audubon Society awarded Disney its highest honor , the Audubon Medal , for promoting the " appreciation and understanding of nature " through his True @-@ Life Adventures nature films . A minor planet discovered in 1980 by astronomer Lyudmila <unk> , was named <unk> <unk> , and he was also awarded honorary degrees from Harvard , Yale , the University of Southern California and the University of California , Los Angeles . 
 = = Personality and reputation = = 
 Disney 's public persona was very different from his actual personality . Playwright Robert E. Sherwood described him as " almost painfully shy ... diffident " and self @-@ deprecating . According to his biographer Richard Schickel , Disney hid his shy and insecure personality behind his public identity . Kimball argues that Disney " played the role of a bashful tycoon who was embarrassed in public " and knew that he was doing so . Disney acknowledged the façade , and told a friend that " I 'm not Walt Disney . I do a lot of things Walt Disney would not do . Walt Disney does not smoke . I smoke . Walt Disney does not drink . I drink . " Critic Otis Ferguson , in The New Republic , called the private Disney : " common and everyday , not inaccessible , not in a foreign language , not suppressed or sponsored or anything . Just Disney . " Many of those with whom Disney worked commented that he gave his staff little encouragement due to his exceptionally high expectations . Norman recalls that when Disney said " That 'll work " , it was an indication of high praise . Instead of direct approval , Disney gave high @-@ performing staff financial bonuses , or recommended certain individuals to others , expecting that his praise would be passed on . 
 Views of Disney and his work have changed over the decades , and there have been polarized opinions . Mark Langer , in the American Dictionary of National Biography , writes that " Earlier evaluations of Disney hailed him as a patriot , folk artist , and popularizer of culture . More recently , Disney has been regarded as a paradigm of American imperialism and intolerance , as well as a <unk> of culture . " Steven Watts wrote that some denounce Disney " as a cynical manipulator of cultural and commercial formulas " , while PBS records that critics have censured his work because of its " smooth façade of sentimentality and stubborn optimism , its feel @-@ good re @-@ write of American history " . Although Disney 's films have been highly praised , very popular and commercially successful over time , there were criticisms by reviewers . Caroline Lejeune comments in The Observer that Snow White ( 1937 ) " has more faults than any earlier Disney cartoon . It is vulnerable again and again to the barbed criticisms of the experts . Sometimes it is , frankly , badly drawn . " Robin Allen , writing for The Times , notes that Fantasia ( 1940 ) was " condemned for its vulgarity and lurches into bathos " , while Lejeune , reviewing Alice in Wonderland ( 1951 ) , feels the film " may drive lovers of Lewis Carroll to frenzy " . Peter Pan ( 1953 ) was criticized in The Times as " a children 's classic vulgarized " with " Tinker Bell ... a <unk> American cutie " . The reviewer opined that Disney " has slaughtered good Barrie and has only second @-@ rate Disney to put in its place " . 
 Disney has been accused of anti @-@ <unk> , although none of his employees ‍ — ‌ including the animator Art Babbitt , who disliked Disney intensely ‍ — ‌ ever accused him of making anti @-@ semitic slurs or taunts . The Walt Disney Family Museum acknowledges that ethnic stereotypes common to films of the 1930s were included in some early cartoons . Disney donated regularly to Jewish charities , he was named " 1955 Man of the Year " by the B 'nai B 'rith chapter in Beverly Hills , and his studio employed a number of Jews , some of whom were in influential positions . Gabler , the first writer to gain unrestricted access to the Disney archives , concludes that the available evidence did not support accusations of anti @-@ semitism and that Disney was " not [ anti @-@ semitic ] in the conventional sense that we think of someone as being an anti @-@ Semite " . Gabler concludes that " though Walt himself , in my estimation , was not anti @-@ Semitic , nevertheless , he willingly allied himself with people who were anti @-@ Semitic [ meaning the Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals ] , and that reputation stuck . He was never really able to expunge it throughout his life " . Disney distanced himself from the Motion Picture Alliance in the 1950s . 
 Disney has also been accused of racism because some of his productions released between the 1930s and 1950s contain racially insensitive material . The feature film Song of the South was criticized by contemporary film critics , the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , and others for its perpetuation of black stereotypes , but Disney later campaigned successfully for an Honorary Academy Award for its star , James Baskett , the first black actor so honored . Gabler argues that " Walt Disney was no racist . He never , either publicly or privately , made disparaging remarks about blacks or asserted white superiority . Like most white Americans of his generation , however , he was racially insensitive . " Floyd Norman , the studio 's first black animator who worked closely with Disney during the 1950s and 1960s , said , " Not once did I observe a hint of the racist behavior Walt Disney was often accused of after his death . His treatment of people ‍ — ‌ and by this I mean all people ‍ — ‌ can only be called exemplary . " 
 Watts argues that many of Disney 's post World War II films " legislated a kind of cultural Marshall Plan . They nourished a genial cultural imperialism that magically overran the rest of the globe with the values , expectations , and goods of a prosperous middle @-@ class United States . " Film historian Jay P. Telotte acknowledges that many see Disney 's studio as an " agent of manipulation and repression " , although he observes that it has " labored throughout its history to link its name with notions of fun , family , and fantasy " . John Tomlinson , in his study Cultural Imperialism , examines the work of Ariel Dorfman and Armand Mattelart , whose 1971 book Para leer al Pato Donald ( trans : How to Read Donald Duck ) identifies that there are " imperialist ... values ' concealed ' behind the innocent , wholesome façade of the world of Walt Disney " ; this , they argue , is a powerful tool as " it presents itself as harmless fun for consumption by children . " Tomlinson views their argument as flawed , as " they simply assume that reading American comics , seeing adverts , watching pictures of the affluent ... [ ' Yankee ' ] lifestyle has a direct pedagogic effect " . 
 Several commentators have described him as a cultural icon . On Disney 's death , journalism professor Ralph S. Izard comments that the values in Disney 's films are those " considered valuable in American Christian society " , which include " individualism , decency , ... love for our fellow man , fair play and toleration " . Disney 's obituary in The Times calls the films " wholesome , warm @-@ hearted and entertaining ... of incomparable artistry and of touching beauty " . Journalist Bosley Crowther argues that Disney 's " achievement as a creator of entertainment for an almost unlimited public and as a highly ingenious <unk> of his wares can rightly be compared to the most successful industrialists in history . " Correspondent Alistair Cooke calls Disney a " folk @-@ hero ... the Pied Piper of Hollywood " , while Gabler considers Disney " reshaped the culture and the American consciousness " . In the American Dictionary of National Biography , Langer writes : 
 Disney remains the central figure in the history of animation . Through technological innovations and alliances with governments and corporations , he transformed a minor studio in a marginal form of communication into a multinational leisure industry giant . Despite his critics , his vision of a modern , corporate utopia as an extension of traditional American values has possibly gained greater currency in the years after his death . 
 = Overman Committee = 
 The Overman Committee was a special subcommittee of the United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary chaired by North Carolina Democrat Lee Slater Overman . Between September 1918 and June 1919 , it investigated German and Bolshevik elements in the United States . It was an early forerunner of the better known House Un @-@ American Activities Committee , and represented the first congressional committee investigation of communism . 
 The Committee 's final report was released in June 1919 . It reported on German propaganda , Bolshevism , and other " un @-@ American activities " in the United States and on likely effects of communism 's implementation in the United States . It described German , but not communist , propaganda efforts . The Committee 's report and hearings were instrumental in fostering anti @-@ Bolshevik opinion . 
 = = Background = = 
 World War I , in which the United States and its allies fought - among other Central Powers - the German Empire , raised concern about the German threat to the United States . The Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 were passed in response . 
 In the Russian Revolution of 1917 the Bolshevik party , led by Vladimir Lenin , overthrew the Russian monarchy and instituted Marxism @-@ Leninism . Many Americans were worried about the revolution 's ideas infiltrating the United States , a phenomenon later named the Red Scare of 1919 @-@ 20 . 
 The Overman Committee was formally an ad @-@ hoc subcommittee of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary , but had no formal name . It was chaired by Senator Lee Slater Overman and also included Senators Knute Nelson of Minnesota , Thomas Sterling of South Dakota , William H. King of Utah , and Josiah O. Wolcott of Delaware . 
 = = Initial investigation = = 
 The Committee was authorized by Senate Resolution 307 on September 19 , 1918 to investigate charges against the United States Brewers Association ( USBA ) and allied interests . Brewing institutions had been largely founded by German immigrants in the mid @-@ 19th century , who brought with them knowledge and techniques for brewing beer . The Committee interpreted this mission to mean a general probe into German propaganda and pro @-@ German activities in the United States . Hearings were mandated after A. Mitchell Palmer , the federal government 's Alien Property Custodian responsible for German @-@ owned property in the U.S. , testified in September 1918 that the USBA and the rest of the overwhelmingly German liquor industry harbored pro @-@ German sentiments . He stated that " German brewers of America , in association with the United States Brewers ' Association " had attempted " to buy a great newspaper " and " control the government of State and Nation " , had generally been " unpatriotic " , and had " pro @-@ German sympathies " . 
 Hearings began September 27 , 1918 , shortly before the end of World War I. Nearly four dozen witnesses testified . Many were agents of the Bureau of Investigations ( BOI ) , the predecessor of the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) . The agents , controversially and usually erroneously , implicated high @-@ profile American citizens as pro @-@ German , using the fallacy of guilt by association . For example , the Bureau chief labeled some people pro @-@ German because they had insubstantial and non @-@ ideological acquaintance with German agents . Others were accused because their names were discovered in the notebooks of suspected German agents , of whom they had never heard . 
 Many attacked the BOI 's actions . The Committee heard testimony that it had not conducted basic background checks of the accused and had not read source material it presented to the Committee . Committee members criticized its testimony as " purely hearsay " . 
 = = Expansion of investigation = = 
 On February 4 , 1919 , the Senate unanimously passed Senator Thomas J. Walsh 's Senate Resolution 439 , expanding the Committee 's investigations to include " any efforts being made to propagate in this country the principles of any party exercising or claiming to exercise any authority in Russia " and " any effort to incite the overthrow of the Government of this country " . This decision followed months of sensational daily press coverage of revolutionary events abroad and Bolshevik meetings and events in the United States , which increased anti @-@ radical public opinion . Reports that some of these meetings were attended by Congressmen caused further outrage . One meeting in particular , held at the Poli Theater in Washington , DC , was widely controversial because of a speech given by Albert Rhys Williams , a popular Congregationalist minister , who allegedly said , " America sooner or later is going to accept the Soviet Government . " 
 Archibald E. Stevenson , a New York attorney with ties to the Justice Department , likely a " volunteer spy " , testified on January 22 , 1919 , during the German phase of the subcommittee 's work . He said that anti @-@ war and anti @-@ draft activism during World War I , which he described as " pro @-@ German " activity , had now transformed into propaganda " developing sympathy for the Bolshevik movement . " . The United States ' wartime enemy , though defeated , had exported an ideology that ruled Russia and threatened America anew . " The Bolsheviki movement is a branch of the revolutionary socialism of Germany . It had its origin in the philosophy of Marx and its leaders were Germans . " He cited the propaganda efforts of John Reed and gave many examples from the foreign press . He told the Senators , " We have found money coming into this country from Russia . " Stevenson has been described by historian Regin Schmidt as a " driving force " behind the growth of anti @-@ Bolshevism in the United States . 
 The final catalyst for the expansion of the investigation was the Seattle General Strike , which began the day before the Senate passed Resolution 439 . This confluence of events led members of Congress to believe that the alleged German @-@ Bolshevist link and Bolshevist threat to the United States were real . 
 = = Bolshevism hearings = = 
 The Overman Committee 's hearings on Bolshevism lasted from February 11 to March 10 , 1919 . More than two dozen witnesses were interviewed . About two @-@ thirds were violently anti @-@ Bolshevik and advocated for military intervention in Russia . Some were refugees of the Russian Diaspora — many former government officials — who left Russia because of Bolshevism . The overriding theme was the social chaos the Revolution had brought , but three sub @-@ themes were also frequent : anti @-@ Americanism among American intelligentsia , the relationship between Jews and Communist Russia , and the " nationalization " of women after the Soviet revolution . 
 Stevenson produced a list of 200 — later reduced to 62 — alleged communist professors in the United States . Like lists of names provided during the German propaganda hearings , this list provoked an outcry . Stevenson declared universities to be breeding grounds of sedition , and that institutions of higher learning were " festering masses of pure atheism " and " the grossest kind of materialism " . Ambassador to Russia David R. Francis stated that the Bolsheviks were killing everybody " who wears a white collar or who is educated and who is not a Bolshevik . " 
 Another recurring theme at the hearings was the relationship between Jews and communists in Russia . One Methodist preacher stated that nineteen out of twenty communists were Jews ; others said the Red Army was composed mainly of former East Side New York Jews . However , after criticism from Jewish organizations , Senator Overman clarified that the Committee was discussing " apostate " Jews only , defined by witness George Simons as " one who has given up the faith of his fathers or forefathers . " 
 A third frequent theme was the " free love " and " nationalization " of women allegedly occurring in Soviet Russia . Witnesses described an orgy in which there was no " respect for virtuous women " ; others who testified , including those who had been in Russia during the Revolution , denied this . After one witness read a Soviet decree saying that Russian women had the " right to choose from among men " , Senator Sterling threw up his hands and declared that this was a negation of " free love " . However , another decree was produced stating , " A girl having reached her eighteenth year is to be announced as the property of the state . " 
 The Senators were particularly interested in how Bolshevism had united many disparate elements on the left , including anarchists and socialists of many types , " providing a common platform for all these radical groups to stand on . " Senator Knute Nelson of Minnesota responded : " Then they have really rendered a service to the various classes of progressives and reformers that we have here in this country . " Other witnesses described the horrors of the revolution in Russia and speculated on the consequences of a comparable revolution in the United States : the imposition of atheism , the seizure of newspapers , assaults on banks and the abolition of the insurance industry . The Senators heard various views of women in Russia , including claims that women were made the property of the state . 
 = = Final report = = 
 The Committee 's final report detailed its investigations into German propaganda , Bolshevism , and other " un @-@ American activities " in the United States and predicted effects of communism 's implementation in the United States . It was endorsed unanimously . Released in June 1919 , it was over 35 @,@ 000 words long , and was compiled by Major Edwin Lowry Humes . 
 The Committee did little to demonstrate the extent of communist activity in the United States . In its analysis of what would happen if capitalism were overthrown and replaced by communism , it warned of widespread misery and hunger , the confiscation of and nationalization of all property , and the beginning of " a program of terror , fear , extermination , and destruction . " Anti @-@ Bolshevik public sentiment surged after release of the report and ensuing publicity . 
 = = = German investigation = = = 
 Johann Heinrich von Bernstorff , Karl Boy @-@ Ed , Franz von Papen , Dr. Heinrich Albert , and Franz von Rintelen , among others , were Germans investigated for producing propaganda . All were previously evicted from the United States for being part of a German espionage ring . The United States Brewers Association , the National German @-@ American Alliance , and the Hamburg @-@ American steamship line were investigated . The final report concluded that these organizations , through financial support , bribes , boycotts , and coercion , sought to control the press , elections , and public opinion . 
 = = = Bolshevism investigation = = = 
 The report described the Communist system in Russia as " a reign of terror unparalleled in the history of modern civilization " . It concluded that instituting Marxism @-@ Leninism in the United States would result in " the destruction of life and property " , the deprivation " of the right to participate in affairs of government " , and the " further suppress [ ion ] " of a " substantial rural portion of the population . " Furthermore , there would be an " opening of the doors of all prisons and penitentiaries " . It would result in the " seizure and confiscation of the 22 @,@ 896 newspapers and periodicals in the United States " and " complete control of all banking institutions and their assets " . " One of the most appalling and far reaching consequences ... would be found in the confiscation and liquidation of ... life insurance companies . " The report also criticized " the atheism that permeates the whole Russian dictatorship " ; " they have denounced our religion and our God as ' lies ' . " 
 Despite the report 's rhetoric and the headlines it produced , the report contained little evidence of communist propaganda in the United States or its effect on American labor . 
 = = = Recommendations = = = 
 The report 's main recommendations included deporting alien radicals and enacting peacetime sedition laws . Other recommendations included strict regulation of the manufacture , distribution , and possession of high explosives ; control and regulation of foreign language publications , and the creation of patriotic propaganda . 
 = = Press reaction = = 
 The press reveled in the investigation and the final report , referring to the Russians as " assassins and madmen , " " human scum , " " crime mad , " and " beasts . " The occasional testimony by some who viewed the Russian Revolution favorably lacked the punch of its critics . One extended headline in February read : 
 Says <unk> , Not the <unk> , Rule in Russia 
 American Manager of Great American Plant There Tells Experiences to Senators 
 Outsiders Seized Power 
 Came Back from Other Countries and are Growing Rich at People 's Expense 
 Factories Being Ruined 
 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Rubles Spent in Three Months at One Plant to Produce 400 @,@ 000 Worth of Goods 
 And one day later : 
 Bolshevism <unk> by R.E. Simmons 
 Former Agent in Russia of Commerce Department <unk> his Story to Senators 
 Women are ' <unk> 
 Official Decrees Reveal Depths of Degradation to Which They are Subjected by Reds 
 Germans Profit by Chaos 
 Factories and Mills are Closed and the Machinery Sold to Them for a Song 
 On the release of the final report , newspapers printed sensational articles with headlines in capital letters : " Red Peril Here " , " Plan Bloody Revolution " , and " Want Washington Government <unk> . " 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Critics denounced the Committee as a " propaganda apparatus " to stoke anti @-@ German and anti @-@ Soviet fears , feeding the Red Scare and spreading misinformation about Soviet Russia . 
 The Committee attracted criticism from the public for its perceived overreach , and especially for publishing the names of those accused of association with communist organizations . One woman from Kentucky wrote to Senator Overman on behalf of her sister , who had been accused by Archibald Stevenson , criticizing the Committee for its " brutal as well as stupid misuse of power " and " gross and cruel injustice to men and women the full peer in intellect , character and patriotism of any member of the United States Senate " . The Committee was compared to " a witch hunt " in one exchange with a witness . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Overman Committee did not achieve any lasting reforms . However , the panel 's sensationalism played a decisive role in increasing America 's fears during the Red Scare of 1919 @-@ 20 . Its investigations served as a blueprint for the Department of Justice 's anti @-@ radical Palmer raids late in the year . These were led by Attorney General Palmer , whose testimony about German brewers had been the catalyst for the Committee 's creation . 
 On May 1 , 1919 , a month after the Committee 's hearings ended , a bomb was mailed to Overman 's home , one of a series of letter bombs sent to prominent Americans in the 1919 United States anarchist bombings . It was intercepted before it reached its target . 
 = = = Later investigative committees = = = 
 The Overman Committee was the first of many Congressional committees to investigate communism . In the aftermath of the Overman Committee 's report , the New York State Legislature established the Lusk Committee , which operated from June 1919 to January 1920 , Archibald E. Stevenson was its chief counsel and one of its witnesses . Unlike the Overman Committee , the Lusk Committee was active in raiding suspect organizations . 
 The Overman Committee was an early forerunner of the better known House Un @-@ American Activities Committee , which was created 20 years later . 
 = Neelam Sanjiva Reddy = 
 Neelam Sanjiva Reddy pronunciation ( 19 May 1913 – 1 June 1996 ) was the sixth President of India , serving from 1977 to 1982 . Beginning a long political career with the Indian National Congress party in the Indian independence movement , he went on to hold several key offices in independent India — as the first Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh , a two @-@ time Speaker of the Lok Sabha and a Union Minister — before becoming the youngest @-@ ever Indian president . 
 Born in present @-@ day Anantapur district , Andhra Pradesh , Reddy completed his schooling at <unk> and joined the Government Arts College at Anantapur . He quit to become an Indian independence activist and was jailed for participating in the Quit India Movement . He was elected to the Madras Legislative Assembly in 1946 as a Congress party representative . Reddy became deputy chief minister of Andhra State in 1953 and the first Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh in 1956 . He was a union cabinet minister under Prime Ministers Lal Bahadur Shastri and Indira Gandhi from 1964 to 1967 and Lok Sabha Speaker from 1967 to 1969 . He later retired from active politics but returned in 1975 , responding to Jayaprakash Narayan 's call for " Total Revolution " against the Indira Gandhi government . 
 Elected to Parliament in 1977 as a candidate of the Janata Party , Reddy was unanimously elected Speaker of the Sixth Lok Sabha and three months later was elected unopposed as President of India . As President , Reddy worked with Prime Ministers Morarji Desai , Charan Singh and Indira Gandhi . Reddy was succeeded by Giani <unk> Singh in 1982 and he retired to his farm in Anantapur . He died in 1996 and his samadhi is at <unk> near Bangalore . In 2013 , the Government of Andhra Pradesh commemorated Reddy 's birth centenary . 
 = = Education and family = = 
 Reddy was born into a Telugu @-@ speaking Hindu peasant family in <unk> village , Madras Presidency ( present @-@ day Anantapur district , Andhra Pradesh ) on 19 May 1913 . He studied at the Theosophical High School at <unk> in Madras and later enrolled at the Government Arts College at Anantapur , an affiliate of the University of Madras , as an undergraduate . In 1958 , Sri Venkateswara University , Tirupati bestowed the degree of Honorary Doctor of Laws on him because of his role in its founding . 
 Reddy was married to Neelam <unk> . The couple had one son and three daughters . 
 = = Role in the Indian independence movement = = 
 Reddy joined the Indian struggle for independence from the British Raj following Mahatma Gandhi 's visit to Anantapur in July 1929 and dropped out of college in 1931 . He was closely associated with the Youth League and participated in a student satyagraha . In 1938 , Reddy was elected Secretary of the Andhra Pradesh Provincial Congress Committee , an office he held for ten years . During the Quit India Movement , he was imprisoned and was mostly in jail between 1940 and 1945 . Released in March 1942 , he was arrested again in August and sent to the <unk> jail where he served time with activists T Prakasam , S. <unk> , K Kamaraj and V V Giri till 1945 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Elected to the Madras Legislative Assembly in 1946 as a Congress representative , Reddy became secretary of the Congress ' legislature party . He was also a Member of the Indian Constituent Assembly from Madras . From April 1949 to April 1951 , he was the Minister for Prohibition , Housing and Forests of the Madras State . Reddy lost the 1951 election to the Madras Legislative Assembly to the Communist leader <unk> Nagi Reddy . 
 = = = Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh ( 1956 – 60 , 1962 – 64 ) = = = 
 In 1951 , in a closely contested election , he was elected President of the Andhra Pradesh Congress Committee defeating N G Ranga . When the Andhra State was formed in 1953 , T. Prakasam became its Chief Minister and Reddy became the deputy . After the later formation of the Andhra Pradesh state by incorporating Telangana with the Andhra State , Reddy became its first Chief Minister from 1 November 1956 to 11 January 1960 . He was Chief Minister for a second time from 12 March 1962 to 20 February 1964 , thus holding that office for over five years . Reddy was MLA from Sri Kalahasti and <unk> respectively during his stints as Chief Minister . The Nagarjuna Sagar and Srisailam multipurpose river valley projects were initiated during his tenure . In 2005 , the Chandrababu Naidu @-@ led government of the Telugu Desam Party renamed the Srisailam project to Neelam Sanjiva Reddy Sagar in his honour . 
 The Congress governments under Reddy placed emphasis on rural development , agriculture and allied sectors . The shift towards industrialisation remained limited and was largely driven by the central government 's investments in large public sector enterprises in the state . Reddy 's first term as Chief Minister ended in 1960 after he resigned on being elected President of the Indian National Congress . In 1964 , he resigned voluntarily following unfavourable observations made against the Government of Andhra Pradesh by the Supreme Court in the Bus Routes Nationalisation case . 
 = = = Congress President ( 1960 – 62 ) and Union Minister ( 1964 – 67 ) = = = 
 Reddy served thrice as President of the Indian National Congress at its Bangalore , Bhavnagar and Patna sessions during 1960 to 1962 . At the Congress session at Goa in 1962 , Reddy 's speech stating India 's determination to end the Chinese occupation of Indian territory and the irrevocable nature of the liberation of Goa was enthusiastically received by attendees . He was thrice member of the Rajya Sabha . From June 1964 , Reddy was Union Minister of Steel and Mines in the Lal Bahadur Shastri government . He also served as Union Minister of Transport , Civil Aviation , Shipping and Tourism from January 1966 to March 1967 in Indira Gandhi 's Cabinet . 
 = = = Speaker of the Lok Sabha ( 1967 – 69 ) = = = 
 In the general elections of 1967 , Reddy was elected to the Lok Sabha from <unk> in Andhra Pradesh . On 17 March 1967 , Reddy was elected Speaker of the Fourth Lok Sabha becoming only the third person to be elected Speaker of the house during their inaugural term . To emphasize the independence of the Speaker 's office , Reddy resigned from the Congress Party . His term as Speaker was marked by several firsts including the admission of a No @-@ Confidence Motion on the same day as the President 's address to a joint session of Parliament , the handing down of a sentence of imprisonment for Contempt of the house and the setting up of the Committee on the Welfare of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes . During his term as Speaker a defamation suit filed against him by an MP resulted in the Supreme Court 's ruling that parliamentarians had complete freedom of speech in the House and that the courts had no say in such matters . Reddy described his role as being the ' watchman of the Parliament ' . He however had several hostile encounters with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in the House that proved costly when he became , two years later , the Congress Party 's nominee to succeed Zakir Hussain as President . 
 = = = Presidential election of 1969 = = = 
 In 1969 , following President Zakir Hussain 's death , the Congress party nominated Reddy , a member of its Syndicate faction , as candidate for President although Prime Minister Indira Gandhi opposed him . She was forced to accept Reddy as the Congress party 's official candidate and feared his election would allow the Syndicate to expel her from office . She asked Congress legislators to " vote according to their conscience " rather than blindly toe the Party line , in effect giving a call to support the independent candidate V V Giri . In a closely fought election held on 16 August 1969 , V V Giri emerged victorious , winning 48 @.@ 01 per cent of the first preference votes and subsequently getting a majority on counting the second preference votes . In the final tally , Giri had 420 @,@ 077 votes against the quota of 418 @,@ 169 votes required to be elected President and Reddy had 405 @,@ 427 votes . The election led to much discord within the Congress Party and culminated in the historic split of 1969 and the subsequent rise of Indira Gandhi in Indian politics . 
 Subsequently , Reddy , who had resigned as Speaker of the Lok Sabha to contest the election , retired from active politics and moved back to Anantapur where he took to farming . 
 = = = Return to active politics ( 1975 – 82 ) = = = 
 In response to Jayaprakash Narayan 's call for a Total Revolution , Reddy emerged from his political exile in 1975 . In January 1977 , he was made a member of the Committee of the Janata Party and in March , he fought the General Election from the <unk> constituency in Andhra Pradesh as a Janata Party candidate . He was the only non @-@ Congress candidate to be elected from Andhra Pradesh . The Congress Party led by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was defeated , ending 30 years of Congress rule in India and a five party coalition with Morarji Desai as its leader came to power . Reddy was unanimously elected Speaker of the Sixth Lok Sabha on 26 March 1977 . However he resigned a few months later to contest in the presidential elections of July 1977 . Reddy 's second term as Speaker lasted three months and 17 days and remains till date the shortest tenure for anyone to have held that post . 
 = = = Presidential election of 1977 = = = 
 The presidential election of 1977 was necessitated by the death in office of the incumbent Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed . Although Prime Minister Morarji Desai wanted to nominate danseuse Rukmini Devi Arundale for the post , she turned down the offer . Reddy was elected unopposed , the only President to be elected thus , after being unanimously supported by all political parties including the opposition Congress party . At 65 , he became the youngest ever person to be elected President of India . He was also the only serious presidential candidate to have contested twice – in 1969 against V V Giri and in 1977 . 37 candidates had filed their nominations for the presidency of whom 36 were rejected by the returning officer . Following these disqualifications , Reddy remained the only validly nominated candidate in the fray which made elections unnecessary . Reddy thus became the first person to be elected President of India without a contest and remains the only President to have been elected unopposed . 
 = = President of India = = 
 Neelam Sanjiva Reddy was elected on 21 July 1977 and was sworn in as the sixth President of India on 25 July 1977 . Reddy worked with three governments , with Prime Ministers Morarji Desai , Charan Singh and Indira Gandhi . Reddy announced , on the eve of India 's thirtieth anniversary of Independence , that he would be moving out of the Rashtrapati Bhawan to a smaller accommodation and that he would be taking a 70 percent pay cut in solidarity with India 's impoverished masses . 
 = = = Morarji Desai government ( 1977 – 79 ) = = = 
 Relations between Reddy and Desai soon soured over the latter 's promotion of his son , Kanti Desai , in politics and over Desai 's communication with Chief Ministers <unk> Rao and Channa Reddy on the issue of land ceilings in Andhra Pradesh . Following mass defections from the Janata Party and from the cabinet , Morarji Desai 's 30 @-@ month @-@ old government ended in July 1979 after he handed in his resignation to Reddy before a no @-@ confidence motion could be tabled against his government in Parliament . Reddy 's actions following Desai 's resignation have been much debated . His decision to accept Desai 's resignation before an alternative government created a ministerial vacuum in the executive according to H. M. Seervai . The faction of the Janata Party supporting Desai continued to have the support of 205 MPs as opposed to Charan Singh 's 80 MPs . Reddy used presidential discretion in choosing Charan Singh as the next Prime Minister over a contending claim from Jagjivan Ram , the leader of the Janata Party . 
 = = = Charan Singh government ( 1979 ) = = = 
 Following Desai 's resignation and the fall of the Janata government headed by him , Reddy appointed Charan Singh as Prime Minister . This was on the condition that he should prove his majority on the floor of the House before the end of August . Singh was sworn in on 28 July 1979 but never faced Parliament to prove his majority when Reddy convened it on 20 August . Reddy had appointed him Prime Minister since he had produced a letter claiming to have a parliamentary majority with the support of the opposition Congress Party led by his rival , the former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi . In return for her support , Gandhi demanded that a law establishing special courts to try her and her son Sanjay Gandhi be repealed – a proposition that was unacceptable to Charan Singh . Gandhi therefore withdrew her support , forcing Singh to resign . His government lasted 24 days and he never faced Parliament . The convention of appointing a Prime Minister in a hung House but with conditions on time to prove majority was later adopted by President R Venkataraman . 
 Following Charan Singh 's resignation , Reddy summoned Chandrashekhar and Jagjivan Ram to Rashtrapati Bhavan to look into the possibility of forming an alternate government . Reddy , convinced that they would not be able to form one , accepted Singh 's advice and dissolved Lok Sabha , calling for a mid term election . Singh was asked to continue as the caretaker prime minister till a new government was sworn in after the election . Reddy 's decision was met with angry denunciations and protests by members of the Janata Party who even threatened to have him impeached . Although heading a caretaker government , Singh proposed as many as seven ordinances on a broad range of matters from effecting changes in company law , providing state funding of elections and reservation of jobs for the backward classes . Reddy however refused to promulgate the ordinances arguing that such momentous changes could not be made by a caretaker government . 
 = = = Indira Gandhi 's return to power ( 1980 – 82 ) = = = 
 In the elections of 1980 , Indira Gandhi 's party the Indian National Congress ( I ) returned to power by winning 351 seats in the Lok Sabha . Neither the Janata Party nor Charan Singh 's Lok Dal won the 54 seats needed for recognition as the official opposition in Parliament . Indira was sworn in as Prime Minister by Reddy for what would become her last term in office in January 1980 . Between 1980 and 1982 President Reddy led seven state visits abroad , visiting the USSR , Bulgaria , Kenya , Zambia , the UK , Ireland , Indonesia , Nepal , Sri Lanka , Ireland and Yugoslavia . At home , as President , he signed an ordinance that gave the new government wide powers to imprison people for up to a year without trial under preventive detention and ordered the imposition of President 's rule in nine opposition @-@ ruled states on the advice of the government . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Reddy was succeeded as President by Giani <unk> Singh who was sworn in on 25 July 1982 . In his farewell address to the nation , Reddy criticised the failure of successive governments in improving the lives of the Indian masses and called for the emergence of a strong political opposition to prevent governmental misrule . Following his presidential term , the then Chief Minister of Karnataka Ramakrishna Hegde invited Reddy to settle down in Bangalore but he chose to retire to his farm in Anantapur . He died of pneumonia in Bangalore in 1996 at the age of 83 . His samadhi is at Kallahalli near Bangalore . The Parliament mourned Reddy 's death on 11 June 1996 and members cutting across party lines paid him tribute and recalled his contributions to the nation and the House . 
 Reddy authored a book , Without Fear or Favour : Reminiscences and Reflections of a President , published in 1989 . The character <unk> , Chief Minister of the fictional state of <unk> in former Prime Minister P V Narasimha Rao 's novel , The Insider , is based on Reddy , portraying his career in Andhra Pradesh and his political rivalry with Kasu Brahmananda Reddy . In 2010 , <unk> Gupta , a CPI ( M ) trade unionist and politician , accused Reddy of having raped her when she met him at an AICC session to discuss the nationalisation of mines in <unk> . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 Sanjiva Reddy 's birth centenary was celebrated in 2013 by the Government of Andhra Pradesh with the concluding ceremony in Anantapur being addressed by President Pranab Mukherjee and with the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka in attendance . The Postal Department of India released a commemorative stamp and special cover in honour of Reddy on the occasion of his birth centenary . In Hyderabad , there is the Neelam <unk> Reddy College of Education . As part of the centenary celebrations of his birth , the Government of Andhra Pradesh has announced that it will rename the Andhra Pradesh State Revenue Academy , Reddy 's alma mater the Government Arts College and the Government Medical College , Anantapur after the former president . In the 1960s , when he was Union Minister for Mines , a statue of him had been unveiled at Vijayawada by K Kamaraj , the then president of the Congress Party , prompting Reddy to ask for its removal as he deemed the practice of erecting statues of people holding public office undesirable . A statue of Sanjiva Reddy , unveiled in 2005 , stands at the Andhra Pradesh Secretariat in Hyderabad . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Juan José Castelli = 
 Juan José Castelli ( July 19 , 1764 – October 12 , 1812 ) was an Argentine lawyer . He was one of the leaders of the May Revolution , which started the Argentine War of Independence . He led an ill @-@ fated military campaign in Upper Peru . 
 Juan José Castelli was born in Buenos Aires , and went to school at the Real Colegio de San Carlos in Buenos Aires and Monserrat College in the city of Córdoba , Argentina . He graduated as a lawyer from the University of Charcas , in Upper Peru . His cousin , Manuel Belgrano , introduced him to the public administration of the Viceroyalty of the Rio de la Plata . Along with Belgrano , Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , and Hipólito Vieytes , Castelli planned a revolution to replace the absolute monarchy with the new ideas of the Age of Enlightenment . He led the Buenos Aires patriots during the May Revolution , which ended with the removal of viceroy Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros from power . He is known as the " Speaker of the Revolution " for his speech during the open cabildo held in Buenos Aires on May 22 , 1810 . 
 Castelli was appointed a Committee member of the Primera Junta and was sent to Córdoba to end Santiago de Liniers 's counter @-@ revolution . He succeeded , and ordered the execution of Liniers and his supporters . He then commanded the establishment of a revolutionary government in Upper Peru ( today 's Bolivia ) with the aim of freeing the indigenous peoples and African slaves . In 1811 Castelli signed a truce with the Spanish in Upper Peru , but they betrayed him and caught the Northern Army unprepared . As a result , the Argentines suffered a major loss in the Battle of Huaqui on June 20 , 1811 . When Castelli returned to Buenos Aires , the First Triumvirate imprisoned him for losing the battle , and Castelli died shortly afterwards from tongue cancer . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and studies = = = 
 Castelli was born in Buenos Aires in 1764 . He was the first of eight children born to a Venetian doctor , Ángel Castelli Salomón , and Josefa <unk> , who was a relative of Manuel Belgrano . He was trained by the Jesuits shortly before their expulsion , and attended the Real Colegio de San Carlos in Buenos Aires . As was customary , one of the children of the Castelli family was ordained into the priesthood , and Juan José was chosen for this . He was sent to study at the Colegio Monserrat , part of the University of Córdoba . He was influenced by the works of Voltaire and Diderot , and especially by Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's The Social Contract . He was a fellow student of men who would later have influence in the public life of South America , including Saturnino Rodríguez Peña , Juan José Paso , Manuel Alberti , Pedro Medrano , and Juan Martínez de Rozas , among others . He focused on studying philosophy and theology , but when his father died in 1785 , he abandoned his career in the priesthood , for which he felt no strong vocation . 
 Rejecting his mother 's proposal of sending him to study in Spain , he enrolled in jurisprudence studies alongside his cousin , Manuel Belgrano , at the University of Salamanca and Alcalá de Henares . He enrolled in the University of Chuquisaca , in the Upper Peru ( modern Bolivia ) . There , he learned about the ongoing French Revolution , and the new ideas of the Age of Enlightenment . He also learned about the 1782 Rebellion of Túpac Amaru II and the oppression of the indigenous peoples , which influenced his actions in his future Upper Peru campaign . Before returning to Buenos Aires , he visited Potosí and witnessed the use of slave labor in the mines . 
 Castelli returned to Buenos Aires and established a legal firm in his family home . He represented the University of Córdoba in various causes , as well as his uncle , Domingo Belgrano Peri . Through his associations with Saturnino Rodríguez Peña , he also met and befriended his brother , Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , and his associate , Hipólito Vieytes . Castelli married María Rosa Lynch in 1794 , and they had seven children : Angela , Pedro , Luciano , Alejandro , Francisco José , and Juana . 
 = = = First political steps = = = 
 The intellectuals of the viceroyalty received and secretly distributed a copy of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen , promulgated by the French Revolution in 1789 . Meanwhile , Belgrano returned from his studies in Europe , and was appointed as Perpetual Secretary of the new Consulate of Commerce of Buenos Aires . Belgrano and Castelli shared similar ideas about the Spanish trade monopoly and the rights of the natives . Belgrano attempted to appoint Castelli as interim Secretary of the Consulate as his assistant , but faced strong opposition from the peninsular merchants , who delayed the appointment until 1796 . Belgrano became ill during his stay in Europe , which forced him to take extended leaves from work , and wanted Castelli to be his successor if he resigned . 
 There was a similar opposition during the 1799 election of delegates to the Buenos Aires Cabildo : Castelli was elected as third <unk> , but was rejected by merchants associated with the port of Cádiz . The conflict lasted a year , until the prominent local merchant Cornelio Saavedra wrote a memorandum recommending Castelli . Viceroy Avilés finally confirmed him in office by royal decree , in May 1800 . Castelli , however , rejected the post because of his high workload in the Consulate . This was seen as an insult by peninsular merchants such as Martín de Álzaga , who was influential in the Cabildo . 
 Castelli and Belgrano backed a pair of projects from Francisco Cabello y Mesa , who had just arrived from Spain . Cabello proposed the creation of a " Patriotic , Literary and Economic Society " lodge and the publication of a newspaper . This newspaper , the first one published in Buenos Aires , was named Telégrafo Mercantil . However , both projects were short @-@ lived : the lodge was never established and its activities were banned by royal decree , and the Consulate was instructed to withdraw support for the newspaper , which was then closed . Published by Castelli , Cabello , and Belgrano ( secretary of the publication ) , as well as José Manuel Lavardén , Miguel de Azcuénaga and Fray Cayetano Rodríguez , the Telegraph was the first journal to advance the concept of fatherland , and the first to speak of the inhabitants as " Argentines . " 
 Nevertheless , Hipólito Vieytes released a new newspaper shortly afterwards , the Agriculture , Trade and Industry Weekly , with Castelli in the staff . The editorial staff had meetings at the house of Saturnino Rodríguez Peña , discussing ideas for technical improvements in agriculture , removal of trade restrictions , development , manufacturing , and other topics . The newspaper also published the biographies of some Founding Fathers of the United States , such as Benjamin Franklin . 
 = = = The British invasions = = = 
 Rodriguez Peña introduced Castelli to James Florence Burke , who claimed to represent the British Empire in support of proposals published by Francisco de Miranda , which aimed to emancipate the Latin American colonies . Burke was actually a British spy , gathering information about the Spanish colonies . Bearing promises of British support , he created the first native secret society organized for such purposes . It would henceforth be known as " party of independence " , and included Castelli , Burke and major contributors of Vieytes 's newspaper . The spy was eventually discovered by Viceroy Rafael de Sobremonte and expelled from the viceroyalty , but his duplicity was not disclosed to his unaware associates . 
 Castelli moved to a farm in modern the Buenos Aires neighborhood of Núñez . The farm had some agriculture fields and a small brick factory . He lived next to other influential people like Cornelio Saavedra , Juan Larrea , Miguel de Azcuénaga , and attorney José <unk> . The meetings of the secret society continued , unaffected by the departure of Burke . On June 2 , 1806 , Castelli 's mother died , and he was still in mourning when the city learned of a British landing in Quilmes . 
 The " party of independence " was caught by surprise by the invasion , as the British proclaimed respect for religion , ownership , order , freedom , and trade — but made no mention concerning Miranda 's ideals . They arranged an interview with the British Viscount William Carr Beresford , asking for a clarification on whether the promises of Burke were still standing . They also asked if the British government would support an independentist attempt . Beresford gave evasive answers , saying he had no instructions to that effect . He explained that with the recent death of Prime Minister William Pitt and the rise of the Liberals to power , he needed further orders . 
 Castelli understood that the British force only aspired to annex the city to the British Empire , and resigned to avoid swearing allegiance to Britain . Santiago de Liniers liberated Buenos Aires a short time later , but Saturnino Rodríguez Peña helped Beresford escape , hoping to influence an eventual second invasion to implement reforms supported by Burke and Miranda . The second British invasion , however , ended the patriot 's hopes of British support , and they fought against their former allies . 
 After the successful defense of the city in 1807 , the local criollos increased their political power with their higher military role . There was a dispute between the newly appointed Viceroy , Santiago de Liniers , and the Buenos Aires Cabildo , led by Martín de Álzaga . Both attempted to take advantage of the new situation , and influence the criollos to support them . Álzaga refrained from accusing Rodríguez Peña for aiding in Beresford 's escape , and Liniers kept the criollo military bodies armed . 
 = = = Carlotism = = = 
 Napoleon invaded Spain in 1807 , starting the Peninsular War . King Charles IV of Spain abdicated in favor of his son Ferdinand VII , but Napoleon captured him and appointed his own brother , Joseph Bonaparte , as king of Spain instead , in a series of transfers of the Spanish crown known as the abdications of Bayonne . The Spanish people organized Government Juntas to resist against the French occupation , and within months the Junta Central of Seville claimed supreme authority over Spain and the colonies . This situation encouraged the Princess Charlotte of Spain to claim the regency of the Spanish American colonies . 
 In this context , Castelli and Álzaga plotted to oust Liniers and constitute a local government Junta , similar to those of the <unk> . This project was not shared by most of the natives or by the head of the Regiment of Patricians , Cornelio Saavedra . Manuel Belgrano proposed as an alternative to support the plans of Princess Charlotte , which were supported by Castelli and other criollos . Belgrano , who held monarchist ideas , argued that the Carlotist project would be the most practical means of achieving independence from Spain in the circumstances . On September 20 , 1808 , Castelli wrote a letter to Charlotte , with the signatures of Antonio Beruti , Hipólito Vieytes , Belgrano , and Nicolás Rodríguez Peña . 
 Charlotte rejected this support : the party of independence sought to establish a constitutional monarchy headed by Charlotte , but she preferred to retain the power of an absolutist monarchy . Consequently , she denounced the letter and organized the detention of Diego Paroissien . Paroissien , who had several letters to the criollos , was charged with high treason . Castelli was his lawyer . 
 Castelli won Paroissien 's acquittal by invoking the doctrine of the retroversion of the sovereignty of the people , which claimed that the Spanish American lands were a personal possession of the King of Spain but not a Spanish colony . That approach was already old , and it was used to legislate in both districts , but in this context Castelli argued that neither the Council of Regency or any other power of Spain — other than the rightful King — had authority over Spanish America . Castelli said that " the will of the people of Spain is not enough to bring the Indies to obedience " . Under these premises , Castelli argued successfully that the regency offered to the sister of the captive king , while not denying the legitimacy of Ferdinand VII , was not an act of treason , but a legitimate political project that should be resolved by the Spanish American people without the intervention of the peninsular Spanish . 
 On January 1 , 1809 , Martín de Álzaga rallied most peninsular battalions to Plaza de Mayo and attempted a mutiny against Liniers . A few criollos , such as Mariano Moreno , laid their hopes for independence in this attempt , but most did not . The battalions still faithful to Liniers – the Regiment of Patricians , the other criollo battalions , and the remaining peninsular ones – conquered the Plaza and ordered the mutinying forces to withdraw . Castelli supported Liniers , accusing Álzaga of independentism . Though Castelli was himself an independentist , and had also sought to remove Liniers , he opposed Álzaga for other reasons : Álzaga was hoping to maintaining the social dominance of the peninsulares over the criollos once the viceroy , who opposed his interests , was deposed . Álzaga was defeated , and the power of the criollos was increased : <unk> and Álzaga were banished to Carmen de Patagones and the Spanish militias who attempted the coup were disbanded . 
 A new viceroy , Baltasar Hidalgo de Cisneros , arrived in July to replace Liniers , and the independentist group did not agree on how to react . Castelli proposed a resumption of Álzaga 's idea of creating a governing Junta , but not headed by the Spanish . Belgrano insisted on the plan to appoint Charlotte as regent of a constitutional monarchy , and Rodriguez Peña proposed a military coup , with or without Liniers at the head . They finally accepted the perspective of Cornelio Saavedra , and delayed taking action until a better opportunity . 
 = = = May Revolution = = = 
 When the news of the fall of the Junta of Seville arrived , the group headed by Castelli and Belgrano led the process leading to the May Revolution . Castelli and Saavedra were the most important leaders of the time , and first discarded Martín Rodríguez 's plan to expel Cisneros in a coup d 'état . After several discussions , they decided to request an open cabildo , an emergency popular assembly . Castelli and Belgrano negotiated with the senior alcalde and nobleman , Juan de Lezica , and the procurator , Julián de Leiva . Although they convinced them , they still needed the permission of Cisneros himself , for which Castelli and Rodriguez went to his office at the Fort of Buenos Aires . Previously , Cornelio Saavedra had denied Cisneros the support of the Regiment of Patricians , on the premise that with the disappearance of the Junta of Seville — who had appointed him as viceroy — he no longer had the right to hold that position . 
 Cisneros was outraged by the appearance of Castelli and Rodríguez , who came armed and without an appointment . They reacted harshly and demanded an immediate reply to the request for an open cabildo . After a brief private conversation with the prosecutor , Caspe , Cisneros gave his consent . When they were leaving , Cisneros inquired about his personal safety , to which Castelli said : " Lord , Your Excellency 's person and your family are among Americans , and this should reassure you " . After the interview they returned to the house of Rodríguez Peña , to inform their supporters of the new situation . 
 Besides his oratory , Castelli is known as the " Speaker of the Revolution " because of his great activity during the " May week " . The memoirs of witnesses and participants mention him at many venues , taking part in many activities . He negotiated with the Cabildo and visited the Fort several times until the viceroy gave in to the pressure . At the same time , he held secret meetings with other criollos at the house of Rodríguez Peña , planning their actions , and he harangued the criollo militias at the barracks . Cisneros himself , describing the events the Council of Regency , called Castelli " the most interested one in the novelty " , i.e. , in the revolution . 
 The open cabildo was held on May 22 , 1810 ; it was debated whether the viceroy should continue in office , and if not , who should replace him . The first opinion was from Bishop Benito Lue y Riega , who held that Cisneros should continue and that , if all of Spain was conquered by France , peninsulars were meant to rule in the Americas . Castelli made a counter @-@ argument , based on the doctrine of the retroversion of the sovereignty of the people that he had already employed in the defense of Paroissien . He insisted that in the absence of a legitimate authority , sovereignty should be returned to the people ; they should govern themselves . The idea of dismissing the viceroy ultimately prevailed , but as Buenos Aires had no authority to decide unilaterally the new form of government , they would elect a provisional government . A congress of deputies called from all other cities would take the final decision . However , there were disputes over who should exercise the provisional government : some argued that the Cabildo should do so , and others that it should be a Junta . Castelli bowed to Saavedra 's proposal to form a Junta , but with the proviso that the procurator of the Cabildo , Julián de Leiva , had a decisive vote in the appointment . By adding this proviso , Castelli sought to add the former supporters of Martín de Álzaga , such as Mariano Moreno , Domingo Matheu , and Leiva himself . 
 However , this power allowed Leiva to perform a maneuver that Castelli had not anticipated . Although he approved the end of Cisneros ' rule as viceroy , Leiva formed a Junta with Cisneros as its president ; Cisneros would stay in power . The other members of the Junta would have been two peninsulars , the priest Juan Nepomuceno Solá and the merchant José Santos Inchaurregui , and two criollos , Saavedra and Castelli . The bulk of the natives rejected the proposal : they did not accept that Cisneros should remain in power , even under a different title . They were suspicious of the intentions of Saavedra , and believed that with Castelli alone in the Junta , little or nothing could be achieved . Castelli and Saavedra resigned that same day to put pressure on Cisneros and force him to resign , and the Junta never came into power . 
 That same night , the criollos gathered at the home of Rodriguez Pena and compiled a list of members for a governing Junta that was presented on 25 May . Meanwhile , Domingo French , Antonio Beruti , Aparicio , Donado , and other armed men occupied the Plaza and its access points . The list included a balance of representatives from different extractions of local politics . Lezica finally reported to Cisneros that he was no longer in command , and the Primera Junta assumed power . 
 Castelli and Mariano Moreno led the more radical positions of the Junta . They became close friends , visiting each other daily . Julio César Chávez described them as associates , sharing projects of a deep political , social and economic revolution , based in higher freedom for the Spanish American criollos . He described them as pragmatic men , willing to reward the allies and punish the enemies of the revolution , even if it meant using capital punishments . They were called " Jacobins " , comparing their actions with those of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution , but they were not Francophiles or afrancesados . Besides this , the similarities between the revolutions at France and Buenos Aires were largely superficial . 
 One of the first steps of Castelli and the Junta was the expulsion of Cisneros and the judges of the Royal Audiencia , who were shipped off to Spain under the pretext that their lives were in danger . 
 = = = Execution of Liniers = = = 
 Upon hearing the news of the change of government , former viceroy Santiago de Liniers prepared a counter @-@ revolution from the city of Córdoba , but Francisco Ortiz de Ocampo routed his militia and captured all the leaders in just a couple of skirmishes . The initial orders were to send them to Buenos Aires , but after their capture the Junta decided to execute them . This decision was taken in a resolution signed by all members of the Junta , excepting Manuel Alberti , because as a priest , he could not give consent to the death penalty . The measure found strong popular resistance in Córdoba , as Liniers and the governor Juan Gutierrez de la Concha were popular and the execution of a priest ( Rodrigo de Orellana , another leader of the counter @-@ revolution ) was rejected as heretical . Ocampo and Chiclana decided to carry on with the original orders , and transferred the prisoners to Buenos Aires . 
 The Junta reconfirmed the order , but excluded the bishop of Córdoba , Rodrigo de Orellana , who was banished instead . Castelli was commissioned by the Junta to enforce the execution order . Mariano Moreno said , " Go , Castelli , and I hope you will not incur the same weakness as our general , if not yet fulfilled the determination , Larrea will go , and finally I 'll go myself if necessary " . Ocampo and Chiclana were demoted . Castelli 's assistants were Nicolás Rodríguez Peña , elected as secretary , his former client Diego Paroissien as a campaign doctor , and Domingo French as head of the escort . 
 Right after finding the prisoners , he ordered and presided over their execution : the governor of Córdoba , Juan Gutiérrez de la Concha , the former Viceroy , Santiago de Liniers , former Governor Santiago Alejo de Allende , the adviser Victorino Rodriguez , and the accountant Moreno . The execution took place at Cabeza de Tigre , in the boundary between Santa Fe and Córdoba . The bishop Orellana was not shot , but was compelled to give spiritual assistance to those convicted and to witness the execution . Domingo French was commissioned to execute the verdict . 
 After shooting Liniers , Castelli returned briefly to Buenos Aires and met Moreno . The secretary of war congratulated him for his conduct , and appointed him as a member representing the Junta , with full power to direct the operations to La Paz . He also left a series of instructions : Castelli was to put the government in the hands of patriots , earn the native 's support , and shoot president Nieto , governor Sanz , and the Bishop of La Paz , in the case of their capture . He received similar orders to capture and execute José Manuel de Goyeneche , who had already defeated the rebels of La Paz revolution ( a rebellion similar to the May Revolution , which took place at La Paz , modern Bolivia ) . Castelli was also instructed to rescue and draft to the Auxiliary Army the <unk> and Patricians soldiers that , under the command of Vicente Nieto , had left Buenos Aires in 1809 to suppress revolutions in Chuquisaca and La Paz . Suspicious of those soldiers , Nieto had them disarmed and sent as prisoners to the mines of Potosi , under the supervision of Francisco de Paula Sanz . More than a third of the soldiers died within a month of work in the mines . 
 = = = Campaign in Upper Peru = = = 
 Castelli was not well received in Córdoba , where Liniers was popular , but he was in San Miguel de Tucumán . In Salta , despite a formal good reception , he had difficulty obtaining troops , mules , food , money , or guns . He took political leadership of the expedition to Upper Peru , displacing Hipólito Vieytes , and replaced Ocampo with Colonel Antonio González Balcarce . He was informed that Cochabamba revolted in support of the Junta , but was threatened by royalist forces from La Paz . Castelli intercepted a letter from Nieto to Gutiérrez de la Concha , governor of Córdoba , who was already executed for his support of Liniers . This letter mentioned a royalist army led by Goyeneche marching to Jujuy . Balcarce , who had advanced to Potosi , was defeated by Nieto in the Battle of <unk> , so Castelli sent two hundred men and two cannon to strengthen his forces . With these reinforcements , Balcarce achieved victory at the Battle of Suipacha , which allowed patriots to control all of Upper Peru unopposed . One of the men sent was Martín Miguel de Güemes , who would eventually lead the Guerra Gaucha in Salta years later . 
 At Villa Imperial , one of the richest cities of Upper Peru , an open cabildo called on Goyeneche to withdraw from their territory . He obeyed , as he did not have the military strength to prevail . The Bishop of La Paz , Remigio La Santa y Ortega , fled with him . Castelli was received in Potosí and requesting that the locals swear allegiance to the Junta . He also requested that the royalist generals Francisco de Paula Sanz and José de Córdoba y Rojas submit to him . He made arrangements that the operation to capture Vicente Nieto should be carried out exclusively by the surviving members of the Regiment of Patricians from the mines of Potosi , who had been incorporated with honors into the Army of the North . Sanz , Nieto , and Córdoba were executed at the Plaza of Potosí . Nieto claimed that he died happy , because it was under the Spanish flag . Goyeneche and Ortega , on the other hand , were safe on royalist land . Bernardo Monteagudo , inmate at the Jail of the Court of Chuquisaca for his participation in the revolution of 1809 , escaped to join the ranks of the army . Castelli , who already knew Monteagudo 's background , appointed him his secretary . 
 Castelli set up his government in Chuquisaca , where he presided over the change of regime for the entire region . He planned the reorganization of the Mines of Potosi , and a reform at the University of Charcas . He proclaimed the end of native slavery and servitude in Upper Peru , and the natives were granted political rights equal to those of the criollos . Castelli forbade the establishment of new convents and parishes to avoid the common practice that , under the guise of spreading Christian doctrine , the natives were forced into servitude by religious orders . He authorized free trade and redistributed land expropriated from the former workers of the mills . The decree was published in Spanish , Guarani , Quechua , and Aymara ; he established several bilingual schools as well . Several Indian chiefs participated in the first anniversary of the May Revolution , celebrated in <unk> , where Castelli paid tribute to the ancient Incas and encouraged the people to rise against the Spanish . Despite their welcome , however , Castelli was aware that most of the aristocracy supported the auxiliary army out of fear instead of genuine support . 
 In November 1810 he requested authorization from the Junta for a military operation : to cross the Desaguadero river , the border between the two viceroyalties , and take control of the Peruvian cities of Puno , Cuzco , and Arequipa . Castelli argued that it was urgent to rise against Lima because its economy depended largely on those districts , and if they lost power over that area , the main royalist stronghold would be threatened . The plan was rejected as too risky , and Castelli complied with the original orders . 
 In December , fifty @-@ three peninsulars were banished to Salta , and the decision was sent to the Junta for approval . The vocal Domingo Matheu , who had business associations with Tulla and Pedro Salvador Casas , arranged the annulment of the act , arguing that Castelli had been influenced by slander and unfounded accusations . Support for Castelli began to decline , mainly due to the favourable treatment of natives and the determined opposition of the church , which attacked the public atheism of Bernardo Monteagudo , Castelli 's secretary . Both royalists in Lima and Saavedra in Buenos Aires compared them with Maximilien Robespierre , leader of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution . 
 Castelli also abolished the mita in Upper Peru , a mandatory form of public service that bordered on slavery . Mariano Moreno has also wished to end the mita , but Moreno had resigned from the Junta by this point . Without Castelli being in Buenos Aires to mediate between them , the disputes between Moreno and Saavedra had worsened . The Junta requested that Castelli should moderate his actions , but he went ahead with the positions he shared with Moreno . Several Saavedrist officers , such as José María <unk> , José León Domínguez , Matías Balbastro , chaplain Manuel Antonio <unk> , and sergeant major Toribio de <unk> , planned to kidnap Castelli , deliver him to Buenos Aires for trial , and give command of the Army of the North to Juan Jose Viamonte . However , Viamonte did not accept the plan when he was informed by the conspirators , and did not attempt to carry it out . When Castelli knew about Moreno 's resignation , he wrote a letter to Vieytes , Rodriguez Peña , Larrea , and Azcuénaga , asking them to move to Upper Peru . If they defeated Goyeneche , they planned to march back to Buenos Aires . However , the letter was sent via the common postal service , and the postmaster of Córdoba , Jose de Paz , decided to send it instead to Cornelio Saavedra . The Morenist members of the Junta had already been ousted and exiled by that point . 
 = = = The Battle of Huaqui = = = 
 The order of the Junta not to proceed to the Viceroyalty of Peru was a de facto truce that would last while Castelli did not attack Goyeneche 's army . Castelli tried to turn the situation into a formal agreement , which would imply recognition of the Junta as a legitimate interlocutor . Goyeneche agreed to sign an armistice for 40 days to allow time for Lima to ratify the agreement , but he actually used the time to reinforce his army . On 19 June , with the truce still in effect , an advanced royalist troop attacked positions at <unk> . Castelli declared the truce broken and declared war on Peru . 
 The royalist army crossed the Desaguadero on June 20 , 1811 , starting the Battle of Huaqui . The army waited near Huaqui , between the plains of <unk> and Lake Titicaca . The patriotic left wing , commanded by Diaz Velez , faced the bulk of the royalist forces , while the center was hit by the soldiers of Pio Tristan . Many patriotic soldiers recruited at Upper Peru surrendered or fled , and many of the recruits from La Paz switched sides during the battle . The Saavedrist Juan José Viamonte helped ensure Castelli 's defeat by refusing to join the conflict . 
 Although the casualties of the Army of the North were not substantial , it was left demoralized and disbanded . Goyeneche pursued the fleeing patriots , and captured Huaqui after his victory . The inhabitants of Upper Peru welcomed the royalists back , so the army had to quickly leave those provinces . However , the resistance of Cochabamba prevented the royalists from proceeding to Buenos Aires . Castelli moved to the post of <unk> , and received orders to return to Buenos Aires for trial . However , by the time he was notified , new orders had been issued : Castelli should be confined at Catamarca , while Saavedra himself took charge of the Army of the North . Saavedra was deposed as soon as he left Buenos Aires , and was confined to San Juan . The First Triumvirate , which had commenced governing by then , required Castelli to return . 
 Once in Buenos Aires , Castelli found himself in political isolation . The triumvirate and the newspaper La Gazeta blamed him for the defeat at Huaqui , and sought punishment as a deterrent . His former supporters were divided between those who supported the ideas of the Triumvirate and those no longer able to help . Castelli suffered from tongue cancer during the long trial , which made it progressively more difficult for him to speak . He died on October 12 , 1812 , while the trial was still underway . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Castelli is largely ignored in the historiography of Argentina . Most historians focus instead on the disputes between Mariano Moreno and Cornelio Saavedra in the Junta , with Castelli described in passing as a supporter of Moreno . Despite of his role in the May Revolution , he was not the clear leader of it , as José Gervasio Artigas was for the Cry of Asencio or Miguel Hidalgo y Costilla for the Cry of Dolores . The May Revolution was instead the result of the convergence of diverse factions that shared the desire to remove the viceroy , and different historians highlight different specific factions . Castelli is largely ignored in Bolivia as well . His support of indigenous rights — still an ongoing issue in the country — and his religious ideas strongly affect the way he is perceived there . 
 The most notable biography of Castelli was Castelli , el <unk> de Mayo ( Spanish : Castelli , the champion of May ) , written by the Paraguayan Julio César Chaves . Andrés Rivera increased the public awareness about Castelli with the historical novel La revolución es un sueño <unk> ( Spanish : The revolution is an eternal dream ) . The famous <unk> Felipe Pigna wrote a whole chapter about Castelli at the book Los mitos de la historia argentina , which was then moved to television in the documentary film Algo <unk> hecho por la historia argentina . 
 = God of War : Chains of Olympus = 
 God of War : Chains of Olympus is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure video game developed by Ready at Dawn and Santa Monica Studio , and published by Sony Computer Entertainment ( SCE ) . It was first released for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) handheld console on March 4 , 2008 . The game is the fourth installment in the God of War series , the second chronologically , and a prequel to the original God of War . It is loosely based on Greek mythology and set in ancient Greece , with vengeance as its central motif . The player controls Kratos , a Spartan warrior who serves the Olympian Gods . Kratos is guided by the goddess Athena , who instructs him to find the Sun God Helios , as the Dream God Morpheus has caused many of the gods to slumber in Helios ' absence . With the power of the Sun and the aid of the Titan Atlas , Morpheus and the Queen of the Underworld Persephone intend to destroy the Pillar of the World and in turn Olympus . 
 The gameplay is similar to the previous installments , with a focus on combo @-@ based combat , achieved through the player 's main weapon — the Blades of Chaos — and secondary weapons acquired throughout the game . It features quick time events that require the player to complete game controller actions in a timed sequence to defeat stronger enemies and bosses . The player can use up to three magical attacks as alternative combat options . The game also features puzzles and platforming elements . The control setup was reconfigured for the PSP , as it has fewer buttons than the PlayStation 2 's controller . Ready at Dawn 's solution for the controls received praise from critics . 
 Debuting at No. 5 on the North American charts , Chains of Olympus achieved the highest composite score for a PSP title from Metacritic and GameRankings . 1UP stated that the game is " a technical showpiece for Sony , and arguably the best @-@ looking game on the system . " It has won several awards , including " Best PSP Action Game " , " Best Graphics Technology " , and " Best Use of Sound " . In September 2010 , GamePro named Chains of Olympus the best PSP game . By June 2012 , the game had sold 3 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide , making it the fourth best @-@ selling PlayStation Portable game of all time . Together with God of War : Ghost of Sparta , Chains of Olympus was remastered and released on September 13 , 2011 , as part of the God of War : Origins Collection for the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) . The remastered version was included in the God of War Saga released on August 28 , 2012 , also for PlayStation 3 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 God of War : Chains of Olympus is a third @-@ person single @-@ player video game viewed from a fixed camera perspective . The player controls the character Kratos in combo @-@ based combat , platforming , and puzzle game elements , and battles foes who primarily stem from Greek mythology , including cyclopes , Gorgons , satyrs , harpies , minotaurs , hoplites , and sphinxes . Morpheus beasts , shades , banshees , fire guards , fire sentries , <unk> guards , and death knights were created specifically for the game . Platforming elements require the player to climb walls , jump across chasms , swing on ropes , and balance across beams to proceed through sections of the game . Some puzzles are simple , such as moving a box so that the player can use it as a jumping @-@ off point to access a pathway unreachable with normal jumping , but others are more complex , such as finding several items across different areas of the game to unlock one door . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Kratos ' main weapon is the Blades of Chaos : a pair of blades attached to chains that are wrapped around the character 's wrists and forearms . In gameplay , the blades can be swung offensively in various maneuvers . As the game progresses , Kratos acquires new weapons — the Sun Shield and Gauntlet of Zeus — offering alternative combat options . Kratos only learns three magical abilities , as opposed to four in previous installments , including the Efreet , the Light of Dawn , and Charon 's Wrath , giving him a variety of ways to attack and kill enemies . He acquires the relic Triton 's Lance — similar to Poseidon 's Trident in God of War — which allows him to breathe underwater ; a necessary ability as parts of the game require long periods of time there . 
 The challenge mode in this game is called the Challenge of Hades ( five trials ) , and requires players to complete a series of specific tasks ( e.g. , Burn 50 soldiers with the Efreet ) . It is unlocked by completing the game . The player may unlock bonus costumes for Kratos , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos , and concept art of the characters and environments , as rewards . Completion of each of the game 's difficulty levels unlocks additional rewards . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 As with the previous games in the God of War franchise , God of War : Chains of Olympus is set in an alternate version of ancient Greece , populated by the Olympian Gods , Titans , and other beings of Greek mythology . With the exception of flashbacks , the events are set between those of the games Ascension ( 2013 ) and God of War ( 2005 ) . Several locations are explored , including the real world locations of the ancient cities of Attica and Marathon , the latter including fictional settings of the Temple of Helios and the Caves of Olympus , and several other fictional locations , including the Underworld , which features scenes at the River Styx , Tartarus , the Fields of Elysium , and the Temple of Persephone . 
 Attica is a war @-@ torn city under assault by the Persian Empire and their pet basilisk , and is the site of Eurybiades ' last battle . The city of Marathon is covered in the black fog of the Dream God , Morpheus . Just beyond the city is the Temple of Helios , which sits atop the Sun Chariot , which has plummeted to Earth in Helios ' absence . Boreas , <unk> , Euros , and <unk> , gods of the north , west , east , and south winds , respectively , reside in the temple and guide the chariot . The Caves of Olympus is an underground cavern below Mount Olympus and houses the goddess Eos , the Primordial Fires , and a statue of Triton . The Underworld is the underground realm of the dead and is host to the River Styx and ferryman of the dead , Charon . Tartarus is the prison of the dead and the Titans where the massive Titan Hyperion is chained . The Fields of Elysium are home to deserving souls that roam peacefully and are overlooked by the Temple of Persephone . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist of the game is Kratos ( voiced by Terrence C. Carson ) , a former Captain of Sparta 's Army , and once servant to the God of War , Ares . He now serves the other Olympian Gods in hopes that they will free him of his nightmares . Other characters include Kratos ' mentor and ally Athena ( Erin Torpey ) , the Goddess of Wisdom ; Eos ( Erin Torpey ) , the Goddess of Dawn and sister of Helios ; Persephone ( Marina Gordon ) , the Queen of the Underworld and the main antagonist ; and Atlas ( Fred Tatasciore ) , a four @-@ armed Titan imprisoned in Tartarus after the Great War . Kratos ' deceased daughter Calliope ( Debi Derryberry ) briefly reunites with him in the Fields of Elysium and his wife Lysandra appears in a flashback . Minor characters include Helios ( Dwight Schultz ) , the captured Sun God ; Charon ( Dwight Schultz ) , the ferryman of the Underworld ; and the Persian King ( Fred Tatasciore ) , leader of the Persian forces attacking Attica . The Dream God Morpheus is an unseen character that affects the plot . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 During Kratos ' ten years of service to the Olympian Gods , he is sent to the city of Attica to help defend it from the invading Persian army . After successfully killing the Persian King , decimating his army and slaying their pet basilisk , Kratos observes the Sun fall from the sky , plunging the world into darkness . As he fights his way through the city of Marathon , the Spartan witnesses the black fog of the Olympian Morpheus cover the land . He hears a haunting flute melody , which he recognizes as a melody once played by his deceased daughter Calliope . Finding the Temple of Helios , Kratos is tasked by Athena to find the missing Sun God , as Morpheus has caused many of the gods to fall into a deep slumber in the absence of light . The Spartan eventually locates Helios ' sister , Eos , who tells Kratos that the Titan Atlas has abducted her brother . Eos advises Kratos to seek the Primordial Fires , which he uses to awaken the fire steeds of Helios . The steeds take the Spartan to the Underworld , where he has two encounters with Charon at the River Styx . Although Charon initially defeats Kratos and banishes him to Tartarus , the Spartan returns and destroys the ferryman . 
 After locating the Temple of Persephone and confronting the Queen of the Underworld , Kratos is given a choice : renounce his power and be with his deceased daughter ( at a cost to mankind ) or proceed with his mission . Kratos sacrifices his weapons and power to be reunited with his daughter , but discovers that Persephone is embittered by Zeus ' betrayal and her imprisonment in the Underworld with her husband Hades . While he was distracted by his reunion with Calliope , Persephone 's ally Atlas was using the power of the kidnapped Helios to destroy the Pillar of the World , which would also end Olympus . Choosing to abandon Calliope forever , Kratos takes back his power and binds Atlas to the Pillar of the World he sought to destroy , forcing the Titan to hold the weight of the world on his shoulders . Kratos then battles Persephone to the death . Although victorious , he is warned by a dying Persephone that his suffering will never end . Atlas also warns Kratos that he will eventually regret helping the gods and that he and Atlas will meet again . Kratos then rides the Sun Chariot back to the mortal world and into the sky as Morpheus retreats . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , Kratos is still riding Helios ' chariot back into the sky and after seeing the return of the Sun , Kratos loses consciousness from the exertion and plummets to the ground . At the last moment , Kratos is saved by Athena and Helios , and Athena tells Helios that " He will live " 
 = = Development = = 
 Game developer Ready at Dawn pitched the idea of a God of War game for the PlayStation Portable to SCE Santa Monica Studio soon after the original God of War launched . In February 2007 , Ready at Dawn posted a teaser featuring " Coming Soon " in the God of War font . An editor from 1UP obtained an early copy of God of War II and posted the game 's instruction manual , featuring a one @-@ page teaser with " PSP " in the Omega symbol and stating " Coming 2007 " . On March 12 , 2007 , God of War II was launched at the Metreon : God of War II Game Director Cory Barlog officially confirmed the development of Chains of Olympus , stating " It is its own story that connects to the overall story . God of War , God of War II , and then if all the stars align God of War III will be the telling of a trilogy . This PSP story will be a further fleshing out . " An initial trailer for Chains of Olympus was released on April 25 , 2007 , coinciding with the announcement of a demo on UMD — the optical disc medium for the PSP . The trailer is narrated by voice actress Linda Hunt . 
 God of War : Chains of Olympus uses a proprietary , in @-@ house engine referred to as the Ready at Dawn engine , which expanded on the engine created for their previous game , Daxter ( 2006 ) , to include a fluid and cloth simulator . The camera system was modified to cater to the fixed cinematic camera for God of War gameplay , and the lighting system was reworked to aid in presenting realistic graphics . The game was originally designed for the PlayStation Portable 's restricted 222 megahertz ( MHz ) processor . Ready at Dawn repeatedly contacted Sony regarding increasing the clock speed of the PSP on account of the difference to the game and had developed a version of the game with higher speed . Sony released a firmware upgrade that allowed games to use the full 333 MHz processor . The faster processor allowed for more realistic blood effects , lighting effects , and shadows as well as improved enemy intelligence . The upgrade , however , noticeably decreased battery life . After the game 's completion , Game Director Ru Weerasuriya stated multiplayer options and other puzzles , characters , and dialogue had to be removed due to time constraints . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Two of the voice actors returned from the previous installments to reprise their roles , which were Terrence C. Carson and Linda Hunt , who voiced Kratos and the narrator respectively . Erin Torpey adopted the dual roles of Athena and Eos . Fred Tatasciore , who voiced different characters in previous installments , returned , and in this game , voiced both Atlas and the Persian King . Carole Ruggier and Michael Clarke Duncan did not return to reprise their roles , which were Athena and Atlas respectively . Voice actor Dwight Schultz voiced both Charon and Helios ; Debi Derryberry voiced Calliope and continued this role in a later installment ; and Marina Gordon provided the voice of Persephone . Brian <unk> , Don Luce , and Andrew Wheeler provided the voices of several minor characters and Keythe Farley was the Voice Director . 
 The soundtrack was composed by Gerard K. Marino , but to date , it has not been commercially released . After the release of the demo disc , Ready at Dawn offered pre @-@ order customers a music track on disc titled " Battle of Attica " . Composer Gerard Marino stated that it was the first cue written for the game , based on concept art and screenshots . Marino composed roughly thirteen minutes of music for the game and re @-@ worked other music from the previous titles . Three tracks from the soundtrack are included as bonus tracks on the God of War : Ghost of Sparta soundtrack . 
 = = Release = = 
 The demo disc , officially titled God of War : Chains of Olympus – Special Edition : Battle of Attica , was released on September 27 , 2007 . In the demo , Kratos battles Persian soldiers and a giant basilisk . The demo progresses through the city of Attica as Kratos chases the basilisk , culminating with Kratos fighting the Persian King . The disc also included a developer video and a lanyard in the shape of the Greek letter Omega . Following the demo 's release , a downloadable version was made available through the PlayStation Store in North American and European regions . Due to the delay of the game , Ready at Dawn offered a " special edition " version of the demo to pre @-@ order customers , with one Ready at Dawn developer stating that preparation of the special demo disc took up to 40 % of the team 's production time . 
 God of War : Chains of Olympus was originally scheduled to be released during the fourth quarter of 2007 , but it was rescheduled and released on March 4 , 2008 , in North America , March 27 in Australia , March 28 in Europe , and July 10 in Japan , where it was published by Capcom . The game was a commercial success , debuting at No. 5 on the North American charts with 340 @,@ 500 copies sold in the first month . The game was re @-@ released in Europe on October 17 , 2008 , as part of Sony 's Platinum Range and was also re @-@ released in Japan and North America in April 2009 under Capcom 's Best Price and Sony 's Greatest Hits labels , respectively . It became available for download from the PlayStation Store on September 30 , 2009 , in North America , October 1 in Europe , and November 11 , 2010 , in Japan . Sony released a limited @-@ edition bundle pack only in North America , on June 3 , 2008 . The pack included the game , a UMD of the 2007 film Superbad , a voucher for the PSP title Syphon Filter : Combat Ops , and a red edition of the console imprinted with an image of Kratos ' face on the rear . As of June 2012 , Chains of Olympus has sold more than 3 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide . 
 Together with God of War : Ghost of Sparta , the game was released for the PlayStation 3 as part of the God of War : Origins Collection ( called God of War Collection – Volume II in Europe ) on September 13 , 2011 , in North America , September 16 in Europe , September 29 in Australia , and October 6 in Japan . The collection is a remastered port of both games to the PS3 hardware , with features including high @-@ definition resolution , stereoscopic 3D , anti @-@ aliased graphics locked at 60 frames per second , DualShock 3 vibration function , and PlayStation 3 Trophies . God of War : Origins Collection and full trials of its two games were also released for download on the PlayStation Store on September 13 , 2011 , in North America . By June 2012 , the collection had sold 711 @,@ 737 copies worldwide . On August 28 , 2012 , God of War Collection , God of War III , and Origins Collection were released as part of the God of War Saga under Sony 's line of PlayStation Collections for the PlayStation 3 in North America . 
 = = Reception = = 
 God of War : Chains of Olympus received critical acclaim from reviewers and achieved the highest composite score for a PlayStation Portable title , scoring 91 out of 100 at Metacritic , who describe their score as " universal acclaim " , and 91 @.@ 06 % at GameRankings . The game was praised for its graphics and presentation . Matt Leone of 1UP claimed Chains of Olympus is " a technical showpiece for Sony , and arguably the best @-@ looking game on the system . " Robert Falcon of <unk> similarly praised the presentation , calling it " an absolute stunner , the pinnacle of PSP development " . He also praised the visuals as " absolutely breathtaking , " and that the " game moves beautifully throughout , with very little loss in detail or speed . " However , G4 's Jonathan Hunt said that it " occasionally suffers from screen tearing and framerate drops . " 
 Several reviewers praised Ready at Dawn 's solution for the controls and gameplay . Because the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) controller has two analog sticks and the PSP only has one , GamePro stated " the lack of a second analog stick could have been problematic but it 's not . " <unk> similarly stated that despite the lack of a second analog stick , " Kratos handles superbly on the PSP " and that the weapon and magic attacks are " mapped out perfectly around the PSP 's control set @-@ up . " IGN 's Chris Roper even claimed the control scheme " works better than on the PS2 . " Roper further claimed that Ready at Dawn " has done a stellar job of keeping Kratos ' move set intact , " stating that " combat is extremely responsive . " Matt Leone of 1UP similarly praised developers solution for the control scheme as well as the game 's " fantastic " pacing . However , GamePro criticized the relative lack of variety in enemies . The puzzles were criticized , and G4 claimed that some " are so maddeningly difficult to solve " , while GameSpot 's Aaron Thomas noted the lack of puzzles , claiming that it " could have used more " . GamePro also criticized the fact that " You still have to lug boxes around to solve environmental puzzles " . Kristan Reed of EuroGamer also criticized Ready at Dawn for cutting some puzzles , as well as cutting co @-@ op play , multiplayer , dialogue , and characters . 
 GameSpot and IGN criticized the short length and minimal boss fights , although GamePro stated that it has " the same epic feel " as the previous installments and claimed that if it was the only God of War title , " it would still stand on its own merits . " Cheat Code Central claimed Chains of Olympus is " one of the best games ever made for the PSP . " They claimed that it is " definitely a must @-@ buy game for all current fans " and that it " has everything you 've come to expect from God of War , just in a little disc and on a smaller screen . " GameTrailers went on to praise the replay value for being able to " bring your powered @-@ up methods of destruction with you . " 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 In IGN 's Best of 2008 Awards , Chains of Olympus received the awards for " Best PSP Action Game " , " Best Graphics Technology " , and " Best Use of Sound " . In GameSpot 's Best Games of 2008 , it received the " Readers ' Choice Award " . Diehard <unk> awarded it " Best PSP Game " for 2008 . At the 2008 Spike Video Game Awards , it was a nominee for " Best Handheld Game " . It was Metacritic 's 2008 " PSP Game of the Year " . In September 2010 , GamePro named God of War : Chains of Olympus the best PSP game . 
 = Problem of Apollonius = 
 In Euclidean plane geometry , Apollonius 's problem is to construct circles that are tangent to three given circles in a plane ( Figure 1 ) . Apollonius of Perga ( ca . 262 BC – ca . 190 BC ) posed and solved this famous problem in his work <unk> ( <unk> , " <unk> " ) ; this work has been lost , but a 4th @-@ century report of his results by Pappus of Alexandria has survived . Three given circles generically have eight different circles that are tangent to them ( Figure 2 ) and each solution circle encloses or excludes the three given circles in a different way : in each solution , a different subset of the three circles is enclosed ( its complement is excluded ) and there are 8 subsets of a set whose cardinality is 3 , since 8 = 23 . 
 In the 16th century , Adriaan van Roomen solved the problem using intersecting hyperbolas , but this solution does not use only straightedge and compass constructions . François Viète found such a solution by exploiting limiting cases : any of the three given circles can be shrunk to zero radius ( a point ) or expanded to infinite radius ( a line ) . Viète 's approach , which uses simpler limiting cases to solve more complicated ones , is considered a plausible reconstruction of Apollonius ' method . The method of van Roomen was simplified by Isaac Newton , who showed that Apollonius ' problem is equivalent to finding a position from the differences of its distances to three known points . This has applications in navigation and positioning systems such as LORAN . 
 Later mathematicians introduced algebraic methods , which transform a geometric problem into algebraic equations . These methods were simplified by exploiting symmetries inherent in the problem of Apollonius : for instance solution circles generically occur in pairs , with one solution enclosing the given circles that the other excludes ( Figure 2 ) . Joseph Diaz Gergonne used this symmetry to provide an elegant straightedge and compass solution , while other mathematicians used geometrical transformations such as reflection in a circle to simplify the configuration of the given circles . These developments provide a geometrical setting for algebraic methods ( using Lie sphere geometry ) and a classification of solutions according to 33 essentially different configurations of the given circles . 
 Apollonius ' problem has stimulated much further work . Generalizations to three dimensions — constructing a sphere tangent to four given spheres — and beyond have been studied . The configuration of three mutually tangent circles has received particular attention . René Descartes gave a formula relating the radii of the solution circles and the given circles , now known as Descartes ' theorem . Solving Apollonius ' problem iteratively in this case leads to the Apollonian gasket , which is one of the earliest fractals to be described in print , and is important in number theory via Ford circles and the Hardy – Littlewood circle method . 
 = = Statement of the problem = = 
 The general statement of Apollonius ' problem is to construct one or more circles that are tangent to three given objects in a plane , where an object may be a line , a point or a circle of any size . These objects may be arranged in any way and may cross one another ; however , they are usually taken to be distinct , meaning that they do not coincide . Solutions to Apollonius ' problem are sometimes called Apollonius circles , although the term is also used for other types of circles associated with Apollonius . 
 The property of tangency is defined as follows . First , a point , line or circle is assumed to be tangent to itself ; hence , if a given circle is already tangent to the other two given objects , it is counted as a solution to Apollonius ' problem . Two distinct geometrical objects are said to intersect if they have a point in common . By definition , a point is tangent to a circle or a line if it intersects them , that is , if it lies on them ; thus , two distinct points cannot be tangent . If the angle between lines or circles at an intersection point is zero , they are said to be tangent ; the intersection point is called a tangent point or a point of tangency . ( The word " tangent " derives from the Latin present participle , <unk> , meaning " touching " . ) In practice , two distinct circles are tangent if they intersect at only one point ; if they intersect at zero or two points , they are not tangent . The same holds true for a line and a circle . Two distinct lines cannot be tangent in the plane , although two parallel lines can be considered as tangent at a point at infinity in inversive geometry ( see below ) . 
 The solution circle may be either internally or externally tangent to each of the given circles . An external tangency is one where the two circles bend away from each other at their point of contact ; they lie on opposite sides of the tangent line at that point , and they exclude one another . The distance between their centers equals the sum of their radii . By contrast , an internal tangency is one in which the two circles curve in the same way at their point of contact ; the two circles lie on the same side of the tangent line , and one circle encloses the other . In this case , the distance between their centers equals the difference of their radii . As an illustration , in Figure 1 , the pink solution circle is internally tangent to the medium @-@ sized given black circle on the right , whereas it is externally tangent to the smallest and largest given circles on the left . 
 Apollonius ' problem can also be formulated as the problem of locating one or more points such that the differences of its distances to three given points equal three known values . Consider a solution circle of radius rs and three given circles of radii r1 , r2 and r3 . If the solution circle is externally tangent to all three given circles , the distances between the center of the solution circle and the centers of the given circles equal d1 
 = r1 + rs , d2 = 
 r2 + rs and d3 
 = r3 + rs , respectively . Therefore , differences in these distances are constants , such as d1 − d2 = 
 r1 − r2 ; they depend only on the known radii of the given circles and not on the radius rs of the solution circle , which cancels out . This second formulation of Apollonius ' problem can be generalized to internally tangent solution circles ( for which the center @-@ center distance equals the difference of radii ) , by changing the corresponding differences of distances to sums of distances , so that the solution @-@ circle radius rs again cancels out . The re @-@ formulation in terms of center @-@ center distances is useful in the solutions below of Adriaan van Roomen and Isaac Newton , and also in hyperbolic positioning or trilateration , which is the task of locating a position from differences in distances to three known points . For example , navigation systems such as LORAN identify a receiver 's position from the differences in arrival times of signals from three fixed positions , which correspond to the differences in distances to those transmitters . 
 = = History = = 
 A rich repertoire of geometrical and algebraic methods have been developed to solve Apollonius ' problem , which has been called " the most famous of all " geometry problems . The original approach of Apollonius of Perga has been lost , but reconstructions have been offered by François Viète and others , based on the clues in the description by Pappus . The first new solution method was published in 1596 by Adriaan van Roomen , who identified the centers of the solution circles as the intersection points of two hyperbolas . Van Roomen 's method was refined in 1687 by Isaac Newton in his Principia , and by John Casey in 1881 . 
 Although successful in solving Apollonius ' problem , van Roomen 's method has a drawback . A prized property in classical Euclidean geometry is the ability to solve problems using only a compass and a straightedge . Many constructions are impossible using only these tools , such as dividing an angle in three equal parts . However , many such " impossible " problems can be solved by intersecting curves such as hyperbolas , ellipses and parabolas ( conic sections ) . For example , doubling the cube ( the problem of constructing a cube of twice the volume of a given cube ) cannot be done using only a straightedge and compass , but <unk> showed that the problem can be solved by using the intersections of two parabolas . Therefore , van Roomen 's solution — which uses the intersection of two hyperbolas — did not determine if the problem satisfied the straightedge @-@ and @-@ compass property . 
 Van Roomen 's friend François Viète , who had urged van Roomen to work on Apollonius ' problem in the first place , developed a method that used only compass and straightedge . Prior to Viète 's solution , <unk> doubted whether Apollonius ' problem could be solved by straightedge and compass . Viète first solved some simple special cases of Apollonius ' problem , such as finding a circle that passes through three given points which has only one solution if the points are distinct ; he then built up to solving more complicated special cases , in some cases by shrinking or swelling the given circles . According to the 4th @-@ century report of Pappus of Alexandria , Apollonius ' own book on this problem — entitled <unk> ( <unk> , " <unk> " ; Latin : De <unk> , De <unk> ) — followed a similar progressive approach . Hence , Viète 's solution is considered to be a plausible reconstruction of Apollonius ' solution , although other reconstructions have been published independently by three different authors . 
 Several other geometrical solutions to Apollonius ' problem were developed in the 19th century . The most notable solutions are those of Jean @-@ Victor Poncelet ( 1811 ) and of Joseph Diaz Gergonne ( 1814 ) . Whereas Poncelet 's proof relies on homothetic centers of circles and the power of a point theorem , Gergonne 's method exploits the conjugate relation between lines and their poles in a circle . Methods using circle inversion were pioneered by Julius Petersen in 1879 ; one example is the annular solution method of <unk> Coxeter . Another approach uses Lie sphere geometry , which was developed by Sophus Lie . 
 Algebraic solutions to Apollonius ' problem were pioneered in the 17th century by René Descartes and Princess Elisabeth of Bohemia , although their solutions were rather complex . Practical algebraic methods were developed in the late 18th and 19th centuries by several mathematicians , including Leonhard Euler , Nicolas Fuss , Carl Friedrich Gauss , Lazare Carnot , and Augustin Louis Cauchy . 
 = = Solution methods = = 
 = = = Intersecting hyperbolas = = = 
 The solution of Adriaan van Roomen ( 1596 ) is based on the intersection of two hyperbolas . Let the given circles be denoted as C1 , C2 and C3 . Van Roomen solved the general problem by solving a simpler problem , that of finding the circles that are tangent to two given circles , such as C1 and C2 . He noted that the center of a circle tangent to both given circles must lie on a hyperbola whose foci are the centers of the given circles . To understand this , let the radii of the solution circle and the two given circles be denoted as rs , r1 and r2 , respectively ( Figure 3 ) . The distance d1 between the centers of the solution circle and C1 is either rs + r1 or rs − r1 , depending on whether these circles are chosen to be externally or internally tangent , respectively . Similarly , the distance d2 between the centers of the solution circle and C2 is either rs + r2 or rs − r2 , again depending on their chosen tangency . Thus , the difference d1 − d2 between these distances is always a constant that is independent of rs . This property , of having a fixed difference between the distances to the foci , characterizes hyperbolas , so the possible centers of the solution circle lie on a hyperbola . A second hyperbola can be drawn for the pair of given circles C2 and C3 , where the internal or external tangency of the solution and C2 should be chosen consistently with that of the first hyperbola . An intersection of these two hyperbolas ( if any ) gives the center of a solution circle that has the chosen internal and external tangencies to the three given circles . The full set of solutions to Apollonius ' problem can be found by considering all possible combinations of internal and external tangency of the solution circle to the three given circles . 
 Isaac Newton ( 1687 ) refined van Roomen 's solution , so that the solution @-@ circle centers were located at the intersections of a line with a circle . Newton formulates Apollonius ' problem as a problem in trilateration : to locate a point Z from three given points A , B and C , such that the differences in distances from Z to the three given points have known values . These four points correspond to the center of the solution circle ( Z ) and the centers of the three given circles ( A , B and C ) . 
 Instead of solving for the two hyperbolas , Newton constructs their <unk> lines instead . For any hyperbola , the ratio of distances from a point Z to a focus A and to the <unk> is a fixed constant called the eccentricity . The two directrices intersect at a point T , and from their two known distance ratios , Newton constructs a line passing through T on which Z must lie . However , the ratio of distances TZ / TA is also known ; hence , Z also lies on a known circle , since Apollonius had shown that a circle can be defined as the set of points that have a given ratio of distances to two fixed points . ( As an aside , this definition is the basis of bipolar coordinates . ) Thus , the solutions to Apollonius ' problem are the intersections of a line with a circle . 
 = = = Viète 's reconstruction = = = 
 As described below , Apollonius ' problem has ten special cases , depending on the nature of the three given objects , which may be a circle ( C ) , line ( L ) or point ( P ) . By custom , these ten cases are distinguished by three letter codes such as CCP . Viète solved all ten of these cases using only compass and straightedge constructions , and used the solutions of simpler cases to solve the more complex cases . 
 Viète began by solving the PPP case ( three points ) following the method of Euclid in his Elements . From this , he derived a lemma corresponding to the power of a point theorem , which he used to solve the LPP case ( a line and two points ) . Following Euclid a second time , Viète solved the LLL case ( three lines ) using the angle bisectors . He then derived a lemma for constructing the line perpendicular to an angle bisector that passes through a point , which he used to solve the LLP problem ( two lines and a point ) . This accounts for the first four cases of Apollonius ' problem , those that do not involve circles . 
 To solve the remaining problems , Viète exploited the fact that the given circles and the solution circle may be re @-@ sized in tandem while preserving their tangencies ( Figure 4 ) . If the solution @-@ circle radius is changed by an amount Δr , the radius of its internally tangent given circles must be likewise changed by Δr , whereas the radius of its externally tangent given circles must be changed by − Δr . Thus , as the solution circle swells , the internally tangent given circles must swell in tandem , whereas the externally tangent given circles must shrink , to maintain their tangencies . 
 Viète used this approach to shrink one of the given circles to a point , thus reducing the problem to a simpler , already solved case . He first solved the <unk> case ( a circle and two lines ) by shrinking the circle into a point , rendering it a LLP case . He then solved the CLP case ( a circle , a line and a point ) using three <unk> . Again shrinking one circle to a point , Viète transformed the CCL case into a CLP case . He then solved the CPP case ( a circle and two points ) and the CCP case ( two circles and a point ) , the latter case by two <unk> . Finally , Viète solved the general CCC case ( three circles ) by shrinking one circle to a point , rendering it a CCP case . 
 = = = Algebraic solutions = = = 
 Apollonius ' problem can be framed as a system of three equations for the center and radius of the solution circle . Since the three given circles and any solution circle must lie in the same plane , their positions can be specified in terms of the ( x , y ) coordinates of their centers . For example , the center positions of the three given circles may be written as ( x1 , y1 ) , ( x2 , y2 ) and ( x3 , <unk> ) , whereas that of a solution circle can be written as ( xs , ys ) . Similarly , the radii of the given circles and a solution circle can be written as r1 , r2 , r3 and rs , respectively . The requirement that a solution circle must exactly touch each of the three given circles can be expressed as three coupled quadratic equations for xs , ys and rs : 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 The three numbers s1 , s2 and s3 on the right @-@ hand side , called signs , may equal ± 1 , and specify whether the desired solution circle should touch the corresponding given circle internally ( s 
 = 1 ) or externally ( s = 
 − 1 ) . For example , in Figures 1 and 4 , the pink solution is internally tangent to the medium @-@ sized given circle on the right and externally tangent to the smallest and largest given circles on the left ; if the given circles are ordered by radius , the signs for this solution are " − + − " . Since the three signs may be chosen independently , there are eight possible sets of equations ( 2 × 2 × 2 = 8 ) , each set corresponding to one of the eight types of solution circles . 
 The general system of three equations may be solved by the method of <unk> . When multiplied out , all three equations have <unk> + <unk> on the left @-@ hand side , and <unk> on the right @-@ hand side . <unk> one equation from another eliminates these quadratic terms ; the remaining linear terms may be re @-@ arranged to yield formulae for the coordinates xs and ys 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 where M , N , P and Q are known functions of the given circles and the choice of signs . Substitution of these formulae into one of the initial three equations gives a quadratic equation for rs , which can be solved by the quadratic formula . Substitution of the numerical value of rs into the linear formulae yields the corresponding values of xs and ys . 
 The signs s1 , s2 and s3 on the right @-@ hand sides of the equations may be chosen in eight possible ways , and each choice of signs gives up to two solutions , since the equation for rs is quadratic . This might suggest ( incorrectly ) that there are up to sixteen solutions of Apollonius ' problem . However , due to a symmetry of the equations , if ( rs , xs , ys ) is a solution , with signs si , then so is ( − rs , xs , ys ) , with opposite signs − si , which represents the same solution circle . Therefore , Apollonius ' problem has at most eight independent solutions ( Figure 2 ) . One way to avoid this double @-@ counting is to consider only solution circles with non @-@ negative radius . 
 The two roots of any quadratic equation may be of three possible types : two different real numbers , two identical real numbers ( i.e. , a degenerate double root ) , or a pair of complex conjugate roots . The first case corresponds to the usual situation ; each pair of roots corresponds to a pair of solutions that are related by circle inversion , as described below ( Figure 6 ) . In the second case , both roots are identical , corresponding to a solution circle that transforms into itself under inversion . In this case , one of the given circles is itself a solution to the Apollonius problem , and the number of distinct solutions is reduced by one . The third case of complex conjugate radii does not correspond to a geometrically possible solution for Apollonius ' problem , since a solution circle cannot have an imaginary radius ; therefore , the number of solutions is reduced by two . Interestingly , Apollonius ' problem cannot have seven solutions , although it may have any other number of solutions from zero to eight . 
 = = = Lie sphere geometry = = = 
 The same algebraic equations can be derived in the context of Lie sphere geometry . That geometry represents circles , lines and points in a unified way , as a five @-@ dimensional vector X 
 = ( v , cx , cy , w , sr ) , where c = 
 ( cx , cy ) is the center of the circle , and r is its ( non @-@ negative ) radius . If r is not zero , the sign s may be positive or negative ; for visualization , s represents the orientation of the circle , with counterclockwise circles having a positive s and clockwise circles having a negative s . The parameter w is zero for a straight line , and one otherwise . 
 In this five @-@ dimensional world , there is a bilinear product similar to the dot product : 
 <formula> 
 The Lie quadric is defined as those vectors whose product with themselves ( their square norm ) is zero , ( X | X ) 
 = 0 . Let X1 and X2 be two vectors belonging to this quadric ; the norm of their difference equals 
 <formula> 
 The product distributes over addition and subtraction ( more precisely , it is bilinear ) : 
 <formula> 
 Since ( X1 | X1 ) = 
 ( X2 | X2 ) 
 = 0 ( both belong to the Lie quadric ) and since w1 = 
 w2 
 = 1 for circles , the product of any two such vectors on the quadric equals 
 <formula> 
