 where the vertical bars sandwiching c1 − c2 represent the length of that difference vector , i.e. , the Euclidean norm . This formula shows that if two quadric vectors X1 and X2 are orthogonal ( perpendicular ) to one another — that is , if ( X1 | X2 ) = 
 0 — then their corresponding circles are tangent . For if the two signs s1 and s2 are the same ( i.e. the circles have the same " orientation " ) , the circles are internally tangent ; the distance between their centers equals the difference in the radii 
 <formula> 
 Conversely , if the two signs s1 and s2 are different ( i.e. the circles have opposite " orientations " ) , the circles are externally tangent ; the distance between their centers equals the sum of the radii 
 <formula> 
 Therefore , Apollonius ' problem can be re @-@ stated in Lie geometry as a problem of finding perpendicular vectors on the Lie quadric ; specifically , the goal is to identify solution vectors <unk> that belong to the Lie quadric and are also orthogonal ( perpendicular ) to the vectors X1 , X2 and X3 corresponding to the given circles . 
 <formula> 
 The advantage of this re @-@ statement is that one can exploit theorems from linear algebra on the maximum number of linearly independent , simultaneously perpendicular vectors . This gives another way to calculate the maximum number of solutions and extend the theorem to higher @-@ dimensional spaces . 
 = = = <unk> methods = = = 
 A natural setting for problem of Apollonius is inversive geometry . The basic strategy of inversive methods is to transform a given Apollonius problem into another Apollonius problem that is simpler to solve ; the solutions to the original problem are found from the solutions of the transformed problem by undoing the transformation . Candidate transformations must change one Apollonius problem into another ; therefore , they must transform the given points , circles and lines to other points , circles and lines , and no other shapes . Circle inversion has this property and allows the center and radius of the inversion circle to be chosen judiciously . Other candidates include the Euclidean plane isometries ; however , they do not simplify the problem , since they merely shift , rotate , and mirror the original problem . 
 Inversion in a circle with center O and radius R consists of the following operation ( Figure 5 ) : every point P is mapped into a new point P ' such that O , P , and P ' are collinear , and the product of the distances of P and P ' to the center O equal the radius R squared 
 <formula> 
 Thus , if P lies outside the circle , then P ' lies within , and vice versa . When P is the same as O , the inversion is said to send P to infinity . ( In complex analysis , " infinity " is defined in terms of the Riemann sphere . ) Inversion has the useful property that lines and circles are always transformed into lines and circles , and points are always transformed into points . Circles are generally transformed into other circles under inversion ; however , if a circle passes through the center of the inversion circle , it is transformed into a straight line , and vice versa . Importantly , if a circle crosses the circle of inversion at right angles ( intersects perpendicularly ) , it is left unchanged by the inversion ; it is transformed into itself . 
 Circle inversions correspond to a subset of Möbius transformations on the Riemann sphere . The planar Apollonius problem can be transferred to the sphere by an inverse stereographic projection ; hence , solutions of the planar Apollonius problem also pertain to its counterpart on the sphere . Other inversive solutions to the planar problem are possible besides the common ones described below . 
 = = = Pairs of solutions by inversion = = = 
 Solutions to Apollonius ' problem generally occur in pairs ; for each solution circle , there is a conjugate solution circle ( Figure 6 ) . One solution circle excludes the given circles that are enclosed by its conjugate solution , and vice versa . For example , in Figure 6 , one solution circle ( pink , upper left ) encloses two given circles ( black ) , but excludes a third ; conversely , its conjugate solution ( also pink , lower right ) encloses that third given circle , but excludes the other two . The two conjugate solution circles are related by inversion , by the following argument . 
 In general , any three distinct circles have a unique circle — the radical circle — that intersects all of them perpendicularly ; the center of that circle is the radical center of the three circles . For illustration , the orange circle in Figure 6 crosses the black given circles at right angles . Inversion in the radical circle leaves the given circles unchanged , but transforms the two conjugate pink solution circles into one another . Under the same inversion , the corresponding points of tangency of the two solution circles are transformed into one another ; for illustration , in Figure 6 , the two blue points lying on each green line are transformed into one another . Hence , the lines connecting these conjugate tangent points are invariant under the inversion ; therefore , they must pass through the center of inversion , which is the radical center ( green lines intersecting at the orange dot in Figure 6 ) . 
 = = = = Inversion to an annulus = = = = 
 If two of the three given circles do not intersect , a center of inversion can be chosen so that those two given circles become concentric . Under this inversion , the solution circles must fall within the annulus between the two concentric circles . Therefore , they belong to two one @-@ parameter families . In the first family ( Figure 7 ) , the solutions do not enclose the inner concentric circle , but rather revolve like ball bearings in the annulus . In the second family ( Figure 8 ) , the solution circles enclose the inner concentric circle . There are generally four solutions for each family , yielding eight possible solutions , consistent with the algebraic solution . 
 When two of the given circles are concentric , Apollonius ' problem can be solved easily using a method of Gauss . The radii of the three given circles are known , as is the distance <unk> from the common concentric center to the non @-@ concentric circle ( Figure 7 ) . The solution circle can be determined from its radius rs , the angle θ , and the distances ds and dT from its center to the common concentric center and the center of the non @-@ concentric circle , respectively . The radius and distance ds are known ( Figure 7 ) , and the distance dT = rs ± <unk> , depending on whether the solution circle is internally or externally tangent to the non @-@ concentric circle . Therefore , by the law of cosines , 
 <formula> 
 Here , a new constant C has been defined for brevity , with the subscript indicating whether the solution is externally or internally tangent . A simple trigonometric rearrangement yields the four solutions 
 <formula> 
 This formula represents four solutions , corresponding to the two choices of the sign of θ , and the two choices for C. The remaining four solutions can be obtained by the same method , using the substitutions for rs and ds indicated in Figure 8 . Thus , all eight solutions of the general Apollonius problem can be found by this method . 
 Any initial two disjoint given circles can be rendered concentric as follows . The radical axis of the two given circles is constructed ; choosing two arbitrary points P and Q on this radical axis , two circles can be constructed that are centered on P and Q and that intersect the two given circles orthogonally . These two constructed circles intersect each other in two points . Inversion in one such intersection point F renders the constructed circles into straight lines emanating from F and the two given circles into concentric circles , with the third given circle becoming another circle ( in general ) . This follows because the system of circles is equivalent to a set of Apollonian circles , forming a bipolar coordinate system . 
 = = = = Resizing and inversion = = = = 
 The usefulness of inversion can be increased significantly by resizing . As noted in Viète 's reconstruction , the three given circles and the solution circle can be resized in tandem while preserving their tangencies . Thus , the initial Apollonius problem is transformed into another problem that may be easier to solve . For example , the four circles can be resized so that one given circle is shrunk to a point ; alternatively , two given circles can often be resized so that they are tangent to one another . Thirdly , given circles that intersect can be resized so that they become non @-@ intersecting , after which the method for inverting to an annulus can be applied . In all such cases , the solution of the original Apollonius problem is obtained from the solution of the transformed problem by undoing the resizing and inversion . 
 = = = = = Shrinking one given circle to a point = = = = = 
 In the first approach , the given circles are shrunk or swelled ( appropriately to their tangency ) until one given circle is shrunk to a point P. In that case , Apollonius ' problem degenerates to the CCP limiting case , which is the problem of finding a solution circle tangent to the two remaining given circles that passes through the point P. Inversion in a circle centered on P transforms the two given circles into new circles , and the solution circle into a line . Therefore , the transformed solution is a line that is tangent to the two transformed given circles . There are four such solution lines , which may be constructed from the external and internal homothetic centers of the two circles . Re @-@ inversion in P and undoing the resizing transforms such a solution line into the desired solution circle of the original Apollonius problem . All eight general solutions can be obtained by shrinking and swelling the circles according to the differing internal and external tangencies of each solution ; however , different given circles may be shrunk to a point for different solutions . 
 = = = = = Resizing two given circles to tangency = = = = = 
 In the second approach , the radii of the given circles are modified appropriately by an amount Δr so that two of them are tangential ( touching ) . Their point of tangency is chosen as the center of inversion in a circle that intersects each of the two touching circles in two places . Upon inversion , the touching circles become two parallel lines : Their only point of intersection is sent to infinity under inversion , so they cannot meet . The same inversion transforms the third circle into another circle . The solution of the inverted problem must either be ( 1 ) a straight line parallel to the two given parallel lines and tangent to the transformed third given circle ; or ( 2 ) a circle of constant radius that is tangent to the two given parallel lines and the transformed given circle . Re @-@ inversion and adjusting the radii of all circles by Δr produces a solution circle tangent to the original three circles . 
 = = = Gergonne 's solution = = = 
 Gergonne 's approach is to consider the solution circles in pairs . Let a pair of solution circles be denoted as CA and CB ( the pink circles in Figure 6 ) , and let their tangent points with the three given circles be denoted as A1 , A2 , A3 , and B1 , B2 , B3 , respectively . Gergonne 's solution aims to locate these six points , and thus solve for the two solution circles . 
 Gergonne 's insight was that if a line L1 could be constructed such that A1 and B1 were guaranteed to fall on it , those two points could be identified as the intersection points of L1 with the given circle C1 ( Figure 6 ) . The remaining four tangent points would be located similarly , by finding lines L2 and L3 that contained A2 and B2 , and A3 and B3 , respectively . To construct a line such as L1 , two points must be identified that lie on it ; but these points need not be the tangent points . Gergonne was able to identify two other points for each of the three lines . One of the two points has already been identified : the radical center G lies on all three lines ( Figure 6 ) . 
 To locate a second point on the lines L1 , L2 and L3 , Gergonne noted a reciprocal relationship between those lines and the radical axis R of the solution circles , CA and CB . To understand this reciprocal relationship , consider the two tangent lines to the circle C1 drawn at its tangent points A1 and B1 with the solution circles ; the intersection of these tangent lines is the pole point of L1 in C1 . Since the distances from that pole point to the tangent points A1 and B1 are equal , this pole point must also lie on the radical axis R of the solution circles , by definition ( Figure 9 ) . The relationship between pole points and their polar lines is reciprocal ; if the pole of L1 in C1 lies on R , the pole of R in C1 must conversely lie on L1 . Thus , if we can construct R , we can find its pole P1 in C1 , giving the needed second point on L1 ( Figure 10 ) . 
 Gergonne found the radical axis R of the unknown solution circles as follows . Any pair of circles has two centers of similarity ; these two points are the two possible intersections of two tangent lines to the two circles . Therefore , the three given circles have six centers of similarity , two for each distinct pair of given circles . Remarkably , these six points lie on four lines , three points on each line ; moreover , each line corresponds to the radical axis of a potential pair of solution circles . To show this , Gergonne considered lines through corresponding points of tangency on two of the given circles , e.g. , the line defined by A1 / A2 and the line defined by B1 / B2 . Let X3 be a center of similitude for the two circles C1 and C2 ; then , A1 / A2 and B1 / B2 are pairs of <unk> points , and their lines intersect at X3 . It follows , therefore , that the products of distances are equal 
 <formula> 
 which implies that X3 lies on the radical axis of the two solution circles . The same argument can be applied to the other pairs of circles , so that three centers of similitude for the given three circles must lie on the radical axes of pairs of solution circles . 
 In summary , the desired line L1 is defined by two points : the radical center G of the three given circles and the pole in C1 of one of the four lines connecting the homothetic centers . Finding the same pole in C2 and C3 gives L2 and L3 , respectively ; thus , all six points can be located , from which one pair of solution circles can be found . Repeating this procedure for the remaining three homothetic @-@ center lines yields six more solutions , giving eight solutions in all . However , if a line <unk> does not intersect its circle <unk> for some k , there is no pair of solutions for that homothetic @-@ center line . 
 = = Special cases = = 
 = = = Ten combinations of points , circles , and lines = = = 
 Apollonius problem is to construct one or more circles tangent to three given objects in a plane , which may be circles , points , or lines . This gives rise to ten types of Apollonius ' problem , one corresponding to each combination of circles , lines and points , which may be labeled with three letters , either C , L , or P , to denote whether the given elements are a circle , line or point , respectively ( Table 1 ) . As an example , the type of Apollonius problem with a given circle , line , and point is denoted as CLP . 
 Some of these special cases are much easier to solve than the general case of three given circles . The two simplest cases are the problems of drawing a circle through three given points ( PPP ) or tangent to three lines ( LLL ) , which were solved first by Euclid in his Elements . For example , the PPP problem can be solved as follows . The center of the solution circle is equally distant from all three points , and therefore must lie on the perpendicular bisector line of any two . Hence , the center is the point of intersection of any two perpendicular bisectors . Similarly , in the LLL case , the center must lie on a line bisecting the angle at the three intersection points between the three given lines ; hence , the center lies at the intersection point of two such angle bisectors . Since there are two such bisectors at every intersection point of the three given lines , there are four solutions to the general LLL problem . 
 Points and lines may be viewed as special cases of circles ; a point can be considered as a circle of infinitely small radius , and a line may be thought of an infinitely large circle whose center is also at infinity . From this perspective , the general Apollonius problem is that of constructing circles tangent to three given circles . The nine other cases involving points and lines may be viewed as limiting cases of the general problem . These limiting cases often have fewer solutions than the general problem ; for example , the replacement of a given circle by a given point halves the number of solutions , since a point can be construed as an infinitesimal circle that is either internally or externally tangent . 
 = = = Number of solutions = = = 
 The problem of counting the number of solutions to different types of Apollonius ' problem belongs to the field of enumerative geometry . The general number of solutions for each of the ten types of Apollonius ' problem is given in Table 1 above . However , special arrangements of the given elements may change the number of solutions . For illustration , Apollonius ' problem has no solution if one circle separates the two ( Figure 11 ) ; to touch both the solid given circles , the solution circle would have to cross the dashed given circle ; but that it cannot do , if it is to touch the dashed circle tangentially . Conversely , if three given circles are all tangent at the same point , then any circle tangent at the same point is a solution ; such Apollonius problems have an infinite number of solutions . If any of the given circles are identical , there is likewise an infinity of solutions . If only two given circles are identical , there are only two distinct given circles ; the centers of the solution circles form a hyperbola , as used in one solution to Apollonius ' problem . 
 An exhaustive enumeration of the number of solutions for all possible configurations of three given circles , points or lines was first undertaken by Muirhead in 1896 , although earlier work had been done by Stoll and Study . However , Muirhead 's work was incomplete ; it was extended in 1974 and a definitive enumeration , with 33 distinct cases , was published in 1983 . Although solutions to Apollonius ' problem generally occur in pairs related by inversion , an odd number of solutions is possible in some cases , e.g. , the single solution for PPP , or when one or three of the given circles are themselves solutions . ( An example of the latter is given in the section on Descartes ' theorem . ) However , there are no Apollonius problems with seven solutions . Alternative solutions based on the geometry of circles and spheres have been developed and used in higher dimensions . 
 = = = Mutually tangent given circles : Soddy 's circles and Descartes ' theorem = = = 
 If the three given circles are mutually tangent , Apollonius ' problem has five solutions . Three solutions are the given circles themselves , since each is tangent to itself and to the other two given circles . The remaining two solutions ( shown in red in Figure 12 ) correspond to the inscribed and circumscribed circles , and are called Soddy 's circles . This special case of Apollonius ' problem is also known as the four coins problem . The three given circles of this Apollonius problem form a Steiner chain tangent to the two Soddy 's circles . 
 Either Soddy circle , when taken together with the three given circles , produces a set of four circles that are mutually tangent at six points . The radii of these four circles are related by an equation known as Descartes ' theorem . In a 1643 letter to Princess Elizabeth of Bohemia , René Descartes showed that 
 <formula> 
 where ks = 1 / rs and rs are the curvature and radius of the solution circle , respectively , and similarly for the curvatures <unk> , k2 and k3 and radii r1 , r2 and r3 of the three given circles . For every set of four mutually tangent circles , there is a second set of four mutually tangent circles that are tangent at the same six points . 
 Descartes ' theorem was rediscovered independently in 1826 by Jakob Steiner , in 1842 by Philip Beecroft , and again in 1936 by Frederick Soddy . Soddy published his findings in the scientific journal Nature as a poem , The Kiss Precise , of which the first two stanzas are reproduced below . The first stanza describes Soddy 's circles , whereas the second stanza gives Descartes ' theorem . In Soddy 's poem , two circles are said to " kiss " if they are tangent , whereas the term " bend " refers to the curvature k of the circle . 
 Sundry extensions of Descartes ' theorem have been derived by Daniel <unk> . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 Apollonius ' problem can be extended to construct all the circles that intersect three given circles at a precise angle θ , or at three specified crossing angles θ1 , θ2 and <unk> ; the ordinary Apollonius ' problem corresponds to a special case in which the crossing angle is zero for all three given circles . Another generalization is the dual of the first extension , namely , to construct circles with three specified tangential distances from the three given circles . 
 Apollonius ' problem can be extended from the plane to the sphere and other quadratic surfaces . For the sphere , the problem is to construct all the circles ( the boundaries of spherical caps ) that are tangent to three given circles on the sphere . This spherical problem can be rendered into a corresponding planar problem using stereographic projection . Once the solutions to the planar problem have been constructed , the corresponding solutions to the spherical problem can be determined by inverting the stereographic projection . Even more generally , one can consider the problem of four tangent curves that result from the intersections of an arbitrary quadratic surface and four planes , a problem first considered by Charles Dupin . 
 By solving Apollonius ' problem repeatedly to find the inscribed circle , the interstices between mutually tangential circles can be filled arbitrarily finely , forming an Apollonian gasket , also known as a Leibniz packing or an Apollonian packing . This gasket is a fractal , being self @-@ similar and having a dimension d that is not known exactly but is roughly 1 @.@ 3 , which is higher than that of a regular ( or rectifiable ) curve ( d 
 = 1 ) but less than that of a plane ( d = 
 2 ) . The Apollonian gasket was first described by Gottfried Leibniz in the 17th century , and is a curved precursor of the 20th @-@ century Sierpiński triangle . The Apollonian gasket also has deep connections to other fields of mathematics ; for example , it is the limit set of <unk> groups . 
 The configuration of a circle tangent to four circles in the plane has special properties , which have been elucidated by Larmor ( 1891 ) and Lachlan ( 1893 ) . Such a configuration is also the basis for Casey 's theorem , itself a generalization of Ptolemy 's theorem . 
 The extension of Apollonius ' problem to three dimensions , namely , the problem of finding a fifth sphere that is tangent to four given spheres , can be solved by analogous methods . For example , the given and solution spheres can be resized so that one given sphere is shrunk to point while maintaining tangency . Inversion in this point reduces Apollonius ' problem to finding a plane that is tangent to three given spheres . There are in general eight such planes , which become the solutions to the original problem by reversing the inversion and the resizing . This problem was first considered by Pierre de Fermat , and many alternative solution methods have been developed over the centuries . 
 Apollonius ' problem can even be extended to d dimensions , to construct the <unk> tangent to a given set of d + 1 <unk> . Following the publication of Frederick Soddy 's re @-@ derivation of the Descartes theorem in 1936 , several people solved ( independently ) the mutually tangent case corresponding to Soddy 's circles in d dimensions . 
 = = Applications = = 
 The principal application of Apollonius ' problem , as formulated by Isaac Newton , is hyperbolic trilateration , which seeks to determine a position from the differences in distances to at least three points . For example , a ship may seek to determine its position from the differences in arrival times of signals from three synchronized transmitters . Solutions to Apollonius ' problem were used in World War I to determine the location of an artillery piece from the time a gunshot was heard at three different positions , and hyperbolic trilateration is the principle used by the Decca Navigator System and LORAN . Similarly , the location of an aircraft may be determined from the difference in arrival times of its transponder signal at four receiving stations . This <unk> problem is equivalent to the three @-@ dimensional generalization of Apollonius ' problem and applies to global positioning systems such as GPS . It is also used to determine the position of calling animals ( such as birds and whales ) , although Apollonius ' problem does not pertain if the speed of sound varies with direction ( i.e. , the transmission medium not isotropic ) . 
 Apollonius ' problem has other applications . In Book 1 , Proposition 21 in his Principia , Isaac Newton used his solution of Apollonius ' problem to construct an orbit in celestial mechanics from the center of attraction and observations of tangent lines to the orbit corresponding to instantaneous velocity . The special case of the problem of Apollonius when all three circles are tangent is used in the Hardy – Littlewood circle method of analytic number theory to construct Hans Rademacher 's contour for complex integration , given by the boundaries of an infinite set of Ford circles each of which touches several others . Finally , Apollonius ' problem has been applied to some types of packing problems , which arise in disparate fields such as the error @-@ correcting codes used on DVDs and the design of pharmaceuticals that bind in a particular enzyme of a pathogenic bacterium . 
 = Mikael Samuelsson = 
 Karl Mikael Samuelsson ( born 23 December 1976 ) is a Swedish former professional ice hockey right winger . Samuelsson began his career in Sweden , starting with Södertälje SK as a junior in 1994 . He went on to also play for Swedish teams IK Nyköping , Frölunda HC and Brynäs IF . After being selected 145th overall in the 1998 NHL Entry Draft by the San Jose Sharks , he moved to North America for the 2000 – 01 NHL season . Samuelsson spent short stints with the Sharks , New York Rangers , Pittsburgh Penguins and Florida Panthers , before returning to Europe during the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout . As NHL play resumed , Samuelsson signed with the Detroit Red Wings , where he enjoyed individual and team success , winning the Stanley Cup with the club in 2008 . After four seasons in Detroit , he signed with the Vancouver Canucks in July 2009 . He enjoyed the two most successful individual seasons of his career with Vancouver , recording back @-@ to @-@ back 50 @-@ point campaigns in 2009 – 10 and 2010 – 11 . In his third year with the club , he was traded to the Panthers for his second stint in Florida . At the end of the season , he re @-@ signed with the Red Wings in July 2012 . 
 Internationally , Samuelsson is a member of the Triple Gold Club . In addition to his Stanley Cup championship , he has won gold medals with the Swedish national team at the 2006 Winter Olympics and 2006 World Championships . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Swedish career ( 1994 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Samuelsson played junior with Södertälje SK of the J20 SuperElit , beginning in 1994 – 95 . Scoring at a point @-@ per @-@ game pace at the junior level the following season , he was called up to the club 's professional club , scoring five goals and an assist in 18 games . He helped Södertälje SK earn a promotion from the second @-@ tier HockeyAllsvenskan to Sweden 's premier league , the Elitserien , for the 1996 – 97 campaign . Debuting in the Elitserien , Samuelsson recorded six points over 29 games . While improving to 16 points in 31 games the following season , he also played in ten games for IK Nyköping in the Allsvenskan . During the subsequent off @-@ season , Samuelsson was selected in the fifth round , 145th overall , by the San Jose Sharks in the 1998 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Upon being drafted , he remained in Sweden for two more seasons . As Södertälje SK was demoted back to the Allsvenskan for the 1998 – 99 season , Samuelsson remained in the Elitserien by joining Frölunda HC , playing with both teams over the course of the season . While scoring 23 points over 18 games with Södertälje , he managed five points over 27 games with Frölunda . The following season , 1999 – 2000 , Samuelsson transferred to Brynäs IF of the Elitserien and recorded seven points in 40 games . He helped the club to the second @-@ best record in the regular season , before losing in the semifinals to Modo Hockey . He ranked second in team @-@ scoring with nine points in 11 post @-@ season games . 
 = = = Early NHL career ( 2000 – 05 ) = = = 
 Samuelsson moved to North America in 2000 – 01 to begin playing within the San Jose Sharks organization . He was assigned to the club 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Kentucky <unk> , out of training camp , where he spent the majority of the season . He had 32 goals and 78 points over 66 games in the AHL to finish seventh in League scoring . Called up to the Sharks on two occasions over the course of the season , he appeared in his first four NHL games , recording no points . 
 In the subsequent off @-@ season , Samuelsson was traded to the New York Rangers , along with fellow prospect Christian Gosselin , in exchange for veteran forward Adam Graves on June 24 , 2001 . He began the 2001 – 02 season with the Rangers ' AHL affiliate , the Hartford Wolf Pack , but after notching nine points in eight games , he was recalled to the NHL on November 5 . He scored his first two NHL goals on November 20 against goaltender Patrick Roy in a 5 – 3 win against the Colorado Avalanche . Samuelsson 's first goal came short @-@ handed and broke Roy 's three @-@ game shutout streak , which was in contention to tie the modern @-@ day NHL record at the time of four games . Samuelsson remained with the Rangers for the rest of the season and recorded six goals and 16 assists over 67 games as an NHL rookie . He was utilized in primarily defensive roles during his time in New York , playing on the penalty kill and matching up against opposing teams ' top offensive lines . 
 In the off @-@ season , Samuelsson was re @-@ signed by the Rangers and made the club 's opening roster for the 2002 – 03 campaign . Late in the season , he was dealt to the Pittsburgh Penguins in an eight @-@ player trade on February 10 , 2003 . Along with Samuelsson , the Rangers sent Rico Fata , Joël Bouchard , Richard Lintner and cash to the Penguins in exchange for Alexei Kovalev , Dan <unk> , Janne <unk> and Mike Wilson . Samuelsson scored two goals in 22 games with the Penguins to finish his second NHL season with a combined 10 goals and 24 points between Pittsburgh and New York . Looking to move up in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft , the Penguins traded him on draft @-@ day , along with their first- and second @-@ round picks ( used to select Nathan Horton and Stefan Meyer , respectively ) , to the Florida Panthers in exchange for the first overall selection that year ( used to pick goaltender Marc @-@ André Fleury ) and a third @-@ round pick ( Daniel Carcillo ) on June 21 , 2003 . 
 Samuelsson spent most of his time with the Panthers on the injured reserve list , beginning with a fractured jaw after receiving a high @-@ stick from Branislav <unk> on November 22 , 2003 . He did not return until January 2004 , missing 22 games . That same month , Samuelsson fractured his hand , missing another 21 games . After finishing the campaign with nine points in 37 games , he was not tendered a qualifying offer by the Panthers and subsequently became a free agent . 
 As it became apparent that the following NHL season would be suspended due to a lockout , Samuelsson initially signed with Genève @-@ Servette HC of the Swiss National League A in September 2004 . He appeared in 12 games for the club , recording six points . A month after signing in Switzerland , he returned to Södertälje SK of the Elitserien in late October . He recorded 20 points over 29 games as the club qualified for the eighth and final playoff spot , where they were defeated by <unk> BK in four @-@ straight games . Samuelsson notched six points in ten post @-@ season games . 
 = = = Detroit Red Wings ( 2005 – 2009 ) = = = 
 With NHL play set to resume following the lockout , Samuelsson was contacted by Håkan Andersson , director of European scouting for the Detroit Red Wings , in the summer of 2005 . Still in Europe , he was loaned from Södertälje SK to the Swiss Rapperswil @-@ Jona Lakers for two games in early @-@ September . Samuelsson competed in one game for the Lakers before signing a one @-@ year contract with the Red Wings . Joining Detroit marked a turning point in his career . Playing mainly on the third line , he was used on the power play and emerged as a legitimate offensive player in the NHL . During his first season with the Red Wings , he recorded 23 goals , 22 assists and 45 points in 71 games . He missed nine games late in the campaign due to a wrist injury , but returned for the playoffs . Seeded first overall in the Western Conference , Detroit was eliminated in the opening round by the Edmonton Oilers . Samuelsson notched an assist while appearing in the first six NHL playoff games of his career . 
 In March 2006 , Samuelsson signed a three @-@ year contract extension with the Red Wings . He recorded 34 points in 53 games the following season , while missing 18 games to a broken right foot . Finishing first overall in the West once more , Detroit advanced to the Conference Semifinals , where they were eliminated by the Anaheim Ducks . Samuelsson contributed 11 points in 18 post @-@ season games . 
 After a 40 @-@ point campaign in 2007 – 08 , Samuelsson helped the Red Wings to a Stanley Cup championship . He recorded 13 points in 22 post @-@ season games , including the first two goals in Game 1 of the Stanley Cup Finals against the Pittsburgh Penguins . Helping the Red Wings defeat the Penguins in six games , the victory made Samuelsson a member of the Triple Gold Club , having won gold medals at the Winter Olympics and World Championships two years prior . Also accomplishing the feat were teammates and fellow Swedes Henrik Zetterberg and Niklas Kronwall . 
 The following season , Samuelsson recorded a second consecutive 40 @-@ point campaign . In the ensuing playoffs , he scored the overtime @-@ winning goal in Game 2 of the Semifinals against the Chicago Blackhawks . He advanced with the Red Wings to the 2009 Stanley Cup Finals , where they met the Penguins for the second consecutive year . Detroit was defeated in seven games , missing out on back @-@ to @-@ back championships . Samuelsson contributed 10 points in 21 playoff games . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 2009 – 11 ) = = = 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Samuelsson signed a three @-@ year deal with the Vancouver Canucks on July 3 , 2009 , worth an annual average value of $ 2 @.@ 5 million . He signed with the Canucks anticipating an expanded offensive role with more ice time , while also commenting that Detroit 's efforts to re @-@ sign him " came up too short , too late . " 
 He scored his first goal as a Canuck in the 2009 – 10 season opener against the Calgary Flames in a 5 – 3 loss on October 1 . On March 9 , 2010 , Samuelsson scored his first career hat trick in a 6 – 4 win against the Colorado Avalanche . All three goals were scored in the second period and assisted by countryman Henrik Sedin . He later earned NHL First Star of the Week honours on March 15 for notching six goals and four assists in four games . The following day , Samuelsson injured his shoulder in a game against the New York Islanders . He missed eight games , returning in time for the 2010 playoffs . He reached the 30 @-@ goal plateau for the first time in his career and added 23 assists for a career @-@ high 53 points . Then @-@ Head Coach Alain Vigneault played Samuelsson primarily on the second line with Ryan Kesler and Mason Raymond , while he also earned time on the top unit of Henrik and Daniel Sedin . 
 Facing the Los Angeles Kings in the opening round of the playoffs , Samuelsson tied two Canucks playoff records . With seven goals in six games , he tied Pavel Bure for most goals in a series and with goals in the first five games of the series , he tied Cliff Ronning for longest goal @-@ scoring streak . The Canucks advanced to the second round , where they were defeated by the Chicago Blackhawks in six games . Samuelsson finished the post @-@ season with eight goals and 15 points in 12 games to lead the Canucks in scoring . 
 The following season , Samuelsson suffered a mild concussion after colliding with St. Louis Blues forward Vladimír Sobotka on December 5 , 2010 , causing him to miss one game . Two months later , he was named the NHL 's Second Star for the week ending February 6 , 2011 . He scored two goals and six points in three Canucks victories to earn the distinction . While his goals total decreased to 18 in 2010 – 11 , Samuelsson recorded his second consecutive 50 @-@ point campaign with a career @-@ high 32 assists . Ranking fourth in team point @-@ scoring behind the Sedins and Kesler , he helped the Canucks to the franchise 's first Presidents ' Trophy as the team with the NHL 's best regular season record . 
 Samuelsson struggled in the 2011 playoffs , as he returned from a lower @-@ body injury that kept him from the six games near the end of the regular season . Recording three points over 11 games against the Blackhawks and Nashville Predators in the first two rounds , he was demoted at one point to the Canucks ' fourth line in the second round against Nashville ; it was suspected he was playing through an injury . In Game 5 of the second round against Nashville , he fell to the ice while stretching to retrieve a loose puck and needed to be helped off the ice . Twelve days later , on May 19 , he underwent surgery for his adductor tendon and a sports hernia , sidelining him for the remainder of the playoffs . With Samuelsson out of the lineup , Vancouver advanced to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , where they were defeated in seven games by the Boston Bruins . 
 Recovering in time for the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Samuelsson played six games for Vancouver before being traded away on October 22 , 2011 . He was sent back to Florida for his second stint with the Panthers , along with fellow veteran forward Marco Sturm , in exchange for forwards David Booth and Steven Reinprecht , as well as a third @-@ round draft pick in 2013 . In an interview with <unk> at the end of the season , he told Swedish reporters that while he enjoyed playing in Vancouver , competing alongside countrymen Alexander Edler and the Sedins in particular , he " didn 't think very highly of management . " He also criticized Alexandre Burrows for his actions during the Finals , when he bit Patrice Bergeron 's finger after the Bruins forward had put it in his mouth , citing it a rallying point for the Bruins in their defeat of the Canucks . 
 = = = Returns to Florida and Detroit ( 2011 – 2014 ) = = = 
 Samuelsson did not make his Panthers debut until December 8 , 2011 , missing the team 's first 20 games following the trade due to a groin complications that had not fully healed in the off @-@ season . In his first month with the team , he suffered another lower @-@ body injury after being checked by Phoenix Coyotes forward Shane Doan during a game on December 20 ; he missed five games . Upon returning , he scored his first goal as a Panther since the 2003 – 04 season on January 6 , 2012 , in a 5 – 2 loss to the New Jersey Devils . Samuelsson finished the campaign with 14 goals and 31 points over 54 games , split between Vancouver and Florida . His points @-@ per @-@ game ranked fifth on the Panthers . 
 Becoming an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Samuelsson signed a two @-@ year , $ 6 million deal to return to the Detroit Red Wings on July 1 , 2012 . The deal included a full no @-@ trade clause . 
 = = = Djurgårdens IF ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = 
 After two injury plagued seasons with the Red Wings , Samuelsson agreed to a one @-@ year contract with Djurgårdens IF of the Swedish Hockey League ( SHL ) on July 29 , 2014 . Samuelsson 's season in Djurgården began with the premiere season of the Champions Hockey League . In the three group stage games he participated in , Samuelsson scored two goals and three points . He scored his first goal for Djurgården in the sixth round of the SHL regular season , a 4 – 5 loss against Örebro HK . He then injured his knee on October 16 and was out of play until October 28 . Samuelsson was again out of the lineup between January 10 and February 19 due to a groin injury , missing 11 games . At the end of the SHL regular season , Samuelsson had scored 13 goals and 26 points in 37 games . He announced his retirement from professional hockey on March 26 , 2015 . 
 = = International play = = 
 Samuelsson debuted for the Swedish national team at the 2005 World Championships in Austria . He recorded five points in nine games as Sweden finished in fourth place , losing the bronze medal game to Russia . The following year , he competed in the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin . He contributed four points in eight games , while playing on a line with future Canucks teammates Henrik and Daniel Sedin . Samuelsson recorded an assist against Finland in the final , helping Sweden win gold . Later that year , he played for Sweden at the 2006 World Championships in Latvia , a tournament in which Sweden defeated the Czech Republic 4 – 0 in the final . Sweden became the first team in hockey history to win the Olympic gold and the World Championship in the same year . He recorded an international career @-@ high nine points over eight games to tie for second in team scoring , while also leading Sweden in shots on goal . 
 Four years later , Samuelsson attracted media attention after being left off the Swedish roster for the 2010 Winter Olympics . He told reporters , " I pretty much have one comment and maybe I 'll regret it . But they [ Team Sweden officials ] can go fuck themselves , " adding that he was not interested in being later added to the roster in the event of an injury . His omission was highly publicized by Swedish media as he was in the midst of a career season with the Canucks ( he went on to record the second @-@ highest goals total among Swedish NHLers that season in 2009 – 10 , with 30 ) . Sweden went on to lose to Slovakia in the quarterfinal , failing to medal . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Samuelsson 's primary offensive attribute is his shot . Rather than relying on stickhandling in the offensive zone , his primary tendency is to direct the puck towards the net , hoping for a rebound . Before becoming an offensive threat later in his career , he established himself first as a defensively responsible forward in the NHL , earning time on the penalty kill and against opposing team 's top players . Strong on his skates , he is also noted to play aggressively , as well . As a result , Samuelsson is known as a versatile , two @-@ way player . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Samuelsson was born in Mariefred , a town 65 kilometres ( 40 mi ) from the Swedish capital of Stockholm . He and his wife Sandra have two children , a son , William , and a daughter , <unk> . In the off @-@ seasons , Samuelsson returns with his family to the Stockholm area , where he owns a home in <unk> . After the Red Wings ' championship victory in 2008 , he brought the Stanley Cup with him to <unk> and had a civic reception with the Cup in Mariefred on July 29 , 2008 . Aside from hockey , Samuelsson is an avid golfer . 
 In September 2010 , Samuelsson posted an online charity auction for fans in Sweden to benefit minor hockey in Mariefred . The highest bidder at $ 6 @,@ 500 , won an all @-@ expenses paid trip for two to Vancouver , featuring tickets to two Canucks games at Rogers Arena , access to the team 's locker room and a five @-@ night stay in Samuelsson 's personal home . Samuelsson has also been involved in the National Hockey League Players Association ( NHLPA ) ' s Goals and Dreams program , which provides equipment to minor hockey teams around the world , including Mariefred . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 Statistics taken from <unk> 
 = = Awards = = 
 = One Love ( Jennifer Lopez song ) = 
 " One Love " is a song recorded by American entertainer Jennifer Lopez for her seventh studio album , Love ? ( 2011 ) . The R & B song was written by Lopez , Anesha Birchett , Antea Shelton and Emile " D 'Mile " Dernst II , the song 's producer . " One Love " was initially written and presented to Lopez by A @-@ Plus ( Birchett and Shelton ) and D 'Mile to record , however , upon hearing the demo of the song , she was not pleased with its verses . Liking the chorus and idea of the song , Lopez wrote new verses to the song with the song 's original writers . 
 " One Love " received generally positive acclaim from music critics , who cited it as a stand @-@ out track on Love ? . Critics made note of the song 's indirect manner , which according to them contains references to Lopez 's ex @-@ boyfriends and husbands , such as Sean Combs and Ben Affleck . Following the release of Love ? , it was revealed that Lopez 's first husband , Ojani Noa , intended to bring her to court over the song , claiming that it contained lyrics about him without his prior knowledge – violating agreements made between the two following their divorce . Despite this , it has been noted that Noa is not referenced in the song and the lawsuit never transpired . 
 = = Production and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " One Love " is a R & B song , with a length of three minutes and fifty @-@ four seconds ( 3 : 54 ) . It was written by Lopez , along with A @-@ Plus ( Anesha Birchett and Antea Shelton ) and the song 's producer Emile " D 'Mile " Dernst II . A @-@ Plus ( Birchett and Shelton ) and D 'Mile wrote and presented the song to Lopez , who loved the idea of it , but thought the track to be " very generic " . In response , she asked : " Why don 't we make it more ' me ' ? " . Lopez then sat with them and wrote new verses for the song , going through every major relationship she had , asking the question : " is there one love ? " . Lopez described the song as being about " if we can ever have one true soul mate " . She recorded her vocals for the song with Kuk Harrell at Record Plant Recording Studios , with additional vocal production from Josh Gudwin , Jim Annunziato and Birchett . John <unk> was responsible for Lopez 's vocal editing on " One Love " , which was later mixed by Mike " Handz " Donaldson at Chalice Recording Studios . 
 Scott Shetler of Pop Crush noted that the song was indirectly about Lopez 's ex @-@ boyfriends and husbands . He commented that the song was " obviously condemning several exes " and wrote " A logical reading of the lyrics , though , reveals that the “ bad boy ” is probably Lopez ’ s former long @-@ term boyfriend and Bad Boy Records founder Diddy , while the guy J. Lo danced with until saying “ I do ” is her second husband Cris Judd , a professional dancer and choreographer . The lyrics go on to reference two more men , who would seem to be Ben Affleck ( “ went nowhere but kept the ring ” ) and Lopez ’ s current husband , Marc Anthony ( “ he sang to me . ” ) " Allison Stewart from The Washington Post said that " One Love " examines all of her high @-@ profiled relationships , and commented that Lopez is not " trying to gin up controversy with these red @-@ meat tidbits about her personal life . She honestly thought you might be curious about Ben Affleck and whatever happened to that huge engagement ring he gave her all those years ago , during <unk> ’ s dark reign . " 
 = = Critical response and lawsuit = = 
 " One Love " received generally positive acclaim from music critics . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine stated that beyond " One Love " , " Love ? doesn 't dig very deep into its titular query " . Monica Herrera from Billboard wrote in her track @-@ by @-@ track review of Love ? : " ' One Love ' – " What 's wrong with a girl wanting everything ? " Jennifer wonders over this slow roller , " and responded with " Nothing , when you 're a triple @-@ threat superstar . " Robert Copsey from Digital Spy called the song generic , while Poppy Reid of The Music Network complimented the song for its lyrical content ; stating that apart from other songs on Love ? , Lopez is acting her age in " One Love " , the album she wrote herself . 
 After the release of Love ? , it was reported that Lopez 's former husband Ojani Noa had filed a lawsuit against Lopez over " One Love " , claiming that it contained lyrics about him without his prior knowledge . Noa 's business partner Ed Meyer released a statement saying that the song violates agreements between Noa and Lopez in their divorce . He further stated that : " I have a conference with the attorney for J.Lo 's partners in the publishing rights for this song on Monday , as we will be adding the dispute over One Love to the lawsuits [ ... ] Any negative reference to Ojani Noa is prohibited by contract , and J.Lo would be in breach to Ojani Noa . Ojani Noa will be bringing a separate civil action over the song , as soon as the album is released , so as to avoid prior restraint , which we are accusing J.Lo of in our case . " Scott Shetler from Pop Crush noted that Noa was not actually referenced in the lyrics of the song . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lopez performed " One Love " live on October 22 , 2011 at an anniversary concert for the Mohegan Sun casino in Uncasville , Connecticut , as part of a medley with her debut single " If You Had My Love " . Photographs of her past high profile relationships appeared on a backdrop as she performed . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love ? . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = We 're Not in Kansas Anymore = 
 " We 're Not in Kansas Anymore " is the pilot episode of the American teen drama 90210 , which premiered on September 2 , 2008 on The CW in the United States and Global in Canada . 90210 is a spin @-@ off to Beverly Hills , 90210 , and the fourth series in the Beverly Hills , 90210 continuity . The pilot was written by Gabe Sachs , Jeff Judah and Rob Thomas , and directed by Mark Piznarski . The episode , aired with " The Jet Set " in a two @-@ hour premiere , averaged 4 @.@ 9 million viewers on its original broadcast . 
 The development of a Beverly Hills , 90210 spin @-@ off by The CW was reported on March 13 , 2008 ; four days later , a detailed breakdown of the pilot written by Thomas was released . Thomas later announced that he was leaving the series , and Sachs and Judah were hired to write a new version of the script . Casting began before the script was completed , and several cast members of the original series were approached , of whom several accepted to appear . Reviews of the episode were mixed , and one critic explained , " it 's not a great show but it 's not a terrible teen drama , not by a long shot . The new 90210 turns out to be a solid sequel with plenty of shout @-@ outs to fans of the old 90210 . " 
 The pilot introduces the Wilson family , along with numerous other students at West Beverly Hills High , where Annie Wilson ( <unk> Grimes ) and Dixon Wilson ( Tristan Wilds ) begin attendance . Their father , Harry Wilson ( Rob Estes ) , returns from Kansas to his childhood home of Beverly Hills with his family to care of his mother , former television star Tabitha Wilson ( Jessica Walter ) , who has a drinking problem . Annie and Dixon struggle to adjust to their new lives while making new friends and adhering to their parents ' wishes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Wilson family — consisting of parents Harry and Debbie ( Lori Loughlin ) , daughter Annie , and adopted son Dixon arrive at the mansion of Harry 's mother , Tabitha . Where they will be taking care of her . Annie and Dixon discuss what their first day of school will be like at West Beverly Hills High , where their father will be the principal . Annie hopes to hook up with a friend named Ethan Ward ( Dustin Milligan ) , whom she met two summers ago . When she arrives at school the next day , Annie spots Ethan in his car and makes eye contact , only to realize that he is receiving fellatio from a fellow student . Dixon goes to journalism class , where he meets Navid Shirazi ( Michael Steger ) , while Annie goes to her first class taught by Ryan Matthews ( Ryan Eggold ) . Matthews asks popular student , Naomi Clark ( AnnaLynne McCord ) , to show Annie around the school . After class , Naomi talks to Annie about her busy life and upcoming sixteenth birthday party . Annie discovers that she is dating Ethan , and meets her best friend , Adrianna Tate @-@ Duncan ( Jessica Lowndes ) , who is the lead in the school play Spring Awakening . Annie , who is also an actress , is upset that she arrived too late to audition for a role , although Adrianna says that she would be better use backstage . Later , Adrianna takes several pills from a drug dealer , and agrees to pay him two hundred dollars the next day . 
 Annie sees Ethan and promises not to tell Naomi what she saw . They part ways for lunch , and Annie meets Silver ( Jessica Stroup ) ; however , Naomi pulls Annie away , explaining that Silver makes insulting YouTube videos about people . Naomi invites Annie to her birthday party , and they decide to go shopping together . Harry and guidance counselor Kelly Taylor ( Jennie Garth ) and <unk> meet with Naomi 's parents , who feel that Naomi should not have to hand in her assignments on time when she is planning her party . Before she leaves , Naomi 's mother , Tracy ( Christina Moore ) , reminds Harry that they dated in high school . Naomi receives a text message from her mother , telling her that she must complete the assignment that night . Annie remembers that she completed a similar assignment for her old school , and offers to give Naomi a copy for inspiration . 
 Dixon is accepted into the lacrosse team after trying out , but gets into a fight with team member George Evans ( Kellan Lutz ) . Annie tells Dixon of her invitation to Naomi 's party , and how she saw Ethan cheating on Naomi . The next day at school , Annie finds out that Silver made a video blog about her , depicting her as a bitchy farmer . Annie confronts Silver , who felt insulted by Annie 's decision to hang out with Naomi . When Silver is reprimanded by her half @-@ sister , Kelly , she realizes that she shouldn 't reprimand Annie for what happened between her and Naomi in the past . Elsewhere , Ethan is forced by his team members to lie that Dixon started the fight during , and he is subsequently kicked off the team . Annie argues with Ethan because of his lying , and asks what happened to the Ethan that she met two years ago . In class , Naomi reads an exact copy of Annie 's paper . Afterward , when Annie confronts Naomi , she apologizes by giving Annie an $ 800 dress . Annie decides to watch the school play rehearsals , and Silver apologizes for the video by asking the drama teacher to let Annie sing with the chorus for the play . Much to Adrianna 's dismay , Annie is allowed to be in the play . Naomi again gets into trouble when Harry discovers that she cheated , and forces her to write the paper in his office . Ethan has a fight with George and tells the truth , resulting in Dixon being allowed to play on the team . Dixon tells Annie that he feels horrible , as he sent a text message to Naomi telling her that Ethan is cheating on her . 
 Harry and Debbie punish Annie by not allowing her to go to Naomi 's party . When they reconsider and decide to let her go , they discover that she has already left . Harry goes to the party to find Annie , but is instead told by Tracy that they have a son together , whom she gave up for adoption over twenty years ago . Adrianna , who had previously stolen money from Naomi 's purse , claims to have found it and gives it back . Naomi checks her phone messages and learns that Ethan is cheating on her . Naomi asks Ethan if he is really cheating on her , and leaves the party after he fails to answer . Annie leaves with Silver for another party on the beach , where she apologizes to Ethan for revealing that he was cheating on Naomi . When she asks why he told the truth about Dixon not starting the fight , he replies that he is trying to be the good guy he used to be . Annie , Silver , Dixon and Navid spend the rest of the night swimming at the beach . In the closing scenes , Kelly talks to the father of her four @-@ year @-@ old son , Adrianna pays her drug dealer with money she stole from Naomi , and Ethan visits Naomi 's house . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 On March 13 , 2008 , it was announced that The CW was developing a contemporary spin @-@ off of Beverly Hills , 90210 , which first aired on Fox from October 1990 to May 2000 . The project was put on the fast track by the network , and an order of the pilot was expected by the end of the month . The Beverly Hills , 90210 creator , Darren Star , was announced not to be involved with the project , as well as producer Aaron Spelling , who died in 2006 . The only surviving element from the original series was the Creative Artists Agency , the talent agency which masterminded the spin @-@ off idea . Veronica Mars creator Rob Thomas was in negotiations to write the pilot , and Mark Piznarski was in talks to direct . 
 A detailed breakdown of the pilot written by Thomas was released on March 17 , containing information on the plot and characters of the series . None of the characters were related to the original series ; however , the series ' featured a similar premise : a family with two teenagers who recently moved from the Midwest to Beverly Hills . To reflect the situation at the Beverly Hills school , where around 40 percent of the students were from Persian descent , a student named Navid Shirazi was created . Thomas intended to introduce The Peach Pit , the diner from Beverly Hills , 90210 , but noted that it would not be featured in the pilot . The writer considered giving the siblings a job at a movie theater , as he did not want them to use their parent 's credit cards . Thomas revealed that there were plans to reintroduce one of the original cast members , but had not met with any of them to discuss a role . Thomas later elaborated the producers wanted to see " as many of the original cast members as possible " , but were careful not to " parade them all out in the pilot " . 
 On April 14 , Thomas announced that he was leaving the series to focus on his two pilots for ABC . Gabe Sachs and Jeff Judah were hired as the new executive producer and wrote a new version of the script in late April . Sachs said that although Thomas had a " great script " , their version of the script was " edgier " . Judah said that they were trying to ground their script in reality , with real character stories and emotional stories . The writers wanted the audience to relate to the characters ' problems , which they wanted to be truthful and emotional , but also comedic . The pair were interested in telling several stories simultaneously , featuring many characters . The pair changed the surname of the family from Mills to Wilson , and told reporters that they would be adding their " comedic impulses " to the script . Sachs and Judah found the parents to be an integral part of the series , and designed them to be contemporary parents . Since the producers were both fathers , they designed the script to include more prominent adult story lines and a strong point of view on parenting . Judah was interested in focusing on how the family kept their moral center when moving to Beverly Hills , and the way the parents dealt with their teenagers . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 On March 13 , Kristin Dos Santos of E ! confirmed that the series would be a spin @-@ off with new characters , and not a remake . In order for the project to be ready for the network 's " upfront " presentations to advertisers in May , casting began before the script was completed . The first actor to be cast was Dustin Milligan on April 1 , followed by AnnaLynne McCord on April 14 . Sachs found Milligan to be " really funny " , and changed Ethan to better represent his personality . McCord was cast because , according to Sachs , " she 's someone who is worldly , and there 's a sophistication to her that 's interesting " . Actress and singer Hilary Duff was rumored to have been offered the part of Annie , but she told reports that it was " not true " . The role was eventually given to <unk> Grimes , who says she was raised watching the original series . Sachs and Judah had seen Grimes ' work before and knew " she had the acting chops " , and she was cast after acting a dramatic scene which she " just killed " . Sachs stated , " she can act , she 's beautiful , and she can give this sweet cuteness ( that lets us see ) through her eyes into this world . " 
 Lori Loughlin auditioned for the role of Debbie and was given the part straight away . Sachs thought that Loughlin was too established to read for the part , but realized that she understood the role immediately . The producers were fans of Jessica Walter after watching her film , Play Misty for Me . Sachs found that Walter knew pieces of scenes , and suggested " stuff that works " . Sachs described Ryan Eggold , who portrayed Matthews , as " a sophisticated actor , and he 's also very funny " . Sachs believed that every time Eggold would be on screen , " people are going to go , ' Wow ! ' " . 
 The producers were looking for an actor who could portray Silver as a " quirky kid who moves to her own beat " . Sachs explained that Jessica Stroup " came in dressed for the part , artsy and quirky , and she had her hair up and she had a bandana . She nailed it . " The producers were fans of Tristan Wilds for his acting on The Wire , and hoped to hire him as Dixon from the start of casting . When asked about Michael Steger , who portrays Navid , Sachs said " he 's just great " . Rob Estes , the last actor to join the series , was a previous cast member of the first Beverly Hills , 90210 spin @-@ off , Melrose Place . Estes was sought by The CW to play Harry , but was contracted on the drama Women 's Murder Club . When that series was canceled , Sachs called Estes and explained the spin @-@ off to him , and he thought it was a great idea . Sachs promised that although he was playing a parent , he would not " be furniture ... as in the seldom seen or heard parents who populate many youth @-@ centric series , like the Walsh parents on the original 90210 . " 
 Following rumors of cast members from Beverly Hills , 90210 appearing on the spin @-@ off , The CW confirmed that Shannen Doherty , Jennie Garth , Tori Spelling and Joe E. Tata would be returning in recurring roles as their original characters . Sachs was familiar with Garth , and talked to her about a possible role in the series . Garth agreed to star on the series without reading a script after brainstorming ideas with Sachs . The producers offered Garth a role as a series regular , but she opted to sign on as a recurring character . Doherty decided to appear after talking with Sachs , but her appearance was moved to the second episode . Sachs described Tata 's casting as an accident ; a friend told Sachs that he had seen Tata in a store , which led to the offer of a recurring role in the series . Sachs said that Tata was ecstatic about the idea and agreed . After reading the script , Spelling expressed interest in returning , and the writers decided to give her character her own fashion line . Spelling was scheduled to appear in the premiere , but due to personal reasons and the birth of her daughter , she opted to appear later in the season . On August 11 , it was reported that Spelling had pulled out of the series after discovering that she was receiving less pay than Garth and Doherty . Spelling asked for her salary of $ 20 @,@ 000 per episode to be increased to match their salaries — $ 40 @,@ 000 to $ 50 @,@ 000 per episode — but when denied she left the show altogether . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On May 11 , 2008 , one day before The CW 's upfront presentations , the network officially picked up the series for the 2008 – 2009 television season . Filming for the pilot began in early June in Los Angeles . Torrance High School , which served as the high school in the original series was also used by the spin @-@ off . Filming for the series usually took place in numerous high schools in Torrance and El Segundo , although several scenes were filmed in Torrance High School because of its large auditorium . Sachs returned to the school for the first time after graduating in 1979 . Judah announced that the Peach Pit would be back , but as a coffeehouse rather than a diner . Other filming locations included the mansions of the Bel @-@ Air neighborhood and the Hollywood night club <unk> . One week prior to the pilot 's broadcast , it was confirmed that filming was still taking place , as the producers wanted to reshoot scenes and add extra ones . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 Prior to the season premieres of most television series in September , a common practice by television networks would be to send screeners of pilots of new shows to critics . On August 18 , The CW notified critics that they would not be releasing the premiere episodes , saying , " [ we ] have made the strategic marketing decision not to screen 90210 for any media in advance of its premiere . We 're not hiding anything ... simply keeping a lid on 90210 until 9 @.@ 02 , riding the curiosity and anticipation into premiere night , and letting all our constituents see it at the same time . " Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV speculated that the decision was an indication of the low quality of the episodes , but pointed out that the pilot may not have been finished in time for a screener release , which was later confirmed to be the case . Despite not having watched the episode , the Parents Television Council said in a statement that " if Gossip Girl is any indication of what 90210 will look like , advertisers have plenty of reason to steer clear of the show ... No reputable advertiser should even consider sponsoring the show without viewing the content in advance . " " We 're Not in Kansas Anymore " , along with the following episode , averaged 4 @.@ 9 million viewers throughout the two @-@ hour broadcast on September 2 . This gave The CW its highest @-@ rated premiere ever in the adults 18 @-@ 49 demographic with a 2 @.@ 6 . By comparison , the series finale of the original series was watched by 25 million viewers on its original broadcast in May 2000 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Most reviews of the pilot were average , claiming that while it was not bad , it was not great either . Metacritic gave the episode a Metascore — a weighted average based on the impressions of a select 12 critical reviews — of 46 , signifying mixed or average reviews . When compared to the original series , Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette felt that the spin @-@ off covered the same themes — family , friends , teen melodrama , relationships — but with more humor . Owen praised the compelling characters and the acting , and found the dialogue to be more clever than painful . Adam Buckman of the New York Post commented on the crude language used by the characters , and found there was nothing new that could have surprised him with watching the episode . Ray Richmond of The Hollywood Reporter found that despite The CW 's decision not to send out screeners to critics , the pilot was " [ not ] so horrible after all " . Richmond praised the actors and writers , especially returning actor Garth , whom he found looked " terrific " and acted well . 
 Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger found that while 90210 was neither " trainwreck nor masterpiece " , it remained remarkably faithful in tone and spirit to the original series . The reviewer realized that " the dialogue was at times intentionally funny " , and pointed out that although the actors looked to old for high school , they acted " a lot more natural " than the actors on the original series . Sepinwall questioned The CW 's intended audience , saying that while the music and styles were reminiscent of Gossip Girl , those who had not seen the original series would not have cared for the returning characters . Verne Gay of Newsday described 90210 as a " perfectly competent and reasonably seamless revival " , with enough contemporary touchstones to attract new viewers . The reviewer commended the spin @-@ off for integrating the new characters with the originals , while also including adults . Gay found that while the pilot featured too many story lines , the " vibe felt right " and it was not the disaster it was expected to be . 
 Among the reviews were several negative ones , which compared the series negatively to the original . Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe felt that like the original , 90210 was " pretty bad " . Gilbert said that the episode " seemed to take forever to set up some remarkably bland plotlines " , which he found had been executed with more finesse by other teen soaps . The reviewer criticized the writers for their " unimaginative material " , exemplified by the risqué anal sex scene which he opined would no longer be considered outrageous for a series targeted at teenagers . Gilbert claimed that the characters lacked depth and distinction , especially Naomi , whom he compared negatively to Gossip Girl 's Blair Waldorf . By contrast , Tom Gliatto of People magazine gave Naomi Clark a favorable review , but stated that he felt the cast as a whole had yet to gel . Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly described the pilot as " corny but trying to be hip , crammed with subplots until the producers figure out which ones the audience responds to . " Tucker praised Walters acting as a " slashing panache that no one else on screen approaches " , and found the only time he laughed with pleasure throughout the pilot was when her character exclaimed , " I 'm gonna call Dan Tana 's for some takeout ! " . Hal Boedeker of the Orlando Sentinel described the pilot as " a blah variation on Beverly Hills , 90210 " , and being too " extravagant and less believable " . Boedeker expressed disappointment in the series , and predicted that it would be canceled within a year . 
 = Violin Concerto ( Mendelssohn ) = 
 Felix Mendelssohn 's Violin Concerto in E minor , Op. 64 , is his last large orchestral work . It forms an important part of the violin repertoire and is one of the most popular and most frequently performed violin concertos of all time . A typical performance lasts just under half an hour . 
 Mendelssohn originally proposed the idea of the violin concerto to Ferdinand David , a close friend and then concertmaster of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra . Although conceived in 1838 , the work took another six years to complete and was not premiered until 1845 . During this time , Mendelssohn maintained a regular correspondence with David , who gave him many suggestions . The work itself was one of the foremost violin concertos of the Romantic era and was influential on many other composers . 
 Although the concerto consists of three movements in a standard fast – slow – fast structure and each movement follows a traditional form , the concerto was innovative and included many novel features for its time . Distinctive aspects include the almost immediate entrance of the violin at the beginning of the work ( rather than following an orchestral preview of the first movement 's major themes , as was typical in Classical @-@ era concertos ) and the through @-@ composed form of the concerto as a whole , in which the three movements are melodically and harmonically connected and played <unk> ( each movement immediately following the previous one ) . 
 The concerto was well received and soon became regarded as one of the greatest violin concertos of all time . The concerto remains popular to this day and has developed a reputation as an essential concerto for all aspiring concert violinists to master , and usually one of the first Romantic era concertos they learn . Many professional violinists have recorded the concerto and the work is regularly performed in concerts and classical music competitions . 
 Mendelssohn also wrote a virtuoso Concerto for Violin and String Orchestra in D minor between 1821 and 1823 , when he was 12 to 14 years old , at the same time that he produced his twelve string symphonies . This work was " rediscovered " and first recorded in 1951 by Yehudi Menuhin . 
 = = History = = 
 Following his appointment in 1835 to principal conductor of the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra , Mendelssohn named his childhood friend Ferdinand David as the orchestra 's concertmaster . The work 's origins derive from this professional collaboration . In a letter dated 30 July 1838 , Mendelssohn wrote to David : " I should like to write a violin concerto for you next winter . One in E minor runs through my head , the beginning of which gives me no peace . " 
 The concerto took another six years to complete . There are many possible reasons for the delay , including self @-@ doubt , his third symphony and an unhappy period in Berlin after a request from King Frederick William IV of Prussia . Nevertheless , Mendelssohn and David kept up a regular correspondence during this time , with Mendelssohn seeking technical and compositional advice . Indeed , this violin concerto was the first of many to have been composed with the input of a professional violinist , and would influence many future collaborations . The autographed score is dated 16 September 1844 , but Mendelssohn was still seeking advice from David until its premiere . The concerto was first performed in Leipzig on 13 March 1845 with Ferdinand David as soloist . Mendelssohn was unable to conduct due to illness and the premiere was conducted by the Danish composer Niels Gade . Mendelssohn first conducted the concerto on 23 October 1845 again with Ferdinand David as soloist . 
 = = Instrumentation = = 
 The work is scored for solo violin and a standard orchestra of its period , consisting of two flutes , two oboes , two clarinets , two bassoons , two horns , two trumpets , timpani , and strings . 
 = = Movements = = 
 The concerto consists of three movements with the following tempo markings : 
 Allegro molto <unk> ( E minor ) 
 Andante ( C major ) 
 Allegretto non troppo – Allegro molto vivace ( E major ) 
 = = = Allegro molto <unk> = = = 
 12 – 14 minutes 
 Instead of an orchestral tutti , the concerto opens with the almost immediate entry of the solo violin , playing the very tune in E minor that gave Mendelssohn no peace . Following a bravura of rapidly ascending notes , the opening theme is then restated by the orchestra . There is then a frenetic chromatic transition passage as the music subsides and modulates into a tranquil second subject theme in G major . The melody is initially played by the woodwinds with the soloist providing a pedal note on an open G string . The tune is played by the solo violin itself before a short <unk> ends the exposition section of the opening movement . The opening two themes are then combined in the development section , where the music builds up to the innovative cadenza , which Mendelssohn wrote out in full rather than allowing the soloist to improvise . The cadenza builds up speed through rhythmic shifts from quavers to quaver @-@ triplets and finally to semiquavers , which require ricochet bowing from the soloist . This serves as a link to the recapitulation , where the opening melody is played by the orchestra , accompanied by the continuing ricochet arpeggios by the soloist . During the recapitulation , the opening themes are repeated with the second theme being played in the E major before returning to E minor for the closing of the movement . The music gathers speed into the coda , which is marked ' Presto ' , before a variant of the original chromatic transition passage ends the first movement . 
 = = = Andante = = = 
 7 – 9 minutes 
 The bassoon sustains its B from the final chord of the first movement before moving up a semitone to middle C. This serves as a key change from the E minor opening movement into the lyrical C major slow movement . The movement is in ternary form and is reminiscent of Mendelssohn 's own Songs Without Words . The theme to the darker , middle section in A minor is first introduced by the orchestra before the violin then takes up both the melody and the accompaniment simultaneously . The tremulous accompaniment requires nimble dexterity from the soloist before the music returns to the main lyrical C major theme , this time leading towards a serene conclusion . 
 = = = Allegretto non troppo – Allegro molto vivace = = = 
 6 – 7 minutes 
 Following the second movement , there is a brief fourteen @-@ bar transitional passage in E minor for solo violin and strings only . This leads into the lively and effervescent finale , the whole of which is in E major and whose opening is marked by a trumpet fanfare . This movement is in sonata rondo form with an opening theme requiring fast passage work from the soloist . The opening exposition leads into a brief second B major theme which is played by the soloist and builds to a series of rapidly ascending and descending arpeggios , reminiscent of the cadenza from the first movement . The orchestra then plays a variation of the opening melody , after which the music moves into a short development section in G major . The recapitulation is essentially similar to the exposition , apart from the addition of a counter @-@ melody in the strings . The second theme is repeated , this time in the home key of E Major . There is almost a small cadenza near the end of the movement when the woodwinds play the main tune against prolonged trills from the solo violin . The concerto then concludes with a frenetic coda . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The concerto is innovative in many respects . In the first movement alone , Mendelssohn departs from the typical form of a Classical concerto in many ways , the most immediate being the entry of the soloist almost from the outset , which also occurs in his First Piano Concerto . Although the first movement is mostly in the conventional sonata form , Mendelssohn has the first theme played by the solo violin and then by the orchestra . Classical concertos typically opened with an orchestral introduction followed by a version of essentially the same material that incorporates the soloist . 
 The cadenza is also novel in that it is written out as part of the concerto and located before the recapitulation . In a typical Classical concerto , the cadenza is improvised by the performing soloist and occurs at the end of a movement , after the recapitulation and just before the final coda . Mendelssohn 's written cadenza was not included in the first published version of the concerto , but instead a " streamlined " version by Ferdinand David without the contrapuntal complexity of the original . This is the most played version today , although some artists , e.g. Arabella <unk> , play Mendelssohn 's original . Joshua Bell performs the concerto with his own cadenza . 
 The violin concerto stands out from previous concertos with its connected movements . There is no break between the first and second movements , with a bassoon note held between the two . The bridging passage between the last two movements begins almost immediately after the slow movement . The melody is similar to that of the opening , which hints at the cyclic form of the piece . The linking was designed to eliminate applause between movements . This would have come as a surprise to Mendelssohn 's audience , who , unlike today 's , were used to applauding between movements . 
 The concerto also calls on the soloist to be nothing more than an accompanist to the orchestra for extended periods , such as the ricochet arpeggios at the start of the recapitulation . This too was novel for a violin concerto of its time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mendelssohn 's Violin Concerto influenced the concertos of many other composers , who adopted aspects of it in their own concertos . 
 For example , the unusual placement of the cadenza before the recapitulation is reflected in the violin concertos of Tchaikovsky ( where the cadenza is similarly placed ) and Sibelius ( where the cadenza serves to extend the development section ) . Moreover , following this concerto it was very rare for a composer to leave a cadenza unwritten for the soloist to improvise as in the days of Mozart and Beethoven . The linking of the three movements also influenced other concertos , such as Liszt 's Second Piano Concerto . 
 The concerto itself was an instant success , warmly received at its premiere and well received by contemporary critics . By the end of the nineteenth century , the piece was already considered one of the greatest violin concertos in the repertoire . It would become one of Mendelssohn 's most popular pieces , and was still regularly performed , even when interest in his music declined in the early twentieth century . In 1906 , the year before his death , the celebrated violinist Joseph Joachim told the guests at his 75th birthday party : 
 The Germans have four violin concertos . The greatest , most uncompromising is Beethoven 's . The one by Brahms vies with it in seriousness . The richest , the most seductive , was written by Max Bruch . But the most inward , the heart 's jewel , is Mendelssohn 's . 
 The work has developed a reputation as an essential one for aspiring violin virtuosi to conquer . This has led to its becoming virtually ubiquitous in the discography of concert violinists , even including those who were only active at the very dawn of recorded sound and of whom very little recorded music exists , such as Eugène Ysaÿe . Even so , it remains technically challenging and is generally considered to be as difficult as many other famous counterparts . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Among a vast discography , the following recordings have received notable awards and outstanding reviews : 
 1964 : Josef Suk ( violin ) , Czech Philharmonic Orchestra , Karel <unk> ( conductor ) , <unk> – " Highly Recommended " by the Gramophone Classical Music Guide , 2010 
 1981 : Kyung @-@ Wha Chung ( violin ) , Montreal Symphony Orchestra , Charles Dutoit ( conductor ) , Decca – " 4 star " by the Penguin Guide 
 1998 : Robert McDuffie ( violin ) , Scottish Chamber Orchestra , Joseph <unk> ( conductor ) , Telarc – " Rosette " by the Penguin Guide 
 2007 : Daniel Hope ( violin ) , Chamber Orchestra of Europe , Thomas <unk> ( conductor ) , Deutsche Grammophon – " 10 / 10 " by <unk> ; " Highly recommended recording " by Gramophone magazine , April 2014 
 2010 : James Ehnes ( violin ) , Philharmonia Orchestra , Vladimir Ashkenazy ( conductor ) , Onyx – " Editor 's Choice " by Gramophone magazine , February 2011 ; " Recommended Recording " by <unk> ; No. 1 Mendelssohn Top Recording , Gramophone , February 2016 
 2011 : Ray Chen ( violin ) , Swedish Radio Symphony Orchestra , Daniel Harding ( conductor ) , Sony Classical – " Disc of the Month " by Gramophone magazine , June 2012 
 2012 : Philippe Quint , Orquesta <unk> de <unk> , Carlos Miguel Prieto ( conductor ) , – " Editor 's choice " by Gramophone magazine , February 2012 . 
 = 1989 – 90 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1989 – 90 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was an average cyclone season , with nine named storms and five tropical cyclones – a storm attaining maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The season officially ran from November 1 , 1989 , to April 30 , 1990 . Storms were officially tracked by the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) in an unofficial basis . The first storm , Cyclone Alibera , was the second longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone on record in the basin , with a duration of 22 days . Alibera meandered and changed directions several times before striking southeastern Madagascar on January 1 , 1989 , where it was considered the worst storm since 1925 . The cyclone killed 46 people and left widespread damage . Only the final storm of the year – Severe Tropical Storm Ikonjo – also had significant impact on land , when it left $ 1 @.@ 5 million in damage ( 1990 USD ) in the Seychelles . 
 Of the remaining storms , several passed near the Mascarene Islands but did not cause much impact . In early February , Severe Tropical Storm Cezera and Tropical Cyclone Dety were active at the same time and interacted with each other through the process of the Fujiwhara effect . Cyclone Gregoara was the strongest of the season , which originated as Cyclone Walter from the adjacent Australian basin . Gregoara attained peak winds of 170 km / h ( 110 mph ) over the open waters of the Indian Ocean in March , although the JTWC considered Alibera to be stronger . In April , Moderate Tropical Storm Hanta approached the northwest coast of Madagascar , but dissipated over the Mozambique Channel . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 During the season , the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin . Using satellite imagery from National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the agency estimated intensity through the Dvorak technique , and warned on tropical cyclones in the region from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator . At the time , the World Meteorological Organization recognized the MFR as a Regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre , and would later label the agency as a Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in 1993 . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force , also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the southwestern Indian Ocean . The season 's nine named storms and five tropical cyclones – a storm attaining maximum sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) – is the same as the long term average for the basin . 
 Operationally , the MFR considered the tropical cyclone year to begin on August 1 and continue to July 31 of the following year . However , the JTWC began the year on July 1 and it lasted through June 30 of the following year . The latter agency tracked two short @-@ lived tropical cyclones in July 1989 , labeling them Tropical Cyclone 01S and 02S , but they are not considered part of MFR 's season . After these early storms , another tropical depression formed east of Diego Garcia on September 21 , classified as Tropical Cyclone 03S . Forming from the near @-@ equatorial trough , the system moved generally to the southwest , dissipating on September 27 as it approached Mauritius . In the next month , Tropical Cyclone 04S formed closer to Diego Garcia on October 11 . The JTWC classified it as a tropical depression on October 13 but dropped advisories the next day . The system initially drifted to the south but later turned to the northwest , dissipating on October 17 . The final of a series of early tropical systems was a tropical depression that formed east of Diego Garcia on October 28 . It moved southeastward , classified by the JTWC as Tropical Cyclone 05S on October 31 . The agency briefly estimated peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , making it a tropical storm , before the storm looped back to the west and dissipated on November 2 . Later , the precursor to Australian Tropical Cyclone Bessi was tracked in the eastern portion of the south @-@ west Indian Ocean basin in the middle of April . The Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BOM ) classified the system as a minimal tropical storm while still west of 90 ° E , although the MFR did not classify the system before it entered the Australian basin on April 15 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Alibera = = = 
 The first named storm of the season , Alibera formed on December 16 , well to the northeast of Madagascar . For several days , it meandered southwestward while gradually intensifying . On December 20 , Alibera intensified to tropical cyclone status with 10 ‑ minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , or the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . That day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , an unofficial warning agency for the region , estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) , while the Météo @-@ France office in Réunion ( MFR ) estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of only 140 km / h ( 87 mph ) . After drifting erratically for several days , the storm began a steady southwest motion on December 29 as a greatly weakened system . On January 1 , Alibera struck southeastern Madagascar near Mananjary , having re @-@ intensified to just below tropical cyclone status . It weakened over land but again restrengthened upon reaching open waters on January 3 . The storm shifted directions while moving generally southward , dissipating on January 5 . It was the second longest @-@ lasting tropical cyclone in the basin since the start of satellite imagery , with a duration of 22 days . Only Cyclone Georgette in 1968 lasted longer at 24 days . 
 Early in its duration , Alibera produced gusty winds in the Seychelles . Upon moving ashore in Madagascar , the cyclone lashed coastal cities with heavy rainfall and up to 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) wind gusts . In Mananjary , nearly every building was damaged or destroyed , and locals considered it the worst storm since 1925 . Across the region , the cyclone destroyed large areas of crops , thousands of houses , and several roads and bridges . Alibera killed 46 people and left 55 @,@ 346 people homeless . After the storm , the Malagasy government requested for international assistance . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Baomavo = = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed on January 2 to the northwest of the Cocos Islands , which was tracked by the JTWC for the preceding few days before being classified as Tropical Cyclone 09S . It originated from the monsoon trough , which is an extended low pressure area within a convergence zone . It gradually intensified as it moved slowly to the southwest due to a high pressure system , or ridge , to the east . On January 3 , the system intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Baomavo , and two days later attained tropical cyclone status while turning more to the south . The JTWC estimated peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 155 km / h ( 96 mph ) on January 5 , and on the next day the MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) . An approaching cold front caused Baomavo to weaken while the storm turned southeastward . By January 8 , the system weakened to tropical depression status while looping back to the northwest , steered by a ridge to the southwest . On the next day , Baomavo dissipated over the open waters of the Indian Ocean . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Cezera = = = 
 On January 31 , a tropical disturbance formed just east of Agaléga . Moving southeastward , it intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Cezera on February 1 , the same day that the JTWC began tracking it as Tropical Cyclone 14S . Cezera quickly intensified , and the JTWC upgraded it to the equivalence of a minimal hurricane on February 3 with 1 ‑ minute peak winds of 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) . By contrast , the MFR only estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 59 mph ) . By February 4 , Cezera began a Fujiwhara interaction with Tropical Cyclone Dety , which was located to the east ; this caused the former storm to turn back to the northwest while gradually weakening . On February 6 , the storm turned to the south and later southeast , weakening to tropical depression status that day . Cezera briefly re @-@ intensified into a moderate tropical storm on February 7 , but weakened again on the next day while passing just north of St. Brandon . After turning more to the east @-@ northeast , the system turned sharply southward on February 10 , and dissipated the next day . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Dety = = = 
 A tropical depression developed within the monsoon trough on February 2 to the southwest of Diego Garcia , about 1 @,@ 125 km ( 699 mi ) east of <unk> . The JTWC had been tracking the system for several days previously , classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 16S also on February 2 . With an anticyclone – a high pressure area over the system – providing favorable conditions , the depression quickly intensified while moving generally south @-@ southwestward . It became Moderate Tropical Storm Dety on February 3 and a tropical cyclone the next day . The MFR estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 135 km / h ( 84 mph ) , while the JTWC assessed stronger 1 ‑ minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Around that time , Dety began a Fujiwhara interaction with Tropical Storm <unk> to the west , causing the former storm to turn to the east @-@ southeast . Increased wind shear weakened the cyclone , although it maintained much of its intensity through February 7 as a severe tropical storm . However , Dety quickly fell to tropical disturbance status the next day while undergoing a counterclockwise loop . After turning back to the southeast , Dety remained a weak system for several days , dissipating on February 11 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Edisoana = = = 
 The MFR began tracking a tropical disturbance on March 1 between Mauritius and Diego Garcia , which was followed by the JTWC for several days previously and classified as Tropical Cyclone 18S . Within a day , it intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Edisoana while tracking southwestward . On March 4 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , and on the next day the MFR followed suit by upgrading Edisoana to tropical cyclone status . The latter agency estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 135 km / h ( 84 mph ) , while the JTWC assessed a peak 1 ‑ minute intensity of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Around that time , the storm passed west of Rodrigues island . Edisoana accelerated southward and gradually weakened , influenced by an approaching trough . On March 7 , the storm began transitioning into an extratropical cyclone , completing it by the next day . The extratropical cyclone rapidly intensified due to the influence of the trough and a nearby ridge , later being absorbed by the westerlies . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Felana = = = 
 On March 7 , a tropical depression formed in the eastern portion of the basin to the east @-@ southeast of Diego Garcia . The nascent quickly intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Felana by March 8 , the same day that the JTWC began tracking it as Tropical Cyclone 22S . Felana moved steadily to the southwest , although on March 10 it turned to the west @-@ northwest , followed by another turn to the south @-@ southwest on the next day . During this time , the MFR only estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , although the JTWC assessed a peak 1 ‑ minute intensity of 85 km / h ( 53 mph ) . Upon turning back southward , Felana passed east of Rodrigues on March 12 . It weakened to tropical depression status on March 15 and dissipated the following day , having curved back to the southeast . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Walter @-@ Gregoara = = = 
 On March 4 , a tropical low formed from the monsoon trough in the Australian basin southwest of the Cocos Islands . It executed a large loop and later turned back to the west due to a ridge to the south , during which it was named Walter by the BOM . On March 13 , Walter crossed 90 ° E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean and was renamed Gregoara by the Mauritius Weather Service . However , the MFR did not begin issuing advisories until March 15 , when Gregoara reached 85 ° E. The JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 23S , which was a separate number from when the storm existed in the Australian basin . Gregoara moved to the southwest , intensifying into a tropical cyclone on March 16 , the same day that the JTWC upgraded it to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . On the next day , the cyclone attained peak winds – the MFR estimated 10 ‑ minute winds of 170 km / h ( 110 mph ) , while the JTWC estimated 1 ‑ minute winds of 205 km / h ( 127 mph ) . The storm subsequently weakened slowly , and was below tropical cyclone status by March 19 . Three days later , Gregoara turned to the southeast as a weakened tropical depression , subjected to cooler waters and stronger wind shear , and it became extratropical . For several days , the system moved slowly over the southern Indian Ocean , turning to the southwest and later to the southeast before dissipating on March 27 . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Hanta = = = 
 A tropical disturbance originated on April 11 just north of the Comoros in the Mozambique Channel . Originally it only consisted of a spiral area of thunderstorms , but it gradually organized . It moved southeastward and intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Hanta on April 12 , passing just north of Mayotte . On the next day , the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone <unk> with peak 1 ‑ minute winds of 85 km / h ( 55 mph ) , although the agency did not include the name Hanta in advisories . By contrast , the MFR only estimated peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Hanta approached the northwest coast of Madagascar on April 14 , passing within 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) of the <unk> Forest before turning back to the west , due to a ridge to the south . Later that day , the system weakened and dissipated . 
 In the <unk> Islands north of Madagascar , Hanta produced 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) wind gusts and 32 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) of rainfall . Later , gusts reached 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) on Mayotte , and the storm dropped 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) of precipitation over 24 hours . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ikonjo = = = 
 The final storm of the season formed as a tropical disturbance on May 11 west @-@ southwest of Diego Garcia . It moved erratically at first , initially to the west , followed by a turn to the south and later a small loop . Its movement during this time and for its duration was dictated by a powerful ridge to the south . During this time , the system remained weak , although it intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Ikonjo on May 14 . The JTWC began classifying the storm as Tropical Cyclone <unk> about two days prior . After becoming a tropical storm , Ikonjo began a steadier westward movement , gradually curving back to the west @-@ northwest , and bringing it just north of Agaléga on May 16 . Two days later , the storm quickly intensified to attain peak 10 ‑ minute winds of 95 km / h ( 59 mph ) , which made Ikonjo a severe tropical storm according to the MFR . Around that time it stalled , even drifting slightly to the west , before resuming a northwest motion , influenced by a ridge to the south . Ikonjo subsequently weakened while moving near or through the Outer Islands of the Seychelles . On May 21 , Ikonjo dissipated at the low latitude of 5 ° S. 
 Late in its duration , <unk> became a rare storm to affect the nation of Seychelles . It passed nearest to <unk> Island , where it destroyed much of the island 's hotel . On the primary island of Mahé , <unk> produced strong winds reaching 83 km / h ( 52 mph ) at Seychelles International Airport , strong enough to knock over several trees . Nationwide , the storm caused $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1990 USD ) in damage and two injuries . A ship passing through the center of Ikonjo reported wind gusts of 148 km / h ( 92 mph ) . 
 = George Ingram = 
 George <unk> Ingram , VC , MM ( 18 March 1889 – 30 June 1961 ) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest decoration for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " that can be awarded to members of the British and Commonwealth armed forces . Ingram became Australia 's final recipient of the Victoria Cross during the First World War following his actions during an attack on the village of Montbrehain in France . Leading a platoon during the engagement , he instigated several charges against a number of German strong points that eventuated in the seizure of ten machine guns and sixty @-@ two prisoners , as well as inflicting high casualties . 
 Born in the Victorian town of Bendigo , Ingram was apprenticed as a carpenter and joiner upon leaving school . Joining the militia at the age of fourteen , he later settled in Melbourne where he worked as a building contractor . Following the outbreak of the First World War , Ingram enlisted in the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force and served on New Guinea before receiving his discharge in early 1916 . Enlisting in the Australian Imperial Force on the same day , he embarked for the Western Front . He was decorated with the Military Medal following his actions as a member of a bombing section during an attack on Bapaume . Commissioned as a second lieutenant in June 1918 , Ingram returned to Australia in 1919 where he was discharged soon after . Re @-@ settling in Melbourne , he was employed as a foreman for a building contractor company . Enlisting for service in the Second World War , he was allotted to the Royal Australian Engineers and achieved the rank of captain before being placed on the Retired List in 1944 . Ingram died in 1961 at the age of 72 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ingram was born in Bendigo , Victoria , on 18 March 1889 to George Ronald Ingram , a farmer , and his wife Charlotte ( née Hubbard ) . Initially educated at the Lilydale State School , he left school at age fourteen and was apprenticed as a carpenter and joiner . Joining the militia at this time , he was attached to No. 7 Company of the Australian Garrison Artillery and in 1906 attended a military exhibition in New Zealand as a member of the Australian contingent . Completing his apprenticeship , Ingram moved to Caulfield , Melbourne , where he entered into business as a building contractor . On 19 January 1910 , Ingram married Jane Francis Nichols in a Congregational ceremony at East Prahran . 
 = = First World War = = 
 On 10 December 1914 , Ingram enlisted as a private in the 3rd Battalion , Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force at South Yarra . Initially posted for service on the newly captured German territory of New Guinea , he returned to Australia 6 December 1915 , and was discharged on 19 January with the rank of corporal . That same day , he enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force and was allotted to the 16th Reinforcements of the 24th Battalion as a private . In October , Ingram embarked with the unit from Melbourne aboard HMAT Nestor . Arriving in France , he was appointed acting corporal and joined the 24th Battalion in January 1917 . 
 On the night of 15 / 16 March 1917 , Ingram took part in the battalion 's attack on the village of Bapaume during the German withdrawal to the Hindenburg Line . Posted to a bombing section during the engagement , he became involved in a fight with German troops who outnumbered his unit . Making effective use of their grenades , the unit was able to hold off the German attack . Later during the assault , the German forces returned in large numbers , forcing the bombing section to retreat . Ingram , in conjunction with two others , covered the party 's withdrawal which thus minimised casualties . For his actions during the battle , Ingram was awarded the Military Medal , the citation noting his " ... great courage and initiative ... " . The announcement of the award was published in a supplement to the London Gazette on 11 May 1917 . 
 Promoted to temporary sergeant on 18 March , Ingram fell ill in April and was hospitalised in Britain until June when he was deemed fit to return to his battalion . He was hospitalised once again in September after dislocating his knee , and upon returning to his unit on 10 October he was made company sergeant major . It was at this time that the Australian focus for the remainder of the year was to be the Ypres sector in Belgium , and as such the 24th Battalion participated in the Battle of Passchendaele . During this time , Ingram was recommended for a commission in the 24th Battalion as a second lieutenant , which was confirmed on 20 June 1918 . Three days later , however , he was once again admitted to hospital suffering from an illness , and as such was unable to assume his duties as an officer until 12 July when he returned to the battalion . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 On 4 October 1918 , the 24th Battalion took part in the attack that captured the Beaurevoir sector in France , and was , therefore , expecting to have a rest the following day when the unit was unexpectedly ordered to take part in another attack . The assault was to commence at 06 : 05 from the village of <unk> , and lead to the capture of Montbrehain by the 21st and 24th Battalions with tanks to provide support . The action was to prove the final engagement for the Australian infantry during the war , and it was during this attack that Ingram was to earn the Victoria Cross ; the sixty @-@ fourth , and final , Australian to do so during the First World War . 
 At the designated time , the two infantry battalions commenced the attack under the cover of an artillery barrage . The advance was heavily counter @-@ attacked by German machine gun and artillery fire , but the Australians managed to continue despite the late arrival of the tanks . Approximately 100 yards ( 91 m ) from the German trenches , the 24th Battalion 's B Company — in which Ingram was commanding a platoon — became the object of severe sniper and machine gun fire , halting the unit 's advance . Under the cover of a Lewis Gun , Ingram dashed ahead of his men and led them against the German strong point . After a fierce fight , the platoon succeeded in capturing nine machine guns and killing all forty @-@ two Germans who had occupied the line ; Ingram accounting for at least eighteen of them himself . 
 Soon after , the company came under heavy fire from an old quarry occupied by over one hundred German soldiers who possessed as many as forty machine guns . Severe casualties were sustained as they began to advance for attack , including the company commander who fell seriously wounded . Taking command of the attack , Ingram rallied the men and rushed forward . Jumping into the quarry , he charged the first post himself , shooting six German soldiers and capturing a machine gun . The German forces were soon overcome , and thirty troops subsequently surrendered . 
 While his men were clearing up the remaining German positions , Ingram scouted ahead in search of machine gun nests in the village . He soon located one positioned in a house , which had been firing through the cellar ventilator . Managing to enter the house , he shot the gunner through the ventilator . He fired several more shots into the cellar before rushing to the head of the cellar stairs . By thus cutting off any means of escape , a further thirty Germans were taken prisoner . 
 The battle for Montbrehain raged until 20 : 00 that night , during which time the line had been linked up and consolidated . The casualties of the 24th Battalion had been so high that two companies of the 27th Battalion had to be attached for support ; the 24th Battalion left the frontline for the last time on 6 October . 
 The full citation for Ingram 's Victoria Cross appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette on 6 January 1919 , it read : 
 War Office , 6th January , 1919 . 
 His Majesty the KING has been graciously pleased to approve of the award of the Victoria Cross to the undermentioned Officers , Non @-@ commissioned Officers and Men : — 
 Lt. George <unk> Ingram , M.M. , 24th Bn . , A.I.F. 
 For most conspicuous bravery and initiative during the attack on Montbrehain , East of Peronne , on 5th October , 1918 . When early in the advance his platoon was held up by a strong point , Lt. Ingram , without hesitation , dashed out and rushed the post at the head of his men , capturing nine machine guns and killing 42 enemy after stubborn resistance . 
 Later , when the company had suffered severe casualties from enemy posts , and many leaders had fallen , he at once took control of the situation , rallied his men under intense fire , and led them forward . He himself rushed the first post , shot six of the enemy , and captured a machine gun , thus overcoming serious resistance . 
 On two subsequent occasions he again displayed great dash and resource in the capture of enemy posts , inflicting many casualties and taking 62 prisoners . 
 Throughout the whole day he showed the most inspiring example of courage and leadership , and freely exposed himself regardless of danger . 
 Ingram was promoted to lieutenant on 24 October , and was training away from the frontline with his battalion when the Armistice was signed on 11 November 1918 ; thus ending the war . On 25 February 1919 , Ingram was decorated with his Victoria Cross by King George V in the ballroom of Buckingham Palace . Boarding a troopship bound for Australia soon after , he arrived in Melbourne on 5 March and was discharged from the Australian Imperial Force on 2 June . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following his discharge , Ingram re @-@ settled in Melbourne and gained employment as a general foreman with E. A. & Frank Watts Pty Ltd , building contractors . In 1926 , Ingram 's marriage with his wife Jane was dissolved upon his instigation on the grounds of desertion on her behalf . On 10 February the following year , he married Lillian <unk> ( née Hart ) , a widow , at the Methodist parsonage , Malvern ; the pair were later to have one son . 
 On 11 November 1929 , Ingram attended the Victoria Dinner for recipients of the Victoria Cross in Melbourne . Following the completion of Melbourne 's Shrine of Remembrance in 1935 , Ingram was chosen as a member of its permanent guard . There had been two hundred and fifty applications for the position , of which only fourteen were appointed ; Ingram being one of the earliest . Following the outbreak of the Second World War , Ingram once again volunteered his services and enlisted in the militia on 17 November 1939 . Posted to a unit in the Royal Australian Engineers , he achieved the rank of captain before being placed on the Retired List on 6 May 1944 . 
 Ingram 's wife Lillian died in May 1951 , and on 24 December of the same year he married another widow , Myrtle Lydia Thomas ( née Cornell ) , in a ceremony at Brunswick Methodist Church ; the couple later had a son , Alex . In 1954 , Ingram attended the dedication of the Shrine of Remembrance by Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh on 28 February following an expansion on the monument to encompass Australia 's contributions to the Second World War . Two years later , he joined the Australian contingent of Victoria Cross recipients who attended the parade in London 's Hyde Park to commemorate the centenary of the institution of the Victoria Cross . On 30 June 1961 , Ingram died of coronary vascular disease at his home in Hastings , Victoria , and was buried at Frankston Cemetery . He is commemorated by a street name in Canberra . 
 On 27 May 2008 , the Victoria Cross , Military Medal and campaign medals awarded to Ingram were sold at auction by Sotheby 's of Melbourne for an approximate hammer price of A $ 383 @,@ 760 . The purchaser of the medals is unknown , but indicated that the Victoria Cross would be donated to the Australian War Memorial in Canberra . This subsequently took place , and Ingram 's Victoria Cross is currently on display along with his other medals in the Memorial 's Hall of Valour . 
 = Glebe ( rugby league team ) = 
 Glebe were an Australian rugby league foundation club who played in the New South Wales Rugby Football League 's Sydney premiership , the major competition for the sport in Sydney , from 1908 until their exit at the end of 1929 . They were formed on 9 January 1908 , with some sources suggesting that they may have been the first Sydney rugby league club to have been created . They were nicknamed and well known as the " Dirty Reds " due to the maroon colour of their playing jerseys . 
 Based in Glebe , New South Wales and playing most of their home matches out of the local Wentworth Oval , Glebe remained a highly competitive team for many years . Though they came close at times , the club was never able to secure a premiership title . After struggling towards the end of the 1920s the club was eventually voted out of the premiership . 
 = = History = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , Glebe was a working @-@ class suburb of Sydney , situated a few kilometres to the west of the city centre . A Glebe team had played in the Sydney second grade rugby competition for a number of years and due to its high popularity was promoted to a new first grade competition which started in 1900 . Glebe immediately made a big impact on the district competition , winning all three grades in the inaugural season before taking out another three first grade titles over the next seven years . 
 When the push for the formation of a new professional rugby league competition began , Glebe was one of the areas considered for the formation of a new breakaway team . The Glebe District Rugby League Football Club was formed as a result on 8 January 1908 , possibly the first rugby league club to be formed in Australia . There was much support from both players and locals for the new team and this was considered an achievement in itself for the New South Wales Rugby League . As with the local rugby team , the new rugby league club chose to play in maroon @-@ coloured jerseys ; a tradition that had been established by other sporting clubs in the Glebe area over many years . The club therefore often got nicknamed the " Dirty Reds " as a reference to the jersey colour , although this moniker had also been used previously to label other Glebe sporting identities well before the arrival of the rugby league team . 
 The club began their premiership campaign with an 8 – 5 victory over Newcastle on 20 April 1908 . Throughout the season they either remained close to or on top of the ladder and with one round remaining were on equal points with South Sydney and Eastern Suburbs to lead the competition . In the last regular @-@ season match , Glebe went down 10 – 5 to sixth @-@ placed Balmain and ended up running third overall , although the match ended up having no impact on who they would play in the finals a week later . In their semi final , Glebe went down 16 – 3 to minor premiers South Sydney and were knocked out of the competition . 
 In 1909 , the club again lost their final regular @-@ season match against Balmain 10 – 5 and ended up missing out on a possible finals berth by virtue of the loss . In 1910 , the club had a mediocre season and had little chance of ever taking the premiership out . The 1911 season was arguably the most successful in the club 's history , taking out the minor premiership outright by two points and winning 11 of their 14 matches on the way . They also secured their first @-@ ever victory over local rivals Balmain , winning 41 – 2 in the second last regular @-@ season match of the season . However , they came up against an Eastern Suburbs side led by Dally Messenger who had won six matches straight . In the final in which Glebe had a chance to take away the premiership , Eastern Suburbs won 22 – 9 , forcing the first @-@ ever Grand Final to be played since the minor premiers had a " right to challenge " if they were to lose the final . In a match where Glebe were leading almost all the way , Eastern Suburbs fought back and took the lead within the final ten minutes to 11 – 8 , giving them the premiership . 
 Following Glebe 's failure to convert their minor premiership into a premiership in 1911 , the New South Wales Rugby Football League decided that no finals would be played from 1912 unless two teams were tied on equal points at the end of the season . In round four , Glebe faced Eastern Suburbs in front of a record crowd of 22 @,@ 000 at the Royal Agricultural Society Grounds , going down 10 – 2 . After 10 rounds , Glebe trailed Eastern Suburbs by just two points and were to face them the following week with four rounds to go . In a match in which Glebe almost certainly had to win to stay in premiership contention , Eastern Suburbs won a close match 6 – 4 in front of another record crowd of 25 @,@ 000 at the Sydney Sports Ground and ended up taking away the premiership four points in front of Glebe at the end of the season . 
 1913 and 1914 proved to be mediocre seasons for Glebe and despite winning more games than they lost in each year , the club only managed to finish fourth and fifth respectively . In 1915 , however , they came close to taking out the premiership . With four rounds remaining and equal with their local rivals , Glebe were to face the undefeated Balmain at the Sydney Sports Ground . Again , however , Glebe failed to win this crucial game , losing 12 – 2 in front of 20 @,@ 000 people and allowed Balmain to take a one @-@ match lead . With both teams winning their remaining games , Balmain ended up taking out the premiership . Overall in 1915 , Glebe won 12 out of their 14 matches , a club best , losing twice to Balmain . 
 In 1917 , Glebe was involved in a dispute with Annandale for fielding a player that did not reside in Glebe 's district . As a result , former Newcastle player Dan Davies received a life ban from all rugby league . The entire Glebe 1st grade squad disagreed and went on strike . All Glebe 1st grade players were suspended . Three of the Burge brothers , including Frank Burge , were banned till the start of the 1919 season ( an eighteen @-@ month suspension ) , however many of these suspensions were subsequently overturned or shortened . Further implications came into the Newcastle Rugby League , where the competition was split until 1920 . 
 Glebe finished out the decade continuing to win more games than they lost each season and regularly finished within the top four , but without a finals system in place they were unable to capitalise on this relatively strong position . In 1922 , they finally gained another shot at the premiership when they and North Sydney finished on equal points at the end of the season . In the ensuing final , North Sydney easily accounted for Glebe 35 – 3 , again denying Glebe the elusive premiership title . 
 From 1923 onwards , the club 's form started to decline and for the first time since 1910 , Glebe lost more games than they won . In 1926 , they were given another shot at the premiership when the finals series was reinstated . Finishing second to runaway leaders South Sydney , Glebe were to face off against fourth @-@ placed University for a place in the final . However , they lost this decisive match 29 – 3 and were sent out of the finals . 
 In their final three seasons , Glebe struggled at the bottom of the premiership after the departure of their long @-@ time player Frank Burge . Out of nine teams they finished eighth in 1927 , seventh in 1928 and eighth in 1929 . At the end of the 1929 season for reasons unknown , the New South Wales Rugby Football League General Committee voted 13 – 12 to expel Glebe from the competition . One theory is that Balmain made a deal with South Sydney to remove Glebe as a means of consolidating both of their local territories . However , others suggest that the local area was changing in such a way that the club was probably on a road to its demise anyway . Glebe never played another match . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 As an individual , Frank Burge holds all of Glebe 's records . His eight try tally in a match against University on 19 June 1920 is not only a club record , but also the standing Australian premiership record for most tries in a game . It was in that same game that he managed to claim the club record for most points in a game , kicking four goals in addition to his eight tries for a total of 32 points . A month earlier he scored eight goals in a match against Annandale , a club record later equalled by Jack Hickey in 1927 . 
 In 1918 , Frank Burge scored a club @-@ record 24 tries in a season and in 1920 , broke the club record for most points in a season with 110 . Overall he scored 137 tries and 49 goals for the club in a career spanning 16 seasons and 138 games , which were also club records . As a forward , his record tally of 146 tries ( including nine later scored with St. George in 1927 ) remained unbroken until Steve Menzies managed to do so in 2004 , almost 80 seasons after Burge had retired . 
 The team 's biggest victory was a 59 – 3 victory over North Sydney at Wentworth Oval on 17 July 1915 . Its biggest ever loss was against Eastern Suburbs when they went down 36 – 0 . Overall , Glebe are also statistically one of the most successful clubs to have played in the premiership . Out of the 33 teams who have made an appearance over the years , Glebe has the fifth @-@ best winning percentage . From 297 games played , 163 were won , six drawn and 128 lost for a winning percentage of 55 @.@ 89 % . 
 = = Notable players = = 
 During their 22 @-@ year presence in the New South Wales Rugby Football League premiership , the club managed to produce 12 internationals . Those twelve players were Alex Burdon , Frank Burge , who was probably the best player they ever had , Peter Burge , Albert Conlon , Bert Gray , Arthur Halloway , Charlie Hedley , Jack Hickey , Tom McCabe , Chris McKivat , Peter Moir and Les Cubitt . A third Burge brother , former Wallaby tourist Albert Burge was also a Dirty Red . Alex Burdon and Chris McKivat had the honour of captaining their country , from 1908 – 09 and 1911 @-@ 12 respectively and Les Cubitt captained an Australasian side in 1921 . 
 In 2008 , to celebrate the Centenary of Rugby League in Australia , a panel commissioned by the Australian Rugby League and National Rugby League voted four Glebe players into a group of " Rugby League 's 100 Greatest Players " . These players were Frank Burge , Les Cubitt , Arthur Halloway and Chris McKivat . 
 The side that played in the 1911 New South Wales Rugby Football League Grand Final is shown below . 
 The side that played in the 1922 New South Wales Rugby Football League Grand Final is shown below . 
 = = Honours = = 
 New South Wales Rugby Football League First Grade runners @-@ up : 4 
 1911 , 1912 , 1915 , 1922 
 New South Wales Rugby Football League minor premierships : 1 
 1911 
 City Cup : 1 
 1913 
 City Cup runners @-@ up : 6 
 1912 , 1915 , 1916 , 1919 , 1923 , 1925 
 Reserve Grade : 5 
 1912 , 1918 , 1919 , 1920 , 1921 
 Third Grade : 1 
 1927 
 = Pilot ( Desperate Housewives ) = 
 The pilot episode of the American dramedy @-@ mystery series Desperate Housewives premiered on October 3 , 2004 , on the ABC network . It was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by Charles McDougall . The pilot introduces the residents of the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane . Following the suicide of an outwardly successful neighbor , her friends begin to deal with the problems in their personal lives . Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) competes for the attention of a new plumber who has moved across the street ; Bree Van de Kamp ( Marcia Cross ) struggles with her failing marriage and ungrateful family ; Gabrielle Solis ( Eva Longoria ) continues an affair with her sixteen @-@ year @-@ old gardener ; and Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) copes with life as a stay @-@ at @-@ home mother of four . 
 Cherry conceived the idea for the series while watching coverage of the Andrea Yates murder trials , and was fascinated by how women lead lives of quiet desperation . He began writing the script in 2002 and pitched it to several networks throughout the following year . In October 2003 , ABC announced that it had picked up the pilot . Casting began in February 2004 and filming took place the following month primarily on the Colonial Street backlot set at Universal Studios . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 21 @.@ 6 million viewers on its original American broadcast , becoming the most @-@ watched program of the week . The pilot received extremely positive reviews , with critics complimenting the series ' tonal diversity . The cast , particularly the four leads and Sheridan , also received praise . The episode won various awards , including three Emmys . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of several residents of the fictitious street of Wisteria Lane . The suburban neighborhood is shocked by the suicide of Mary Alice Young ( Brenda Strong ) , who seems to have led an ideal domestic life . Mary Alice 's close friends , Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) , Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) , Bree Van de Kamp ( Marcia Cross ) , and Gabrielle Solis ( Eva Longoria ) , struggle to come to terms with the news . Later , Mary Alice 's son , Zach ( Cody Kasch ) , awakens in the middle of the night to find his father , Paul ( Mark Moses ) , unearthing a mysterious chest from the drained swimming pool in their backyard . 
 Susan , a divorced mother , takes interest in Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) , a plumber who has recently moved to Wisteria Lane ; however , she faces competition with neighbor Edie Britt ( Nicollette Sheridan ) , a promiscuous serial divorcée . Suspicious that Mike is spending the night with Edie , Susan enters Edie 's home uninvited with the pretense of borrowing sugar . While inside , she accidentally knocks over a candle , which sets fire to the entire house . Susan flees the scene , leaving behind her glass measuring cup . Though wracked with guilt , Susan is relieved to learn that Mike was not the man with whom Edie was fornicating . Meanwhile , Lynette , a former career woman , is frustrated with raising four young children while her husband , Tom ( Doug Savant ) , is constantly away on business . 
 Bree , a perfectionist homemaker who feels unappreciated by her family , is troubled when her husband Rex ( Steven Culp ) asks for a divorce . She poisons him by mistakenly putting onions , to which he is deathly allergic , in his salad . At the hospital , Rex accuses Bree of being emotionally unavailable and obsessed with achieving domestic perfection . Elsewhere , Gabrielle , a former model , grows increasingly unhappy with her marriage to Carlos ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) , who buys her love with extravagant gifts . She continues an affair with her sixteen @-@ year @-@ old gardener , John Rowland ( Jesse Metcalfe ) . 
 Paul asks Susan , Lynette , Bree , and Gabrielle to sort through Mary Alice 's belongings , as he cannot bear to do so himself . In a box of Mary Alice 's clothes , the women discover a blackmail note reading " I know what you did [ . ] It makes me sick [ . ] I 'm going to tell [ . ] " The postmark indicates that Mary Alice received it the day she killed herself and the women begin to wonder what secret their friend could have been keeping . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Creation and development = = = 
 In 2002 , Marc Cherry was in a precarious financial situation and was having trouble finding a job . He commented , " I was broke , unable to get even an interview for a writing job , and seriously concerned about my future . I had just turned forty and was starting to wonder if I was one of those deluded writers that wander around Hollywood , convincing themselves they 're talented when all the evidence points to the contrary . " While watching television coverage of the Andrea Yates trials with his mother , Cherry turned to her and asked , " Can you imagine being so desperate that you would do that to your children ? " to which his mother replied , " I 've been there . " Cherry was intrigued by the idea that a " perfectly sane , rational woman could have the life she wanted , being a wife and mother ... and still have moments of insanity ; " he began writing the pilot episode soon after . Cherry originally developed the concept as a half @-@ hour comedy . However , after his agent was arrested for embezzlement , Cherry signed with Paradigm Talent Agency , where he was advised to rewrite the script as a soap opera . Cherry completed the first draft of the pilot in April 2002 and pitched the script to CBS , NBC , Fox , HBO , Showtime , and Lifetime , all of which turned it down . 
 Following script rewrites , Cherry pitched the series to ABC , who picked up the pilot . ABC executives were , however , concerned about the title of the series , which Cherry had selected before even writing the script . They suggested renaming the series Wisteria Lane or The Secret Lives of Housewives , but Cherry insisted on keeping the original title . He later commented , " I put ' desperate ' [ into the title ] to try to indicate , however subtly ... I 'm going to have some fun with the imagery , to take it to some interesting places . Most critics got the joke . Some people see the word ' housewives ' and it pushes a button in them and they seem to lose all reason . " The project was officially announced on October 23 , 2003 as a cross between American Beauty and Knots Landing . While Desperate Housewives , along with fellow new series Grey 's Anatomy and Lost , would later help reverse ABC 's flagging fortune , network executives Lloyd Braun and Susan Lyne were fired shortly after greenlighting these risky and expensive pilots . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting for Desperate Housewives began in February 2004 . Director Charles McDougall reported seeing around 150 " very good and determined women " audition for the four leads . Eva Longoria was the first actor cast in a lead role , landing the role of Gabrielle Solis , a materialistic ex @-@ model , after two auditions . Longoria , an unknown soap opera actress at the time , stated that prior to her audition , she had not read the entire script . She recounted , " Marc Cherry asks , ' So what did you think of the script ? ' like the whole thing . And I said , ' Well I didn ’ t read the script . I only read my part . ' And Marc Cherry goes , ' I knew you were Gabrielle at that moment because it was such a Gabrielle thing to say . ' " Roselyn Sánchez also auditioned for the role . Teri Hatcher was cast in the role of Susan Mayer , a single mother looking for love , after a second audition for ABC network executives . Cherry commended Hatcher 's audition , calling it " the best audition I 've ever seen in network [ television ] . " Actors originally considered for the role include Courteney Cox , Calista Flockhart , Mary @-@ Louise Parker , and Sela Ward . Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus also expressed interest in the role , but network executives felt she was not right for the part . 
 Cherry offered the role of Bree Van de Kamp , a " perfect homemaker " reminiscent of The Stepford Wives , to Dana Delany three times . Delany rejected the role , as it was too similar to her character on Pasadena , but would later join the series in its fourth season as Katherine Mayfair . Marcia Cross was later cast as Bree . Roma Downey , Jeri Ryan , and Stacey Travis were also considered for the role , while Nicollette Sheridan auditioned for the part and was cast as neighborhood tramp Edie Britt instead . On her audition , Sheridan recalled , " At the end of the reading , the director looked at me and said , ' No , no , I see you as Edie . ' I said , ' Oh , I see , I come in a housewife and mother of two and leave the slut . ' " The Edie character was originally intended to be a small role , but it was expanded once Sheridan was cast . Felicity Huffman was cast as Lynette Scavo , a frustrated stay @-@ at @-@ home mother of four , after talking about her own experiences as a mother during her audition . Cherry called Huffman 's casting " very lucky , " commenting that " within fifteen minutes she had the part . " Alex Kingston read for the role of Lynette , and has since alleged that she was denied the role for being too heavy . The role of series narrator Mary Alice Young was given to Sheryl Lee . Cross originally auditioned for the role before being cast as Bree instead . Jeanne Tripplehorn and Heather Locklear also auditioned for leading roles . 
 Ricardo Antonio Chavira was cast as Gabrielle ’ s wealthy and condescending husband , Carlos Solis . Kyle Searles joined the cast as John Rowland , the Solis ’ teenage gardener with whom Gabrielle is having an affair . Andrea Bowen was hired to play Susan 's teenage daughter , Julie , while James Denton was cast as Susan 's love interest and new neighbor , plumber Mike Delfino . Mark Moses was cast as Paul , Mary Alice 's mysterious husband , and Cody Kasch as their troubled teenage son Zach . Michael Reilly Burke was cast as Bree 's sexually dissatisfied husband , Rex Van de Kamp . The pilot also introduced several recurring cast members . Christine Estabrook appeared as nosy neighbor Martha Huber , a role originally intended for an Asian American actress . Doug Savant made his first appearance as Tom , Lynette 's husband who is always away on business . Savant later became a series regular for the second season , a promise Cherry made to him when he signed on for the first season . Shawn Pyfrom and Joy Lauren each made their debut appearances as Andrew and Danielle Van de Kamp , Bree 's defiant teenage children . Cherry stated that casting the two roles was difficult because of their limited involvement in the first few episodes of the series . Additionally , Brent Kinsman , Shane Kinsman , and Zane Huett were cast respectively as Preston , Porter , and Parker Scavo , Lynette and Tom 's three sons . 
 = = = Filming and subsequent casting changes = = = 
 Filming for the pilot was initially intended to take place in an actual Los Angeles neighborhood until the production team realized the difficulties that would ensue . Instead they chose Colonial Street , a backlot street set at Universal Studios Hollywood . The house sets on Colonial Street had been used in numerous film and television productions as early as 1946 . Many of the sets , whose styles ranged from contemporary to Victorian to ranch , were remodeled to create a uniform neighborhood . Cherry and production designer Thomas A. Walsh wanted the street to recall the Eisenhower era and convey traditional American values , but appear modern at the same time . Walsh viewed episodes of Father Knows Best , My Three Sons , and Leave It to Beaver , among other television series , to capture the visual style of classic conservative America . Walsh commented , " We were trying to honor that sensibility and at the same time create an <unk> that was neither a red state nor a blue state . " Instead , Walsh insisted that the street was in " kind of a pink state . We 're somewhere in the middle of America 's soul . " Refurbishments of the house sets , which included building interior rooms , cost around $ 700 @,@ 000 . While Walsh strove for a visually unified look for the street as a whole , he carefully designed the interior of each home to reflect the tastes and budgets of the characters . 
 According to McDougall , another director was originally hired to work on the episode but quit after learning casting would be a group decision . Filming took place over thirteen days in March 2004 . During filming , McDougall suggested removing references to pop culture from the script to ensure the pilot had " more of a timeless feel . " ABC picked up the series for 13 episodes on May 18 , 2004 . In June , ABC called for three starring cast members to be recast . Jesse Metcalfe replaced Searles as John Rowland , as producers wanted to add more sexual appeal to the role " to justify why ( Gabrielle ) was having an affair . " Metcalfe had previously read for the role during the initial casting process . The role of Rex Van de Kamp was given to Steven Culp , who was Cherry 's first choice for the part but was unavailable when the original pilot was filmed . Brenda Strong took over the role of Mary Alice , as producers thought that Lee was not right for the part . Strong commented on the casting change for her character , explaining , " I think it was a conceptual shift ... There certainly wasn 't something wrong with what [ Lee ] did . It was just that instead of vanilla they wanted chocolate , and I happened to be chocolate . " Scenes featuring the original actors were refilmed with their replacements , however Burke and Searles are present in the background of some scenes in the final cut of the episode . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Promotion and viewership = = = 
 To promote the series , ABC issued a laundry @-@ themed campaign and purchased advertisement space in magazines such as InStyle and People and on dry @-@ cleaning bags across the country . The show 's <unk> prompted several advertisers to remove their commercials from the broadcast , but they were quickly replaced . The pilot premiered at 9 pm Eastern Time Zone ( ET ) on October 3 , 2004 , one week after its intended broadcast date . The premiere drew 21 @.@ 6 million viewers and an 8 @.@ 9 rating / 21 share among adults 18 to 49 years of age . It was the highest debut for an ABC series since Spin City in 1996 and for any non @-@ spinoff series since NBC 's Inside Schwartz in 2001 , as well as the most @-@ watched debut of a drama series in eleven years . The pilot was the most @-@ watched program of the week and also had the highest rating among the demographic of women aged 18 to 49 . Additionally , it was the most @-@ watched program among men aged 18 to 34 . In the United Kingdom , the pilot aired on Channel 4 on January 5 , 2005 and drew 4 @.@ 8 million viewers , the highest premiere for a drama series on the network since ER nine years earlier . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The pilot was met with extremely positive critical reception . Robert Bianco of USA Today gave the series premiere four out of four stars , commenting that it was as " involving as any new drama and funnier than any new sitcom [ because it ] matches high visual style with a witty @-@ but @-@ never arch sensibility . " He highlighted the performances of the six leading actresses , writing , " Individually , each is terrific ; combined , they 're an irresistible feminine force " , and praised Hatcher 's " revelatory performance . " Bianco also noted that Cherry avoided making the pilot campy . The San Francisco Chronicle 's Tim Goodman complimented the pilot 's tonal diversity while expressing concern that American audiences would " tune in , get freaked out by the scattershot emotional chords and flip over to something safer . " However , he praised Cherry 's writing as well as the acting , declaring , " There are almost too many things to love in ' Desperate Housewives . ' " In his review of the episode , Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe commended the episode for its " marvelous tonal elasticity , as it stretches from sharp satire to dishy soap opera to tragique tribute and back again . " 
 Justin Ravitz of PopMatters called the series a " cleverly trashy postmodern soap " and credited it for reviving the soap opera genre , which he felt had disappeared but still suited American culture . He compared the pilot to Sex and the City , declaring it " could potentially replace the departed Sex as the TV Sunday ritual for women and gay men everywhere , although DH is the <unk> pleasure of the two . " However , he noted the contrasting tones and dynamics between the two series , and stated that the friendships between Desperate Housewives 's four leading women seemed " tenuous , " opining , " the sisterly , sugar @-@ swapping connection between the surviving women is superficial , and clearly vulnerable to shifting alliances , acts of betrayal and crowd @-@ pleasing cat @-@ fights . " Brian Lowry of Variety called the pilot " oodles of fun . " He complimented the cast , stating that while Hatcher provides " the emotional core " of the series , " nearly everyone is intriguing in one way or another , " and predicted that Eva Longoria would become the show 's breakout star . However , Lowry noted that Desperate Housewives may be " a little too smart for its own good " and expressed concern over the series ' " soapy elements . " Tom Shales of The Washington Post praised the pilot , assessing , " In visual style , witty language , borderline surrealism and overall mad attitude , [ the series ] stands on a mountaintop all its own , the best new drama of the season and perhaps the best new comedy , too . " He complimented Cross and Hatcher 's performances , as well as the writing for the Mary Alice character 's narrations . The Futon Critic selected the pilot as the 26th best television episode of 2004 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The pilot episode won three Emmy Awards : Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Felicity Huffman ) , Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series ( Charles McDougall ) , and Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series ( Michael Berenbaum ) . Marc Cherry was nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series . Berenbaum also won for an American Cinema Editor 's Award for his work on the episode . McDougall was also nominated for a Directors Guild of America Award for directing the episode . 
 = Pies Descalzos = 
 Pies Descalzos ( English : Bare Feet ) is the third studio album and major @-@ label debut by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , released on October 6 , 1995 , by Sony Music and Columbia Records . Its music incorporates Latin pop styles , additionally experimenting with pop rock elements . Looking to revive her struggling career after the commercial failures of her first two studio efforts Magia and Peligro , she assumed a prominent position in its production . As executive producer , Luis Fernando Ochoa co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced each of the eleven tracks on the record with Shakira . 
 In retrospect , Pies Descalzos received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented it as a strong debut showing . Commercially , the project became Shakira 's breakthrough record , with which she established notability throughout Latin America . It was awarded the " Diamond Prism " in her native Colombia , acknowledging one million copies sold in the nation . The album additionally peaked at numbers three and five on the US Billboard Latin Pop Albums and Latin Albums component charts , respectively . It was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . To date , the record has sold over five million copies worldwide . 
 Six singles were released from Pies Descalzos , all of which attained commercial success in the United States . Its lead single " Estoy Aquí " peaked at number 2 on the Billboard Latin Songs component chart , and was her first track promoted through an accompanying music video . Follow @-@ up singles " ¿ Dónde Estás Corazón ? " , " Pies Descalzos , Sueños Blancos ' , " Un Poco de Amor " , " Antología " , and " Se Quiere , Se Mata " peaked within the top twenty of the chart . The record was additionally promoted through the Tour Pies Descalzos , which visited North and South America and Europe throughout 1996 and 1997 . The album was reissued as Colección de Oro in 2002 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Shakira signed a recording contract with Sony Music . Her debut studio album Magia was released in 1991 , and largely consisted of tracks she had written since she was eight years old . Commercially , the project struggled , selling an underwhelming 1 @,@ 200 copies in her native Colombia . Her follow @-@ up record Peligro was released in 1993 , and suffered a similar failure . Consequently , Shakira took a two @-@ year hiatus , allowing her to complete her high school education . Looking to revive her struggling career , Shakira decided to make a major @-@ label debut studio album . Pies Descalzos was produced on a budget of $ 100 @,@ 000 , since it was expected to only move 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Composition = = 
 It primarily focuses on Latin pop genres , though it experiments with pop rock styles . Assuming a prominent position in its production , she co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced each of the eleven tracks included on the record . The albums opens with " Estoy Aquí " ( " I 'm Here " ) , which sees prominent uses of guitar instrumentation . Lyrically , it discusses a willingness to correct a failed relationship . The pop ballad " Antología " ( " Anthology " ) notes an appreciation of the knowledge a lover has shared . " Un Poco de Amor " ( " A Little Bit of Love " ) states that Shakira is waiting to find someone who loves her . It became her first track to include phrases in English , performed by the uncredited Howard Glasford , and additionally experiments with elements of reggae music . 
 The guitar @-@ driven " Quiero " ( " I Want " ) explains Shakira 's happiness upon the return of a lover . Similarly , the mid @-@ tempo " Te <unk> " ( " I Need You " ) and the upbeat " Vuelve " ( " Return " ) describe her yearning for a romantic partner to re @-@ enter her life . " Te Espero <unk> " ( " I Wait Sitting " ) expresses a desire for a romantic partner to be aware of the sorrow his absence brings to Shakira . " Pies Descalzos , Sueños Blancos " ( " Bare Feet , White Dreams " ) suggests that one is happiest when living a carefree lifestyle , while " Pienso en Ti " ( " I Think of You " ) notes that Shakira thinks more about a lover as times progresses . The penultimate track " ¿ Dónde Estás Corazón ? " ( " Where Are You Love ? " ) asks that her boyfriend comes back to her . The album closes with its eleventh track " Se Quiere , Se Mata " ( " You Like , You Kill " ) , which tells the story of expectant parents Braulio and Dana , and sees the usage of a harmonica during its chorus . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Estoy Aquí " was serviced as the lead single from Pies Descalzos in 1995 . It was met with positive reviews from music critics , who recognized it as a stand @-@ out track from its parent album . Additionally , it became Shakira 's first recording to attain commercial success . The song peaked at numbers 1 and 2 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs component charts . " Estoy Aquí " became the first track by Shakira to receive an accompanying music video , and was directed by Simon Brand . The setting depicts a barn during the fall and wintertime , and shows a black @-@ haired Shakira performing the song with her guitar . 
 " ¿ Dónde Estás Corazón ? " was originally featured on a Colombian compilation album Nuestro Rock . After attaining success on the record , it was later released as the second single from Pies Descalzos , and was also embraced as a highlight from the record . The track peaked at numbers 3 and 5 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs charts , respectively . Its music video was directed by Gustavo Garzón , and shows various scenes of Shakira holding photographs , sitting in a red chair , and singing in the rain . 
 " Pies Descalzos , Sueños Blancos " was serviced as the third single from its parent album , and was praised for its melody and songwriting . In comparison to its preceding singles , the track slightly underperformed , reaching number 11 on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . Its accompanying music video was directed by Garzón , and films Shakira singing while attending an upper class masquerade ball . " Un Poco de Amor " became the fourth single from the project , and was appreciated for its prominent reggae influences . It peaked at number 11 on both the Billboard Latin Songs and Latin Pop Songs charts . The music video was directed by Garzón , and depicts Shakira dancing with uncredited guest vocalist Howard Glasford , in addition to members of various ethnic groups . 
 The fifth single " Antología " peaked at numbers 3 and 15 on the Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs charts , respectively . The track did not receive an formal music video , though a performance in the Netherlands during the Oral Fixation Tour was officially released to YouTube in 2007 . The sixth and final single " Se Quiere , Se Mata " reached numbers 1 and 8 on the Latin Pop Songs and Latin Songs charts , respectively . Its music video was directed by Juan Carlos Martin ; it tells the story of Braulio and Dana , who succumb to their sexual desires , resulting in Dana 's pregnancy . It concludes as Dana goes to abort her unborn child , and dies herself . To further promote Pies Descalzos , Shakira embarked on the Tour Pies Descalzos during 1996 and 1997 . By its conclusion , she visited ten countries and performed twenty @-@ one shows across two continents . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In retrospect , Pies Descalzos received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who complimented it as a strong debut showing . Carlos Quintana from About.com appreciated Shakira 's " combination of styles , well thought lyrics and music arrangements " , and placed it among her strongest bodies of work . Jose F. Promis of Allmusic opined that the record " [ balanced ] heartfelt , earnest ballads with catchy , jangly pop / rock " and was a " solid debut " . A reviewer from Billboard provided a positive review , opining that the record " [ carries ] passion , conviction , and honesty " . At the 1997 Billboard Latin Music Awards , the album received two awards for " Pop Album of the Year by a Female Artist " and " Pop Album of the Year by a New Artist " . It was also nominated at the 9th Lo Nuestro Awards in 1997 for " Pop Album of the Year " , but lost to Enrique Iglesias 's album Vivir . Shakira herself received the Lo Nuestro Awards for " Pop Female Artist of the Year " and " Pop New Artist of the Year " . In 2015 , Billboard listed Pies Descalzos as one of the Essential Latin Albums of Past 50 Year stating that " Finally , Latin rock had found its muse " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Commercially , the project became Shakira 's breakthrough record , with which she established notability throughout Latin America . In Argentina , it attained double @-@ platinum certification after passing 120 @,@ 000 in sold copies . In her native Colombia , the album was awarded the " Diamond Prism " by her record label , acknowledging sales of one million units . The record was certified platinum in Brazil ; in selling 900 @,@ 000 copies , it has since become one of the best @-@ selling albums in the country . It was additionally certified platinum in Chile . In Ecuador , Pies Descalzos , sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies earned the album a platinum certification . 
 In Peru , Pies Descalzos attained platinum certification after surpassing 10 @,@ 000 sold copies . It also was awarded platinum recognition in Venezuela . Elsewhere , the album peaked at number 71 on the German Albums Chart . In the United States , it failed to chart on the Billboard 200 . However , it reached number 34 on the Billboard Hot Heatseekers Albums component chart , and additionally peaked at numbers 3 and 5 on the Latin Pop Albums and Latin Albums charts . It was later certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of one million copies . As of 2008 , Pies Descalzos has sold over five million copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Pies Descalzos . 
 All songs written and composed by Shakira and Luis Fernando Ochoa . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Mega Man Powered Up = 
 Mega Man Powered Up ( known in Japan as Rockman Rockman ( <unk> ) is a side @-@ scrolling platform video game developed and published by Capcom . It was released for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) handheld game console in March 2006 . It is a remake of the original Mega Man game released in 1987 for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . Players control the eponymous star Mega Man who must stop Doctor Wily from conquering the world using eight robots called Robot Masters . Unlike the original game , players can control these eight Robot Masters under the right circumstances . Other new features include a level creator mode and a challenge mode . 
 First revealed in 2005 , Powered Up was produced by series mainstay Keiji Inafune . It was released in a bundle alongside Mega Man : Maverick Hunter X ( also for PSP ) and was slated for release on the PSP 's PlayStation Network ( PSN ) . It was released for the PSN service in Japan , but a US release did not occur due to technical difficulties . The game uses a chibi @-@ style that was intended for the original game but was not possible at the time . The designers intended to keep this design faithful to the way the characters worked and looked in the original . While it received generally positive reviews , the game sold poorly , and plans for a remake of Mega Man 2 titled Mega Man Powered Up 2 fell through . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The robot creator Doctor Light created two human @-@ like robots with advanced artificial intelligence named Mega and Roll . Following this , he created eight more robots intended for industrial use : Cut Man , Guts Man , Ice Man , Bomb Man , Fire Man , Elec Man , Time Man , and Oil Man . He received a Nobel Prize for Physics , and his old colleague and rival Doctor Wily has grown bitter for not being acknowledged for his work on the project . Wily discovered a prototype robot made by Doctor Light before Mega and Roll called Proto Man , who is in danger of having his energy generator go critical . Wily gave him a nuclear energy supply to extend his life . He later steals and reprograms the eight industrial robots to attempt world domination . Mega volunteered to stop Wily and the robots and was converted into a fighting robot called Mega Man . After defeating all eight robots , Mega Man goes through Dr. Wily 's fortress and challenges him . After beating Wily , he surrenders and asks Mega Man to spare him . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is a remake of the original NES Mega Man title and has similar gameplay and level designs . The game moves on a 2D plane and players are given control of the game 's eponymous hero Mega Man . Unlike the original 's 8 @-@ bit graphics , the game uses 3D character models with super deformed designs . Mega Man 's primary abilities include jumping and shooting and he is given both a health meter and a life meter . Mega Man can lose health by touching enemies or their projectiles , while lives will be lost when Lives will be consumed if Mega Man touches certain spikes , or falls into a pit . Lives and health can be found either dropped by enemies or in fixed locations . 
 At the beginning of the game , players are given an introductory level and boss to overcome . Afterward , they are given access to eight different stages , each representing one of the above @-@ mentioned Robot Masters . At the end of each stage , players must battle a Robot Master . When a Robot Master is destroyed , it will give Mega Man its respective weapon , which can be used against other Robot Masters or enemies but has limited ammunition . If Mega Man defeats the Robot Master using his primary weapon , the Robot Master will be captured and reprogrammed . This allows players to play through stages as one of the Robot Masters . 
 It features two styles of gameplay : " Old Style " is comparable to the NES version aside from the updated presentation , and " New Style " uses the PSP 's entire widescreen and contains storyline cutscenes with voice acting , altered stage layouts , remixed music , and three difficulty modes for each stage . Additionally , the remake lets players unlock and play through the game as the eight Robot Masters , Roll , and Protoman . The New Style stages differ in structure from that of Old Style , with some pathways only accessible to specific Robot Masters . Mega Man Powered Up also features a Challenge Mode with 100 challenges to complete , a level editor for creating custom stages , and an option to distribute fan @-@ made levels to the PlayStation Network online service . 
 = = Development = = 
 Mega Man Powered Up was developed and published by Capcom for the PlayStation Portable handheld game console . It was produced by Keiji Inafune . Mega Man Powered Up was first seen on a list of games that would have demos at the 2005 Tokyo Game Show titled Rockman Rockman . It was later revealed to be a remake of the NES Mega Man . It was announced for a US release on November 8 , 2005 under the title Mega Man Powered Up . A European release was also announced . It was bundled with Mega Man : Maverick Hunter X on UMD . It was slated to be released on the PSP 's PlayStation Network service along with other Capcom PSP titles . While it was released for the Japanese PSN , a US release of Powered Up never occurred due to technical difficulties that neither Sony nor Capcom could resolve . 
 Inafune had originally planned to use this chibi @-@ style in the original Mega Man , but could not due to the hardware constraints of the NES . Producer Tetsuya Kitabayashi stated that redesigning the character models was a result of the PSP 's 16 : 9 widescreen ratio . The larger heads on the characters allowed the development team to create visible facial expressions . Character designer Tatsuya Yoshikawa explained the concept of the design was " toys " and be " Geared towards little kids ... the kinds of characters that you 'd see hanging off of keychains and such " . He added that the design team made sure proportions and movements were accurately reflected on the models . As the size of the remake 's stages are not proportional to those of the original , the widescreen ratio also presented the developers with more space to fill . The Robot Master Oil Man originally had black skin and pink lips , which GamesRadar identified as a " 1920 's caricature . " The design was changed for the US release to blue skin and yellow lips to avoid controversy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Mega Man Powered Up received generally positive reception after it was revealed . It was perceived initially as a " straight port " of the NES game with graphical enhancements . IGN writer Nix felt that the graphical update as seen at the 2005 Tokyo Game Show was well @-@ designed . He noted that its biggest hang @-@ up was the fact that the original Mega Man was improved upon by its sequels and that the original lacked functions such as the charge shot , the slide , and Rush . Jeff Gerstmann felt the game was promising and praised its take on the original levels as well as its level editor . Juan Castro felt that it would appeal to Mega Man fans and those looking for an " oldschool platformer . " 
 = = = Post @-@ release = = = 
 Sales of Mega Man Powered Up in Japan were considered very poor , though it sold better in the US . Speculation existed for the low sales which included the possibility that it came out too early in the PSP 's life and a " lack of overlap between Mega Man gamers and PSP owners . " Fan lamentation also existed for the fact that it was not available for the Nintendo DS ( which featured several other Mega Man titles ) . Inafune expressed an interest in making a Mega Man Powered Up 2 , though he noted that it would take time to get to . Due to the poor sales of the game , further remakes have been put on hold . 
 Despite poor sales , it received generally positive reviews , currently holding aggregate scores of 83 % on GameRankings and 82 out of 100 on Metacritic respectively . It received positive attention from the Mega Man fanbase . Game Revolution 's Mike Reily praised the game ' variety of challenges , playable bosses , level editor , and the gameplay variety but criticized its " trial and error " gameplay and graphical slowdown . Gamasutra writer Connor Cleary praised its improvements of the original Mega Man and noted that those who do not love the art style would be able to get over it after playing . David Oxford , from 1UP.com felt that it was the most notable remake of the original Mega Man . In his review , Jeremy Parish , also from 1UP.com , called it " one of the most addictive PSP games to date " and felt that it reminded players of Mega Man 's greatness . He also praised its level editor , which he noted came before future Sony titles that featured a level editor such as LittleBigPlanet and Sound Shapes . He later included it in his list of games to play on a short flight due to its quick levels and auto @-@ save feature . GameSpot 's Alex Navarro called it the best remake of the original Mega Man due to a combination of the original game 's quality and the quality of the additional features , while IGN 's Juan Castro felt that the quality and polish of the game would appeal to veteran Mega Man fans and newcomers to the franchise . Detroit Free Press called it " a must @-@ buy for fans of the long @-@ running series , despite its super cute @-@ ified new look . " Matt Keller from PALGN called the original an " all @-@ time classic " and felt that Powered Up was " the remake it deserves . " 
 GameSpy placed Powered Up as the seventh best handheld game of 2006 , as well as the fifth best PSP game . IGN ranked it the ninth best PSP game ever made . It was also nominated for " Best Action Game " for the " 2006 1UP Awards " , losing to another Capcom game Dead Rising . 
 = Super Smash Bros. Brawl = 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl , known in Japan as Dairantō Smash Brothers X ( <unk> ( <unk> ) <unk> ( エックス ) ? , lit . " Great Melee Smash Brothers X " ) , is the third installment in the Super Smash Bros. series of crossover action games , developed by an ad hoc development team consisting of Sora , Game Arts , and staff from other developers , and published by Nintendo for the Wii video game console . Brawl was announced at a pre @-@ E3 2005 press conference by Nintendo president and Chief Executive Officer Satoru Iwata . Masahiro Sakurai , director of the previous two games in the series , assumed the role of director for the third installment at the request of Iwata . Game development began in October 2005 with a creative team that included members from several Nintendo and third @-@ party development teams . After delays due to development problems , the game was finally released on January 31 , 2008 , in Japan ; March 9 , 2008 , in North America ; June 26 , 2008 , in Australia ; and June 27 , 2008 , in Europe . Twenty @-@ seven months after its original Japanese release , the game was released in Korea , on April 29 , 2010 . 
 The number of playable characters in Brawl has grown from that in Super Smash Bros. Melee , although a few character from Melee were cut in Brawl . Brawl is the first game in the series to have playable third @-@ party characters . Like that of its predecessors , the object of Brawl is to knock an opponent off the screen . It is a departure from traditional fighting games , notably in its simplified move commands and emphasis on ring outs over knockouts . It includes a more extensive single @-@ player mode than its predecessors , known as the Subspace Emissary ( SSE ) . This mode is a plot @-@ driven , side @-@ scrolling beat ' em up featuring computer @-@ generated cut scenes and a selection of playable characters . Brawl also supports multiplayer battles with up to four combatants , and is the first game of its franchise to feature online battles via Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . The game is unique , in that it may be played with four different controllers , including the Wii Remote , Wii Remote with Nunchuk , GameCube controller , and Classic Controller , simultaneously . 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl received critically positive reviews , with praise for the game 's entertainment value , despite issues relating to its content loading times . The game 's musical score , composed through a collaboration by 38 renowned video game composers , was lauded for its representation of different generations in gaming history . Brawl received an aggregate review score of 93 % on Metacritic and 92 @.@ 84 % on Game Rankings , and was ranked " Fighting Game of the Year " for 2008 by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . In 2010 , the game was included as one of the titles in the book 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die . As of March 31 , 2016 , it is the eighth best @-@ selling Wii game , with a total of 13 @.@ 10 million copies sold worldwide . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Following its predecessors , Brawl uses a battle system unlike that of typical fighting games . Players can choose from a large selection of characters , each attempting to knock their opponents off the screen as they fight on various stages . The characters in Brawl include most of the same ones as the predecessors , such as the well @-@ known Mario and Pikachu . Instead of using traditional health bars that start at a maximum value and lose value , Brawl characters start the game with 0 % ; the value rises as they take damage and may rise over 100 % to a maximum of 999 % . As a character 's percentage increases , the character flies further back when hit . When a character is knocked beyond a stage 's boundary and disappears from the screen , the character loses either a life , a point , or coins , depending on the mode of play . Brawl includes a function which allows players to create profiles with personalized button configurations for each control method along with their chosen username . 
 The characters in Brawl fight each other using a variety of attacks , that give the player a wider selection than the predecessors . Players execute each move by pressing a button in conjunction with a tilt of the control stick or a press of the D @-@ pad , depending on the mode of control . In addition to basic attacks , characters have access to more powerful moves , known as smash attacks . Each character has four unique moves , which often cause effects besides damage to an opponent . Brawl introduces the ability to perform character @-@ specific super attacks , referred to as " Final Smash " moves . Significantly more powerful than regular attacks , these moves have a wide variety of effects that range from nearly unavoidable blasts to temporary transformations . Final Smash moves can be performed by destroying a Smash Ball : a colorful , glowing , orb @-@ like item bearing the Smash Bros. logo that floats around each stage every so often depending on the selection of items that were set before the start of the match . 
 Characters can use items ranging from projectiles to melee weapons ; each has a different effect on the characters around it . Although many items have returned from previous Super Smash Bros. games , new ones have been introduced as well . Some returning items have changed appearance and function . Two varieties of items , Assist Trophies and Poké Balls , temporarily summon guest characters and Pokémon , respectively , that generally aid the summoner . They cannot be controlled by players and are usually invincible . 
 = = = Group = = = 
 In addition to the standard multiplayer mode , Brawl features other multiplayer modes and options in Group mode . Special Melee , from the previous game , returns as Special Brawl . In this mode , players are able to battle in matches using special rules for a greater level of customization . Whereas previously standard options such as " Giant Melee " or " Invisible Melee " were limited to one feature per match , players may now select multiple options for a single match . Another returning game type , Tourney mode ( formerly Tournament mode ) , enables players to create an elimination @-@ based tournament , where up to 32 players can play , with a large number of game @-@ controlled or human @-@ controlled opponents . A " Rotation " feature has been introduced in Brawl , which allows up to sixteen players to compete in sequence by switching out winners or losers after each round . 
 = = = Solo = = = 
 Like its predecessors , Super Smash Bros. Brawl includes various modes of play from the previous game designed for a single player . Classic mode , as the name implies , is a classical approach to the game , in which players fight individual characters in a selected order . Each match features an arena or opponent from a particular series , such as The Legend of Zelda or Pokémon . Several matches have a unique battle condition , such as a metal opponent , large opponent or a two @-@ on @-@ two team battle . Similar to Classic mode are All Star mode and Boss Battles , where the player has only one life to defeat all of the playable characters and bosses , respectively . 
 Brawl features Events , which are matches with predetermined battle conditions such as defeating opponents within a time limit or reaching a specific goal . New to single @-@ player mode , each of the 41 Events has three difficulty levels , with a distinct high score recorded for each . In addition to the normal set of 41 Events played with a single player , a smaller set of 21 two @-@ player Events is included . 
 Stadium mode is a collection of objective @-@ oriented minigames , or small games within the game . Returning from the two previous games is the " Target Smash ! " minigame , in which the player must break ten targets as quickly as possible . Additionally , items scattered across the stage are available for use . In the Home @-@ Run Contest , the player must beat Sandbag to inflict as much damage as possible in 10 seconds , then strike it with a Home @-@ Run Bat . Updated from Melee , all Stadium mode minigames feature cooperative or competitive multiplayer . 
 = = = = Adventure Mode : The Subspace Emissary = = = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl features a new Adventure mode titled " The Subspace Emissary " ( SSE ) . This mode features unique character storylines and numerous side @-@ scrolling levels and bosses to fight , as well as cut scenes explaining the plot . SSE introduces a group of antagonists called the Subspace Army , who are led by the Ancient Minister . Some of these enemy characters appeared in previous Nintendo video games , such as Petey Piranha from the Mario series and a squadron of R.O.B.s based on classic Nintendo hardware . SSE boasts a number of original enemies , such as the Roader , a robotic unicycle ; the <unk> , a one @-@ eyed , ball @-@ like creature which can replicate itself if left alone ; and the <unk> , enemies that fight with a variety of weapons . Though the game is primarily played as a single @-@ player mode , cooperative multiplayer is available . This mode features a mechanism which strengthens the selected character 's abilities . They are in the form of collectible stickers that can be applied to the base of the player 's character trophies . 
 Unlike other game modes , SSE has a team system for the characters , with a limited choice of characters at the beginning of the mode . Others join the team as the game progresses , while some characters may leave the team temporarily . Most characters start off with their own teams , but the teams merge occasionally until they become a unified team by the end of the game . In cooperative multi @-@ player , once one player loses a life , an ally can take his or her place until the number of lives run out . If there are no lives left and player one is defeated , the game is interrupted , with the choice of starting again from the previous " door " the player passed through or quitting . 
 The game 's director , Masahiro Sakurai , said that this mode would be more " fleshed out " than the single @-@ player modes in previous Smash Bros. titles . Shigeru Miyamoto has explained that Sakurai always wanted to have a deep single @-@ player game , but he wanted Sakurai to focus more on the multiplayer aspects in the previous titles since there were already many single @-@ player games of this kind . Both were possible with the development time allotted for Brawl . Sakurai selected Kazushige Nojima , a scenario writer known for his work on the Final Fantasy series , to construct a plotline for the mode in cooperation with him . 
 = = = = = Plot = = = = = 
 The mode begins as Mario and Kirby face each other on a stadium located in the Smash Bros. world . In this world , when a fighter is defeated , they turn into a trophy form , which can be revived by touching the base . Suddenly , smoke pours from the sky and the Battleship Halberd flies over . It releases a stream of black purple @-@ clouded bugs called Shadow Bugs that form the soldiers of the Subspace Army . The Ancient Minister , a cloak @-@ clad , mysterious hovering General of the Subspace Army , arrives with his Army and detonates a Subspace Bomb , which can only be detonated by the sacrifice of two R.O.B.s , and which transports the stadium into Subspace , an alternate dimension where the Subspace Army resides . The Ancient Minister 's advance prompts the heroes to progressively team up and attempt to repel the enemy , while villains harvest the power of the allied characters by using dark cannons to convert them into trophies , and using shadow bugs on some of them to fight the protagonists during their adventure . 
 The Ancient Minister is revealed as a subordinate to Ganondorf , Bowser and Wario who are under orders from Master Hand to draw the world into Subspace . Wario , who had stolen Ness with his dark cannon , is turned into a trophy by a Pokémon trainer Red and a vengeful Lucas , and is then helplessly sucked in by a Subspace Bomb . Meanwhile , Meta Knight seeing his ship , the Halberd , being used for evil , leaves his group to reclaim it . He meets and allies with Lucario and Solid Snake , where they reach the cockpit and destroy the Mr. Game and Watch clones that were piloting it . 
 The Ancient Minister 's true identity is found to be that of the Master <unk> unit , who rebels against Ganondorf to join the allied characters . The three major groups that had formed over the storyline then all converge in one area , and use the Halberd to battle Ganondorf and Bowser 's subspace gunship . Although they destroy the Halberd , all of the characters make it out unscathed in smaller vehicles . Unable to hit so many targets , Ganondorf and Bowser retreat into subspace after Kirby destroys the gunship with his dragoon . An enraged Ganondorf turns Bowser into a trophy with his dark cannon , and he learns that Master Hand was being manipulated by the chains of the actual Subspace Army leader , known only as Tabuu . Ganondorf jumps up and does the attack on Tabuu who easily defeats him , Ganondorf collides with Master Hand , thus breaking free from the chains and turning Ganondorf into his trophy . Master Hand attempts to attack Tabuu , but to no avail . 
 The allied characters enter , and looks at the defeated Ganondorf and Master Hand . But before they 've the opportunity to battle him , Tabuu unveils his wings and uses his powerful attack known for releasing crimson energy rings called " Off Waves " which turns all of the characters into trophies and scattered in a <unk> , although a select few ( Luigi , Kirby , and Ness ) are revived by the brooches ( a golden badge with a face imprinted ) that were attached to them by King Dedede earlier in the story . They work together to revive the characters that scattered across Subspace and make their way through a great maze where Tabuu is located . As Tabuu is about to use his " Off Waves " to turn the characters back into trophies , he is ambushed by Sonic , who weakens it ; with that done , the fighters ultimately destroy Tabuu and save the Smash Bros. universe . 
 In the final scene , all the fighters look at the horizon , where instead of the Isle of the Ancients appears a great luminous cross . 
 = = = Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection = = = 
 Brawl allows players to play against distant opponents via the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . Online multiplayer games can be played either with registered friends or with randomly selected participants . Additionally , players can converse with up to four phrases that are preset by the player , which appear as speech bubbles when activated . These names and phrases are not displayed in random @-@ player matches . The Spectator mode allows players to watch matches being played between other players , and bet on the outcome using coins earned within the game . The winner of the match earns a jackpot of coins . 
 Snapshots may be taken during battles or in certain other modes , which can later be sent to friends or submitted to Nintendo . Video replay footage can be captured in specific game modes , including Brawl and Target Smash ! modes , and sent to friends in the same manner . Snapshots , custom stages and replays can be submitted to Nintendo 's " Smash Service " for a chance to get the content featured and updated on all Smash Service @-@ enabled Wii consoles . Since Brawl 's launch , the Smash Service has updated the game 's Vault with one user submitted snapshot , custom stage and replay data chosen by Nintendo every day ; each new update <unk> the previous . The user can choose to not receive updates from the service through the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection options menu . After June 30 , 2009 , the Smash Service stopped accepting content from its users . 
 = = = Vault = = = 
 Returning from Melee are trophies , statuettes of video game characters and objects that give brief histories or descriptions of their subjects , such as Mario and Link , or other characters and items that appear in their respective series . A minigame , the Coin Launcher , replaces the lottery machine from Melee as the primary method of obtaining trophies . The Coin Launcher is a machine that uses coins as projectiles to shoot trophies and counter incoming dangers such as missiles . Coins can also be used to bet on the victor of online battles via Spectator mode . Trophies unavailable in Coin Launcher mode are obtained by using an item called the Trophy Stand on weakened enemy characters and bosses within The Subspace Emissary . Trophies obtained in this manner may contain information on the backstory of the Subspace Emissary . 
 In addition to trophies , players can now collect stickers of video game artwork . Players can place stickers and trophies onto virtual backgrounds and take snapshots , which can be sent to other players via Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection . Stickers can be applied to characters to power up their abilities during the Subspace Emissary . 
 Other stickers or trophies which cannot be collected through the Coin Launcher minigame , Subspace Emissary , or Vs. matches can be unlocked from the Challenges menu , an interactive display which catalogs unlocked features and items in gridded windows . Once a window has been broken and its contents are unlocked , horizontally adjacent windows display the conditions necessary to unlock them . 
 Brawl contains demo versions of several Nintendo games , named " Masterpieces " , which were originally released for older consoles and feature characters playable in Brawl . These games use Virtual Console technology to emulate older hardware and have time constraints ranging from thirty seconds to five minutes . Some use save data to allow the player to play a certain scenario or level . Along with Masterpieces comes the inclusion of the Chronicles section , a library of previous Nintendo games which lists games either previously made or published by Nintendo on all of its consoles . New games appear when certain characters , trophies or stickers related to the game are unlocked . 
 = = Playable characters = = 
 Brawl allows the player to select from 39 characters . Some are new , but others return from Melee — in some cases updated or refined , either in appearance , fighting capabilities , or both . For example , Link and Fox have adopted designs from more recent titles , while Samus has gained the ability to change into a new form , Zero Suit Samus . Dr. Mario , Roy , Young Link , Mewtwo , and Pichu are the first characters to not return from a previous game , though they do appear as stickers or trophies . 
 Some previously represented series have had more characters added to Brawl . Diddy Kong , from the Donkey Kong series , Ike , from the Fire Emblem series , and Lucas , from the EarthBound series make their first appearance in the Smash Bros. series . Other newcomers are the first to represent their series . These include characters such as Pit , representing the Kid Icarus series for the first time since the 1991 Game Boy game Kid Icarus : Of Myths and Monsters , <unk> of the Pikmin series , and Wario , as he appears in Nintendo 's WarioWare . Solid Snake , the protagonist of Konami 's Metal Gear franchise , and Sonic the Hedgehog from Nintendo 's former rival Sega are the first third @-@ party characters to appear in a Super Smash Bros. game . 
 = = Stages = = 
 Brawl 's stages are generally based on plot devices from the various game series of Super Smash Bros. Stages range from floating platforms to moving areas where the characters must stay within the field of play . Each stage has a boundary that cannot be passed , or the character will be " KO 'd " , thus losing a life or " point " , depending on the mode of play . 
 Brawl contains 41 selectable stages , 29 of which are initially available . Many stages undergo elaborate changes while battles take place , such as a cycling day @-@ to @-@ night system and changing seasons . A stage based on the Animal Crossing series features a live events system in which special events may occur depending on the date and time . Environmental gameplay mechanics are featured in this installment , such as destructible terrain and the ability to float . Unlike its predecessors , Brawl includes stages based on third @-@ party games such as the Metal Gear Solid @-@ inspired Shadow Moses Island . The game also includes stages taken from its predecessor , Super Smash Bros. Melee . 
 Brawl allows players to create their own stages using several options in a mode called Stage Builder . Players can save their stages to an SD card or to the internal memory of the Wii console . Through Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , players can submit their creations to their friends , or to Nintendo to receive a daily stage from the service . 
 = = Development = = 
 At the pre @-@ E3 2005 press conference , Nintendo president Satoru Iwata announced that the next installment of Super Smash Bros. was soon to be in development for its next console and would be a launch title with Wi @-@ Fi compatibility for online play . The announcement was a surprise to Sakurai , who left HAL Laboratory in 2003 . He was not informed of Nintendo 's intent to release another Smash Bros. game , despite the fact that Iwata told Sakurai shortly after his resignation from HAL that if a new Smash game was to be developed , he would want Sakurai to again serve as director . It was not until after the conference that Iwata requested that Sakurai hold a private meeting with him , where he was asked to be involved as Brawl 's director . Sakurai agreed to become director , and development of the game began in October 2005 , when Nintendo opened a new office in Tokyo just for its production . Help from a variety of studios such as Monolith Soft and Paon was enlisted , with Game Arts as the main team in the preliminary development stages . In addition , several Smash Bros. staff members that resided in the area of the new office joined the project . Altogether , roughly 100 individuals worked on the project full @-@ time , and were given access to all the original material and tools from the development of Melee , courtesy of HAL Laboratory . 
 The game was absent from Nintendo 's Wii showing at its 2006 pre @-@ E3 press conference . Nintendo officially revealed the game under the name of Super Smash Bros. Brawl the next day , May 10 , 2006 , along with the game 's first official trailer during the E3 After @-@ Hours Press Conference . In an interview with IGN , Sakurai said the Wii 's motion sensing features might not be included because " [ his team ] found that trying to implement too much motion @-@ sensory functionality can get in the way of the game " . As far as Wi @-@ Fi play is concerned , Sakurai stated his plan was to include Wi @-@ Fi connection compatibility from the start . He goes on to say , " One of the primary reasons Super Smash Bros. Brawl was created was that Nintendo , when taking Wii online , wanted to have Smash Bros. to do that . " However , Sakurai stated on the Japanese version of the Smash Bros. website that there were " hurdles of all sorts that [ made ] it very difficult " to implement online battles . Furthermore , he said that an online ranking system is unlikely to be implemented . During a test play between Sakurai and Hideo Kojima , Kojima stated that the game felt complete and that Nintendo " could put it out now and it would sell millions of copies " . Starting May 22 , 2007 and ending April 14 , 2008 , the site had daily weekday updates . 
 At the Nintendo Media Conference at E3 2007 , Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils @-@ Aimé announced that Super Smash Bros. Brawl would be released on December 3 , 2007 in the Americas . However , just two months before its anticipated December release , the development team asked for more time to work on the game . During the Nintendo Conference on October 10 , 2007 , President Iwata announced the delay , 
 " In order to fine @-@ tune Smash Bros. , with this unprecedented game depth , we have decided that we have to take a little more time to complete the game than we announced before . We are sorry for the fans that are already anxiously waiting for the launch , but we would like to launch this game on January 24 , 2008 in Japan . As for the North American launch , we will review that too , and our local subsidiaries will make their own announcements . " 
 On October 11 , 2007 , George Harrison of Nintendo of America stated that Super Smash Bros. Brawl would be released on February 10 , 2008 in North America . On January 15 , 2008 , the game 's release was delayed one week in Japan to January 31 and nearly a month in the Americas to March 9 . On April 24 , 2008 , Nintendo of Europe confirmed that Brawl would be released in Europe on June 27 . Similarly , Nintendo Australia announced on May 15 , 2008 , that the game would be released in that region on June 26 , 2008 . 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl uses a dual @-@ layer disc due to the size of the game data . Nintendo of America has stated that some Wii consoles may have difficulty reading the high @-@ density software due to a contaminated laser lens . Nintendo offered a free repair for owners who experienced this issue . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Sakurai revealed a list of 36 musicians providing musical arrangements for the game on May 22 , 2007 . He asked composers such as Koji Kondo , Yasunori Mitsuda , Yoko Shimomura , and Yuzo Koshiro , amongst many others , " to listen to an elite selection of Nintendo music and arrange several of their favorite songs . " The game 's various stages have multiple musical tracks which players can listen to using the new " My Music " feature , including some pieces taken directly from other games without any modification or special arrangements . This feature allows the player to select how often a piece gets played during a stage . Some of the pieces need to be unlocked by collecting CDs which are awarded via the game 's Challenges Mode , or by spawning randomly while playing . The game 's original music was composed by Takahiro Nishi , Shogo Sakai , Masaaki Iwasaki , Yutaka <unk> , Keigo Ozaki , and Kentaro Ishizaka , while the main theme was composed by former Final Fantasy series composer , Nobuo Uematsu , and arranged by Sakai . 
 = = = Inclusion of characters = = = 
 Sakurai originally stated that he did not want to emphasize Japan @-@ only characters . However , reflecting upon Marth and Roy 's inclusion in Melee , which led to the international release of the Fire Emblem series , he became more interested in characters exclusive to Japan @-@ only releases . Sakurai said that third @-@ party characters would amount to two at the most , aside from Snake . The inclusion of Konami @-@ created character Solid Snake may seem to conflict with the Super Smash Bros. paradigm — to only include characters from games made by Nintendo and its second parties — but Sakurai said that Metal Gear creator Hideo Kojima " practically begged " for Snake to be included in Super Smash Bros. Melee , which did not happen since the game was too far into development . This in turn led to his appearance in the following game instead . Similarly , the now @-@ playable Lucas from Mother 3 was intended to be used in Melee , but was left out due to the delay of Mother 3 . 
 Japanese fans were asked to submit their desired characters and musical themes via a forum on the game 's official Japanese site for possible inclusion . The most requested third @-@ party character , Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog , was announced to be in Brawl on October 10 , 2007 . 
 During Brawl 's development , Sakurai briefly considered adding Miis as playable characters . However , due to concerns about the Miis ' lighter tone not meshing with that of Brawl or potential associations with bullying , he ultimately decided against it . Miis would later be integrated into the series as playable characters in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl has received universal acclaim and commercially successful worldwide . In the United States , the game sold 874 @,@ 000 units on launch day and 1 @.@ 4 million units in its first week to become the fastest @-@ selling video game in Nintendo of America 's history , according to Nintendo . According to the NPD Group , it was the best @-@ selling game of March 2008 in Canada and the United States , selling 200 @,@ 000 and 2 @.@ 7 million units , respectively ; the game is the best @-@ selling game of 2008 in Canada as of April 1 , 2008 . Electronic Entertainment Design and Research analyst Jesse Divnich attributed the game 's strong US sales to it fulfilling " the needs of the casual , social , and sub @-@ 13 @-@ year @-@ old markets " . Upon release in PAL regions , Brawl reached number one on both European and Australian sales charts . According to the NPD Group , GfK Chart @-@ Track , and Enterbrain , the game has sold 3 @.@ 539 million units in the United States , 213 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom , and 1 @.@ 681 million in Japan , respectively , for a total of 5 @.@ 433 million units as of August 1 , 2008 . It is also the fifth best @-@ selling game of Japan in 2008 , selling 1 @,@ 747 @,@ 113 copies . It was the fourth best @-@ selling game of 2008 , selling over 4 @.@ 17 million copies . By March 31 , 2016 , the game had sold 13 @.@ 10 million units worldwide , according to Nintendo . 
 The editors of Japanese game magazine Famitsu , who awarded it a perfect score , praised the variety and depth of the single @-@ player content , the unpredictability of Final Smashes , and the dynamic fighting styles of the characters . Chris Slate of Nintendo Power awarded Brawl a perfect score in the March 2008 issue , calling it " one of the very best games that Nintendo has ever produced " . GameSpot editor Lark Anderson noted that Brawl 's " simple controls and gameplay make it remarkably accessible to beginners , yet still appealing to veterans " , while GameTrailers mentioned the amount of content that gives the game " staying power that few other games possess " . Eurogamer praised the game 's ability to stay fun in both single @-@ player and multiplayer modes , while " fulfilling its usual role of dominating a willing crowd 's evening into the early hours , and now allowing you to sustain that after everyone 's gone home " . Game Revolution hailed Brawl 's soundtrack as " spectacular ... spanning a generous swath of gaming history " . Game Informer highlighted Brawl 's " finely tuned balance , core fighting mechanics , and local multiplayer modes " . Edge concluded that , while the Smash Bros. games have often been " derided as button @-@ mashing " , Brawl features " one of the most enduringly innovative and deep systems of any fighter " . 
 IGN editor Matt Casamassina , however , noted that , although Brawl is " completely engrossing and wholly entertaining " , it suffers from " long loading times " and " uninspired enemies and locales " in the Subspace Emissary adventure mode . He also described the graphics as " an enhanced version of Melee " , with backgrounds that lack detail in areas . GameSpy echoed this by equating the quality of the graphics to that of the GameCube . Mitchell Saltzman of Gameworld Network expressed disappointment at the lack of " stat tracking , voice chat , and a mostly lag free environment " in the online mode . NGamer 's Matthew Castle points to the franchise 's lack of innovation with the verdict , " Smash Bros risks growing too familiar . It never breeds contempt , but it doesn 't quite muster that Galaxy magic . " Jeff Gerstmann rated the game 4 out of 5 stars on Giant Bomb , saying that players who are not into Nintendo 's history or multiplayer " probably won ’ t understand what all the fuss is about in the first place " . 1UP.com , however , suggested that Brawl is not directed exclusively towards serious gamers , as it offers " a curious diversion for uninterested gamers " as well . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl won multiple Wii @-@ specific awards from IGN in IGN 's 2008 video game awards , including " Best Fighting Game " , " Best Local Multiplayer Game " and " Best Original Score " . It was also nominated by them for several other Wii @-@ specific awards , including " Best Graphics Technology " , " Best Use of Sound " , " Best Online Multiplayer Game " and " Game of the Year " . The game also won " Best Fighting Game " in GameSpot 's Game of the Year awards 2008 . The game placed 15th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time . 
 It was ranked by Nintendo Power as the fifth best game of the 2000s released on a Nintendo system . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Brawl is unusually moddable for a console game , due to the " Smash Stack " exploit found within the game 's built @-@ in stage builder when loading stages from an SD card . Rather than stage data , a specialized program can be inserted onto the SD card that renders the builder unusable while present , but allows loading of fan @-@ made patches from the card on top of the game 's on @-@ disc data . These patches range from simple character skins and balance adjustments to more complex modifications such as whole additional characters and extra stages more complex than the internal stage builder allows . 
 = = = Project M = = = 
 In 2011 , a team of competitive Super Smash Bros. players , known collectively as the Project M Back Room ( <unk> ) , began development on a mod of Brawl titled Project M. It was designed to retool Brawl to play more like its predecessor , Super Smash Bros. Melee , in response to complaints about Brawl 's physics , slower @-@ paced gameplay , use of chance elements , and mechanics of certain attacks compared to Melee . The mod rebalances each of Brawl 's playable characters , adds new character costumes and gameplay modes , and adds the characters Mewtwo and Roy , who were present in Melee but omitted from Brawl 's roster . The mod has received praise from many reviewers and fans , with the " Version 3 @.@ 0 " demo having received over 300 @,@ 000 downloads as of February 2014 . 
 = Mucho Macho Man = 
 Mucho Macho Man ( foaled June 15 , 2008 ) is a retired American Thoroughbred racehorse notable as the winner of the 2013 Breeders ' Cup Classic . He was foaled in Florida and named after the Village People song " Macho Man " . His breeders were Carole and John Rio of Florida , who owned his dam . His <unk> nickname was " Lazarus " because he appeared lifeless at birth , but spontaneously revived . He grew to be a very large horse , standing over 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) high . Throughout most of his racing career , Mucho Macho Man was primarily owned by Dean and Patti Reeves of Reeves Thoroughbred Racing of Suwanee , Georgia . They purchased a majority interest in him after his first race in 2010 , and in 2012 became his sole owners . In February 2014 , Frank Stronach purchased an undisclosed share in the horse on behalf of his Adena Springs Farms , owner of Mucho Macho Man 's sire , Macho Uno . The stallion now lives at Adena Springs and began to stand at stud in the 2015 breeding season . 
 When Dean and Patti Reeves purchased the horse , they placed him with horse trainer Tim Ritvo , who shortly thereafter began a job with Gulfstream Park . Training duties were turned over to Tim 's wife and fellow trainer Kathy Ritvo , who trained Mucho Macho Man from his fourth race on . His racing career was supported by a close @-@ knit team , led by Ritvo and the Reeves as well as Reeves ' racing manager Finn Green . Mucho Macho Man was ridden in races by several top jockeys , including Rajiv Maragh , Ramon Dominguez , Mike Smith , Edgar Prado and Gary Stevens . 
 Because Mucho Macho Man was born late in the year for a Thoroughbred foal , as a growing two- and three @-@ year @-@ old he had to compete against horses that were several months older and more mature . He was also very tall , and as a young racehorse sometimes got in his own way ; as a three @-@ year @-@ old , he stepped on his front feet with his hind feet and tore off a horseshoe in two different races . In 2011 , he competed in all three Triple Crown races , coming in third in the Kentucky Derby . Following a five @-@ month layoff due to surgery that addressed a problem with his breathing , he returned to the track in November 2011 with a win , won three graded stakes races in 2012 , and finished a close second to Fort Larned in that year 's Breeders ' Cup Classic . 
 In 2013 , after overcoming a respiratory virus early in the year , he ran two races on the east coast , finishing third both times , and then was shipped early to Santa Anita Park to prepare for that year 's Breeders ' Cup . He won a preparatory race , the Awesome Again Stakes , his seventh win overall and his first Grade I win . This qualified him for the 2013 Breeders ' Cup Classic , which he won , narrowly defeating Will Take Charge and Declaration of War . His success earned him the Secretariat Vox Populi Award and the National Thoroughbred Racing Association Moment of the Year as well as two Eclipse Award nominations and 2013 Florida @-@ bred Horse of the Year . Sportswriter Steve Haskin , who followed the horse 's career for The Blood @-@ Horse , stated that the saga " provided enough uplifting human interest stories to fill a book " . Mucho Macho Man returned to the track in January 2014 with a decisive win in the Sunshine Millions Classic , but finished fourth in the Santa Anita Handicap . He remained in training , still essentially sound , but following the discovery of bruising on his fetlocks and other signs of " wear and tear " , he was retired in July 2014 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mucho Macho Man is a bay horse with white markings that include a star and stripe on his face , a sock on his left hind leg , and a coronet on his front right leg . He stands over 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) high . He was sired by Macho Uno , who won the Breeders ' Cup Juvenile and was named American Champion Two @-@ Year @-@ Old Colt in 2000 . Macho Uno was a son of Hall of Fame champion Holy Bull . Mucho Macho Man 's dam is the 2001 <unk> Stakes winner Ponche de Leona . Both sire and dam were owned by Frank Stronach 's Adena Springs Farms at the time of mating ; the pregnant mare was subsequently purchased by John and Carole Rio of Florida , where Mucho Macho Man was foaled , and thus the Rios are officially listed as his breeders . Mucho Macho Man was Ponche de Leona 's second foal and was born extremely late in the foaling season on June 15 , 2008 ; this meant that as a two- and three @-@ year @-@ old , not yet fully grown , he had to compete on equal terms with horses who were as much as five months older than he . 
 Ponche de Leona delivered Mucho Macho Man three weeks after her due date . At birth , the foal was lifeless with no heartbeat . Farm staff tried to revive him by massaging and shaking him . He was unresponsive for several minutes , then his eyes opened and he " just got up and galloped away " . As a result , his <unk> nickname was " Lazarus " . In addition to being a late foal , he was very big and hence slow to reach full development . Because the young horse was so tall and skinny , John Rio called him " Mr. Green Jeans " , though no one else did . His official name is derived from the Village People song " Macho Man " , and owner Dean Reeves ' nickname for him is " Macho " . 
 The Rios sold the horse as a two @-@ year @-@ old to Jim Culver of Dream Team One Racing Stable , keeping an ownership share for themselves . After Mucho Macho Man 's first race in 2010 , a majority share in the colt was purchased by Dean and Patti Reeves , owners of Reeves Thoroughbred Racing of Suwanee , Georgia , near Atlanta . When the Reeves purchased their controlling interest , he was sent into training with Tim Ritvo , but when Ritvo was appointed director of racing at Gulfstream Park in Florida , the conditioning of the colt was turned over to his wife and fellow trainer , Kathy . Jonathan " Finn " Green joined the Reeves ' program as racing manager in September 2011 . 
 Mucho Macho Man overcame several health issues in 2011 and 2013 . He had surgery to address a breathing problem in 2011 , and suffered from a respiratory virus and hoof problems , including a quarter crack , in 2013 . 
 Not only did the horse survive near @-@ death in 2008 , so did Kathy Ritvo , who had a heart transplant in November 2008 . She was diagnosed with cardiomyopathy in 2001 , limiting her horse training career . By 2008 her condition deteriorated to the point where she was hospitalized for several months , and she was near death when an organ became available . Less than six months after transplant surgery , she returned to training race horses . In a 2011 interview , she compared her own rapid recovery to the spontaneous recovery of the horse as a foal , and stated , " from the moment I opened my eyes [ following surgery ] , I felt fantastic . He 's Mucho Macho Man and I 'm Macho Woman . " 
 In 2012 , Reeves Thoroughbred Racing bought out Dream Team One 's 30 @-@ percent interest and became the sole owners of Mucho Macho Man . Later , Mike and Laura <unk> obtained a minority share . Also in 2012 , the team added a permanent exercise rider to their roster : Ritvo 's nephew , former jockey Nick Petro , Jr . Petro actually rode Mucho Macho Man more than anyone else . A strong support staff also worked consistently with the horse , including assistant trainer Marcelino Valencia , stable groom <unk> Tapia , and hot walker Karina Lopez . The horse 's connections remained unchanged through 2013 . In February 2014 , anticipating the stallion 's future retirement to a stud career after the 2014 season , Adena Springs Farms purchased an interest in Mucho Macho Man , but he remained in training with the same team and raced under Reeves ' colors . Frank Stronach , noting that Adena arranged the mating between Macho Uno and Ponche de Leona , described the sale as " a homecoming of sorts " . 
 Mucho Macho Man was given his basic start under saddle by Carole and John Rio . Still tall and lanky , he was sent to Bill White for race training , with Carole telling the trainer , " physically this horse is late , but mentally he 's way ahead . " Throughout his racing career , Mucho Macho Man has been described as a generally calm horse with a good temperament , a " happy " horse who " likes his job " , " businesslike " and easy to rate . However , he disliked being whipped , and was notorious for his dislike of wet conditions , performing poorly when asked to run in the mud ; his worst races were on sloppy tracks . Though viewed as " laid back " , he was generally very fast out of the starting gate , which caused him problems twice in his three @-@ year @-@ old season when he tore off a front horseshoe by stepping on his own front heels with his hind feet . Ritvo said " I think he 's so excited to get out of the gate that he 's springing before his front feet are gone . " His quickness out of the gate , described by one of his jockeys as akin to that of a Quarter Horse , became an asset once he matured . Steve Haskin noted that the horse was undefeated whenever he had the lead by the eighth pole but had never won when he did not . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 2010 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Mucho Macho Man first raced at Calder Race Course . He was scratched by the track veterinarian from the first race into which he was entered ; he had been slightly injured when the horse next to him reared and flipped over in the starting gate . He was entered in another race a week later , a maiden race in which he finished second , losing to a colt named Gourmet Dinner . After that race , Mucho Macho Man was purchased by Reeves Thoroughbred Racing . Dean and Patti Reeves had considered purchasing Gourmet Dinner , but Dean Reeves recalled saying at the time , " Call me crazy , but I like the second horse . " After the sale , Tim Ritvo took over the training of Mucho Macho Man from his original trainer , Bill White . The colt came in third at his next race , at Saratoga in New York state ; he won his first race on September 19 , 2010 , at Monmouth Park in New Jersey . After that race , the colt 's training was turned over to Kathy Ritvo when Tim began working for Gulfstream Park . In November 2010 , Mucho Macho Man moved up to graded class and finished second behind To Honor and Serve twice in a row at Aqueduct Racetrack in New York City , first in the Nashua Stakes and then in the Remsen Stakes . Throughout his two @-@ year @-@ old year the young horse was easily distracted , so he raced with blinkers for both White and Ritvo . 
 = = = 2011 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Mucho Macho Man began his second year of racing by finishing fourth behind winner Dialed In in the Grade III Holy Bull Stakes at Gulfstream Park , and once again finished behind Gourmet Dinner , who was third . Mucho Macho Man was then sent to New Orleans for the Risen Star Stakes at the Fair Grounds Race Course . Ridden by Rajiv Maragh , he recorded his first graded stakes win , prevailing by one and a half lengths over <unk> . Ritvo took away the blinkers for a workout prior to the race and kept them off , stating that the colt had matured and was more at ease without them . At the Risen Star , he first came to the notice of one of his future jockeys , Gary Stevens , then a sports analyst , who noted the colt 's calm demeanor , describing him as " a chilled out customer ... very relaxed " . The next race was the Louisiana Derby , a major preparatory race for the Kentucky Derby . In that race , he lost his right front horseshoe at the start when he " grabbed a quarter " — tearing off the shoe and a bit of his hoof when he stepped on the heel of his front foot with one of his back feet . He finished third behind Pants on Fire and Nehro . 
 Before he was a full 36 calendar months old , Mucho Macho Man contested all three legs of the American Triple Crown . He finished third to Animal Kingdom and Nehro in the Kentucky Derby . He was described as having a " babyish look " prior to the Derby , and Ritvo said that he was still growing , but Stevens noted during the Derby 's television broadcast , " when he fills into this frame , he 's going to be a big , powerful horse . " Mucho Macho Man was sixth behind Shackleford in the Preakness . At the start , he again tore off a shoe , this time from his left front hoof , even though Ritvo had switched him to glued @-@ on horseshoes . The misstep may have accounted for his low placing . Before the Belmont , Ritvo brought in a farrier specialist , who gave the horse custom made glued @-@ on horseshoes made of a wire @-@ framed synthetic composite and who also squared off the toes of Mucho Macho Man 's hind shoes to make it harder for him to accidentally step on his front heels . At the Belmont , Ramon Dominguez took over from Maragh as the colt 's jockey , and went on to ride him for a total of five races . That day , the track was sloppy and the horse ran seventh behind winner Ruler on Ice . After the Belmont , he did not race for several months because he needed surgery to fix a problem with his breathing . 
 In September , Finn Green , a recovering alcoholic with his own story of triumph over adversity , began working for Reeves . A knowledgeable horseman , Green insisted that as a condition of employment he had the right to advocate for what was best for a horse under his management , even if that meant expressing disagreement and imposing " tough love " on the owners . He and Ritvo saw eye to eye on Mucho Macho Man , and they began planning the colt 's return to the track . After a break of almost five months , Mucho Macho Man raced in November and won an allowance race at Aqueduct , beginning a three @-@ race winning streak . He had lost his " babyish " look , put on weight , and as Ritvo put it , " His shoulders [ caught ] up with his behind . " Ritvo and Green then mapped out a 2012 workout and racing schedule for Mucho Macho Man , intending to run him every six to ten weeks with recovery time after each race . 
 = = = 2012 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 For his four @-@ year @-@ old debut , Mucho Macho Man ran at Gulfstream Park , defeating Ron the Greek in the Sunshine Millions Classic , a race restricted to horses bred in Florida or California . He had finally grown into his tall frame . Dominguez returned as his jockey and was pleased with what he saw , saying , " You can really tell how much he 's grown up since I rode him in the Belmont . Back then , he was just a big skinny horse that had a lot of maturing to do . Now he looks like he 's grown up and has everything figured out . " Dominguez further described him as " forward " out of the gate and said the race was an " easy " win . He raced again in March , winning the Grade II Gulfstream Park Handicap by two lengths . In May at Churchill Downs , he finished third behind Successful Dan and Fort Larned in the Grade II <unk> Stakes , carrying top weight of 123 pounds ( 56 kg ) . His next race was the Grade II Suburban Handicap at Belmont Park on July 7 . Ridden for the first time by Mike Smith , who was his jockey for the remainder of the year , he took the lead in the straight and won by 2 @.@ 5 lengths . It was considered his most significant win of the year . In the Woodward Stakes at Saratoga on September 1 , he finished second by a neck , having been pushed toward the outside of the track by the winner , To Honor and Serve , in the final furlong . On November 3 , Mucho Macho Man was one of twelve horses to contest the Breeders ' Cup Classic at Santa Anita in California . Starting at odds of 6 – 1 , he was always in the first two and finished second , half a length behind Fort Larned . There was a 6 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ length gap back to the other runners , who included Flat Out , Game On Dude , To Honor and Serve , and Ron The Greek . He ended the year seventh in the nation for total race earnings , and tied for thirteenth in the World Thoroughbred Rankings . 
 = = = 2013 : five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Mucho Macho Man began his 2013 season by running again in the Sunshine Millions Classic , but the track was sloppy , and on this occasion he was pulled up in the homestretch and placed last in the race . As the horse was not visibly lame , jockey Smith told Ritvo , " It 's gotta be something inside . " Though speculation was that he simply did not like the wet track , shortly thereafter he was diagnosed with a respiratory virus . He also developed a quarter crack in his hoof and spent the rest of the spring recuperating at Fair Hill Training Center in Maryland . 
 In June , he returned to the track . Ridden by Edgar Prado , he started as the odds @-@ on favorite for the Criminal Type Stakes at Belmont Park but finished third of the five runners . On August 3 , he finished third to Cross Traffic and Successful Dan in the Whitney Handicap at Saratoga , with Ron The Greek fourth and Fort Larned fifth . It was at this time that his proclivity to win only when in front at the eighth pole was first commented upon in the racing press . He was once again entered in the Woodward Stakes at Saratoga on August 31 , but Ritvo scratched him on the day of the race due to the wet track , described as a " sea of slop " . 
 Ritvo then moved Mucho Macho Man to Santa Anita Park almost two months before the Breeders ' Cup races because she felt he " thrived " in California . It was a major commitment for the horse 's team , as Ritvo , Green , Petro , Tapia and Lopez had to leave their home base in Florida , and Reeves had to cover the expenses . Dean Reeves said , " Everybody has basically put their lives and their family second to the benefit and the best we can do for Macho . " The horse 's next race was the Awesome Again Stakes at Santa Anita on September 28 . Because both Smith and Prado had prior riding commitments , Ritvo and Green decided to contact Gary Stevens . Stevens ' contribution to the human interest saga included a comeback in 2013 after having been forced to retire seven years earlier due to debilitating knee pain . He also had his own near @-@ death experience , having survived a major riding accident in 2003 . In a twist of serendipity , Stevens ' agent , Craig O 'Brien , came by the barn to inquire about the horse 's availability about the same time Ritvo and Green had decided to see if Stevens was available . Stevens later claimed to be unaware of his agent 's machinations . Noting that Stevens had portrayed Seabiscuit 's jockey George Woolf in the eponymous film , Ritvo later joked , " I was in Hollywood . How could I not use a film star ? " In the course of the Awesome Again , Mucho Macho Man settled behind the leaders before making a bid on the final turn . The horse led by three lengths in the homestretch , and accelerated clear of the field to win easily by 4 1 ⁄ 2 lengths over Paynter . It was his first win in 2013 and his first Grade I stakes win . The victory was also a " win and you 're in " qualifying race for the Breeders ' Cup Classic , which included a waiver of the $ 100 @,@ 000 entry fee for the Classic . 
 On November 2 , Mucho Macho Man contested his second Breeders ' Cup Classic and was the second favorite at 4 – 1 in a strong field that included Game On Dude ( the favorite ) , Paynter , Palace Malice , Fort Larned , Will Take Charge and Flat Out , as well as the European challenger Declaration of War . The horse broke quickly from the gate and took the lead , but Stevens decided to settle him just behind the leaders before going to the outside and moving to the front on the final turn . In the closing stages , he held off two strong late challenges to win by a slim nose over second @-@ place finisher Will Take Charge and by a head over third @-@ place finisher , the European contender Declaration of War . After Mucho Macho Man 's victory , the 50 @-@ year @-@ old Stevens , winning the Classic for the first time after 14 previous attempts , said , " this was a tremendous experience to win this race ... It 's the icing on the cake of my career . " Ritvo was credited with a " super " job of training the horse . In a moment of synchronicity , actress Elizabeth Banks , who co @-@ starred with Stevens in Seabiscuit , playing Marcella Howard , presented the Breeders ' Cup Classic trophy . 
 In December , Mucho Macho Man was awarded the 2013 Secretariat Vox Populi Award , recognizing the struggles the horse had overcome in reaching success , also noting the accomplishments of his connections , including trainer Ritvo 's success overcoming her own health issues to train him and Stevens ' comeback from retirement . Dean and Patti Reeves stated , " It is a great honor to think that a horse with such humble beginnings could intertwine the lives and stories of so many people , and tug at the heartstrings of racing fans from all over the world . " At the end of 2013 , Mucho Macho Man was the number one @-@ ranked horse for the year in North American purse winnings , higher than rivals Will Take Charge and Game On Dude as well as the other two top five contenders Orb and Wise Dan . He was also nominated for two Eclipse Awards , Horse of the Year and Older Male Horse , but finished second in both categories to Wise Dan . 
 He was named Florida @-@ bred Horse of the Year for 2013 , noting that he was only the third Florida @-@ bred horse to win the Classic , after Unbridled and Skip Away . In the 2013 World 's Best Racehorse Rankings , Mucho Macho Man was given a rating of 125 , the best horse in the world running solely on dirt , a five @-@ way tie as the seventh @-@ best racehorse in the world , and tied with Animal Kingdom as the second @-@ best racehorse in North America , behind Wise Dan . His win in the Classic was also selected as the National Thoroughbred Racing Association 's " Moment of the Year " . Participation in the online polling for that award , up by more than 50 percent from the previous year , was believed to be largely due to the popularity of Mucho Macho Man and the people around him . 
 = = = 2014 : six @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 In December 2013 , Ritvo and Green confirmed that Mucho Macho Man would return to race as a six @-@ year @-@ old , and their goal for the horse was to " target the Breeders ' Cup again " . Though presumed full @-@ grown , he still had continued to fill out from the previous year . Ritvo announced that the horse would begin his racing season for a third time with the Sunshine Millions Classic , if the track was dry . On January 18 , 2014 , Ritvo and the horse got a clear day and a fast track . Mucho Macho Man won the six @-@ horse race by 14 lengths . The field included his former nemesis , Gourmet Dinner , who finished fifth . Stevens returned as his jockey and stated , " I geared him down at the end to try not to overdo it . " 
 His connections next entered him in the Santa Anita Handicap , nicknamed the " Big ' Cap " , on March 8 , returning to California rather than shipping him overseas to run in the $ 10 million Dubai World Cup later that month , again stating that they considered it to be best for the horse . With the announcement that Will Take Charge was also coming to California , the 2014 race became the most highly anticipated running since the matchup of <unk> and Ferdinand in 1988 , the only other time that the previous year 's Breeders ' Cup top two finishers returned to challenge one another at the Santa Anita Handicap . Additional interest came from the return of Game On Dude , who won the Big ' Cap in 2011 and 2013 . Mucho Macho Man was assigned the highest impost at 124 pounds ( 56 @.@ 2 kg ) . Will Take Charge was assigned 123 pounds ( 55 @.@ 8 kg ) and Game on Dude , 122 pounds ( 55 @.@ 3 kg ) . Eight horses entered , with Mucho Macho Man the morning line favorite . Game On Dude , described as " on fire " that day , won the race and broke the stakes record in doing so , Will Take Charge was second , but Mucho Macho Man started to lose energy at the three @-@ eighths pole and finished fourth behind <unk> . Ritvo had no excuses for his finish , noting only that he had missed a few training days due to rain , and the extra moisture had also changed the condition of the Santa Anita track . On May 1 , 2014 , Georgia Governor Nathan Deal proclaimed Mucho Macho Man Day in the state of Georgia , recognizing the accomplishments of the horse and the attention he and his owners brought to Georgia . 
 He returned to Florida for training after the Big ' Cap , but after performing poorly in a June workout was found to have some bruising of his fetlocks , and was given lighter duty . On July 15 it was announced that Mucho Macho Man was officially retired from racing and would stand at stud at Adena Springs beginning in the 2015 breeding year . In a further twist of synchronicity , in the same week Stevens announced he was taking a break from race riding due to the need for a total knee replacement . Ritvo explained that Mucho Macho Man was sound , but " [ a ] fter five seasons of training and racing , he shows signs of some minor wear and tear . He is still sound and happy , but we have decided that it is in his best interests to retire him . He has nothing more to prove to any of us . " 
 = = Racing statistics = = 
 Conversions of distance and abbreviations for the owners are given after the table . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Mucho Macho Man is sired by Macho Uno , who stands at stud at Adena Springs Farms in Kentucky . As of January 2014 , Macho Uno had sired 27 stakes winners . Besides Mucho Macho Man , they include : <unk> , winner of the Hollywood Oaks ; Macho Again ; and Wicked Style . Macho Uno is a son of Holy Bull , who was the 1994 American Horse of the Year , and Breeders ' Cup Classic winner Awesome Again is a half @-@ brother to Macho Uno ; both horses were out of the mare Primal Force . The sire line of Mucho Macho Man traces back to the 1898 Kentucky Derby winner , <unk> . Because Macho Uno carries no lines to stallions Northern Dancer , Seattle Slew , Hail to Reason , or In Reality , who commonly appear in Thoroughbred pedigrees , he is valued as a near @-@ total outcross for most Thoroughbred mares in North America . 
 Mucho Macho Man 's dam is stakes @-@ winning Ponche de Leona , whose pedigree is not particularly well known . Her sire , Ponche , won five stakes races and sired five stakes winners . Her dam won one race in 19 starts . Mucho Macho Man thus has very little linebreeding ; only a 4 × 4 cross to the sire Mr. Prospector , meaning that this horse appears twice in the fourth generation of his pedigree . Ponche de Leona was purchased at the Keeneland sale in November 2007 by John and Carole Rio for $ 33 @,@ 000 when in foal with Mucho Macho Man , the relatively low price partly owing to having been bred late in the year ; late foals are difficult to sell . However , by November 2011 , after the success of Mucho Macho Man in his three @-@ year @-@ old year , and in foal to Macho Uno again , the Rios resold her at Keeneland for $ 300 @,@ 000 . Following Mucho Macho Man 's Breeders ' Cup win in 2013 , and having also produced the stakes @-@ placed Mucho Man 's Gold , she was again sold at the Keeneland January 2014 sale , this time in foal to Distorted Humor , bringing $ 775 @,@ 000 . In 2013 , she was named Florida broodmare of the year by the Florida Thoroughbred Breeders ' and Owners ' Association . 
 = Kyla Tyson = 
 Kyla Tyson is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , portrayed by actress Rakie Ayola . She appeared from 7 February 2006 to 9 December 2008 , from the series eight episode " I 'll Be Back " to the series eleven episode " Sweet Bitter Love " . Ayola had made a former minor appearance in the show several years prior to being cast as Kyla , and was later asked to return in a more permanent role . She departed from the show after becoming pregnant with her second child . 
 Kyla is a nurse and single mother , constantly trying to balance her career , her child and her love life . Her storylines see her subjected to domestic abuse by her husband , temporarily lose her son to foster care and become an alcoholic . After getting her life back on track , she departs from Holby , moving to Ghana with her partner Abra Durant ( Adrian Edmondson ) . 
 In August 2006 , Ayola was shortlisted for the " Female Performance in TV " award at the fourth Screen Nation Awards for her portrayal of Kyla , and was granted " Honourable Mention " in the same category the following year . However , the character has also been criticised for the dramaticism of her storylines , and the manner in which they reflect upon real NHS nurses . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Prior to being cast as Kyla , Rakie Ayola had made former appearances in both Holby City and its sister show Casualty - in the former as a patient , in series five , episode 32 " By Any Other Name " , and the latter as a patient 's relative , in series 13 , episode 19 , " Trapped " . She was approached about returning to Holby City in a more permanent role by BBC casting director Julie Harkin , who was also responsible for casting fellow Holby City newcomers Luke Roberts as Joseph Byrne and Tom Chambers as Sam Strachan . After a series of three meetings , two years after the birth of her first child , she agreed readily , despite being " nervous about signing such a long contract " , and having claimed just sixteen months previously that she had no desire to work in any long running serial - lambasting the quality of long @-@ term recurring characters by stating : " I watch lots of soaps and love watching them but I often think how frustrating it must be when they make a character into such an idiot . I think it would drive me mad to pick up a script and think , ' Who am I kissing now ? ' " 
 Ayola has since explained that her change of heart stemmed from becoming a mother . In the early years of her marriage to fellow actor Adam Smethurst the couple struggled financially , and with the added expense of the birth of their daughter , Ayola had been on the verge of giving up her acting career to begin a business franchise . On joining the cast of Holby City , she disclosed : " I 've been someone who 's loved the uncertainty of acting . I 've loved that one month it 's Sahara in Morocco and the next I 'm doing a stage play , then it 's a six @-@ part telly thing . But last summer I started thinking it would be really nice not to have to look for a job every couple of weeks . It would be nice just to stay put for a while . If I 'm going to be a working mum I 'd rather just be one rather than be one intermittently . And then Holby came along , so I 'm very grateful . " 
 Ayola signed a three @-@ year contract to play Kyla , which expired in October 2008 . It was announced on 11 October 2008 that she would be departing from the show in order to have a second child . Ayola said of her decision to leave : " It 's strange but sad at the same time . I 've had a great time and I 'll miss it . I made the decision purely because I was pregnant , but I wasn 't really ready to put down the character of Kyla . I 'm very sorry to have to let her go " . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Upon announcing the character 's arrival , BBC Publicity described Kyla as a " survivor " , someone who had " been through a lot in her life , firstly losing out on her dream career as a runner and then escaping a violent marriage . " It was stated : " Kyla is compassionate , feisty , gives others the benefit of the doubt , strong and loyal - but you wouldn 't want to cross her . Kyla has a habit of picking the wrong men , she 's inflexible once she 's made her mind up and can be volatile if pushed . She has come to Holby with her son Max eager to start anew . " 
 From May 2007 onwards , the character was portrayed as increasingly emotionally unstable , having had " her whole world crash down around her " , following storylines including the death of her husband , and her son 's request to be taken into foster care . As this emotional instability continued and worsened with the abrupt ending of another relationship , the character was seen to develop full blown alcoholism . Series producer Diana Kyle said of the storyline : " It 's important we cover topics that are relevant today . Every day , people in the medical profession deal with patients who have drink or drug problems . Plus , the fact that some of the Holby staff are also suffering with these addictions is very pertinent to hospitals in real life . " Speaking of Kyla 's struggle to deal with her addiction , she added : " She 'll work so hard to get her life together . She has a long way to go , but hopefully there 's a light at the end of the tunnel ... " 
 Discussing the storyline which saw Kyla 's Alcoholics Anonymous companion Stuart McElroy ( Conor Mullen ) violently attack her colleague , Ward Sister Chrissie Williams ( Tina Hobley ) , Ayola has stated : " It makes her finally accept what Stuart was capable of . She sees this huge gash and feels that all her instincts about other people are wrong – so she ends up running off . [ ... ] [ Kyla ] has no excuses – all she can think is that she ’ s really messed up and needs to leave . " This plot strand saw Kyla once more resort to drinking while at work , and decide to quit her job , only to be talked out of doing so by Nursing Consultant Mark Williams ( Robert Powell ) . Ayola explained : " He suggests she takes a demotion , so she ’ ll have less to worry about and more time to deal with her problems . It 's the lifeline she needs , because her work is all she has right now . I think if Kyla did leave , she ’ d end up simply going home and buying loads of cheap booze . " When asked if Kyla would be able to overcome her addiction and regain custody of her son , Ayola responded : " I hope so . Kyla 's had trouble being a good parent to Max , but she 's had lots of time to reflect on why this is . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Kyla was involved in three romantic relationships during her time in the show , the first of which was with physiotherapist Justin Fuller ( Ben Richards ) . Ayola said of the relationship : " She hasn 't got great taste in men ! She likes good @-@ looking blokes - that whole ' take me to a cave ' thing - but she doesn 't check that there is a soft , gentle , sensitive side to him . He 's gorgeous to look at , but she hasn 't learned that you have to look a bit deeper . " Roger Griffiths was cast as Kyla 's ex @-@ husband Harvey . Ayola commented on their previous relationship : " I think they split up because Kyla is so volatile . The more we learn about Harvey the more I think he might not be the reason for their split " . She expanded : " They had a tempestuous relationship and Kyla is very irrational which got too much for Harvey . Harvey brings out the worst in Kyla and she just ends up yelling at him . It 's a very difficult and if he knew how to handle her maybe it could work out but he doesn 't . " 
 Asked in July 2006 what she hoped for Kyla in the long run , Ayola responded : " Most of all I ’ d like to see her laugh , big belly laughs as she has not done much of that ! ... I also would like her to find a man that she is with not just because he is attractive but someone who can work her out and understand her " . Several months after this interview , the character was romantically linked to newcomer and former guest star , general surgical consultant Abra Durant , played by Adrian Edmondson . Edmondson departed from and returned to the show several times , with Kyla and Abra breaking up and reuniting on multiple occasions . Asked in February 2008 whether the two would ever get back together , Ayola responded : " He treated Kyla like dirt , so I don ’ t know if she ’ ll forgive him , but I love working with Ade – he ’ s a gorgeous man . " The two ultimately left Holby together , moving to Ghana . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Kyla arrives at Holby General as an agency nurse in the episode " I 'll Be Back " . She makes a good impression on consultant Ric Griffin ( Hugh Quarshie ) , and is invited to take on the position of Acting Sister . When her former boyfriend , physiotherapist Justin Fuller , begins working at the hospital , they briefly renew their relationship . Kyla tires of Justin 's immaturity , however , and breaks up with him again . In retaliation , Justin kidnaps Kyla 's son Max , plying him with alcohol , and sending him into a hypoglycemic coma . While Kyla and her ex @-@ husband Harvey manage to get to Max in time to save him , Harvey tells Kyla she is an unfit mother and he will be filing for sole custody of their son . 
 Kyla and Harvey fight a brief custody battle . When it is revealed that Max has been bullying his classmates , his parents realise they need to set aside their differences for their son 's sake . Shortly after this , Kyla begins a relationship with new general surgical consultant Abra Durant . Kyla helps Abra cover up an illegal xenotransplantation he performed , and keeps quiet when she discovers he has been stealing and shipping returned anti @-@ retroviral drugs to African hospitals in need . When Abra 's illegal dealings are uncovered , he is forced to flee the country , devastating Kyla . 
 Shaken by Abra 's departure , when Max falls ill with food poisoning in the episode " Feast or Famine " Kyla realises he needs a male influence in his life and begrudgingly allows Harvey to move back in with them . Harvey becomes physically abusive , is suspended from his work as a police officer , and begins drinking heavily . When Harvey discovers lingerie bought for Kyla by Abra , the pair fall out once again , culminating in Harvey falling to his death from the hospital roof . Max , who witnessed this , blames his mother , causing her to lash out at him . As a result , he is taken into foster care , and although social services decide he may return to Kyla 's custody , he requests to remain in his new foster home . 
 Abra returns to Holby , and although Kyla initially rebukes his advances , they ultimately resume their relationship , moving in together . Abra makes a drunken proposal to her in episode " Bad Reputation " however laughs it off as a joke when she assumes he is not serious . Kyla is seen to develop an increasing dependence on alcohol as she grieves for her son . When Abra abruptly terminates their relationship in order to move back to Africa , this alcohol dependence continues and worsens . Kyla is devastated when Max applies for a Guardianship Order , and becomes negligent at work , leading to the deaths of two patients . Kyla admits she has become an alcoholic and agrees to begin attending AA meetings . Initially this goes well , and she is supported by new consultant Stuart McElroy who is also an alcoholic . However , Kyla 's confidence is damaged when Stuart violently attacks colleague Chrissie Williams , and she resorts to drinking once more . She attempts to hand in her notice , but Mark Williams persuades her to take a voluntary demotion to give her more time to deal with her problems . 
 Kyla is shocked when Abra returns to Holby again , contemplating going back to both him and alcohol , but managing to resist . In the episode " Send No Flowers " , she is unexpectedly reunited with Max when he arrives at the hospital to visit his foster brother , a patient in Kyla 's care . After an argument , Max suffers cardiac arrest and requires an operation . Kyla suspects he has been neglected by his foster mother . Max is initially highly defensive of her , but after a stern talking to by Abra , and being implored to do the right thing by Kyla , Max admits to his social worker that his foster mother is frequently neglectful . Kyla is delighted when he finally asks to come home with her . 
 Kyla briefly re @-@ unites with Abra , when he reveals to her that he was subject to a machete attack in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , however he then leaves Holby once more to check himself into a psychiatric hospital . When Lola Griffin ( Sharon D. Clarke ) finds Abra being treated for post @-@ traumatic stress by his own mother , she and Kyla convince Abra to discharge himself and return to Ghana . Shortly thereafter , Max is accepted into a prestigious football academy in Rotterdam , the Netherlands . Kyla hands in her notice , intent on leaving with him , however Max convinces Abra to return and take Kyla back to Ghana with him . Kyla initially refuses , but comes to realise that Max only wants to make her happy , and agrees to leave with Abra , who proposes marriage to her . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ayola was shortlisted in August 2006 for the " Female Performance in TV " award at the 2006 Screen Nation Awards , for her portrayal of the character . The 2007 Screen Nation Awards saw Ayola receive " Honourable Mention " , again for " Female Performance in TV " , however she failed to make shortlist this time around . Kyla has achieved mild popularity with Holby City fans . She was voted fans ' fifth favourite newcomer of series eight in the official 2006 <unk> Awards , and she and Abra were voted fifth favourite couple of series nine , the following year in the 2007 awards . 
 The level of dramaticism of some of the character 's storylines , as well as those of other Holby City nurses was heavily criticised by the Nursing and Midwifery Council . The lead article of the July 2007 issue of the NMC magazine tackled nurses in popular culture , discussing " the ease with which writers can attach terrible storylines to a caring profession " , and stating : " Nurses who become prostitutes to pay the bills , nurses who kill their husbands , nurses who abuse the system to get their own way - Holby City has always been a hotbed of slanderous storylines . Good people doing bad things makes excellent entertainment ... The bald fact is that real life nurses doing their jobs well just aren 't that entertaining . " 
 Kyla 's " no @-@ nonsense " personality has led to mixed reviews in the press . A number of episodes central to her storylines have been reviewed by various publications as televisual ' picks of the day ' - from her introductory episode , to the death of her husband , to the surprise return of her former boyfriend Abra . Her " fiery " stance resulted in the assessment that , from a viewing perspective , the character " has never been one of the more likeable members of staff " , however her descent into alcoholism drew some more sympathetic reviews , with Linda Gibson of TV Quick writing of the character : " Let 's hope that Kyla pulls herself together , gets her son back and meets a man who can give her what she wants . " Conversely , Daily Mirror TV critic Jim Shelley opined that the character had formerly been one of the more " normal " and " reliable " members of the cast , but criticized the handling of her alcoholism storyline , stating that the character seemed to have become an alcoholic " overnight " . 
 In October 2007 , drinks ' industry body the Portman Group made an official complaint to communications regulator Ofcom about a scene in Holby City which depicted two medics drinking five shots of tequila following a stressful day at work . The body 's chief executive David Poley claimed that in failing to show the negative consequences of this action , the series was presenting a " highly irresponsible portrayal of excessive and rapid drinking " . Ofcom received a total of eight complaints about the incident . In response to the accusation that " We would expect the BBC to take greater care with the portrayal of alcohol in programmes " , the BBC released a statement tying the complaint closely to the alcoholism storyline being played out with Kyla at the time , explaining that : " Holby City is in the middle of a storyline in which a key character ( Kyla ) has spiralling problems in her personal and professional life because of alcohol — a storyline that fully and realistically depicts the negative impact of alcohol dependency in the workplace . Kyla has now been seen to seek help for alcoholism and the audience will see how she fares on the road to recovery . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The 17 November 2006 Children in Need charity telethon included a segment featuring the Holby City cast performing a version of Hung Up by Madonna . Ayola as Kyla featured prominently in this sketch , performing the song 's bridge and providing vocals for its introduction . 
 The 16 November 2007 Children in Need appeal again contained a musical performance from Holby City cast members . Ayola , alongside Nadine Lewington ( Maddy Young ) and Phoebe Thomas ( Maria Kendall ) provided backing vocals for Sharon D Clarke ( Lola Griffin ) , who performed a soul version of Aretha Franklin 's signature song , Respect . 
 On 3 June 2008 , BBC Two cooking programme Ready Steady Cook broadcast a Holby City special , featuring Ayola and Edmondson . As well as competing over their cooking skills , the pair discussed their characters ' relationship and storylines . 
 = European Commission = 
 The European Commission ( EC ) is the executive body of the European Union responsible for proposing legislation , implementing decisions , upholding the EU treaties and managing the day @-@ to @-@ day business of the EU . Commissioners swear an oath at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg , pledging to respect the treaties and to be completely independent in carrying out their duties during their mandate . 
 The Commission operates as a cabinet government , with 28 members of the Commission ( informally known as " commissioners " ) . There is one member per member state , but members are bound by their oath of office to represent the general interest of the EU as a whole rather than their home state . One of the 28 is the Commission President ( currently Jean @-@ Claude Juncker ) proposed by the European Council and elected by the European Parliament . The Council of the European Union then nominates the other 27 members of the Commission in agreement with the nominated President , and the 28 members as a single body are then subject to a vote of approval by the European Parliament . The current Commission is the Juncker Commission , which took office in late 2014 . 
 The term Commission is used either in the narrow sense of the 28 @-@ member College of Commissioners ( or College ) or to also include the administrative body of about 23 @,@ 000 European civil servants who are split into departments called directorates @-@ general and services . The procedural languages of the Commission are English , French and German . The Members of the Commission and their " cabinets " ( immediate teams ) are based in the Berlaymont building in Brussels . 
 = = History = = 
 The European Commission derives from one of the five key institutions created in the supranational European Community system , following the proposal of Robert Schuman , French Foreign Minister , on 9 May 1950 . Originating in 1951 as the High Authority in the European Coal and Steel Community , the Commission has undergone numerous changes in power and composition under various presidents , involving three Communities . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The first Commission originated in 1951 as the nine @-@ member " High Authority " under President Jean Monnet ( see Monnet Authority ) . The High Authority was the supranational administrative executive of the new European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) . It took office first on 10 August 1952 in Luxembourg . In 1958 the Treaties of Rome had established two new communities alongside the ECSC : the European Economic Community ( EEC ) and the European Atomic Energy Community ( Euratom ) . However their executives were called " Commissions " rather than " High Authorities " . The reason for the change in name was the new relationship between the executives and the Council . Some states such as France expressed reservations over the power of the High Authority and wished to limit it giving more power to the Council rather than the new executives . 
 Louis Armand led the first Commission of Euratom . Walter Hallstein led the first Commission of the EEC , holding the first formal meeting on 16 January 1958 at the Château of Val @-@ Duchesse . It achieved agreement on a contentious cereal price accord as well as making a positive impression upon third countries when it made its international debut at the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) negotiations . Hallstein notably began the consolidation of European law and started to have a notable impact on national legislation . Little heed was taken of his administration at first but , with help from the European Court of Justice , his Commission stamped its authority solidly enough to allow future Commissions to be taken more seriously . However , in 1965 accumulating differences between the French government of Charles de Gaulle and the other member states ( over British entry , direct elections to Parliament , the <unk> Plan and the budget ) triggered the " empty chair " crisis ostensibly over proposals for the common agricultural policy . Although the institutional crisis was solved the following year , it cost Etienne Hirsch his presidency of Euratom and later Walter Hallstein the EEC presidency despite otherwise being viewed as the most ' dynamic ' leader until Jacques Delors . 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 The three bodies , collectively named the European Executives , co @-@ existed until 1 July 1967 when , under the Merger Treaty , they were combined into a single administration under President Jean Rey . Due to the merger the Rey Commission saw a temporary increase to 14 members , although subsequent Commissions were reduced back down to nine , following the formula of one member for small states and two for larger states . The Rey Commission completed the Community 's customs union in 1968 and campaigned for a more powerful , elected , European Parliament . Despite Rey being the first President of the combined communities , Hallstein is seen as the first President of the modern Commission . 
 The Malfatti and <unk> Commissions followed with work on monetary co @-@ operation and the first enlargement to the north in 1973 . With that enlargement the Commission 's membership increased to thirteen under the <unk> Commission ( the United Kingdom as a large member was granted two Commissioners ) , which dealt with the enlarged community during economic and international instability at that time . The external representation of the Community took a step forward when President Roy Jenkins , recruited to the presidency in January 1977 from his role as Home Secretary of the United Kingdom 's Labour government , became the first President to attend a G8 summit on behalf of the Community . Following the Jenkins Commission , Gaston Thorn 's Commission oversaw the Community 's enlargement to the south , in addition to beginning work on the Single European Act . 
 = = = Jacques Delors = = = 
 The Commission headed by Jacques Delors was seen as giving the Community a sense of direction and dynamism . Delors and his team are also considered as the " founding fathers of the euro " . The International Herald Tribune noted the work of Delors at the end of his second term in 1992 : " Mr. Delors rescued the European Community from the doldrums . He arrived when <unk> was at its worst . Although he was a little @-@ known former French finance minister , he breathed life and hope into the EC and into the dispirited Brussels Commission . In his first term , from 1985 to 1988 , he rallied Europe to the call of the single market , and when appointed to a second term he began urging Europeans toward the far more ambitious goals of economic , monetary and political union " . 
 = = = Jacques Santer = = = 
 The successor to Delors was Jacques Santer . The entire Santer Commission was forced to resign in 1999 by the Parliament as result of a fraud and corruption scandal , with a central role played by Édith Cresson . These frauds were revealed by an internal auditor Paul van Buitenen . 
 That was the first time a Commission had been forced to resign en masse and represented a shift of power towards the Parliament . However the Santer Commission did carry out work on the Amsterdam Treaty and the euro . In response to the scandal the European Anti @-@ Fraud Office ( OLAF ) was created . 
 = = = Romano Prodi = = = 
 Following Santer , Romano Prodi took office . The Amsterdam Treaty had increased the Commission 's powers and Prodi was dubbed by the press as something akin to a Prime Minister . Powers were strengthened again with the Nice Treaty in 2001 giving the Presidents more power over the composition of their Commissions . 
 = = = José Manuel Barroso = = = 
 In 2004 José Manuel Barroso became President : the Parliament once again asserted itself in objecting to the proposed membership of the Barroso Commission . Due to the opposition Barroso was forced to reshuffle his team before taking office . The Barroso Commission was also the first full Commission since the enlargement in 2004 to 25 members and hence the number of Commissioners at the end of the Prodi Commission had reached 30 . As a result of the increase in the number of states , the Amsterdam Treaty triggered a reduction in the number of Commissioners to one per state , rather than two for the larger states . 
 Allegations of fraud and corruption were again raised in 2004 by former chief auditor Jules Muis . A Commission officer Guido Strack reported alleged fraud and abuses in his department in years 2002 – 2004 to OLAF and was fired as result . In 2008 Paul van Buitenen ( the former auditor known from Santer Commission scandal ) accused the European Anti @-@ Fraud Office ( OLAF ) of a lack of independence and effectiveness . 
 Barroso 's first Commission term expired on 31 October 2009 . Under the Treaty of Nice , the first Commission to be appointed after the number of member states reached 27 would have to be reduced to " less than the number of Member States " . The exact number of Commissioners was to be decided by a unanimous vote of the European Council and membership would rotate equally between member states . Following the accession of Romania and Bulgaria in January 2007 , this clause took effect for the next Commission . The Treaty of Lisbon , which came into force on 1 December 2009 , mandated a reduction of the number of commissioners to two @-@ thirds of member @-@ states from 2014 unless the Council decided otherwise . Membership would rotate equally and no member state would have more than one Commissioner . However , the treaty was rejected by voters in Ireland in 2008 with one main concern being the loss of their Commissioner . Hence a guarantee given for a rerun of the vote was that the Council would use its power to amend the number of Commissioners upwards . However , according to the treaties it still has to be fewer than the total number of members , thus it was proposed that the member state that does not get a Commissioner would get the post of High Representative – the so @-@ called 26 + 1 formula . This guarantee ( which may find its way into the next treaty amendment , probably in an accession treaty ) contributed to the Irish approving the treaty in a second referendum in 2009 . 
 Lisbon also combined the posts of European Commissioner for External Relations with the Council 's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy . This post , also a Vice @-@ President of the Commission , would chair the Council of the European Union 's foreign affairs meetings as well as the Commission 's external relations duties . The treaty further provides that the most recent European elections should be " taken into account " when appointing the Commission , although the President is still proposed by the European Council ; the European Parliament " elects " the Commission rather than " approves " it as under the Treaty of Nice . 
 = = = Jean @-@ Claude Juncker = = = 
 In 2014 , Jean @-@ Claude Juncker became President of the European Commission . 
 = = Powers and functions = = 
 The Commission was set up from the start to act as an independent supranational authority separate from governments ; it has been described as " the only body paid to think European " . The members are proposed by their member state governments , one from each . However , they are bound to act independently – neutral from other influences such as those governments which appointed them . This is in contrast to the Council , which represents governments , the Parliament , which represents citizens , the Economic and Social Committee , which represents organised civil society , and the Committee of the Regions , which represents local and regional authorities . 
 Through Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union the Commission has several responsibilities : to develop medium @-@ term strategies ; to draft legislation and arbitrate in the legislative process ; to represent the EU in trade negotiations ; to make rules and regulations , for example in competition policy ; to draw up the budget of the European Union ; and to scrutinise the implementation of the treaties and legislation . The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the Commission 's operation and organisation . 
 = = = Executive power = = = 
 Before the Treaty of Lisbon came into force , the executive power of the EU was held by the Council : it conferred on the Commission such powers for it to exercise . However , the Council was theoretically allowed to withdraw these powers , exercise them directly , or impose conditions on their use . This aspect has been changed by the Treaty of Lisbon , after which the Commission exercises its powers just by virtue of the treaties . Powers are more restricted than most national executives , in part due to the Commission 's lack of power over areas like foreign policy – that power is held by the European Council , which some analysts have described as another executive . 
 Considering that under the Lisbon Treaty the European Council has become a formal institution with the power of appointing the Commission , it could be said that the two bodies hold the executive power of the EU ( the European Council also holds individual national executive powers ) . However , it is the Commission that currently holds executive powers over the European Union . The governmental powers of the Commission have been such that some such as former Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt have suggested changing its name to the " European Government " , calling the present name of the Commission " ridiculous " . 
 = = = Legislative initiative = = = 
 The Commission differs from the other institutions in that it alone has legislative initiative in the EU . Only the Commission can make formal proposals for legislation : they cannot originate in the legislative branches . Under the Treaty of Lisbon , no legislative act is allowed in the field of the Common Foreign and Security Policy . In the other fields the Council and Parliament are able to request legislation ; in most cases the Commission initiates the basis of these proposals . This monopoly is designed to ensure coordinated and coherent drafting of EU law . This monopoly has been challenged by some who claim the Parliament should also have the right , with most national parliaments holding the right in some respects . However , the Council and Parliament may request the Commission to draft legislation , though the Commission does have the power to refuse to do so as it did in 2008 over transnational collective conventions . Under the Lisbon Treaty , EU citizens are also able to request the Commission to legislate in an area via a petition carrying one million signatures , but this is not binding . 
 The Commission 's powers in proposing law have usually centred on economic regulation . It has put forward a large number of regulations based on a " precautionary principle " . This means that pre @-@ emptive regulation takes place if there is a credible hazard to the environment or human health : for example on tackling climate change and restricting genetically modified organisms . This is opposed to weighting regulations for their effect on the economy . Thus , the Commission often proposes stricter legislation than other countries . Due to the size of the European market this has made EU legislation an important influence in the global market . 
 Recently the Commission has moved into creating European criminal law . In 2006 , a toxic waste spill off the coast of Côte d 'Ivoire , from a European ship , prompted the Commission to look into legislation against toxic waste . Some EU states at that time did not even have a crime against shipping toxic waste leading to the Commissioners Franco Frattini and Stavros Dimas to put forward the idea of " ecological crimes " . Their right to propose criminal law was challenged in the European Court of Justice but upheld . As of 2007 , the only other criminal law proposals which have been brought forward are on the intellectual property rights directive , and on an amendment to the 2002 counter @-@ terrorism framework decision , outlawing terrorism ‑ related incitement , recruitment ( especially via the internet ) and training . 
 = = = Enforcement = = = 
 Once legislation is passed by the Council and Parliament , it is the Commission 's responsibility to ensure it is implemented . It does this through the member states or through its agencies . In adopting the necessary technical measures , the Commission is assisted by committees made up of representatives of member states and of the public and private lobbies ( a process known in jargon as " <unk> " ) . Furthermore , the Commission is responsible for the implementation of the EU budget , ensuring , along with the Court of Auditors , that EU funds are correctly spent . 
 In particular the Commission has a duty to ensure the treaties and law are upheld , potentially by taking member states or other institutions to the Court of Justice in a dispute . In this role it is known informally as the " guardian of the treaties " . Finally , the Commission provides some external representation for the Union , alongside the member states and the Common Foreign and Security Policy , representing the Union in bodies such as the World Trade Organisation . It is also usual for the President to attend meetings of the G8 . 
 = = College = = 
 The Commission is composed of a college of " Commissioners " of 28 members , including the President and vice @-@ presidents . Even though each member is appointed by a national government , one per state , they do not represent their state in the Commission . In practice , however , they do occasionally press for their national interest . Once proposed , the President delegates portfolios among each of the members . The power of a Commissioner largely depends upon their portfolio , and can vary over time . For example , the Education Commissioner has been growing in importance , in line with the rise in the importance of education and culture in European policy @-@ making . Another example is the Competition Commissioner , who holds a highly visible position with global reach . Before the Commission can assume office , the college as a whole must be approved by the Parliament . Commissioners are supported by their personal cabinet who give them political guidance , while the Civil Service ( the DGs , see below ) deal with technical preparation . 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 The President of the Commission is first proposed by the European Council taking into account the latest Parliamentary elections ; that candidate can then be elected by the European Parliament or not . If not , the European Council shall propose another candidate within one month . The candidate has often been a leading national politician , but this is not a requirement . In 2009 , the Lisbon Treaty was not in force and Barroso was not " elected " by the Parliament , but rather nominated by the European Council ; in any case , the centre @-@ right parties of the EU pressured for a candidate from their own ranks . In the end , a centre @-@ right candidate was chosen : José Manuel Barroso of the European People 's Party . 
 There are further criteria influencing the choice of the candidate , including : which area of Europe the candidate comes from , favoured as Southern Europe in 2004 ; the candidate 's political influence , credible yet not overpowering members ; language , proficiency in French considered necessary by France ; and degree of integration , their state being a member of both the eurozone and the Schengen Agreement . In 2004 , this system produced a number of candidates and was thus criticised by some MEPs : following the drawn @-@ out selection , the <unk> group leader Graham Watson described the procedure as a " Justus Lipsius carpet market " producing only the " lowest common denominator " ; while Green @-@ EFA co @-@ leader Daniel Cohn @-@ <unk> asked Barroso after his first speech " If you are the best candidate , why were you not the first ? " 
 Following the election of the President , and the appointment of the High Representative by the European Council , each Commissioner is nominated by their member state ( except for those states who provided the President and High Representative ) in consultation with the Commission President , although he holds no hard power to force a change in candidate . However the more capable the candidate is , the more likely the Commission President will assign them a powerful portfolio , the distribution of which is entirely at his discretion . The President 's team is then subject to hearings at the European Parliament which will question them and then vote on their suitability as a whole . If members of the team are found to be too inappropriate , the President must then reshuffle the team or request a new candidate from the member state or risk the whole Commission being voted down . As Parliament cannot vote against individual Commissioners there is usually a compromise whereby the worst candidates are removed but minor objections are put aside so the Commission can take office . Once the team is approved by parliament , it is formally put into office by the European Council ( TEU Article 17 : 7 ) . 
 Following their appointment , the President appoints a number of Vice @-@ Presidents ( the High Representative is mandated to be one of them ) from among the commissioners . For the most part , the position grants little extra power to Vice @-@ Presidents , except the first Vice @-@ President who stands in for the President when he is away . Since 2009 the First Vice @-@ President has gained further power by also being the High Representative . 
 = = = Dismissal = = = 
 The European Parliament can dissolve the Commission as a whole following a vote of no @-@ confidence but only the President can request the resignation of an individual Commissioner . However , individual Commissioners , by request of the Council or Commission , can be compelled to retire on account of a breach of obligation ( s ) and if so ruled by the European Court of Justice ( Art. 245 and 247 , Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ) . 
 = = = Political styles = = = 
 The Barroso Commission took office in late 2004 after being delayed by objections from the Parliament , which forced a reshuffle . In 2007 the Commission increased from 25 to 27 members with the accession of Romania and Bulgaria who each appointed their own Commissioners . With the increasing size of the Commission , Barroso adopted a more Presidential style of control over the college , which earned him some criticism . 
 However , under Barroso , the Commission began to lose ground to the larger member states as countries such as France , the UK and Germany sought to sideline its role . This has increased with the creation of the President of the European Council under the Treaty of Lisbon . There has also been a greater degree of politicisation within the Commission . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The Commission is divided into departments known as Directorates @-@ General ( DGs ) that can be likened to departments or ministries . Each covers a specific policy area such as Agriculture or Justice and citizens ' rights or internal services such as Human Resources and Translation and is headed by Director @-@ General who is responsible to a Commissioner . A Commissioner 's portfolio can be supported by numerous DGs , they prepare proposals for them and if approved by a majority of Commissioners it goes forward to Parliament and Council for consideration . The Commission 's civil service is headed by a Secretary General , currently Alexander <unk> . The rules of procedure of the European Commission set out the Commission 's operation and organisation . 
 There has been criticism from a number of people that the highly fragmented DG structure wastes a considerable amount of time in turf wars as the different departments and Commissioners compete with each other . Furthermore , the DGs can exercise considerable control over a Commissioner with the Commissioner having little time to learn to assert control over their staff . 
 According to figures published by the Commission , 23 @,@ 803 persons were employed by the Commission as officials and temporary agents in September 2012 . In addition to these , <unk> " external staff " ( e.g. Contractual agents , detached national experts , young experts , trainees etc . ) were employed . The single largest DG is the Directorate @-@ General for Translation , with a <unk> @-@ strong staff , while the largest group by nationality is Belgian ( 18 @.@ 7 % ) , probably due to a majority ( 17 @,@ 664 ) of staff being based in the country . 
 = = = Press = = = 
 Communication with the press is handled by the Directorate @-@ General Communication . The Commission 's chief spokesperson is Pia <unk> Hansen who takes the midday press briefings , commonly known as the " Midday Presser " . It takes place every weekday in the Commission 's press room at the Berlaymont where journalists may ask questions of Commission officials on any topic and legitimately expect to get an " on the record " answer for live TV . Such a situation is unique in the world . 
 It has been noted by one researcher that the press releases issued by the Commission are uniquely political . A release often goes through several stages of drafting which emphasises the role of the Commission and is used " for justifying the EU and the commission " increasing their length and complexity . Where there are multiple departments involved a press release can also be a source of competition between areas of the Commission and Commissioners themselves . This also leads to an unusually high number of press releases , 1907 for 2006 , and is seen as a unique product of the EU 's political set @-@ up . The number of Commission press releases shows a decreasing trend . 1768 press releases were published in 2010 and 1589 in 2011 . 
 There is a larger press corps in Brussels than Washington D.C. ; in 2007 media outlets in every Union member @-@ state had a Brussels correspondent . However , since the global downturn by 2010 the press corps in Brussels shrunk by a third . There is one journalist covering EU news for Latvia and none for Lithuania . Although there has been a worldwide cut in journalists , the considerable press releases and operations such as Europe by Satellite and <unk> leads many news organisations to believe they can cover the EU from these source and news agencies . In the face of high @-@ level criticism , the Commission is also due to shut down <unk> on 20 December 2013 . 
 = = Legitimacy = = 
 While the Commission is the executive branch , the candidates are chosen individually by the 28 national governments , which means it is not possible for a Commission Member or its President to be removed by a direct election . Rather , the legitimacy of the Commission is mainly drawn from the vote of approval that is required from the European Parliament , along with Parliament 's power to dismiss the body , which , in turn , raises the concern of the relatively low turnout ( less than 50 % ) in elections for the European Parliament since 1999 . While that figure may be higher than that of some national elections , including the off @-@ year elections of the United States Congress , the fact that there are no elections for the position of Commission President calls the position 's legitimacy into question in the eyes of some . The fact that the Commission can directly decide ( albeit with oversight from specially formed ' <unk> committees ' ) on the shape and character of implementing legislation further raises concerns about democratic legitimacy . 
 Even though democratic structures and methods are developing there is not such a mirror in creating a European civil society . The Treaty of Lisbon may go some way to resolving the deficit in creating greater democratic controls on the Commission , including enshrining the procedure of linking elections to the selection of the Commission president . An alternative viewpoint is that electoral pressures undermine the Commission 's role as an independent regulator , considering it akin with institutions such as independent central banks which deal with technical areas of policy . In addition some defenders of the Commission point out that legislation must be approved by the Council in all areas ( the ministers of member states ) and the European Parliament in some areas before it can be adopted , thus the amount of legislation which is adopted in any one country without the approval of its government is limited . 
 In 2009 the European ombudsman published statistics of citizens ' complaints against EU institutions , with most of them filed against the Commission ( 66 % ) and concerning lack of transparency ( 36 % ) . In 2010 the Commission was sued for blocking access to documents on EU biofuel policy . This happened after media accused the Commission of blocking scientific evidence against biofuel subsidies . Lack of transparency , unclear lobbyist relations , conflicts of interests and excessive spending of the Commission was highlighted in a number of reports by internal and independent auditing organisations . It has also been criticised on IT @-@ related issues , particularly with regard to Microsoft . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Commission is primarily based in Brussels , with the President 's office and the Commission 's meeting room on the 13th floor of the Berlaymont building . The Commission also operates out of numerous other buildings in Brussels and Luxembourg . When the Parliament is meeting in Strasbourg , the Commissioners also meet there in the Winston Churchill building to attend the Parliament 's debates . 
 = Bob Ward ( American football ) = 
 Robert " Bob " Richard Ward ( September 16 , 1927 – April 29 , 2005 ) was an American football coach and player . He played college football for the Terrapins at the University of Maryland . He is considered , alongside Randy White , as one of the greatest linemen to have ever played for Maryland . Ward is the only player to have been named an Associated Press first @-@ team All @-@ American for both an offensive and defensive position . 
 In 1950 , Ward was named a first @-@ team All @-@ American , and the following year , he received consensus first @-@ team honors . He served as the Maryland head football coach from 1967 to 1968 , but without success . He coached football for a total of 22 years , including assistant coaching positions at Oklahoma , Iowa State , and Army , and in the Canadian Football League . Ward was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame as a player in 1980 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bob Ward was born in Elizabeth , New Jersey on September 16 , 1927 . He attended Jefferson High School . During the Second World War , Ward enlisted in the United States Army . He completed Airborne School to become a paratrooper and was stationed at Fort Benning , Georgia . He later served as a first lieutenant in the United States Air Force . 
 = = College career = = 
 In 1948 , Ward enrolled at the University of Maryland and played varsity football all four years as both an offensive guard and defensive lineman . At 5 feet , 9 inches ( 1 @.@ 75 meters ) and 187 pounds ( 84 @.@ 8 kg ) , Ward was undersized for a lineman by the standards of the day ( and would be significantly undersized compared with current linemen ) , but was known for " consistently <unk> [ ing ] " much larger players . His relatively small stature earned him the nickname of the " watch @-@ charm guard . " Ward was known for his aggressiveness and tenacity , traits he used to compensate for being out @-@ sized by opposing linemen . Maryland quarterback and 1952 Heisman Trophy runner @-@ up , Jack Scarbath , later said about Ward : 
 " I remember a game against Michigan State when Bobby [ Ward ] was at middle guard and went right over top of the center to make a tackle . Then he went right under the center to make another tackle . A little later , he went around the center to the left . Then he went around him to the right . I 've never seen anybody who could dominate a game like Bobby . " 
 During Ward 's four years at Maryland , the Terrapins achieved a 32 – 7 – 1 record , won two bowl games , and secured a national championship . In the 1950 Gator Bowl , Ward was named the game 's Most Valuable Player . In the 1952 Sugar Bowl , what the Washington Post called the second " game of the century " , Ward was part of the third @-@ ranked Maryland team that defeated coach Robert Neyland 's first @-@ ranked Tennessee team , 28 – 13 . That performance capped a perfect 10 – 0 season for the Terrapins . During that final game of his career , Ward tackled Tennessee offensive back Hank <unk> and forced a fumble , upon which Maryland capitalized with a touchdown . Ward graduated from the University of Maryland in 1951 with a bachelor 's degree in business . 
 In the 1952 College All @-@ Star Game , Ward captained the college team against the reigning National Football League ( NFL ) champions , the Los Angeles Rams , but the professionals won , 10 – 7 . Ward declined a professional playing career himself , and turned down contract offers from the Baltimore Colts and a 24th @-@ round NFL Draft selection by the Dallas Texans . 
 = = = Awards and praise = = = 
 Ward was named an Associated Press ( AP ) first @-@ team All @-@ American as a defensive middle guard in 1950 and as an offensive guard in 1951 . He is the only player to have ever achieved the honor for both an offensive and defensive position . In 1950 , legendary sportswriter Grantland Rice named Ward a Look magazine All @-@ American , and every team that Maryland had played selected Ward to The Chicago Tribune 's All @-@ Players All @-@ America team . He was also named to the 1950 All @-@ Southern Conference team . 
 In 1951 , Ward was a consensus All @-@ American as selected by the Associated Press , United Press International , The Sporting News , and the International News Service . He was also named the 1951 Southern Conference Player of the Year , the Washington D.C. Touchdown Club Lineman of the Year , and the Philadelphia Sportswriters Association Lineman of the Year . He was again selected to the All @-@ Southern Conference team in 1951 . Ward was voted as Maryland 's Most Valuable Player all four years of his playing career and twice received the Anthony C. Nardo Memorial Trophy for the team 's most outstanding lineman . His jersey number , 28 , was the first to be retired by the University of Maryland . 
 Maryland head coach Jim Tatum , who had previously coached eight first @-@ team All @-@ Americans at Oklahoma and coached six aside from Ward at Maryland , said that Ward was " the greatest football player I 've seen ounce @-@ for @-@ ounce , and the best I 've ever coached . " Quarterback Jack Scarbath considered Ward one of Maryland 's best all @-@ time linemen alongside Randy White . Teammate and first @-@ round NFL Draft pick Ed Modzelewski said , " I still believe he was the greatest player , pound for pound , that I have seen in either pro or college ball . " Ward was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 1980 , and into the University of Maryland Athletic Hall of Fame in 1984 . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 After he declined offers to pursue a professional playing career , Ward coached the game for 22 years . Most of that time was spent as an assistant coach , and he served in that capacity at Maryland from 1952 to 1957 , Oklahoma from 1957 to 1958 , Iowa State from 1958 to 1965 , and Army in 1966 . At the United States Military Academy , Ward enjoyed the strictly regimented environment , and the players appreciated his aggressiveness . 
 In 1967 , Ward returned to his alma mater to take the head coaching position . Before the season , 12 players failed to academically qualify to play on the team . During that first season , the team lost all nine of their games for the first time in the modern era . Ward 's second year saw slight improvement , recording eight losses but with wins over North Carolina and South Carolina . However , many of his players were growing increasingly disgruntled with his coaching style . 
 In March 1969 , Maryland athletic director Jim Kehoe called a meeting among 120 players , Ward , his assistants , and a three @-@ man committee . Thirty @-@ one players told Ward that they no longer wished to play on the team and accused him of using intimidation tactics that included verbal and physical abuse . Ward listened to the player 's grievances , but did not respond at the time . Two days later , he resigned as head coach . Later that year , Sports Illustrated interviewed Ward , and he said : 
 " I won 't go into all the specifics , but it wasn 't the good players who started it . It was the guys who couldn 't fight their way out of a paper bag , guys who sat on the bench and couldn 't take it and a couple of pip @-@ squeak cub newspaper guys who don 't know what football 's all about ... He gets on the campus newspaper and all of a sudden he 's got power he never thought of having . " 
 The Diamondback , the university 's student newspaper , had criticized Ward for moving the team into one dormitory , which forced some other students out . Ward stated that the move was done on the advice of Kehoe — which Kehoe denied — and with the intent of focusing the players on their studies and building camaraderie . Ward and his assistants monitored the players ' academic performance , enforced class attendance , and placed curfews on perceived troublemakers . Ward stated that , in his first year , only two of his players failed out of the school that he claimed had a history of poor athlete academics . He complained that he was a scapegoat and that there had been poor communication between him and Kehoe . Penn State head coach Joe Paterno was concerned with the situation surrounding Ward 's resignation and sent a letter to the American Football Coaches Association demanding an investigation . Paterno said : 
 " I don 't know who 's right or wrong , but ... I don 't think it 's a good thing for a squad to fire a coach . As an association , we ought to know what happened . If a university fired an English professor because his class didn 't like the way he was doing things , I know darn well that the American Association of University Professors would want to know what happened . " 
 Maryland head coach Ralph Friedgen played as an offensive guard under Ward , and was one of the players who remained on the team when 40 of his teammates walked off in protest . Long after the events , Friedgen said " he was a tough coach ... If he had addressed some of the players ' concerns , I don 't know that so many would have left ... One of the things I learned from him was to surround myself with good assistants , and I don 't know if he necessarily did that . " Kehoe , who had been one of Ward 's track coaches in college , said , " I think Bob 's problem was that he expected his players to play and hustle the same way he had , and times had changed . " After Maryland , Ward took a job as an assistant coach with the Ottawa Rough Riders of the Canadian Football League in 1969 , and later coached for the Montreal Alouettes , from 1970 to 1971 , and the Toronto Argonauts from 1975 to 1976 . He remained in Canada for the remainder of his coaching career . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his Canadian coaching stint , Ward and his wife , Miss Ellen , opened a liquor store , Manhattan Liquors , located on the City Dock in Annapolis , Maryland , which they operated from 1970 to 1988 . They had three sons , James ; Robert , Jr . ; and Kelly ( who had two sons , most importantly Benjamin ) ; and one daughter , Kathleen . Kelly Ward attended Iowa State University where he was a three @-@ time All @-@ American wrestler and the national champion in his weight class in 1979 . Bob Ward died in one of his sons ' homes in <unk> , Maryland on April 29 , 2005 at the age of 77 , due to complications related to Alzheimer 's disease . His remains were interred at the Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = EL / M @-@ 2080 Green Pine = 
 The EL / M @-@ 2080 Green Pine ( Hebrew : אורן <unk> , pronounced [ oʁen <unk> ] ) is an Israeli ground @-@ based missile @-@ defense radar produced by Elta , a subsidiary of Israel Aerospace Industries , to operate mainly with the Arrow theater missile defense system of Israel , which is jointly funded and produced with the United States . Green Pine was exported to India , and its advanced version , the Super Green Pine , is also to be delivered to South Korea at a cost of $ 83 million apiece , and to Azerbaijan . The Israeli Air Defense Command within the Israeli Air Force ( IAF ) of the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) operates both Green Pine radars and Super Green Pine radars as an integral part of the Arrow system . 
 = = History = = 
 The Arrow program was launched as a response to the acquisition by Arab states of long range surface @-@ to @-@ surface missiles . The United States and Israel signed a memorandum of understanding to co @-@ fund it in 1986 , and in 1988 the United States Department of Defense Strategic Defense Initiative Organization ( SDIO ) placed an order with Israel Aircraft Industries for the Arrow 1 technology demonstrator . Over the years SDIO was renamed to Ballistic Missile Defense Organization ( <unk> ) , and later to Missile Defense Agency ( MDA ) , while Israel Aircraft Industries was renamed to Israel Aerospace Industries . The Gulf War , which exposed the controversial performance of the Patriot missile against Iraqi " Al Hussein " missiles , gave further impetus to the development of the Arrow . It was initially designed to intercept missiles such as the SS @-@ 1 " Scud " , its " Al Hussein " derivative , the SS @-@ 21 " Scarab " operated by Syria , and the CSS @-@ 2 operated by Saudi Arabia . The Arrow evolved also with an eye on the advanced missile programs of Iran . 
 Elta was awarded the contract to develop and manufacture the EL / M @-@ 2080 Green Pine radar in 1992 . The Green Pine was developed from the Elta Music phased array radar , presented in November 1994 , rolled out in 1995 , and turned operational in November 1998 . The Green Pine has since been used in dozens of tests of the Arrow system . In 2000 it was revealed that the Green Pine detected the launch of a Syrian Scud @-@ D missile from its base outside Aleppo in northern Syria , and tracked its full trajectory until its impact point , some 700 km ( 430 mi ) in the southern desert . In 2005 , and in 2008 , Green Pine detected and tracked similar drills of Syrian <unk> . 
 On July 29 , 2004 , Israel and the United States carried out a joint test at the Naval Air Station Point Mugu ( NAS Point Mugu ) Missile Test Center in California , in which the Arrow interceptor was launched against a real Scud @-@ B missile . The test represented a realistic scenario that could not have been tested in Israel due to test @-@ field safety restrictions . To enable the test a full battery was shipped to Point Mugu . The Green Pine radar and command @-@ and @-@ control systems were deployed at the base , while the Arrow launcher was installed 100 km ( 62 mi ) offshore on an island that forms part of the test range . The test was a success , with the interceptor destroying the Scud that flew a 300 km ( 190 mi ) trajectory at an altitude of 40 km ( 25 mi ) , west of San Nicolas Island . This was the seventh test of the complete system , the first interception of a real Scud . 
 As of 2012 the Green Pine radar has a proven track record demonstrated in over 20 successful ballistic missile intercepts . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 In contrast to the older AN / <unk> @-@ 53 Passive Electronically Scanned Array ( <unk> ) radar set of the MIM @-@ 104 Patriot PAC @-@ 2 , the Green Pine is an active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) solid state radar . Unlike the advanced AN / <unk> @-@ 2 X band radar of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system , Green Pine operates at L band - in the range 500 MHz to 1 @,@ 000 MHz , or 1 @,@ 000 MHz to 2 @,@ 000 MHz . 
 Green Pine reportedly operates in search , detection , tracking , and missile guidance modes simultaneously , capable of detecting targets at ranges of up to about 500 km ( 310 mi ) , and is able to track more than 30 targets at speeds over 3 @,@ 000 m / s ( 10 @,@ 000 ft / s ) . It discriminates targets from natural clutter and countermeasures , illuminates the true target and guides the missile to within 4 m ( 13 ft ) of the target . 
 The effective radiated power ( ERP ) of the Green Pine also makes it a possible candidate for conversion into a directed @-@ energy weapon , by focusing pulses of radar energy on target missiles . The energy spikes are tailored to enter missiles through antennas or sensor apertures where they can fool guidance systems , scramble computer memories or even burn out sensitive electronic components . 
 The radar system includes a 9 m ( 30 ft ) wide by 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high trailer @-@ mounted rotatable antenna array , a power system , a cooling system and a radar control center . The power system has both no @-@ break and transformer containers , with the former including a diesel generator , an inductive clutch control module and a diesel fuel tank . The transformer container houses transformers , a service generator , a direct current converter and switching racks . The radar 's cooling system is a heat exchanger that makes use of inherently redundant cascade cooling machines and incorporates an integral coolant tank and control panels . The radar is made up of 2 @,@ 000 – 2 @,@ 300 transmit – receive modules and weighs 60 tonnes ( 130 @,@ 000 lb ) . The system is transportable rather than mobile , as it can be moved to other prepared sites , but cannot be set up just anywhere . According to its developer , Green Pine 's deployment at a new operational site takes " less than 24 hours " . 
 = = = Super Green Pine = = = 
 An advanced version of the radar , called EL / M @-@ <unk> Super Green Pine , Green Pine Block @-@ B , or Great Pine ( Hebrew : אורן <unk> , pronounced [ oʁen <unk> ] ) , is to take the place of the original Green Pine . It is composed of more powerful but smaller transmit – receive modules with better capabilities than those of the Green Pine , and is believed to produce double the power output , extending detection range to about 800 – 900 km ( 500 – 560 mi ) . In October 2010 the IDF decided to put another Arrow 2 battery into operational use . The new battery will receive the new radar - " Super Green Pine " . An even more advanced upgrade of the Super Green Pine is under development . 
 = = Users = = 
 Azerbaijan 
 According to Stockholm International Peace Research Institute report , an arms deal signed between Israel and Azerbaijan in 2011 considers import of one Green Pine radar . 
 Israel 
 Israel had deployed at least 2 Green Pine radars as an integral part of the Arrow system . As of 2008 an unknown number of both Green Pine and Super Green Pine versions were active . As of 2012 , the first Super Green Pine was declared operational and is deployed alongside the two Green Pines . 
 India 
 India had acquired and deployed two Green Pine radars around July 2002 and another one in August 2005 . The Swordfish Long Range Tracking Radar of the Indian Defence Research and Development Organisation is an acknowledged derivative of the original Green Pine . The Indian government has sought to purchase the complete Arrow system since 1999 , but in early 2002 the U.S. vetoed Israel 's request to sell the Arrow 2 missiles to India , exercising its right as a major funding contributor . U.S. officials argued that the sale would violate the Missile Technology Control Regime ( MTCR ) . 
 South Korea 
 South Korea was also considering buying two Green Pine radars , which would become operational in 2012 . South Korea preferred two Super Green Pine radars , at a cost of $ 83 million each , to their counterpart – <unk> ' <unk> radars . 
 = Paul Wurtsmith = 
 Paul Bernard Wurtsmith ( 9 August 1906 – 13 September 1946 ) was a United States Army Air Forces general during World War II . 
 Enlisting in the United States Army Air Corps as a flying cadet in 1927 , Wurtsmith was commissioned in 1928 . Over the next 13 years , he served in instructional and command positions . He took over command of the 49th Pursuit Group in December 1941 and between March 1942 and January 1943 , his fighters downed 78 enemy aircraft in the defense of Darwin in northern Australia , against Japanese air attacks . In 1943 he assumed command of the V Fighter Command , part of Major General George Kenney 's Fifth Air Force . In 1945 , he commanded the Thirteenth Air Force in the Southern Philippines and Borneo campaigns . After the war Wurtsmith served with the Strategic Air Command . 
 Wurtsmith was killed when his B @-@ 25 Mitchell crashed into a mountain near Asheville , North Carolina , on 13 September 1946 . In February 1953 , the United States Air Force named Wurtsmith Air Force Base in Oscoda Township , Michigan , in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Paul Bernard Wurtsmith was born in Detroit , Michigan , on 9 August 1906 , the eldest of three sons of Fred Bernard Wurtsmith , a railroad engineer on the Pere Marquette Railroad , and his wife Ella . Paul was educated at Holy Redeemer Grammar School and Cass Technical High School in Detroit . In his teenage years he earned some money working as a copy boy at The Detroit News . In his spare time he worked on a Ford Model @-@ T hot rod . He attended the University of Detroit , where he earned a degree in aeronautical engineering . 
 He enlisted in the Army Air Corps as a flying cadet on 4 August 1927 . On earning his wings through the successful completion of flight training at Kelly Field , San Antonio , Texas , he was directly commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Air Reserve on 23 June 1928 . On 2 February 1929 , he received a regular commission in the US Army Air Corps . He married Irene Gillespie . The couple had no children . Wurtsmith joined the 94th Pursuit Squadron , the famed World War I " Hat in the Ring " Squadron , at Selfridge Field , Michigan . Over the next 13 years , he served in numerous instructional and command positions . He won the Mitchell Trophy Air Race in 1930 . On 1 October 1934 , he was promoted to first lieutenant and was temporary captain from 7 August 1935 to 16 June 1936 before being promoted substantively on 2 February 1939 . He graduated from the Air Corps Tactical School in 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Defense of Australia = = = 
 Wurtsmith commanded the 17th Pursuit Squadron at Selfridge Field from September 1939 to July 1940 , then the 41st Pursuit Squadron until January 1941 . Still at Selfridge Field , he served with the 50th Pursuit Group until December 1941 , when he assumed command of the 49th Pursuit Group at Key Field , Mississippi , shortly after the United States entered the war following the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor . 
 The 49th Pursuit Group was soon on its way to fight the Japanese in the South West Pacific . Arriving in Australia in February 1942 , the 49th Pursuit Group moved to the Darwin area in March and April 1942 . By this time , Darwin had been bombed a number of times . The 49th Pursuit Group became its principal defense . Conditions in the area were still primitive , and spare parts and equipment were scarce . Lacking adequate logistical support , the Americans were heavily dependent on their Australian allies . Morale was low , but the sight of Wurtsmith 's aircraft patrolling the skies provided an important boost . 
 Between December 1941 and March 1942 , over 300 P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , 100 P @-@ 400 and 90 P @-@ 39 Airacobras had been sent to Australia ; of these , around 125 had been lost to enemy action in the Dutch East Indies campaign , 75 had been transferred to the RAAF , 74 were under or awaiting repair and perhaps another 100 had yet to be completely assembled . On 18 March , 33 P @-@ 39s , 92 P @-@ 40s and 52 P @-@ 400s were on hand . While there were three USAAF pursuit groups in Australia , the 8th , 35th and 49th , Wurtsmith 's was the only one considered combat ready . Of the 102 pilots in his group , only Wurtsmith , with 4 @,@ 800 hours of pursuit time , and his executive officer , Major Donald R. Hutchinson , with 2 @,@ 600 hours , were veteran pilots . Five others had more than 600 hours and nine had about 15 hours . The remaining 89 pilots had no pursuit time at all . 
 The P @-@ 40s were better armored and faster in level flight than the Japanese fighters they were up against , mostly Mitsubishi A6M Zeroes , and could <unk> them . On the other hand , the Japanese fighters had greater range , could <unk> the P @-@ 40 , and were far more maneuverable . For an American P @-@ 40 pilot , risking a dogfight with a Japanese fighter was practically suicidal . Wurtsmith attempted to develop tactics that would exploit the strengths of the P @-@ 40 and minimize its weaknesses . The two @-@ plane element was fixed as the chief unit of combat , and individual dogfighting was strictly prohibited . The P @-@ 40s would attempt to dive into a Japanese formation , attack , and then continue diving at a speed the Japanese fighters could not match . Above all , Wurtsmith attempted to make sure that he had enough P @-@ 40s in commission to outnumber the Japanese . The efforts of the ground crews and service troops made this possible . By May 1942 , he had lost seven P @-@ 40s and three pilots while claiming the destruction of 38 Japanese aircraft . The heaviest Japanese attack had been by nine fighters and 24 bombers , which Wurtsmith had met with 50 P @-@ 40s ; the P @-@ 40 pilots claimed 11 Japanese aircraft shot down . May was the first month that passed without a raid since January but the Japanese returned on four consecutive days in June , with three of these raids consisting of 18 to 20 fighters and 27 bombers . That month nine P @-@ 40s and 13 Japanese aircraft were lost . Wurtsmith was promoted to colonel on 6 July 1942 . Between March 1942 and January 1943 , his fighters claimed to have downed 78 enemy aircraft . 
 = = = New Guinea = = = 
 In August 1942 , Major General George Kenney assumed command of the Allied Air Forces in the South West Pacific Area , becoming the senior Allied air officer under the theater commander , General Douglas MacArthur . Kenney split the Allied Air Forces into Australian and American components , with the American part becoming the re @-@ formed Fifth Air Force in September 1942 . Kenney concurrently commanded the Fifth Air Force , with Brigadier General Ennis Whitehead as his deputy . The major commands of the Fifth Air Force were the V Service Command under Major General Rush B. Lincoln , V Bomber Command under Brigadier General Kenneth Walker , and the V Fighter Command . Activated at Fort George Wright in April 1942 as V Interceptor Command , it was redesignated V Fighter Command in August . Wurtsmith assumed command on 11 November , with his headquarters at Port Moresby . Kenney told him that if he " made good " , he would be promoted to brigadier general . If not , he would be sent home on a slow boat . 
 By early 1943 , Kenney was convinced that Wurtsmith had " made good " in the Papuan Campaign , and he took the papers recommending Wurtsmith 's promotion to MacArthur , who promised to approve it and sent it in to Washington , DC . One of MacArthur 's staff quipped that he hoped Wurtsmith was over 21 . Wurtsmith was actually 36 ; but MacArthur , who had been promoted to the rank of brigadier general at age 37 , icily replied , " We promote them out here for efficiency , not age . " Wurtsmith was duly promoted on 8 February 1943 . He also became one of a handful of American officers to be decorated by the Australian government , being awarded the Commander of the Order of the British Empire for " excellence of training and direction of fighter operations in New Guinea " . The award was eventually presented by General Sir Thomas Blamey on Leyte in March 1945 . 
 The first long @-@ range American fighter was the twin @-@ engined P @-@ 38 Lightning but none reached the South West Pacific Area until October 1942 and , beset with a host of mechanical difficulties , it was not until December 1942 that they flew their first major combat mission over New Guinea . Deliveries were suspended in January 1943 owing to the requirements of the North African Campaign , forcing Kenney to accept the P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt , the first of which arrived in Australia in July 1943 . Early model P @-@ 47s had less range than P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks until 200 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 910 l ) fuel tanks could be manufactured for them in Australia . These enabled the 348th Fighter Group to become operational in August 1943 . While the tanks were very successful on the P @-@ 38s and P @-@ 40s , overloading the P @-@ 47s caused numerous crashes , and the pilots were reluctant to fly with more than 505 US gallons ( 1 @,@ 910 l ) of fuel . In 1945 , the P @-@ 47s were replaced by P @-@ 51 Mustangs . By September 1943 , Wurtsmith 's five fighter groups had 598 aircraft but this included 70 P @-@ 39s , 30 P @-@ 400s and 118 P @-@ 40s , half of which were in the depots . The technical representative of Bell Aircraft reported that the P @-@ 39s and P @-@ 40s averaged 300 combat hours . That of Curtiss @-@ Wright similarly reported that the P @-@ 40s had from 300 to 500 combat hours , which was equivalent to about 2 @,@ 000 normal hours . General Kenney wrote to General Henry H. Arnold that " With the possible exception of Chennault , I do not believe that anyone else is flying stuff as old and worn out as these youngsters out here . " 
 In New Guinea , the main role of the fighters was escort — something not foreseen before the war . Early losses of bombers made fighter protection the rule rather than the exception , and if fighter cover was not available , the bombers flew by night . During the last half of 1943 , V Fighter Command flew 6 @,@ 607 sorties in support of bombers and 10 @,@ 215 to protect transports , out of 24 @,@ 397 sorties for the period in total . These missions often depended upon securing forward fighter fields , particularly for long missions . Wurtsmith made what he claimed was the " shortest landing ever made in a P @-@ 40 " at <unk> in order to see if it could serve as a forward fighter strip . He proved that it could , although a better site was subsequently located at nearby Tsili Tsili . This base allowed Wurtsmith 's fighters to support the bombing of Wewak and the landing at Nadzab . The range of the fighters was increased by the addition of external 200 @-@ gallon fuel tanks . Then , in July 1944 , Charles Lindbergh , who was visiting the South West Pacific area as civilian observer , taught Wurtsmith 's pilots how to obtain additional range by economical operation of their engines . The new technique increased the combat radius of the P @-@ 38s to 600 miles ( 970 km ) , a gain of some 30 percent . Combining three external <unk> tanks with new techniques increased the range of the P @-@ 40s to 650 miles ( 1 @,@ 050 km ) . 
 On 30 January 1945 , Wurtsmith replaced Major General St. Clair Streett as commander of the Thirteenth Air Force . He was promoted to the rank of major general on 19 March 1945 . The Thirteenth Air Force was tasked with the support of Lieutenant General Robert L. Eichelberger 's Eighth United States Army in the Victor series of operations to clear the Southern Philippines that included the Invasion of Palawan , Battle of the Visayas , and the Battle of Mindanao . Operating under Air Vice Marshal William Bostock 's RAAF Command , the Thirteenth Air Force also supported Lieutenant General Sir Leslie Morshead 's Australian I Corps in the Oboe series of operations against Japanese forces in Borneo . 
 = = Post @-@ war years = = 
 Wurtsmith relinquished command of the Thirteenth Air Force in July 1946 and returned to the United States , where he was assigned to the headquarters of the Strategic Air Command ( SAC ) at Washington , DC 's Bolling Field . While perhaps an unusual posting for a fighter expert , SAC was then commanded by Kenney . Wurtsmith attended the 1946 Operation Crossroads nuclear weapons tests on Bikini Atoll as an observer , and in September 1946 , he was appointed commander of the Eighth Air Force , one of SAC 's three numbered air forces . On 12 September 1946 , he took off from MacDill Field , Florida , in a B @-@ 25 Mitchell . He first flew to Bolling Field , where he had some business , then on to Selfridge Field . He paid a visit to his family , whom he had not seen for three years , including his mother Ella , whose 77th birthday was on 14 September . On 13 September , with Wurtsmith at the controls , the Mitchell , 44 @-@ <unk> , set out for MacDill Field in bad weather , flying at 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) — below the safe altitude for the area . At around 11 : 20 all on board were killed when the aircraft crashed into Cold Mountain , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) southwest of Asheville , North Carolina . The official report listed the cause of the crash as " miscalculation of altitude " . 
