 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Director Neil Marshall lived near the ruins of Hadrian 's Wall , a Roman fortification built to defend England against Scotland 's tribes . The director fantasised about what conditions would cause the Wall to be rebuilt and imagined a lethal virus would work . Marshall had also visualised a mixture of medieval and futuristic elements : " I had this vision of these futuristic soldiers with high @-@ tech weaponry and body armour and helmets — clearly from the future — facing a medieval knight on horseback . " The director favoured the English / Scottish border as the location for a rebuilt wall , finding the location more plausible than a lengthy boundary between the United States and Canada . Additionally , Scotland is the home to multiple castles , which fit Marshall 's medieval aspect . 
 The lethal virus in Doomsday differs from contemporary films like 28 Days Later and 28 Weeks Later by being an authentic plague that actually devastates the population , instead of infecting people so they become aggressive cannibals or zombies . Marshall intended the virus as the backdrop to the story , having survivors scavenge for themselves and set up a primitive society . The director drew from tribal history around the world to design the society . Though the survivors are depicted as brutal , Marshall sought to have " shades of gray " by characterising some people in England as selfishly manipulative . 
 The director intended Doomsday as a tribute to post @-@ apocalyptic films from the 1970s and 1980s , explaining , " Right from the start , I wanted my film to be an homage to these sorts of movies , and deliberately so . I wanted to make a movie for a new generation of audience that hadn 't seen those movies in the cinema — hadn 't seen them at all maybe — and to give them the same thrill that I got from watching them . But kind of <unk> it , pump up the action and the blood and guts . " Cinematic influences on Doomsday include : 
 Mad Max ( 1979 ) , The Road Warrior ( 1981 ) , and Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome ( 1985 ) : Marshall drew inspiration from the punk style of the films and also shaped Rhona Mitra 's character after Max Rockatansky as a police officer with a history . 
 Escape from New York ( 1981 ) : The director drew from the concepts of gang warfare and the experience of being walled @-@ in . Rhona Mitra 's character has an eye patch like Snake Plissken ( the eye patch is not in the last part of the film ) , though the director sought to create a plot point for the eye of Mitra 's character to reinforce its inclusion . 
 Excalibur ( 1981 ) : Marshall enjoyed John Boorman 's artistry in the film and sought to include its medieval aspects in Doomsday . 
 The Warriors ( 1979 ) : The director enjoyed the tough and violent films of Walter Hill , including the " visual style of the gang warfare " . 
 No Blade of Grass ( 1970 ) : Marshall perceived the film as a predecessor to 28 Days Later and 28 Weeks Later , though he sought to make Doomsday less straight @-@ faced . 
 The Omega Man ( 1971 ) : The director was inspired by the " empty city " notion of the film and drew upon its dark and gritty nature . 
 A Boy and His Dog ( 1974 ) : Marshall created a homage to the 1974 film 's ending by including a scene of a human being cooked in Doomsday . 
 Waterworld ( 1995 ) : The director enjoyed the gritty atmosphere and how people scavenge to survive and adapt in their new world . 
 Gladiator ( 2000 ) : Like in Gladiator , Marshall sought to put Mitra 's character through a trial by combat . 
 Children of Men ( 2006 ) : With the film coming out during the development of Doomsday , the director realised the similarity of the premises and sought to make his film " more bloody and more fun " . 
 Marshall also cited <unk> ( 1983 ) , Zulu ( 1964 ) , and works of director Terry Gilliam like The Fisher King ( 1991 ) as influences in producing Doomsday . Marshall acknowledged that his creation is " so outrageous you 've got to laugh " . He reflected , " I do think it 's going to divide audiences ... I just want them to be thrilled and enthralled . I want them to be overwhelmed by the imagery they 've seen . And go back and see it again . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Rogue Pictures signed Marshall to direct Doomsday in October 2005 , and in November 2006 , actress Rhona Mitra was signed to star in Doomsday as the leader of the elite team . Production was budgeted at £ 17 million , an amount that was triple the combined total of Marshall 's previous two films , Dog Soldiers ( 2002 ) and The Descent ( 2005 ) . The increase in scale was a challenge to the director , who had been accustomed to small casts and limited locations . Marshall described the broader experience : " There 's fifty or more speaking parts ; I 'm dealing with thousands of extras , logistical action sequences , explosions , car chases — the works . " 
 Production began in February 2007 in South Africa , where the majority of filming took place . South Africa was chosen as a primary filming location for economic reasons , costing a third of estimated production in the United Kingdom . Shooting in South Africa lasted 56 days out of 66 days , with the remaining ten taking place in Scotland . Marshall said of South Africa 's appeal , " The landscape , the rock formations , I thought it was about as close to Scotland as you 're likely to get , outside of Ireland or Wales . " In Scotland , secondary filming took place in the city of Glasgow , including <unk> in the city 's East End , and at Blackness Castle in West Lothian , the latter chosen when filmmakers were unable to shoot at Doune Castle . The entire shoot , involving thousands of extras , included a series of complex fight scenes and pyrotechnical displays . The director sought to minimise the use of computer @-@ generated elements in Doomsday , preferring to subscribe to " old @-@ school filmmaking " . In the course of production , several sequences were dropped due to budgetary concerns , including a scene in which helicopter gunships attacked a medieval castle . 
 A massive car chase scene was filmed for Doomsday , described by Marshall to be one part Mad Max , one part Bullitt ( 1968 ) , and one part " something else entirely different " . Marshall had seen the Aston Martin DBS V12 used in the James Bond film Casino Royale ( 2006 ) and sought to implement a similarly " sexy " car . Since the car company did not do product placement , the filmmakers purchased three new Bentley Continental <unk> for US $ 150 @,@ 000 each . The film also contains the director 's trademark gore and violence from previous films , including a scene where a character is cooked alive and eaten . The production was designed by Simon Bowles who had worked previously with Marshall on " Dog Soldiers " and " The Descent " . Paul <unk> , the prosthetic make @-@ up designer who worked on The Descent , contributed to the production , researching diseases including sexually transmitted diseases to design the make @-@ up for victims of the Reaper virus . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The visual effects for Doomsday stemmed from the 1980s stunt @-@ based films , involving approximately 275 visual effects shots . While filmmakers did not seek innovative visual effects , they worked with budget restrictions by creating set extensions . With most shots taking place in daylight , the extensions involved matte paint and 2D and 3D solutions . The visual effects crew visited Scotland to take reference photos so scenes that were filmed in Cape Town , South Africa could instead have Scottish backgrounds . Several challenges for the visual effects crew included the illustration of cow overpopulation in line with a decimated human population and the convincing creation of the rebuilt Hadrian Wall in different lights and from different distances . The most challenging visual effects shot in Doomsday was the close @-@ up in which a main character is burned alive . The shot required multiple enhancements and implementations of burning wardrobe , burning pigskin , and smoke and fire elements to look authentic . 
 Neil Marshall 's car chase sequence also involved the use of visual effects . A scene in which the Bentley crashes through a bus was intended to implement pyrotechnics , but fire marshals in the South African nature reserve , the filming location for the scene , forbade their use due to dry conditions . A miniature mock @-@ up was created and visual effects were applied so the filming of the mock @-@ up would overlay the filming of the actual scene without pyrotechnics . Other visual effects that were created were the Thames flood plain and a remote Scottish castle . A popular effect with the visual effects crew was the " rabbit explosion " scene , depicting a rabbit being shot by guns on automatic sensors . The crew sought to expand the singular shot , but Neil Marshall sought to focus on one shot to emphasize its comic nature and avoid drawing unnecessary sympathy from audiences . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Marshall originally intended to include 1980s synth music in his film , but he found it difficult to combine the music with the intense action . Instead , composer Tyler Bates composed a score using heavy orchestra music . The film also included songs from the bands Adam and the Ants , Fine Young Cannibals , Siouxsie and the Banshees , Frankie Goes to Hollywood , and Kasabian . The song " Two Tribes " by Frankie Goes to Hollywood was the only song to remain in the film from the first draft of the screenplay . " Spellbound " by Siouxsie and the Banshees was a favorite song of the director , who sought to include it . Marshall also hoped to include the song " Into the Light " by the Banshees , but it was left out due to the producer disliking it and the cost being too high to license it . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 For its theatrical run , the film was originally intended to be distributed by Focus Features under Rogue Pictures , but the company transferred Doomsday among other films to Universal Pictures for larger @-@ scale distribution and marketing beginning in 2008 . Doomsday was commercially released on 14 March 2008 in the United States and Canada in 1 @,@ 936 theatres , grossing US $ 4 @,@ 926 @,@ 565 in its opening weekend and ranking seventh in the box office , which Box Office Mojo reported as a " failed " opening . Its theatrical run in the United States and Canada lasted 28 days , ending on 10 April 2008 , having grossed US $ 11 @,@ 008 @,@ 770 . The film opened in the United Kingdom , Republic of Ireland , and Malta on 9 May 2008 , grossing a total of US $ 2 @,@ 027 @,@ 749 in its entire run . The film 's performance in the UK was considered a " disappointing run " . The film premiered in Italy in August 2008 , grossing an overall US $ 500 @,@ 000 . Worldwide , Doomsday has grossed US $ 22 @,@ 211 @,@ 426 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Doomsday was not screened for critics in advance of its commercial opening in cinemas . The film received mixed reviews from critics . Rotten Tomatoes reported that 50 % of critics gave the film positive write @-@ ups , based on a sample of 68 , with an average score of 5 @.@ 2 / 10 . The website 's consensus reads , " Doomsday is a pale imitation of previous futuristic thrillers , minus the cohesive narrative and charismatic leads . " At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film has received an average score of 51 , based on 14 reviews . 
 Alison Rowat of The Herald perceived Doomsday as " decidedly everyday " for a thriller , with Marshall 's script having too many unanswered questions and characters not fully developed despite a decent cast . Rowat said , " In his previous films , Marshall made something out of nothing . Here he does the opposite " . The critic acknowledged the attempted homages and the B @-@ movie approach but thought that " there has to be something more " . Steve Pratt of The Northern Echo weighed in , " As a writer , Marshall leaves gaping holes in the plot while as a director he knows how to extract maximum punch from car chases , beatings and fights without <unk> on the gore as body parts are lopped off with alarming frequency and bodies squashed to a bloody pulp . " Philip Key of the Liverpool Daily Post described the film , " Doomsday is a badly thought @-@ out science fiction saga which leaves more questions than answers . " 
 Alonso Duralde of MSNBC described Doomsday : " It 's ridiculous , derivative , confusingly edited and laden with gore , but it 's the kind of over @-@ the @-@ top grindhouse epic that wears down your defenses and eventually makes you just go with it . " Duralde believed that Mitra 's character would have qualified as a " memorable fierce chick " if the film was not so silly . David Hiltbrand of The Philadelphia Inquirer rated Doomsday at 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars and thought that the film was better paced than most fantasy @-@ action films , patiently building up its action scenes to the major " fireworks " where other films would normally be exhausted early on . 
 Reviewer James Berardinelli found the production of Doomsday to be a mess , complaining , " The action sequences might be more tense if they weren 't obfuscated by rapid @-@ fire editing , and the backstory is muddled and not all that interesting . " Berardinelli also believed the attempted development of parallel storylines to be too much for the film , weakening the eventual payoff . Dennis Harvey of Variety said Neil Marshall 's " flair for visceral action " made up for Doomsday 's lack of originality and that the film barely had a dull moment . He added , " There 's no question that Doomsday does what it does with vigor , high technical prowess and just enough humor to avoid turning ridiculous . " Harvey considered the conclusion relatively weak , and found the quality of the acting satisfactory for the genre , while reserving praise for the " stellar " work of the stunt personnel . Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle also praised the film 's stunts , noting that it was reminiscent of " the beauty of the exploitation film era " . Hartlaub said of the effect , " Hire a couple of great stuntmen and a halfway sober cinematographer , and you didn 't even need a screenwriter . " 
 Matt Zoller Seitz of The New York Times saw Rhona Mitra 's character as a mere impersonation of Snake Plissken and considered the film 's major supporting characters to be " lifeless " . Seitz described his discontent over the lack of innovation in the director 's attempted homages of older films : " Doomsday is frenetic , loud , wildly imprecise and so derivative that it doesn ’ t so much seem to reference its antecedents as try on their famous images like a child playing dress @-@ up . " 
 = = = Scottish response = = = 
 Scotland 's tourism agency <unk> welcomed Doomsday , hoping that the film would attract tourism by marketing Scotland to the rest of the world . The country 's national body for film and television , Scottish Screen , had contributed £ 300 @,@ 000 to the production of Doomsday , which provided economic benefits for the cast and crew who dwelt in Scotland . A spokesperson from Scottish Screen anticipated , " It 's likely to also attract a big audience who will see the extent to which Scotland can provide a flexible and diverse backdrop to all genres of film . " 
 In contrast , several parties have expressed concern that Doomsday presents negativity in England 's latent view of Scotland based on their history . Angus MacNeil , member of the Scottish National Party , said of the film 's impact : " The complimentary part is that people are thinking about Scotland as we are moving more and more towards independence . But the film depicts a country that is still the plaything of London . It is decisions made in London that has led to it becoming a quarantine zone . " 
 Doomsday was not nominated nor considered as a possible contender at the BAFTA Scotland awards despite being one of the largest productions in Scotland in recent memory ; £ 2 million was spent on local services . Director Neil Marshall applied for membership with the organisation to add " fresh blood " , but Doomsday was not mentioned during jury deliberations . According to a spokesperson from the organisation , the film was not formally submitted for consideration , and no one directly invited the filmmakers to discuss a possible entry . Several of BAFTA Scotland 's jury members believed that the criteria and procedures for a Scottish film were unclear and could have been more formalised . 
 = = = Haunted house = = = 
 Doomsday was used as inspiration in building a haunted house for Halloween Horror Nights in Orlando . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Doomsday was the first Blu @-@ ray title released by Universal Pictures after the studio 's initial support of the now @-@ folded HD DVD format . The unrated version was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on 29 July 2008 in the United States , containing an audio commentary and bonus materials covering the film 's post @-@ apocalyptic scenario , visual effects , and destructive vehicles and weapons . IGN assessed the unrated DVD 's video quality , writing , " For the most part , it 's a crisp disc that 's leaps above standard def . " The audio quality was considered up to par with the film 's loud scenes , though IGN found volume irregularity between the loud scenes and the quiet scenes . IGN called the commentary " a pretty straight @-@ up behind @-@ the @-@ scenes take on the movie and a bit over @-@ congratulatory " . It found the " most fascinating " featurette to be about visual effects , while deeming the other featurettes skippable . 
 = Nouvelles Extraordinaires de Divers <unk> = 
 Nouvelles Extraordinaires de Divers <unk> ( English : " Extraordinary News from Various Places " ) or Gazette de Leyde ( Gazette of Leiden ) was the most important newspaper of record of the international European newspapers of the late 17th to the late 18th century . In the last few decades of the 18th century it was one of the main political newspapers in the Western world . 
 It was published in French in Leiden , Netherlands . At that time the Netherlands enjoyed a significant freedom of the press . Its circulation likely exceeded 10 @,@ 000 , and it may have reached even up to 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Netherlands ( United Provinces ) were , in the 18th century , very tolerant in matters of freedom of the press and religious freedom . Compared to most contemporary countries , such as France , Great Britain or the Holy Roman Empire , there was little government interference ( censorship or monopolies ) . Many Huguenots fled France for the Netherlands during the reign of Louis XIV , particularly after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685 . Several of them began publishing French @-@ language newspapers ( French being both their language and internationally used - see lingua franca ) in a number of European cities covering political news in France and Europe . Read by the European elite , these papers were known in France as the " foreign gazettes " ( fr. gazettes <unk> ) . 
 = = Contents and history = = 
 The paper was founded by a Huguenot family , the de la Fonts , and passed into the hands of another Huguenot family , the <unk> , in 1738 . Sources vary on the exact date it was founded , suggesting 1660 , 1667 1669 or 1680 ; they all agree the publication continued to 1798 ( or 1811 under a different name ) . 
 It was published twice a week ( on Tuesdays and Thursdays ) in Leiden ( hence its popular unofficial name , Gazette de Leyde ) . The newspaper usually contained eight pages arranged as a four @-@ page booklet . The size varied ; surviving examples are generally 11 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 6 in ) by 19 @.@ 4 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) or 12 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) by 19 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 8 in ) , in which the text is organized into two columns . A four @-@ page , single column supplement was published from 1753 . The paper quality varied , war time conditions often enforced use of low quality stock , and the print was small and cramped . Subscriptions from France amounted to over 2 @,@ 500 by 1778 , at an annual cost of 36 livres . 
 Despite being a French @-@ language publication , the gazette was seen as independent of France . Its production was tolerated and even encouraged by the authorities , who often used Gazette de Leyde and other similar publications for their own ends , when wishing to publicize information that could not be released via the official channels . The paper also gave voice to institutions like the Parliament of France that were finding it difficult to publish in the official French newspaper , the Gazette de France . 
 Nouvelles Extraordinaires , like other newspapers of its time , gave primarily political and commercial information , classified by source and date of arrival ( the oldest , from the most distant lands , coming first ) . It offered reports on international politics , such as wars and diplomatic relations , as well as coverage of major domestic affairs . The newspaper also contained trivia , editorials and advertising . Like many other early newspapers , it offered judgments and prognostications , and was in the main a juxtaposition of rumors and announcements from various sources , presented without much unification . 
 It is distinguished by its position against the French absolute monarchy , support for religious tolerance , including for <unk> , support for democratic reforms such as the introduction of parliaments , support for the American independence and the Polish Constitution of May 3 , 1791 . The newspaper preferred to praise the changes in Poland ( the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth ) more than those in France , criticizing the violence of the French Revolution , and contrasting it with the peaceful transformation in Poland . This relative lack of support for the French Revolution may explain why the paper was abolished on 23 April 1798 , three years after the invasion of the Netherlands by France and the Batavian Revolution . It reappeared as the Nouvelles politiques <unk> à Leyde in October , but it was seen as no longer independent . Under a new name — Journal politique <unk> à Leyde — it lasted from 1804 until 1811 , but it never regained its audience and its quality , and disappeared after the annexation of Holland by the French Empire . A new Leyden Gazette briefly appeared after the liberation of Holland in 1814 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Its circulation reached several thousand , with the highest estimates of about 10 @,@ 000 issues , and copies of it were found from Moscow and Istanbul to Madrid and the United States . With unlicensed copies and shared subscriptions its circulation might have even been several times higher , reaching at the highest estimates close to 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Nouvelles Extraordinaires was the most popular of about 20 French @-@ language newspapers published mainly outside France , most in the Netherlands and Germany ( in terms of popularity , it was followed by Gazette d <unk> and later , Courier du Bas @-@ Rhin ) . Thomas Jefferson referred to it as " the best in Europe " and " the only one worth reading " and it was said to be the only journal read by Louis XVI . The paper 's impact and recognition on the 18th century has been compared to that of the London Times in the 19th century , and the New York Times in the 20th . 
 = = Editors = = 
 The newspaper editors were : 
 Jean Alexandre de la Font ( 1677 – 1685 ) 
 Claude Jordan ( 1685 ? <unk> ? ) 
 Anthony de la Font ( 1689 – 1738 ) 
 Etienne <unk> ( 1738 – 1772 ) 
 Jean <unk> ( 1772 – 1798 ) 
 = Furry convention = 
 A furry convention ( also furry con or fur con ) is a formal gathering of members of the furry fandom — people who are interested in the concept of fictional non @-@ human characters with human characteristics . These conventions provide a place for fans to meet , exchange ideas , transact business and engage in entertainment and recreation centered on this concept . Originating in California , USA during the mid @-@ 1980s , there are now over 40 annual furry conventions worldwide , mostly in North America and Europe . The largest furry convention is Anthrocon which is held each year in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . 
 Furry conventions offer a range of volunteer @-@ led programming , usually focusing on anthropomorphic art , crafts , music and literature . Some raise money for charity . Attendees often dress up and wear artistic name badges for identification , though the majority do not bring fursuits . They may also spend money on the work of amateur and professional artists , both directly and at auction . 
 = = Origin and growth = = 
 Furry conventions started in mid @-@ 1986 with parties at popular science fiction conventions , such as <unk> and <unk> in the San Francisco Bay Area . Over time , these parties split off into conventions of their own , starting with ConFurence 0 in 1989 . Attendance at furry conventions has been growing , with the number of conventions , total attendance of all conventions and maximum size of a single convention all doubling over the period 2000 – 2006 . 
 Furry conventions sometimes start out as <unk> , where groups of local fans meet at a regular location , often on a scheduled basis . As the local community grows , these groups may put on events which attract dealer attention or significant fan activity and which become recognized as fully @-@ fledged conventions . Other conventions spring up in the wake of discontinued events ; for example , <unk> was founded in 2004 following the final ConFurence in 2003 , in order to keep a furry convention in the Los Angeles Basin and <unk> was founded in 2014 , after <unk> hosted their last event in 2013 . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Convention programming includes presentations , panels , workshops and tutorials on anthropomorphic culture , from literature , fiction and art to science , technology and spirituality . The convention will often provide space for stand @-@ up comedy routines by entertainers like Uncle Kage and 2 , <unk> music , many kinds of gaming , and roleplaying sessions , as well as numerous puppeteering and performing arts events . A unifying theme is common for larger events . 
 Most conventions will feature some kind of an art show , in which artists ' work is displayed , often for direct purchase or auction during the convention . There will often be a Dealers Den where art and comic book distributors and other merchants can sell their wares for a fee , and an Artists ' Alley where individual artists are given space for no fee or a token fee , usually on the condition that they only sell their own work . Artists may also trade art between each other using sketchbooks . Erotic art is typically allowed if kept separate from other pieces , and only shown to adult attendees ; a few conventions are rated strictly PG @-@ 13 . Individual transactions are relatively small ( usually around US $ 10 – $ 50 for sketches or badges , $ 10 – $ 200 for auction pieces ) , but the total can approach US $ 100 @,@ 000 at the largest events ( excluding professional dealers ) . 
 Major conventions tend to have a rave on at least one evening . Often there is a " fursuit @-@ friendly " dance prior to the main event , with raised lighting and slower music to offset fursuiters ' reduced vision and mobility . The use of glowsticks and illuminated poi are popular once the lights are dimmed . A furry convention is also an opportunity to socialize , and private parties for subgroups of the fandom are common . 
 Conventions with significant numbers of fursuiters may offer an event known as the furry games , furry races , or <unk> . These focus on feats of dexterity suited to multiple players in teams , such as dragging a sled filled with plush toys or other fursuiters around a marked track , or racing back and forth while tethered to one another with a hula hoop . 
 Some conventions have established charity auctions , which ( in the US ) usually raise several thousand dollars for the convention 's yearly charity , typically a wildlife refuge , nature reserve , animal shelter , sanctuary or rescue group . Organizers may also donate from the convention 's own funds . In total , furry conventions raised over US $ 50 @,@ 000 for charity in 2006 , with Further Confusion and Anthrocon raising over US $ 60 @,@ 000 throughout their history . 
 = = Attendees = = 
 Attendees include artists and dealers offering products and services for sale to fans , and those wish to buy them . Others come for the programming , or to meet friends or other furry fans in general . Many attend for all of these reasons . Some later publish a con report detailing their experiences . 
 Attendees of major conventions receive a bag with the convention book ( or <unk> ) , a lavishly illustrated volume featuring themed artwork , fiction and articles submitted by members and the Guests of Honor , along with a description of the event 's programming , staff , rules , guests and any charity being supported by the convention . Local restaurant information and a combination pocket schedule and map may also be included . Sponsors often receive additional items such as T @-@ shirts , pins or ribbons , as well as faster registration badge pick @-@ up and on @-@ site meals ( some conventions provide a con suite with basic refreshments for all members ) . They may also be displayed prominently in convention publications . 
 Fans may wear a full or partial fursuit or other costume to express their identity and entertain others , though typically less than 15 % of attendees bring a costume , and few of these wear them all the time . Others may wear accessories such as ears or a tail , particularly outside the main convention area . Nearly all will wear one or more custom convention badges featuring a depiction of their anthropomorphic persona , some with attached ribbons providing an indicator of social status , such as a notice of affiliation , or sponsorship of the convention . Sales of such accessories form a part of the commerce at furry conventions . 
 Attendees under the age of majority are commonly allowed to attend with a notarized parental permission slip or accompanied by an adult . Eurofurence is one exception , only admitting those above 18 . Underage attendees are usually given a distinctive badge to allow staff and dealers to restrict access to mature content . Government @-@ issued photo ID is usually required . 
 = = Organization and staffing = = 
 Furry conventions are run and staffed by volunteers , though venues may require certain activities to be contracted out . Event funding typically relies on convention registrations . Many of the larger conventions are incorporated as non @-@ profit organizations , usually to achieve tax @-@ exempt status and safeguard the organizers ' personal assets - in the US , some are 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) charities , while others are registered as recreational clubs . The largest events may require up to a hundred volunteers , not including <unk> . Volunteers are thanked for their participation during the closing ceremonies , which are usually well @-@ attended , and often receive T @-@ shirts or other benefits . 
 = = Timing and duration = = 
 Most furry conventions take place over a weekend , with events scheduled between Friday evening and Sunday afternoon . Saturday is typically the busiest day , as most fans must return home on Sunday . One @-@ day passes are sometimes sold at a reduced price . 
 Reasons for this include : 
 Most fans would have to take a vacation from work or study to attend an event held during the work week . 
 Transportation costs are often lower for weekend travelers . 
 Hotels have few business travelers during the weekend , making it much easier to reserve a block of rooms and secure space for programming at a reduced price . Many fans are students and have little discretionary income , so hotel and convention fees are important factors . 
 As a given convention expands in growth over the years , increased demand for programming often results in events scheduled late into the night . Convention activities may also be extended to Thursday and early Friday for early arrivals . Unofficial activities are frequently coordinated by groups of people on Sunday evening and Monday morning , usually open to anyone who wishes to join , and may include bowling , bar hopping , visits to arcades , shopping malls , theme parks , zoos , dinner or morning brunch . 
 = = Media and public perception = = 
 While small , and often avoiding media coverage , furry conventions have increasingly become a topic of attention for the news and mass media : 
 The Commercial Appeal covered <unk> <unk> 7 in September 2003 . Two years later , The Memphis Flyer did a piece about MFM 2005 . 
 An October 2003 episode of CSI featured <unk> , a fictional furry convention held in Las Vegas . Reactions to the show were varied . 
 A CBC Newsworld episode of Culture Shock about furries spent much of its time covering <unk> 2003 in November . 
 The News Tribune of Tacoma wrote a short article about <unk> Northwest 2004 . 
 The Financial Times Weekend Magazine took a look at Anthrocon 2005 . 
 The Corner News of Auburn , Alabama covered Rocket City <unk> 2006 . 
 Several newspapers were invited to attend Anthrocon 2006 , including the Pittsburgh Tribune @-@ Review , the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , and the Pittsburgh City Paper , which printed both a preview and an extensive review . When local television station KDKA @-@ TV showed up , chairman Samuel Conway gave a short television interview outside the convention hotel . There was similar coverage in 2007 . 
 The Montreal Gazette covered <unk> 2007 . 
 Eurofurence 13 received extensive coverage by several regional newspapers in Thuringia . 
 An undercover reporter from Hartford Advocate attended <unk> 2007 and published her findings 
 A suspected chlorine gas attack on December 7 , 2014 , resulted in nineteen Midwest <unk> attendees being sent to the hospital . MSNBC " Morning Joe " host Mika Brzezinski was so amused that she had walk off the set of the show due to uncontrollable laughter . 
 One public misconception — popularized by the CSI episode " Fur and Loathing " — is that furry conventions are places for people to dress up as animals and perform sexual acts with each other . In an article about furries , Vanity Fair described some hotel guests as " stunned " , with some calling convention @-@ goers " freaks " , " blatant homosexuals " , and various derogatory terms . Some U.S. Army personnel present during the same convention described attendees as " a little unusual " and " people that have problems " , while others considered the event " something nice to bring kids to . " 
 = History of Dallas ( 1874 – 1929 ) = 
 The history of Dallas , Texas , United States from 1874 to 1929 documents the city 's rapid growth and emergence as a major center for transportation , trade and finance . Originally a small community built around agriculture , the convergence of several railroads made the city a strategic location for several expanding industries . During the time , Dallas prospered and grew to become the most populous city in Texas , lavish steel and masonry structures replaced timber constructions , Dallas Zoo , Southern Methodist University , and an airport were established . Conversely , the city suffered multiple setbacks with a recession from a series of failing markets ( the " Panic of 1893 " ) and the disastrous flooding of the Trinity River in the spring of 1908 . 
 = = Shift to industry = = 
 The shift towards manufacturing and heavy industry in Dallas formed partially out of problems hurting Dallas area cotton farmers . After purchasing supplies on credit during the year , farmers owed merchants most of their crop , whose price was lowered by the high shipping costs to the port of Galveston . Worldwide cotton prices were low , due to overproduction . The Farmers ' Alliance , created in 1877 , hoped to help farmers by setting up a Dallas warehouse to ship cotton to St. Louis . However , bankers refused to finance the warehouse , and the venture failed within twenty months . 
 There was little manufacturing in Dallas . The city began to light its streets with gas lamps in 1874 and began to brick over dirt lanes . In 1880 , the first telephone switchboard came to Dallas , linking the water company and the fire station . In 1885 , the Main Street was lit with electricity . In 1888 , the Dallas Zoo opened as the first zoo in the state . In 1890 , Dallas annexed the geographically @-@ larger city of East Dallas , making it the most populous city in Texas . 
 = = Panic of 1893 = = 
 Following the national financial " Panic of 1893 " , numerous business failed , including five local banks . Cotton prices dipped below five cents a pound , and the lumber and flour markets weakened . 
 By 1898 however , the city began to recover and grow again . Restored growth invigorated the skilled workers , who joined trade unions <unk> with the American Federation of Labor , which granted a charter to the Trades Assembly of Dallas in 1899 to coordinate local activity and prevent jurisdictional disputes . 
 In 1894 , Parkland Memorial Hospital opened just west of Oak Lawn . In 1903 , Oak Cliff , a city across the Trinity River , was annexed . The same year , the Wilson Building , patterned after Paris ' Grand Opera House , opened on Main Street in downtown . 
 By the turn of the century Dallas was the leading wholesale market in the entire Southwestern United States for many products . More important it became the world center for the cotton trade . It led the world in the manufacturing of saddlery and cotton gin machinery . As it further entered the 20th century , Dallas built up a major presence in banking and insurance . 
 = = Progressive reform = = 
 Progressive Era reformers sought to improve municipal government by such changes as the commission system , city planning , and zoning controls . The interests of white business and residential districts were protected , but sometimes at the expense of blacks who lived in segregated neighborhoods . Fairbanks ( 1999 ) explores the changing assumptions about city planning and government among the city 's leaders . Dissatisfied with its haphazard development they endorsed centralized planning and wrote and secured the adoption of a new charter and set up a board of commissioners . The commission structure , however , caused government officials to view the city in separate parts rather than as a whole . By the 1920s supporters of comprehensive planning were calling for a program that included adoption of council @-@ manager government , a citywide zoning policy , and public funds for improvements in parks , sewers , schools , and city streets . Voters approved the bond proposals and charter amendments in 1927 and 1930 . Dallas thus achieved a more coordinated government which was theoretically more aware of the city 's needs and more able to treat those needs equally for the benefit of the city as a whole . 
 = = Self image = = 
 The city 's fathers originally depicted Dallas as southern in order to rationalize slavery and opposition to Reconstruction , but this discouraged Northern investment and the political support of wealthy northern migrants to the city . From the 1870s on , Dallas leaders portrayed the city as southwestern , or later as part of the " Sunbelt " , in order to incorporate wealthy non @-@ southern whites , including Jews , into society . For example , between 1852 and 1925 the seven Sanger brothers built successful mercantile businesses along developing railroad lines , including the Sanger Bros. department store , and occupied numerous city and state government posts . White blue collar workers were marginalized , and even more so the Mexican Americans , and blacks . 
 = = Gender = = 
 Women did much to establish the fundamental elements of the social structure of the city , focusing their energies on families , schools , and churches during the city 's pioneer days . Many of the organizations which created a modern urban scene were founded and led by middle class women . Through voluntary organizations and club work , they connected their city to national cultural and social trends . By the 1880s women in temperance and suffrage movements shifted the boundaries between private and public life in Dallas by pushing their way into politics in the name of social issues . 
 During 1913 @-@ 19 , advocates of woman suffrage drew on the educational and advertising techniques of the national parties and the lobbying tactics of the women 's club movement . They also tapped into popular culture , successfully using popular symbolism and traditional ideals to adapt community festivals and social gatherings to the task of political persuasion . The Dallas Equal Suffrage Association developed a suffrage campaign based on social values and community standards . Community and social occasions served as recruiting opportunities for the suffrage cause , blunting its radical implications with the familiarity of customary events and dressing it in the values of traditional female behavior , especially propriety . 
 Women of color usually operated separately . Juanita Craft ( 1902 – 85 ) was a leader in the civil rights movement through the Dallas NAACP . She focused on working with black youths , organizing them as the vanguard in protests against segregation practices in Texas . 
 = = 1908 flood = = 
 The relationship between Dallas and the Trinity River was never as healthy as <unk> had hoped for . Dallas 's establishment on the banks of the Trinity was done with hopes that navigation south to the Trinity and Galveston Bays , and ultimately the Gulf of Mexico , would be realized . However , attempts to even move <unk> up and down the river proved futile , and plans to transform the river into a canal never came to fruition . The Trinity also suffered from chronic flooding : floods occurred in 1844 , 1866 , 1871 , and 1890 , but none were as severe as the flood of 1908 . On May 26 , 1908 , the Trinity River reached a depth of 52 @.@ 6 feet ( 16 @.@ 03 m ) and a width of 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) . Five people died , 4 @,@ 000 were left homeless , and property damages were estimated at $ 2 @.@ 5 million . 
 Dallas was without power for three days , all telephone and telegraph service was down , and rail service was canceled . The only way to reach Oak Cliff was by boat . West Dallas was hit harder than any other part of the city — the Dallas Times Herald said " indescribable suffering " plagued the area . Much to the horror of residents , thousands of livestock drowned in the flood and some became lodged in the tops of trees — the stench of their decay hung over the city as the water subsided . 
 = = Flood control = = 
 After the disastrous flood , the city wanted to find a way to control the reckless Trinity and to build a bridge linking Oak Cliff and Dallas . The immediate reaction was citizens and the city clamoring to build an indestructible , all @-@ weather crossing over the Trinity . This had already been attempted following the 1890 flood — the result was the " Long Wooden Bridge , " that connected Jefferson Boulevard in Oak Cliff and Cadiz in Dallas , but the unstable wooden structure was washed swiftly away by the 1908 flood . George B. Dealey , publisher of the Dallas Morning News , proposed a 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) concrete bridge similar to one crossing the Missouri River in Kansas City . Ultimately a US $ 650 @,@ 000 bond election was approved and in 1912 , the Oak Cliff viaduct ( now the Houston Street viaduct ) was opened among festivities drawing 58 @,@ 000 spectators . The bridge , at the time , was the longest concrete structure in the world . 
 Efforts beyond this had begun in 1911 when George Kessler , a city planner , created a plan for both the Trinity and the city . His plans included using levees to divert the river , removing railroad lines on Pacific Avenue , consolidating train depots into a central station , new parks and playgrounds , and the straightening and widening of several streets . Most of his plans lay unimplemented , but in later years , many began to see its importance . In 1920 , Kessler was brought back to update his plan and by the 1930s many of his plans had been realized . 
 = = Financial center = = 
 Efforts began in 1910 to have Southwestern University in Georgetown relocate to Dallas . The school refused , but this action brought Dallas to the attention of the Methodists . They voted in 1911 to establish a university in Dallas , after the city offered $ 300 @,@ 000 and 666 @.@ 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 70 km2 ) of land for the campus . In 1915 , Southern Methodist University opened and is still operational today . 
 In 1911 , Dallas became the location of the eleventh regional branch of the Federal Reserve Bank . The city had campaigned to have it located in Dallas for years , and the bank 's arrival assured Dallas 's place as a major financial center . 
 In 1912 , The Adolphus Hotel was constructed in downtown Dallas . The Beaux Arts style building , at twenty @-@ one stories and 312 feet ( 95 m ) was the tallest building in Texas at the time . It officially opened on October 5 , 1912 . In August 1922 , the 29 @-@ story Magnolia Petroleum Building ( now the Magnolia Hotel ) opened next door and took the title of tallest @-@ in @-@ Texas . 
 Aviation became a popular topic in World War I. Love Field was established as an aviation training ground , and Fair Park was the home of Camp Dick , a training facility as well . The city purchased Love Field in 1927 to use as a municipal airport . 
 = House at 130 Mohegan Avenue = 
 The House at 130 Mohegan Avenue , also known as the House of Steel or Steel House , is a prefabricated , modular , International Style house in New London , Connecticut , United States . The House was designed by Howard T. Fisher , who founded General Houses , Inc. in 1932 . Winslow Ames , a professor of art history at Connecticut College and the art director of the Lyman Allyn Museum , had the home built after attending the Century of Progress Exposition in Chicago . The House is a single story 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) by 37 feet ( 11 m ) rectangular steel prefabricated home that rests upon a concrete slab . It originally had a flat roof and included an attached garage . Throughout the years , the house has undergone significant alteration , including the addition of a gable roof . 
 The house was used by Ames , and later by Connecticut College , as a rental property , until the structure was slated for demolition in 2004 . The push to restore the house is credited to Doug Royalty , who worked with the college 's Abigail Van Slyck . Completed in 2013 , restoration cost $ 500 @,@ 000 and involved several phases , including the dismantling , transportation , and reassembly of the house . The house was added to the Connecticut Historic Register in July 2007 and it was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 28 , 2009 . 
 = = Construction and use = = 
 The house was designed by Howard T. Fisher , who founded General Houses , Inc . , and commissioned by Winslow Ames , a professor of art history at Connecticut College and the art director of the Lyman Allyn Museum . In 1933 , Ames decided to construct two houses on the museum @-@ owned property after seeing prefabricated homes at the Century of Progress Exposition in Chicago . Ames had a strong interest in the Modernism movement and believed such houses would become predominant . 
 Completed in November 1933 and costing about $ 4 @,@ 500 in total , the House is a single story 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) by 37 feet ( 11 m ) rectangular steel prefabricated home that rests upon a concrete slab . The house is frameless , with the weight borne by 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) by 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) steel panels ; the exterior panels are flanged and vertically bolted through wooden T @-@ shaped pieces . The interior wall panels are made of steel and filled with insulation . Originally the house had a flat roof , but it changed to a gable roof at an unknown time . The house has two bedrooms , one bathroom , and an open living @-@ dining @-@ kitchen space . The house also has an attached garage . 
 After its completion , Winslow Ames used the house as a rental property until 1949 when he went to work in a museum in Springfield , Missouri . The house was sold to Connecticut College . Connecticut College continued to rent it to staff and students until 2004 , when plans were made to demolish the house . Changing the flat roof to a gable roof was a significant alteration from the original plan ; the date of the alteration is unknown , but it preceded 1995 . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 In 2008 , an article in The Day stated that the push to restore the house came from conservation specialist Doug Royalty , who was researching prefabricated homes from the 1920s and 1930s . Royalty approached Abigail Van Slyck , the chairwoman of Connecticut College 's art history department and architectural studies program about the house . The Day referred to the house 's historic value as a new discovery , but its history was included in the Winslow Ames House National Register of Historic Places nomination in 1995 . The Winslow Ames House nomination detailed the House 's origin , but criticized its gable roof modification . After its re @-@ discovery , Connecticut College began collecting grants to restore the house under the direction of Royalty and Van Slyck . Royalty stated that the House and Winslow Ames House are very rare , with only a few surviving examples in the United States . 
 In April 2007 , the leaking roof was repaired . In December 2007 , the House received a $ 28 @,@ 500 grant from the Dr. Scholl Foundation . The grant was used to complete lead @-@ paint abatement , which would make conducting other restoration work safer . By 2010 , the Dr. Scholl Foundation granted another $ 50 @,@ 000 and a family foundation provided another $ 50 @,@ 000 for the restoration . It was reported that other college grants totaling $ 15 @,@ 500 were given for preservation planning , in part by the Connecticut Trust for Historic Preservation . It was reported in May 2010 that a matching grant of $ 101 @,@ 500 was given to Connecticut College from the Connecticut Commission on Culture and Tourism , which provided the funding for the next phase of renovations for restoring the House . 
 The celebration for the House 's completed restoration was held in October 2013 . The cost of restoration totaled around $ 500 @,@ 000 . The building was dismantled , transported to Philadelphia for restoration and treatment for rust resistance , and then reassembled on the campus . The work was performed by Milner + Carr , a conservation company . The house was added to the Connecticut Historic Register on July 2007 and it was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 28 , 2009 . 
 = Confidence Man ( Lost ) = 
 " Confidence Man " is the eighth episode of the first season of Lost . The episode was directed by Tucker Gates and written by Damon Lindelof . It first aired on November 10 , 2004 , on ABC . The character of James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) is featured in the episode 's flashbacks . Sawyer is accused of stealing Shannon Rutherford 's ( Maggie Grace ) inhaler , and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) tortures him in an attempt to find out where it is . In the flashbacks , Sawyer 's life before the crash is revealed , showing his scams as a confidence man . 
 The episode was intended to make Sawyer look like less of a belligerent , as he had generally acted as the antagonist in previous episodes . It also set the stage for the love triangle between Kate , Sawyer , and Jack . The episode was first broadcast in the United States on November 10 , 2004 , earning 18 @.@ 44 million viewers . It received mostly positive reviews , although a few reviewers discussed aspects of the episode that they felt did not blend in well with the rest of the episode and series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 Sawyer is in bed with a young woman , Jessica ( Kristin Richardson ) . After he declares his love for her , she realizes he is late for a meeting . As he rushes to leave , his briefcase falls open , revealing thousands of dollars in cash he claims she was not supposed to have seen . Sawyer then informs her that he is meeting someone to get money for an investment that will triple his cash in two weeks , and Jessica tells him that she will get additional money from her husband , David ( Michael DeLuise ) , so that she and Sawyer can split the profit . Later , Sawyer is revealed to be a con artist in debt with a loan shark , Kilo ( Billy Mayo ) , who demands his money back , plus fifty percent , by the next day . Sawyer goes to Jessica 's house to finalize the deal , but reconsiders upon seeing a small boy ( Jim <unk> ) emerge from another room . He suddenly calls off the con , drops his briefcase of money , and rushes out of their house . 
 = = = On the island = = = 
 It is Day 9 , September 30 , 2004 . On the beach , Sawyer catches Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) searching through his stash of items he salvaged from the crash , and Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) attends to a wound on the head of Sayid . Sayid reports his failure in triangulating the distress signal , and the destruction of the transceiver by his attacker . Shannon brings a bloody Boone to the caves , where he explains to Jack that Sawyer beat him , and that his sister Shannon 's asthma has become a problem . Many of the survivors become convinced that Sawyer is hoarding some inhalers from the wreck . Jack unsuccessfully demands the inhalers from Sawyer , and when Kate does the same , Sawyer says he will give up the inhaler if Kate kisses him . Kate calls his bluff and challenges him about the letter he often reads . Sawyer makes Kate read the letter aloud . The letter is addressed to " Mr. Sawyer " and explains that Mr. Sawyer had sex with the letter writer 's mother and stole all of the letter writer 's father 's money , resulting in the father killing his wife and himself . 
 As Sayid and John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) discuss the attack on Sayid , Locke suggests that Sawyer is the culprit , since he is doing well for himself on the island , hoarding other people 's possessions , and also seems to dislike Sayid . Meanwhile , Shannon begins to have trouble breathing due to her lack of medication and panic resulting from this problem . Jack tries beating answers out of Sawyer by punching him , but stops when he sees others ' disapproval . Then with Jack 's approval , Sayid ties Sawyer to a tree and tortures him for answers , revealing that he has tortured people before . 
 Sawyer finally agrees to give up the inhalers , but only to Kate . He again says he will hand over the medication if she kisses him , which she reluctantly does , only to be told by him that he does not have the medication after all . Kate elbows Sawyer , and an enraged Sayid attacks him , stabbing him in the arm and hitting an artery . Jack arrives to stop the bleeding and save Sawyer 's life . 
 Sawyer wakes up the next day , October 1 , 2004 , with his arm bandaged up , while Kate looks on . She tells Sawyer that she knows the letter was written when Sawyer was a kid , and also works out that the letter wasn 't written to Sawyer , but by him . He tells Kate that his real name isn 't Sawyer and that the letter was written to the real Sawyer , a con man , who ruined his family . He ended up becoming a con man himself , so he took the name Sawyer as an alias . He snatches the letter from Kate and tells her not to feel sorry for him and to leave . 
 Despite pleas from Kate , Sayid sets off to explore the island 's shoreline in self @-@ imposed isolation , needing time to come to terms with his actions in torturing Sawyer , while Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) helps Shannon by making a eucalyptus salve to clear her bronchial passages . Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) convinces Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) to move to the caves , because they made a deal that if Charlie found peanut butter , she would move ; Charlie shares an imaginary jar of peanut butter with her . Sawyer attempts to burn the letter he wrote , but he finds himself unable to go through with it . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written to humanize Sawyer and set up the love triangle between him , Kate and Jack . Kate was meant to look at Sawyer in a new way , and , according to Lindelof , think , " wow , this guy is not just a belligerent . " The episode also shows the moral ambiguity of some characters by revealing more of their personalities , with the ones introduced as protagonists doing things that are generally not viewed as protagonist @-@ like – an example being Jack beating Sawyer and eventually asking Sayid to torture him ; and an antagonistic character , Sawyer , proving not to be solely antagonist @-@ like – an example being his backstory and flashback , which show that he is not exclusively evil . Lindelof explained that he wanted Sawyer to " come out of his shell a little , and say to the audience , ' you 're supposed to like this guy ' " , further explaining , " the root of him being an asshole is that these horrible things happened to him when he was a little kid , and he 's really really angry . " 
 Sawyer and Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) were the least @-@ liked characters by viewers during the first few episodes , because , according to Lindelof , " they were just really obnoxious , bad guys " . In later episodes , however , Sawyer and Jin changed to be more likable . Towards the beginning of " Confidence Man " , Sawyer is seen reading the novel Watership Down by Richard Adams ( this is the book that caused Boone to think that Sawyer took Shannon 's inhaler ) . The novel has numerous similarities to Lost , including " letting go " , and building a society . Furthermore , the protagonists of Watership Down are rabbits – a recurring motif in Lost . The episode ends with a montage of various characters performing different activities , featuring the song " I Shall Not Walk Alone " , written by Ben Harper and performed by The Blind Boys of Alabama . One lyric from the song is , " I just reach for mother Mary " ; Sawyer 's mother 's name is Mary , and , according to reviewer Therese Odell from the Houston Chronicle , the lyric may be alluding to this . Also , percussionist Ryan <unk> of The Blind Boys of Alabama said of many members of the group 's blindness , " Our disability doesn ’ t have to be a handicap . It 's not about what you can 't do . It 's about what you do . And what we do is sing good gospel music . " This quotation is very similar to the oft @-@ repeated quotation by many characters ( especially Locke ) , " Don 't tell me what I can 't do . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Confidence Man " first aired in the United States on November 10 , 2004 . 18 @.@ 44 million people in America watched the episode live , a slight decrease from the previous episode , " The Moth " , which garnered 18 @.@ 73 million viewers . The episode received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews . Chris Carabott of IGN gave the episode an 8 @.@ 4 / 10 and called it " a well @-@ written , fascinating character piece that does an excellent job of bringing Sawyer into the spotlight " , later praising Josh Holloway 's performance , writing that " The success of this episode begins and ends with Josh Holloway . So far , we know that he 's good at playing Sawyer : The Tough Guy , but now he has to sell a multilayered fragment of a human being who hates himself for becoming the man who destroyed his family . Holloway succeeds in creating a character that quickly unravels throughout the episode as his terrible secret is revealed . " The website later ranked " Confidence Man " the 47th best episode of Lost , praising how it " change [ d ] your entire perspective of a character " in revealing how Sawyer came to be , which made a starting point for " one of the greatest character arcs not only in Lost , but in all of modern television . " 
 Ryan McGee of Zap2it also had a positive review of the episode , writing that " Confidence Man " was " A taut , tense , character @-@ based episode which excelled on the Island and paid off in the flashback as well . " Robin Pierson of The TV Critic gave the episode a 82 / 100 , praising Sawyer 's performance , and writing that it was a " a very well written story " , but criticized the music montage at the end as being a crutch , explaining that " It ’ s as if the directors can ’ t think of any other way to finish the show . " Myles McNutt of The A.V. Club gave " Confidence Man " a B and wrote that " Sawyer ’ s flashback is really well done " , but adds that " Lost — at least at this point in its run — is not calibrated for one of its characters to torture another one . The episode simply doesn ’ t do enough to get us to the point where we can understand why this event was necessary , and why cooler heads couldn ’ t have prevailed . " Todd VanDerWerff of The Los Angeles Times ranked the episode as the 83rd best of Lost ( excluding the finale ) , writing the episode is " Not bad , but giving Sawyer a big , epic origin story feels kind of beside the point . " 
 = Out from Under = 
 " Out from Under " is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears , taken from her sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) . The song was written by Shelly Peiken , Arnthor Birgisson , and Wayne Hector , initially for the soundtrack of Bratz : The Movie , featuring vocals of American recording artist Joanna <unk> . After approaching Spears and Guy Sigsworth in 2008 , the songwriters suggested the singer to re @-@ record the song for her album . " Out from Under " is a soft rock song that alludes to the ending of Spears ' marriage with Kevin Federline , and blends the singer 's breathy vocals with acoustic guitars in the background . 
 Despite not being released as a single , " Out from Under " managed to peak at number nineteen on Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , following the release of Circus , and at number thirty @-@ two in Sweden . The song was featured on the fifth season of MTV 's The Hills . 
 = = Background = = 
 In early 2007 , songwriters Shelly Peiken , Arnthor Birgisson , and Wayne Hector wrote a song titled " Out from Under " for the soundtrack of Bratz : The Movie . The song was recorded by Joanna <unk> in Stockholm , Sweden . In 2008 , it was confirmed that Spears was in the process of recording her sixth studio album . Her manager Larry Rudolph confirmed the singer would spend " her summer in the recording studio " to work on it . Despite no official album confirmation at the time , Rudolph revealed they were happy with her progress and that she had been working with a range of producers , such as Sean Garrett , Guy Sigsworth , Danja and Bloodshy & Avant . Sigsworth and Spears were approached by the songwriters of " Out from Under " , who suggested the singer to re @-@ record the song for the album . Spears recorded her vocals for the song at Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California , while audio mixing and vocal recording was done by Andy Page . Background vocals were provided by Leah Haywood . The song appeared on a six @-@ song mix of Circus that was released on November 13 , 2008 . In an interview included on the deluxe edition of Circus , Spears revealed that she " [ has ] always loved ballads . It 's like , there is always a time on the show , a transition where you can gather your thoughts , and [ ... ] just chill " . The singer also said she wrote " My Baby " during the recording sessions of " Out from Under " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Out from Under " is a soft rock song that alludes to the ending of Spears ' marriage with Kevin Federline which is perceived in lines such as " We tried everything we could try / So let 's just say goodbye forever " . Poppy Cosyns of The Sun noted that " a starker vocal and acoustic guitar backing herald " the song , while considering its lyrical content as " a sincere story of a suffocating relationship " . " Out from Under " lasts for three minutes and fifty @-@ three seconds , and features Spears singing the song with breathy vocals , over a background with acoustic guitars . Anna Dimond of TV Guide noted the song 's lyrics also relates to Spears ' conservatorship , from which the singer was " becoming more independent every day " . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone noted that Spears vocals aren 't heavily processed , saying , " Britney 's vocals on Blackout sounded phoned in , but on Circus , she put in real studio time , actually singing some slow jams " , naming " Out from Under " as an example . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song has received mixed reviews from music critics . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times noted that " Out from Under " and the other ballads from Circus " have [ Spears ] hiccuping emotion from deep in the back of her throat " . Chris Richards of The Washington Post commented that the singer " emerges from her media bender hoping to forget the past " with the song , and Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone considered it " Spears ' best ballad since ' I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman ' " . Jon Pareles of The New York Times said " Out from Under " " gleam with acoustic guitars " , and that the song , " My Baby " and " Unusual You " , " are the album 's only attempts at warmth . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic considered the song , along with " My Baby " , " a couple of not @-@ good @-@ at @-@ all ballads " , while Dave Donnelly of Sputnikmusic said both " subtly evoke the Britney of old : airy pop ballads that benefit from the former Frou Frou producer 's sophisticated , layered arrangements . " While comparing Circus to Blackout , Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted , " the ballads are back , bringing with them the inevitable sprinkling of tedium " . Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club felt that both songs " are about five years out of date , and [ Spears ] vocals seem anemic and distracted in spite of the confessional lyrics . " Steve Jones of USA Today commented that " Spears tosses in a couple of ballads along [ Circus ] , but these really aren 't her forte . The slew of top @-@ flight producers [ ... ] bolsters her vocal variety of echoes and gimmicky effects , but they don 't really help the breathy ' Out From Under ' or saccharin ' Unusual You ' " . Mike Newmark of PopMatters described the song as " nearly @-@ emo " along with " Unusual You , " saying both " try for heartfelt and come off flabby . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Following the release of Circus , " Out from Under " peaked at number nineteen on Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , on the dated week of December 20 , 2008 . The song became a radio hit on commercial radio stations in Sweden , and also entered the Swedish Singles Chart on the dated week of August 14 , 2009 , at number forty , peaking at number thirty @-@ two the following week . " Out from Under " stayed over a month on the chart , peaking at number forty @-@ one in the last week of its appearance . 
 = = Appearances in media = = 
 " Out from Under " was featured on the fifth season of MTV 's The Hills , during a scene where Lauren Conrad comforts Heidi Montag . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Out from Under " was performed Live A Winter Circus Promo Tour 
 = = Credits and Personnel = = 
 Credits for " Out from Under " are adapted from Circus liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Published by <unk> Songs ( BMI ) , Maratone Publishing ( ASCAP ) , Sony / ATV Tunes LLC ( ASCAP ) . 
 Vocal recording and audio mixing at Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The song was released as a single in Europe with rewritten lyrics as " Now Or Never " by Swedish pop singer Emilia de Poret in 2009 . A video for " Now Or Never " can be found on de Poret 's official YouTube channel . That same year , reggae singer and former UB40 frontman Ali Campbell released his version as a single . 
 = DuPont Manual High School = 
 duPont Manual High School is a public magnet high school located in the Old Louisville neighborhood of Louisville , Kentucky , USA and serving students in grades 9 – 12 . It is a part of the Jefferson County Public School District . DuPont Manual is recognized by the United States Department of Education as a Blue Ribbon School . 
 Manual opened in 1892 as an all @-@ male manual training school . It was the second public high school in Louisville . Manual merged with its rival , Male High School , into a consolidated school from 1915 to 1919 . Manual permanently merged with the Louisville Girls High School in 1950 and moved into their Gothic @-@ style three @-@ story building , built in 1934 . In 2004 , after conducting a poll , Louisville 's Courier @-@ Journal newspaper listed Manual as one of Louisville residents ' ten favorite buildings . As a coeducational school , Manual experienced a decline in discipline and test scores in the 1970s . In 1984 , Manual became a magnet school , allowing students from throughout the district to apply to five specialized programs of study , or magnets . 
 Manual and Male High School have the oldest football rivalry in the state , dating back to 1893 . Manual 's football team has won five state titles and claims two national championships . In the 1980s and 1990s Manual became a prominent academic school and has been included several times in lists of America 's top high schools in Redbook and Newsweek magazines . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = duPont Manual Training High School = = = 
 In 1892 , Louisville factory owner Alfred Victor du Pont donated $ 150 @,@ 000 to the board of Louisville Public Schools to establish a training school to teach young men industrial arts ( " manual " ) skills that would fit them for their duties in life . The Victorian building was built on the corner of Brook and Oak Streets by the firm of Clark and Loomis , which also designed the Speed Art Museum and Waverly Hills Sanatorium . After Manual moved out of the building it was used as a Middle School until 1974 when it was converted to apartments . Manual 's first principal , Henry <unk> , was a favorite of du Pont but was unpopular with the school board , which conspired to replace him in 1895 . Despite a summer of controversy and protest from the du Pont family , Manual 's first two graduating classes and the four major local newspapers , the board replaced him with Harry Brownell on July 2 . 
 Manual was initially a three @-@ year school with some general academic classes and an emphasis on mechanical and industrial training . Although graduates recall the school being viewed as blue @-@ collar and academically inferior to Male High School in its early days , numerous early graduates went on to become medical doctors , and students published a literary magazine called The Crimson from 1899 to 1955 . In order to accommodate newly added French and Latin classes , Manual was expanded to a four @-@ year school in 1901 . In 1911 , Manual became the first school in Kentucky to serve lunches to students . 
 In 1913 , Louisville Public Schools announced a plan to merge Manual and its rival Male High School into Louisville Boys High so that the two schools could share a new $ 300 @,@ 000 facility . The plan took effect in 1915 . Industrial training classes continued at the old Manual building . Parents objected to their children having to travel between the two buildings and the consolidation did not save the school board any money , so they voted to end the experiment in 1919 . The new building became Male 's home for the next 70 years and Manual returned to its old building at Brook and Oak . In 1923 an expansion added new laboratories , a cafeteria , and the largest gym ever built in Louisville at the time . The addition eventually burned and had to be destroyed in 1991 . 
 Manual 's enrollment numbers , which had hovered around 400 since the 1890s , soared from 429 in 1919 to 1 @,@ 039 in 1925 . The Manual <unk> football team , which had also been consolidated with Male 's from 1915 to 1918 , had great success in the 1920s , beating Male two years in a row for the first time in its history . Manual shared athletic facilities with Male for many years , but in the early 1920s alumni raised funds to construct Manual Stadium . The stadium opened in 1924 with 14 @,@ 021 permanent seats . It was one of the largest high school stadiums in America at the time . The original structure was condemned and closed in 1952 after years of heavy use and minimal upkeep , and was reopened after being rebuilt in 1954 . Its modern capacity is 11 @,@ 463 . 
 = = = Louisville Girls High School = = = 
 The Louisville Girls High School opened as Female High School in 1856 at what became the intersection of Armory Place and Muhammad Ali Boulevard . It was the female counterpart to Male High School , also opened in 1856 , and they were the first two public high schools in Louisville . Female High School moved to a location on First Street north of Chestnut in 1864 and remained there until 1899 when it moved to a location at Fifth and Hill Streets . It changed its name to Louisville Girls High School in 1911 . 
 In 1934 , the school moved into Reuben Post Halleck Hall , which had just been completed . The building was initially home to the Girls High School on the second and third floors , and Louisville Junior High School on the first . Over 12 @,@ 000 women graduated from the school in its 94 years of operation . 
 = = = Merger = = = 
 By the 1940s , budget concerns and national trends made it clear that Louisville Girls High School and duPont Manual would merge into one coeducational school . They finally did so in September 1950 and remained in the old Louisville Girls High School building . This fusion of institutions resulted in the birth of the modern duPont Manual High School - dropping ' Training ' from its previous name . The same school building remains in use today , although two major additions have since been made . The middle school located on the building 's first floor became Manly Junior High and moved to Manual 's old building at Brook and Oak . 
 The merged school began developing traditions such as Homecoming in 1951 , and Red and White Day in 1953 . Red and White Day eventually became a full week of school spirit related activities preceding the annual Male @-@ Manual football game . Two traditions of the sexually segregated past , sororities and the all @-@ male Mitre Club , persisted into the 1950s as unofficial organizations but gradually faded away . Students began publishing a newspaper , The Crimson Record , in 1955 . 
 Following the Brown v. Board of Education Supreme Court decision , Manual became racially integrated without controversy and graduated its first two black students in 1958 . Starting in the 1960s , Manual began to face problems associated with inner city schools in the United States as economically advantaged families moved towards Louisville 's suburbs . Manual was exempt from court @-@ ordered busing in the 1970s because its racial makeup already met federal guidelines . 
 On November 11 , 1976 , what school board members referred to as a race @-@ related riot occurred on campus , injuring 16 and leading to six arrests and 60 suspensions . Students and school administrators agreed that there was an atmosphere of racial tension brewing at Manual in the 1970s that lead to the riot . In his 2005 book on the history of Manual , Mike McDaniel wrote that November 11 , 1976 was " quite probably the worst day in the history of Manual . " 
 The late 1960s and 1970s were a time of major change at Manual . A new wing featuring a gym with a seating capacity of 2 @,@ 566 opened in 1971 . The school had as many as 3 @,@ 360 students in the 1971 – 72 school year , necessitating 17 portable classrooms in the front and rear courtyards . Manual still had grades seven through twelve at this time , and overcrowding gradually began to improve after Manual dropped the seventh and eight grades when Noe Middle School opened in 1974 . Throughout the decade the administration gradually dropped the last vestiges of its manual training emphasis as the number of shop classes dwindled from 16 in 1971 to three in 1979 . The Youth Performing Arts School , actually a magnet school within Manual , opened in 1978 and , along with the changing curriculum , presaged Manual 's transition to an academically intensive magnet school in the 1980s . 
 = = = Magnet school = = = 
 Manual became a magnet school in 1984 , creating specialty programs and allowing students from around the district to apply to attend . The change initially met with a mixed reaction , especially as most freshman and sophomores were to be transferred to other schools . One critic in the black community called the plan " one @-@ way busing " . A few days after the proposal was announced , about 300 students walked out of class at Manual and marched to Central High School , where most of them were being transferred , in protest . The protest succeeded in persuading the school board to modify the proposal to exclude sophomores from being transferred . 
 The magnet programs succeeded in attracting applicants and by the mid @-@ 1990s only about a third of students who applied were accepted . In the midst of the transition to magnet school , Manual underwent a $ 1 @.@ 9 million building improvement plan which added computer and science labs . Also in 1991 , the United States Department of Education recognized Manual as a Blue Ribbon School , the highest honor the department can bestow on a school . 
 Many interior shots of the 1999 film The Insider were shot at Manual . Dr. Jeffrey Wigand , the subject of the film , taught science and Japanese at Manual after he was fired by tobacco company Brown & Williamson in 1993 . 
 = = Building and campus = = 
 Manual classrooms and offices are located in three buildings spread over two city blocks . The main building was originally called Reuben Post Halleck Hall and was home to the Louisville Girls High School before it merged with Manual . The Gothic @-@ style building was completed in 1934 at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 1 million . The 9 @-@ acre ( 36 @,@ 000 m2 ) tract it was built on had previously been the site of the old Masonic Widows and Orphans Home . 
 In 1967 an urban renewal program demolished a residential block east of the main building to create a running track and various athletic fields . The project doubled Manual 's campus to its modern size of 17 acres ( 69 @,@ 000 m2 ) . This was a part of a larger city @-@ funded effort which created Noe Middle School north of Manual and increased the size of the University of Louisville campus , which was originally touted as a plan to create a continuous chain of schools over many blocks . Manual even became a home for two of the university 's women 's athletic teams . In the 1980s , the U of L women 's basketball team used Manual 's gym as a part @-@ time home , playing a total of 40 games in eight seasons there . The U of L volleyball team used the Manual gym as its primary home from 1977 through 1990 , after which the team moved into the newly built Cardinal Arena on its own campus . In 1992 , Manual began a $ 3 @.@ 5 million renovation of the main building which included a new roof and a glass @-@ enclosed cafeteria for juniors and seniors . 
 The Youth Performing Arts School has its own building a half @-@ block from Manual 's main building . It was completed in 1978 at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 5 million as the final stage of the same plan that expanded Manual 's campus and built Noe . Noe had been built without an auditorium in anticipation of a theater @-@ oriented school being built on site . The YPAS building includes production facilities , a costume shop and an 886 @-@ seat proscenium @-@ style theater . The YPAS building did not contain extensive classroom space , however , and for many years teachers conducted YPAS classes in hallways and on loading docks if other space wasn 't available . Since 1993 , YPAS has used an adjacent facility , built in 1899 and formerly home to Cochran Elementary , as an annex . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Manual focused on industrial training early in its history , but by the late 1970s it had a standard curriculum . In 1980 , Iowa Test of Basic Skills scores ranked Manual 23rd out of the 24 high schools in the county . Under principal Joe Liedtke , academics improved , especially after Manual became a magnet school in 1984 and could attract students from throughout the county . 
 All students enroll in one of five magnet programs . The High School University ( HSU ) magnet offers a traditional college preparatory curriculum with electives . The Math / Science / Technology ( MST ) magnet specifically prepares students for college programs in engineering , science and math . Minimal requirements for MST students include courses in algebra , trigonometry , calculus ( including mandatory AP Calculus ) , biology , chemistry and computer programming . The Journalism & Communication ( J & C ) magnet focuses on journalism , publishing , and media production . To earn class credit , J & C students can participate in production of the school 's national award @-@ winning yearbook ( The Crimson ) , student newspaper ( The Crimson Record ) , multimedia website ( RedEye ) or a weekly morning television show called Manual AM , which is broadcast to all classrooms . The J & C program was formerly known as CMA ( Communications and Media Arts ) , but the name was changed so that the Manual program would stand out from others in the district with similar names . 
 Admission to the HSU , MST and J & C magnets are decided by a committee of Manual teachers based on academic performance as measured by prior school grades and the Commonwealth Accountability Testing System , although extracurricular involvement is also considered . J & C applicants also participate in an on @-@ demand writing assessment . The acceptance rate to each magnet varies with the number of applicants in any given year ; in the mid @-@ 1990s about a third of applicants to these three magnets were selected each year . Admission the other two magnets , Visual Arts and the Youth Performing Arts School , are decided based primarily on auditions . 
 The Visual Arts magnet is located in a wing of art classrooms and features an art show each year for graduating seniors . The Visual Arts magnet provides students with the opportunity to work with a variety of medium , including clay / sculpture , fibers , printmaking , painting , drawing and graphic design . The Math / Science / Technology program and the Youth Performing Arts School have achieved national recognition on multiple occasions . 
 In 1994 , Manual began offering Advanced Placement ( AP ) courses . In 2001 it offered 45 AP courses , more than any other school in the state . Qualifying students may take college courses free of charge at the University of Louisville , which is located directly south of Manual . In 2000 , Manual implemented block scheduling , which allowed students to take eight classes per year , which are scheduled four per day on alternating days . 
 Since 2000 , Manual has held Kentucky 's state record of 52 National Merit Semifinalists , ranking third in the United States for that year . Manual 's academic team won state titles at Governor 's Cup , Kentucky 's top high school academic competition , in 1993 , 1994 , 2005 , and 2013 . Matt Morris , a Manual graduate who was on the 1993 and 1994 teams , was the 1994 Teen Champion on Jeopardy ! . Three other Manual students have competed on Jeopardy . Manual 's academic teams have also won both National Science Bowl and National Academic League championships , and achieved 7th place at the <unk> 's High School National Championships . Manual has a history of one of the top policy debate programs in the state . In the 1990s Manual students won the Jefferson County championships most years and qualified teams for the National Forensic League tournament and the <unk> Tournament of Champions . Manual has been mentioned several times in lists of America 's top high schools in Redbook and Newsweek magazines . In 2002 , Manual was separated from the rest of the schools in its district and made to hold its own regional science fair . 
 In 2015 , duPont Manual had the distinction of being the high school that sent the most students to the <unk> International Science and Engineering Fair ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Youth Performing Arts School = = = 
 The Youth Performing Arts School ( YPAS ) is one of only two programs in Kentucky allowing high school students to major in performing arts . Between 1995 and 2005 , 90 % of YPAS students received college scholarships totaling an average of over one million dollars per year . YPAS has its own building a half @-@ block from Manual 's main building , which includes classrooms , production facilities , a costume shop and an 886 @-@ seat proscenium @-@ style theater . Since 1993 , YPAS has used an adjacent facility , built in 1899 and formerly home to Cochran Elementary , as an annex . 
 YPAS is one of Manual 's magnet programs and YPAS students take their academic classes at Manual and must complete the same academic requirements as any public school student in Kentucky . Unlike the other magnets , YPAS is semi @-@ autonomous ; it has its own assistant principals , counselor , administrative staff , and parents ' organization . Many Manual students take classes at YPAS , even if it is not their academic major . 
 Students at YPAS major in vocal music , instrumental music ( band , orchestra or piano ) , dance , theater design and production , or musical theatre . YPAS instructors are school teachers recruited from around the district for their backgrounds in the arts . The YPAS choir was the only chorus to perform at the January 2001 inauguration of President George W. Bush . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Manual students first organized a football team in 1892 . The team won the state championship five times : 1925 , 1938 , 1948 , 1959 and 1966 . The 1925 and 1938 teams claimed to be national champions due to their undefeated records and defeats of other top national teams , but the 1925 claim is considered a mythical national championship because there was no tournament . The National Sports News Service gave the 1938 High School Football National Championship to Manual . That year , Manual defeated New Britain , Connecticut in a national championship game in Baton Rouge , Louisiana . The game was sponsored by the Louisiana Sports Association , which was affiliated with the Sugar Bowl . 
 Manual 's rivalry with the Male Bulldogs , dubbed the " Old Rivalry , " dates directly to 1893 and is the oldest high school rivalry in Kentucky . The most recent winning team holds a trophy referred to as " The Barrel . " The rivalry was fueled in its early years by class differences between college @-@ bound Male students and " blue collar " Manual students . The Louisville Post wrote in 1897 that " [ Male 's school colors ] have always waved triumphant over the Red of the ' blacksmiths ' as their more cultured opponents are wont to dub them " . The game , traditionally played on Thanksgiving Day , was hotly contested and widely attended , with 10 @,@ 000 spectators attending as early as 1909 . The rivalry paused when the schools ( and football teams ) were consolidated from 1915 to 1918 but was renewed in 1919 after Manual reformed and built its own stadium . Attendance averaged 14 @,@ 000 from the 1920s through 1957 , when crowds were so large that the schools began holding the game at Cardinal Stadium , with a capacity of over 20 @,@ 000 . The record attendance was 22 @,@ 000 in 1966 . Due to changes in the state athletics schedules the Thanksgiving Day game tradition ended in 1980 amid protests from fans , and the game was moved to late October . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 John <unk> , an early Major League Baseball player , organized Manual 's first baseball team in 1900 . An early baseball star was Ferdie <unk> , who would go on to pitch in the 1917 World Series , but left Manual two months before graduating . Manual claims seven " mythical " state baseball championships and has won six official ones , most recently in 1962 . A total of ten Manual players have played in Major League Baseball , most notably Pee Wee Reese . 
 The varsity cheerleaders have won several NCA National Championship titles . In 1997 , 1998 , 2004 , and 2005 , they won the Large Varsity Division , and in 2003 and 2006 they won the Medium Varsity Division title . Varsity Boys ' Soccer was second at states in 2005 and third in 2004 . 
 In 2006 , the Manual Girls ' Cross Country team finally won the school 's first team title after placing second in 2004 and 2005 . The 2006 win was the first championship for a Jefferson County , Kentucky Class AAA Public School since 1980 . In 2007 , the Manual Boys ' Cross Country team attained a Class AAA state championship , matching the feat that the Girls ' team earned the previous year . 
 The swim team maintained state titles from 2003 — 2008 . From 2004 through 2008 , Manual has won the Combined Girls and Boys State Championship , and the girls alone have maintained their own state championship from 2005 through 2008 . 
 The boys ' tennis team achieved their best finish at the KHSAA State Tennis Tournament in 2008 by winning the team title . Previously , their best result had come in 2006 when they tied rival St. Xavier High School for second place . The boys ' team also won the state doubles title in 2006 , which was the first state title in Ram Tennis history on the boys ' side . The team had five consecutive runner up positions from the 2001 — 2002 year until the 2005 — 2006 year . In 2008 , the Manual boys ' tennis team went on to win the first ever regional tournament in Manual history . The state team won the state title in 2008 , making Manual the second public school to ever win the title . 
 Manual 's boys ' track team has won 15 state titles , more than any other in the state . The boys ' bowling team won the state title in 2010 . The school also offers basketball , dance ( called the Dazzlers ) , field hockey , golf , lacrosse , and volleyball among other sports teams . The varsity field hockey team won the state title in 2011 for the first time in the history of the program . DuPont Manual Girls ' Lacrosse has won many state titles and tournament trophies since the year 2001 when the sport was developed . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 James Gilbert Baker , astronomer and optician 
 Michelle Banzer , 2007 Miss Kentucky USA 
 Chad <unk> , actor , most often on the Disney Channel 
 Bud Bruner , boxing trainer and manager 
 Keenan Burton , NFL football player 
 Nathaniel Cartmell , Olympic gold medalist 
 James S. Coleman , sociologist 
 Paige Davis ( 1987 ) theater performer , host of Trading Spaces on TLC from 2001 to 2005 . 
 Bremer Ehrler , Jefferson County Judge @-@ Executive and sheriff 
 Sara <unk> ( 1995 ) , Broadway performer . 
 Ray <unk> ( 1945 ) , architectural lighting designer 
 Bruce <unk> , former Mayor of Louisville 
 Sherman Lewis , Heisman Trophy runner @-@ up 
 Victor M. Longstreet , U.S. Assistant Secretary of the Navy ( Financial Management ) , 1962 – 65 
 Mitch McConnell , United States senator , Senate majority leader 
 John Jacob Niles , " Dean of American Balladeers " . 
 Travis Prentice , college and professional football player 
 Pee Wee Reese ( 1937 ) , baseball player 
 Nicole Scherzinger ( 1996 ) , lead singer of The Pussycat Dolls . 
 Joseph D. Scholtz , former Mayor of Louisville 
 Gene Snyder , former member of the House of Representatives 
 Josh Whelchel , award @-@ winning video game composer and entrepreneur 
 = Excellence in Broadcasting = 
 " Excellence in Broadcasting " is the second episode of the ninth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on October 3 , 2010 . The episode features anthropomorphic dog Brian , an adamant liberal , confronting conservative radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh at a book signing in Quahog , and ultimately having a political change of heart when Limbaugh convinces him to read his latest book . Brian eventually decides to become a devoted member of the Republican Party , and soon begins criticizing liberals . This leads Brian to become roommates with Limbaugh , and begins following him everywhere , before Limbaugh convinces Brian of his true political convictions . 
 The episode was written by Patrick Meighan and directed by John Holmquist . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references , in addition to receiving both praise and criticism from conservative news outlets . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 94 million homes in its original airing . As well as Limbaugh , the episode featured guest performances by Gary Cole , Christine Lakin , Phil LaMarr , Shelley Long , Nana Visitor and Rainn Wilson , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Excellence in Broadcasting " was released on DVD along with three other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In light of " And Then There Were Fewer " , the Griffins watch on the news where Tom Tucker reveals that Diane Simmons committed the murders at James Woods ' mansion and is now dead . Tom then introduces Diane 's successor , Joyce Kinney . As Lois reads the newspaper , she discovers that conservative radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh is holding a book signing in Quahog , causing Brian to decide to confront Limbaugh about his political beliefs . At the signing , Limbaugh is criticized by Brian , he asks him whether he has read any of his books , leaving Brian dumbfounded and angry . Brian is mugged by a gang ; Limbaugh defeats them all . Thankful , Brian agrees to read Limbaugh 's book , and overnight becomes a conservative Republican . Lois questions Brian 's conviction , citing his past liberalism , while Brian defends his ability to change his mind based on new information . Lois mentions that Brian goes out of his way to not agree with the general consensus on many things ( for example , he hated Slumdog Millionaire and Titanic but defends the movie Cocktail ) , and accuses him of being a " contrarian " rather than a genuine believer . Brian meets with Limbaugh to thank him for helping his political conversion , and the two travel to the Republican National Headquarters , where they are greeted by former President of the United States George W. Bush and United States Senator John McCain . 
 Returning home , Brian informs Lois that Limbaugh will be coming over for dinner . That night , Lois and Peter begin arguing and challenging Limbaugh politically . Deciding to confront Limbaugh for brainwashing Brian , Lois demands for their dog to go back to the way he used to be . Limbaugh insists Brian became a conservative on his own terms , and the two sing a number based on " The Company Way " , " Republican Town " . Angered , Brian decides to move out and become roommates with a reluctant Limbaugh . Brian begins to irritate Limbaugh with his blind devotion . He replaces lots of Limbaugh 's possessions with American @-@ Made versions , which all go wrong . Deciding to follow Limbaugh to his radio show , Brian attempts to voice his own political opinions on the air about Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi , causing Limbaugh to become frustrated and throw him out . Deciding to prove his devotion to the conservative cause , Brian attempts to <unk> Pelosi before being apprehended and arrested . After being bailed out by Limbaugh later that day , Brian continues to assert his conservatism . Limbaugh attempts to convince Brian he is only fighting against the Establishment due to his desire of being the underdog . He tells Brian that a child was executed in Texas and Brian is visibly horrified ; Limbaugh then says that he made up the story , but Brian 's honest reaction to it shows he is a liberal at heart . <unk> Brian of his liberal convictions , Rush leaves the jail , making a Grapes of Wrath @-@ like pledge to " be around " wherever conservative causes need help . Outside , they heckle each other with reassurance , and the episode ends with Limbaugh then transforming into a bald eagle and flying away into the skyline . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 First announced by series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane in an interview on August 13 , 2009 , the episode was written by series regular Patrick Meighan , and directed by series regular John Holmquist shortly after the conclusion of the production of the eighth season . In the interview , with The Hollywood Reporter , MacFarlane conceded that " Family Guy tends to be very liberal because " it 's written by liberals . " In choosing the conservatives who would be featured in the episode , MacFarlane stated , " we put it out there to a lot of Republicans — ' we 're doing this show , who wants in ? ' — and we got some bites . " Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising director , with Andrew Goldberg , Alex Carter , Elaine Ko and Spencer Porter serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Walter Murphy , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Excellence in Broadcasting " . It is the first episode to feature a high @-@ definition opening credit sequence . 
 On The Rush Limbaugh Show on September 27 , 2010 , Limbaugh explained that he agreed to do the episode based on his continuing friendly relationship with Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , commenting , " Seth appreciates and has a great affection for professionals , and we 're all professionals here . " Limbaugh went on to reveal that he was in the studio 's sound booth for " three or four days at four hours at a time , " while recording his lines for the episode , as well as for the accompanying musical number , which Limbaugh admitted to being something of a challenge . Later on his radio show , Limbaugh went on to criticize 20th Century Fox 's public relations department , following a comment by author and commentator Andrew Breitbart , accusing the Fox Broadcasting Company of " burying " the episode . Limbaugh also admitted , however , that " there was nothing in the script that [ he ] would want them to edit out . " 
 " Excellence in Broadcasting " , along with the two other episodes from Family Guy 's ninth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast and Limbaugh , actor Gary Cole , actress Christine Lakin , voice actor Phil LaMarr , actress Shelley Long , actress Nana Visitor and actor Rainn Wilson guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Chris Cox , actor Ralph Garman , and writers Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , John Viener and Wellesley Wild also made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , the Griffin family are shown watching the syndicated television show The Brady Bunch , with Mike and Carol Brady then appearing in bed with one another . After Lois discovers that Limbaugh will be appearing at a book signing in Quahog , Chris references a previous episode , " FOX @-@ y Lady " , in which Limbaugh appeared as a character created by actor Fred Savage , which was subsequently reported on by Lois for Fox News . The episode featured a brief cameo appearance of conservative character Stan Smith from Seth MacFarlane 's second show , American Dad ! . 
 The scene of Limbaugh rescuing Brian is an almost shot @-@ for @-@ shot homage to the scene of Mr. Miyagi rescuing Daniel in The Karate Kid . Returning home after being saved by Limbaugh , Brian begins watching the NBC comedy series The Office , featuring actor and comedian Rainn Wilson . Deciding to thank Limbaugh for his newfound conservatism , Brian is taken by Limbaugh to the National Republican Party headquarters in Washington , D.C. , in order to meet former President of the United States George W. Bush and United States Senator John McCain from Arizona . McCain then recalls when he and Limbaugh solved mysteries together . A parody of the animated television series Scooby @-@ Doo is then shown , including McCain and Limbaugh capturing United States Congressman Barney Frank from Massachusetts , disguised as a mummy . 
 After deciding to sing a song entitled " <unk> , " several political figures are shown and parodied , including former Vice President of the United States Dick Cheney , President of the United States Barack Obama , and former Presidents of the United States Jimmy Carter , Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton . Actors Mickey Rourke , Chuck Norris and Jon Voight also appear , while Voight 's " pretty hot at one time " daughter is Angelina Jolie . The song " <unk> " is a parody of the song " The Company Way " from the musical How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Excellence in Broadcasting " was broadcast on October 3 , 2010 , as a part of an animated television night on Fox , and was preceded by The Simpsons , and Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane 's spin @-@ off , The Cleveland Show , and followed by the 100th episode of American Dad ! . It was watched by 7 @.@ 94 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with Desperate Housewives on ABC , the season premiere of Undercover Boss on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 9 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating American Dad ! and The Cleveland Show in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings decreased significantly from the show 's season premiere . 
 Television critics reacted mostly mixed to " Excellence in Broadcasting " , calling the storyline " funny , " but " toothless . " In a simultaneous review of the episodes of The Simpsons and The Cleveland Show that preceded the show , and the broadcast of American Dad ! that followed it , The A.V. Club reviewer Rowan Kaiser noted , " most of the episode was spent justifying its existence as a Rush Limbaugh episode of Family Guy , " and that the episode " failed to do that . " In the conclusion of his review Kaiser praised Family Guy for its past political humor , but ultimately rated it as a D , the second worst rating , behind The Simpsons episode " Loan @-@ a Lisa " and the American Dad ! episode " 100 A.D. " , beating only The Cleveland Show 's F @-@ grade episode " Cleveland Live ! " . In a slightly more positive review , Jason Hughes of TV Squad praised Limbaugh 's appearance in the episode , commenting Limbaugh " certainly deserves credit for his willingness to participate and lend his own voice . " Hughes went on to comment positively on the episode 's debut of the high @-@ definition opening sequence , and its introduction of Joyce Kinney as a replacement for news anchor Diane Simmons , who was killed off in " And Then There Were Fewer . " Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " The show definitely skewered Brian ’ s hardcore conservative conversion , but overall it seemed like a pretty fair fight . " 
 Limbaugh 's appearance in the episode has drawn both praise and criticism from news outlets , including Daniel Foster of National Review who commented , " It is to Mr. Limbaugh 's credit that he can make fun of himself . But Seth MacFarlane , the whiskey @-@ soaked Dada creator of Family Guy , is responsible for more sophomoric cartooning than the combined patrons of America ’ s truck stop and dive bar bathrooms . " Foster went on to add , " I can only look at the Limbaugh @-@ MacFarlane mash @-@ up with a wary eye . " Columnist Matt Lewis of Politics Daily also questioned Limbaugh 's appearance on Family Guy , citing his support for former Governor of Alaska Sarah Palin , whose daughter , Bristol Palin , has openly criticized MacFarlane and called the show 's writers " heartless jerks . " In contrast , John Nolte of Andrew Breitbart 's Big Hollywood wrote , " What MacFarlane ’ s doing fits exactly into our template . He ’ s entitled to his opinion , worked very hard to reach the top of the most difficult business there is to succeed in , and in turn uses that forum to further his own agenda — that ’ s how it ’ s supposed to work . But at the same time he doesn ’ t completely shut us out . " Prior to the episode 's official broadcast on television in the United States , Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post called Limbaugh 's guest appearance in the episode " genuinely funny , " and David Weigel of Slate commented , " I 'm not at all surprised that Limbaugh would embrace the show and answer its mockery of conservatives ; the plotline [ ... ] is a perfect conservative narrative . " 
 = G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero ( Marvel Comics ) = 
 G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero ( also known as G.I. Joe or A Real American Hero ) is a comic book that was published by Marvel Comics from 1982 to 1994 . Based on Hasbro , Inc . ' s G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero line of military @-@ themed toys , the series has been credited for making G.I. Joe into a pop @-@ culture phenomenon . G.I. Joe was also the first comic book to be advertised on television , in what has been called a " historically crucial moment in media convergence . " 
 The series was written for most of its 155 @-@ issue run by comic book writer , artist , and editor Larry Hama , and was notable for its realistic , character @-@ based storytelling style , unusual for a toy comic at the time . Hama wrote the series spontaneously , never knowing how a story would end until it was finished , but worked closely with the artists , giving them sketches of the characters and major scenes . While most stories involved the G.I. Joe Team battling against the forces of Cobra Command , an evil terrorist organization , many also focused on the relationships and background stories of the characters . Hama created most characters in collaboration with Hasbro , and used a system of file cards to keep track of the personalities and fictional histories of his characters , which later became a major selling point for the action figure line . 
 G.I. Joe was Marvel 's top @-@ selling subscription title in 1985 , and was receiving 1200 fan letters per week by 1987 . The series has been credited with bringing in a new generation of comic book readers , since many children were introduced to the comic book medium through G.I. Joe , and later went on to read other comics . The comic book has been re @-@ printed several times , and also translated in multiple languages . In addition to direct spin @-@ offs of the comic book , several revivals and reboots have been published throughout the 2000s . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the early 1980s , Hasbro noted the success of Kenner Products ' Star Wars action figures , and decided to re @-@ launch their long @-@ running G.I. Joe property as G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero with 3 @.@ 75 inches ( 9 @.@ 5 cm ) scale action figures rather than the traditional 12 inches ( 30 cm ) scale . Hasbro also decided that they wanted the new figures to have a back story . In 1981 , Hasbro CEO Stephen Hassenfeld and Marvel Comics President Jim Galton met by coincidence at a charity fundraiser and Hassenfeld shared Hasbro 's plans for the G.I. Joe relaunch . Galton offered Marvel 's services as creative consultants , and Hassenfeld agreed to allow Marvel attempt to design a concept for G.I. Joe . 
 Coincidentally Larry Hama , then an editor at Marvel , had begun to design characters and background for a series concept he was pitching that would be entitled Fury Force , about a team of futuristic super @-@ soldiers affiliated with S.H.I.E.L.D. , an existing Marvel Universe property combining military and science fiction genre elements . As Hama tells it , he got the job of writing for the series because Marvel had asked every other available creator to write it and no one else would . Unable to find other writing work , he later said that , " If they had asked me to write Barbie , I would have done that , too . " 
 Soon after this , Hasbro hosted a meeting with Hama , Jim Shooter , Tom <unk> , Archie Goodwin , and Nelson <unk> to discuss the future of the property . It was at this meeting that Goodwin suggested the idea of Cobra Command as a recurring enemy for G.I. Joe to fight ( similar to the <unk> terrorist organization - recurring enemies to the aforementioned S.H.I.E.L.D. organization ) . Prior to this , Hasbro had not considered giving G.I. Joe an enemy . Based on the results of this meeting , Hasbro contracted Marvel to produce a comic book series featuring the toys . 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 The first issue was published in June 1982 , containing two stories , both of which were written by Hama . The first story , " Operation : Lady Doomsday " , was drawn by Herb Trimpe , who drew most of the early issues and also wrote issue # 9 , and the second story , " Hot Potato " , was drawn by Don <unk> . This issue introduced many basic concepts of the G.I. Joe universe , such as the Joes having a base under a motor pool , and introduced the iconic " original 13 " G.I. Joe Team members . The issue also introduced two recurring villains , Cobra Commander and the Baroness . Whereas Cobra Commander and the various Joes already had action figures issued , The Baroness is the earliest example of a G.I. Joe character whose first appearance in the comics predated the conception of their action figure . 
 Most of the early stories were completed in one issue , but multi @-@ part stories began to appear by the middle of the series ' first year of publication , and there were hints of the ongoing storylines that would later characterize the series . In May 1983 , issue # 11 introduced many new characters , including most of the 1983 action figure line and the villain Destro , who would become a frequently recurring character . Many subsequent storylines involved the machinations and power struggles between him , Cobra Commander , and the Baroness . Issue # 11 established a pattern for the series in which every so often Marvel would publish an issue introducing a group of characters and vehicles that represented the new year 's toy offerings . 
 An early highlight was 1984 's " Snake Eyes : The Origin " Parts I & II , published in issues # 26 @-@ 27 . This issue established Snake Eyes ' complicated background , and tied his character into many other characters , both G.I. Joe and Cobra . Hama considers it to be his favorite storyline from the Marvel run . In 1986 , echoing events portrayed in the TV series , G.I. Joe # 49 was published , introducing the character of <unk> , a genetically created amalgam of history 's greatest warriors . <unk> played a significant role in the Cobra Civil War , which occurred in issues # 73 @-@ 76 , a landmark story event that involved nearly every G.I. Joe and Cobra character vying for control of Cobra Island . 
 = = = Later years and cancellation = = = 
 When G.I. Joe began , most toy tie @-@ in comics lasted an average of two years , so G.I. Joe , lasting for 12 years , was considered a runaway success . Through the years , the comic book series chronicled the adventures of G.I. Joe and Cobra , using a consistent storyline . In the early 1990s , however , it began to drop in quality , and was canceled by Marvel in 1994 with issue # 155 due to low sales . Hasbro canceled the A Real American Hero toy line in the same year . Between the lack of new toys and the cancellation of the second TV series three years earlier , the comic book could not count on the same cross @-@ platform support it had enjoyed in the past . The target demographic had also changed considerably . According to Hama : 
 It reached the end of its half @-@ life . Until G.I. Joe and Transformers , toy books had a life expectancy of 1 @-@ 2 years – 3 years was considered a long time . Hasbro didn ’ t expect the toy @-@ line to have that much life in it . Also , the market had changed completely . When I first started doing store signings , there were lines around the block and it was all 10 @-@ year @-@ old boys . The last time I did a story signing in New York City , everybody was over 30 , and two of the guys who showed up were <unk> who had skipped off their routes to get their books signed . 
 The final issue featured a stand @-@ alone story titled " A Letter from Snake Eyes . " <unk> from his perspective , Snake Eyes tells his story through recollections of his many comrades @-@ in @-@ arms who have died over the years . 
 Shortly after the final issue , G.I. Joe Special # 1 was released in February 1995 , containing alternate art for issue # 61 by Todd McFarlane . McFarlane was the original penciller for issue # 61 , but his artwork had been rejected by Larry Hama as unacceptable , and so Marshall Rogers was brought in to pencil the final published version . In the years following , McFarlane became a superstar comic artist , and Marvel eventually decided to print the unpublished work . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Hasbro used television advertising to publicize the series , and when the first one aired in 1982 featuring G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero # 1 , it was the first time a commercial had ever been used to promote a comic book . Since the commercials were technically promoting the comic books rather than the toys , they allowed Hasbro to circumvent television regulations mandating that toy commercials could not contain more than ten seconds of animation . By not showcasing any characters and toys outside of the comic book context , they were able to include a full thirty seconds of animation . Marvel was paid $ 5 million by Hasbro to produce the commercials through its animation division Marvel Productions . Larry Hama relates the genesis of the commercials : 
 There were only a few seconds of animation you could have in a toy commercial , and you had to show the toy , so people wouldn ’ t get totally deluded . Somebody at Hasbro ( who was actually sort of a genius ) named Bob <unk> , realized that a comic book was protected under the first amendment , and there couldn 't be restrictions based on how you advertised for a publication . 
 Between the toy line , comic books , commercials and subsequent cartoon series , Hasbro 's marketing plan was highly successful and eventually became an industry standard , an early example of a practice that would years later be described by Jenkins as a " transmedia narrative . " Although the adolescent male demographic was the traditional comic book reader , an unintended result of the TV advertising tie @-@ ins was that they attracted people who were not traditional comic book readers . In an interview , Hama stated : 
 I think [ the commercials have ] also opened it up to a very different type of audience . I get a lot of letters from girls . I get a lot of letters from young housewives who sort of started watching the cartoons with their kids and sort of started getting into the characters , and then somewhere along the line they picked up the comic book and they started following the stories and got caught up in the continuity . 
 The comic book 's popularity with women has also been attributed to the strong female characters featured in the comic , such as Scarlett and Lady Jaye . Since very few of the G.I. Joe action figures were female , Hama tended to frequently use all of the female characters , including those that were created as recurring characters in the comics . 
 = = Writing style = = 
 Many readers praised the series for its attention to detail and realism in the area of military tactics and procedures . Much of this was due to Hama 's military experience ( he was drafted into the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers during the Vietnam war ) , but he also did a large amount of research in order to be as up @-@ to @-@ date as possible . He frequented Sky Books , a military @-@ oriented bookstore in New York , and read many U.S. Army field manuals and technical manuals , and also credits his friend Lee Russel , a military historian , for helping him with research . 
 In style and plot structure , the comic often made use of overlapping story threads . According to Hama : 
 We ’ ve been following one basic storyline pretty much in the comic for fifty issues . It ’ s sort of like an extended soap opera , although I try to have a real solid resolution at the end of each book . But I like to keep some plot threads going . There 's a sort of episodic quality to some of the earlier books , like one episode will last six issues . That will resolve completely , but two issues into it another thread may have started . At any given time there ’ s probably about three overlapping threads . 
 The story arcs coincided with each of the new lines of G.I. Joe toys that Hasbro was producing , however the comic book was not directly influenced by the toy products . Of the Hasbro / Marvel relationship , Hama observed that the toy company did not demand the book to be written a certain way : 
 We 're the final word on what happens with the book . Hasbro has been extremely open about it , [ and ] I don 't write this as a kiddie book . I don 't write G.I. Joe any differently from the way I write Wolverine . 
 Hama wrote out page @-@ by @-@ page plots for all of the issues he wrote , with most pages having four to six panels . He worked very closely with the artists in plotting the book , and wrote the series spontaneously , never knowing how an issue would end until he got to the last page . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 In the first issue , it is revealed that the team ’ s official moniker is Special Counter @-@ Terrorist Unit Delta . G.I. Joe featured an ensemble cast , with the original thirteen characters being Hawk , Stalker , Breaker , Clutch , Scarlett , Snake Eyes , Rock ‘ n Roll , Steeler , Grand Slam , Flash , Short @-@ Fuze , Grunt and Zap . This reflected their origins in the Hasbro toy line , with the initial characters being the same as the action figures in the original 1982 release of the toy line . The team roster expanded as additional action figures were released . 
 Hama created most characters in collaboration with Hasbro . Hasbro would send him character sketches and brief descriptions of each character 's military specialties , and Hama would create detailed dossiers on each characters , giving them distinct personalities and background stories . Hama kept track of each character on file cards , and eventually Hasbro decided to reprint shortened versions of these dossiers as file cards on the packaging for the action figures . The file cards themselves became a selling point for the toy line , and appealed to both children and adults . Hama noted that : 
 ... it has to be read on two levels ... A ten @-@ year @-@ old kid has to be able to read it and think it 's absolutely straight [ but ] there should be a joke in there for the adult . One of the factors that helped sell G.I. Joe [ figures ] was that the salesmen who sold it to retailers used the dossiers as a selling point . 
 Hama tended to base the personalities of the characters on people that he knew , and he credits this technique for the realism of his characterization . He later said that , " Events and continuity never meant anything to me . The important thing was the characters . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Initially , the response to the new comic book was muted due to its low status as a " toy book . " However its popularity eventually grew , and is credited with bringing in a new generation of comic readers . Within two months of the toy line 's launch , " some 20 per cent of boys from ages five to twelve had two or more G.I. Joe toys " , and by 1988 / 89 a survey conducted by Hasbro found that " two out of every three boys between the ages of five and eleven owned at least one G.I. Joe figure . " These boys were drawn to the G.I. Joe comic book through its association with the toy line , and then went on to other comics . As Hama puts it : 
 It was a toy book . Very uncool to the fan @-@ boys at the time . It never got reviewed in the fan press . Totally ignored . The kids who bought G.I. Joe were a totally new crowd who were coming into the comic shops for the first time because they had the toys and they saw the commercials . Many of them started to buy other comics while they were there . 
 According to comic book historian John Jackson Miller , Hasbro 's promotion of the comic resulted in dramatic sales increases , from 157 @,@ 920 copies per month in 1983 to 331 @,@ 475 copies per month in 1985 , making it one of Marvel 's " strongest titles . " According to Jim Shooter , G.I. Joe was Marvel 's number one subscription title in 1985 . By 1987 , the main title was getting 1200 letters every week . Hama read every one , and sent out fifty to one hundred hand @-@ written replies every week . 
 An early issue that attracted much attention , both positive and negative , was G.I. Joe # 21 , titled " Silent Interlude " , which was told entirely without words or sound effects . In a 1987 interview , Hama explained that the motivation for the story was that he " ... wanted to see if [ he ] could do a story that was a real , complete story — beginning , middle , end , conflict , characterization , action , solid resolution — without balloons or captions or sound effects . " At first , the issue was controversial ; some readers felt cheated that it had no words and could be " read " so quickly . However , it eventually became one of the series ' most enduring and influential issues . Issue # 21 has been recognized as a modern comic classic , and has become a prime example of comics ' visual storytelling power . Comic book artist and theorist Scott McCloud ( author of Understanding Comics ) describes " Silent Interlude " as " ... a kind of watershed moment for cartoonists of [ our ] generation . Everyone remembers it . All these things came out of it . It was like 9 / 11 . " The issue would eventually be ranked # 44 in Wizard Magazine 's listing of the " 100 Best Single Issues Since You Were Born " , and # 6 on io9 's " 10 Issues of Ongoing Comics that Prove Single Issues Can Be Great . " 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 In 1985 , G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero spawned an annual publication called G.I. Joe : Yearbook . G.I. Joe : Yearbook differed from the typical comic book annual publication in that it was more like a magazine . Each issue contained articles about the animated TV program , a summary of the comic book 's plot to date , and one or two original stories written by Larry Hama . G.I. Joe : Yearbook ran until 1988 . 
 In 1986 , the success of A Real American Hero lead Marvel to produce a second title : G.I. Joe : Special Missions which lasted 28 issues . Herb Trimpe was the artist for most of the run , with Dave <unk> providing pencils on several issues . Spinning out of G.I. Joe # 50 and set in the same continuity , the series presented more intense violence and a more ambiguous morality than the main title , and the Joes faced enemies who were not related to Cobra . Each issue usually featured a stand @-@ alone mission focusing on a small group of Joes . 
 Two mini @-@ series were also produced . The first , G.I. Joe : Order of Battle , was a 4 @-@ issue mini @-@ series running from December 1986 to March 1987 , reprinting the data found on the action figures ' file cards with some edits . Written by Hama , with all @-@ new artwork by Trimpe , the first two issues featured G.I. Joe members , while the third issue focused on the members of Cobra Command , and the fourth highlighted the vehicles and equipment used by both organizations . A trade @-@ paperback edition , which included material from all four issues , was published in 1987 . 
 The second , G.I. Joe and The Transformers , was a 4 @-@ issue mini @-@ series running from January to April 1987 . The story had the Joes and the Autobots joining forces to stop the Decepticons and Cobra from destroying the world . A trade paperback later collected all four issues . 
 = = Reprints and revivals = = 
 The first 37 issues of the main series were released in thirteen digests titled G.I. Joe Comic Magazine . Subsequently , Tales of G.I. Joe reprinted the first fifteen issues of G.I. Joe on a higher quality paper stock than that used for the main comic . Four Yearbooks ( 1985 – 1988 ) also collected some previous stories , summarized events , and published new stories that tied into the main title , aside from the first Yearbook , which re @-@ printed the seminal first issue . The series was also translated into several languages , including German , Spanish , Portuguese , Polish , French ( Canada ) , Swedish , Norwegian , Finnish , Danish , Japanese , Arabic , and Indonesian . 
 G.I. Joe European Missions was published monthly from June 1988 until August 1989 . The European Missions series are all reprints of Action Force Monthly , which was published in the UK . Unlike the weekly Action Force series , these were all original stories , never before seen in the U.S. They were not written by Larry Hama . 
 In July 2001 , Devil 's Due Publishing acquired the rights to G.I. Joe and released a four @-@ issue limited series entitled G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero ( Reinstated ) . Strong sales led to Reinstated being upgraded to ongoing , and it lasted for 43 issues , before being relaunched as a new series G.I. Joe : America 's Elite , which lasted for 36 issues . Devil 's Due 's license with Hasbro expired in 2008 and was not renewed . 
 Building on the success of the Devil 's Due Comics run of G.I. Joe , Marvel Comics collected the first 50 issues in five trade paperbacks , with ten issues in each book . All covers for the trade paperbacks were drawn by J. Scott Campbell . 
 In 2009 , IDW Publishing began to re @-@ publish the original series again as Classic G.I. Joe , and like Marvel before it , collects ten issues in each volume ; the last few collections have slightly more issues in order to conclude with the 15th paperback volume , which was published in August , 2012 . Other collections for the spin @-@ off Special Missions and assorted Annuals also appeared . In November 2012 , IDW restarted their reprint series with the hardcover G.I. <unk> : The Complete Collection , Vol . 1 , intending to reprint all the stories in reading order . IDW also revived the original G.I. Joe : A Real American Hero as an ongoing series in 2010 , with a special # 155 ½ issue released on Free Comic Book Day , followed by issue # 156 onwards in July 2010 . 
 = Hermann Fegelein = 
 Hans Georg Otto Hermann Fegelein ( 30 October 1906 – 28 April 1945 ) was an SS @-@ Gruppenführer ( general ) of the Waffen @-@ SS in Nazi Germany . He was a member of Adolf Hitler 's entourage and brother @-@ in @-@ law to Eva Braun through his marriage to her sister , Gretl . 
 Fegelein joined the Reiter @-@ Regiment 17 ( Cavalry Regiment 17 ) in 1925 and transferred to the SS on 10 April 1933 . He became a leader of an SS equestrian group , and was in charge of preparation of the courses and facilities for the equestrian events of the Berlin Olympic Games in 1936 . He tried out for the Olympic equestrian team himself , but was eliminated in the qualifying rounds . 
 In September 1939 , after the successful Invasion of Poland , Fegelein commanded the SS Totenkopf Reiterstandarte ( Death 's @-@ Head Horse Regiment ) . They were garrisoned in Warsaw until December . In May and June 1940 , he participated in the Battle of Belgium and France as a member of the SS @-@ Verfügungstruppe ( later renamed the Waffen @-@ SS ) . For his service in these campaigns he was awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class on 15 December 1940 . Units under his command on the Eastern Front in 1941 were responsible for the deaths of over 17 @,@ 000 civilians during the Pripyat swamps punitive operation in the Byelorussian SSR . As commander of the 8th SS Cavalry Division Florian Geyer in 1943 , he was involved in operations against partisans as well as defensive operations against the Red Army , for which he was awarded the Close Combat Clasp in bronze . 
 Fegelein was seriously wounded in September 1943 , and was reassigned by Heinrich Himmler to Hitler 's headquarters staff as his liaison officer and representative of the SS . Fegelein was present at the failed attempt on Hitler 's life on 20 July 1944 . He was on duty at Hitler 's Führerbunker in Berlin in the closing months of the war , and was shot for desertion on 28 April 1945 , two days before Hitler 's suicide . Historians William L. Shirer and Ian Kershaw characterise him as cynical and disreputable . Albert Speer called him " one of the most disgusting people in Hitler 's circle " . Fegelein was an opportunist who ingratiated himself with Himmler , who granted him the best assignments and rapid promotions . 
 = = Career = = 
 Fegelein was born in Ansbach , Bavaria , to the retired Oberleutnant Hans Fegelein . As a boy working at his father 's equestrian school in Munich , he became proficient in riding skills and participated in jumping events . During this period he met Christian Weber , an original member of the Nazi Party . Weber later sponsored Fegelein 's entry into the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) . 
 In 1925 , after studying for two terms at Munich University , Fegelein joined the Reiter @-@ Regiment 17 ( Cavalry Regiment 17 ) . On 20 April 1927 , he joined the Bavarian State Police in Munich as an officer cadet . In 1929 he left the police service when he was caught stealing examination solutions from a teaching superior 's office . The official communication at the time was that he resigned for " family reasons " . Fegelein later stated that he had left the police on " his own account " to better serve the Nazi Party and SS . His father had started the <unk> Fegelein ( Riding Institute Fegelein ) in 1926 . In Munich Fegelein came into contact with National Socialism and the SS . His father had made the institute available to the SS as a meeting place , and the training facilities and horses were used by equestrian units of the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) and SS . 
 Fegelein joined the Nazi Party ( membership number 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 158 ) and the SA in 1930 . He transferred to the SS on 10 April 1933 , with membership number 66 @,@ 680 . He worked as an instructor at the <unk> Fegelein and became the leader of the SS @-@ <unk> , the SS equestrian group based at the facility . By the mid @-@ 1930s he took over administration of the school from his father . He was promoted to the Allgemeine @-@ SS rank of SS @-@ Untersturmführer that year and to SS @-@ Obersturmführer on 20 April 1934 and to SS @-@ Hauptsturmführer on 9 November 1934 . Beginning in November 1935 , Fegelein oversaw the preparation of the courses and facilities for the equestrian events of the Berlin Olympic Games . He was promoted to the rank of SS @-@ Sturmbannführer on 30 January 1936 . He participated in the selection process for the German equestrian team , but was unable to prevail against the strong competition from the <unk> Hannover ( cavalry school Hanover ) , who went on to win all the equestrian gold medals . 
 Fegelein won the Deutsches <unk> und <unk> international tournament in 1937 , as did his brother , Waldemar , in 1939 . He was promoted to the rank of SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer on 30 January . On 25 July 1937 Reichsführer @-@ SS Himmler , by special order of the SS @-@ Oberabschnitt Süd , created the Haupt @-@ <unk> München ( SS Main Riding School ) in Munich . The school was started from his father 's stud farm . Fegelein was named its commander and promoted to SS @-@ Standartenführer the same day . Funding for the very expensive horses came in part from then SS @-@ Brigadeführer Weber , who supported the school with more than 100 @,@ 000 Reichsmarks annually . Fegelein won the " <unk> Band von Deutschland " ( Brown Ribbon of Germany ) , an annual horse race which in 1938 was held on the premises of the riding school in Munich . Fegelein at the time had strong ambitions to participate in the 1940 Summer Olympics . With the help of his friend Höherer SS- und Polizeiführer ( HSSPF ; Higher SS and Police Leader ) Karl von Eberstein , he arranged the transfer of all the Bavarian State Police horses to the SS riding school in case of mobilization . His fear was that the horses would be handed to the Wehrmacht . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 In September 1939 , Fegelein commanded the SS Totenkopf Reiterstandarte ( Death 's @-@ Head Horse Regiment ) , which arrived in Poland shortly after the end of the Polish Campaign . The unit was placed under the command of the Ordnungspolizei ( Orpo ; order police ) and was split into small groups assigned to support police activities at posts throughout the Poznan district . On 15 November , Himmler ordered the expansion of the regiment from four to thirteen squadrons and renamed it as 1 . SS @-@ Totenkopf @-@ Reiterstandarte ( 1st Death 's Head Cavalry Regiment ) . Additional men were recruited from ethnic Germans living in the General Government and further afield . Many of the officers , including Fegelein , had never attended officer training school , so much of the training provided to new recruits was rudimentary . However , it was rigorous , and the men developed a strong camaraderie . Fegelein 's unit was involved alongside the Orpo in the extermination , ordered by Hitler , of members of the Polish elite such as intellectuals , aristocrats , and clergy , in an action called <unk> . On 7 December 1939 Fegelein 's unit was involved in the mass shooting of 1 @,@ 700 such people in the <unk> Forest . 
 On 15 December , the unit was split into two <unk> ( regiments ) , with Fegelein commanding the 1 . Standarte under the overall command of Höherer SS- und Polizeiführer @-@ Ost Friedrich @-@ Wilhelm Krüger . The unit was short of basic supplies such as weapons , food , and uniforms , which led to deteriorating morale and ill health . Incidents of corruption and theft took place , particularly among members of the regimental staff in Warsaw . On 23 April 1941 , Fegelein faced court @-@ martial charges for an incident in 1940 where he and his unit had been caught stealing money and luxury goods for transportation back to Germany . Fegelein 's court @-@ martial was quashed by direct order of Himmler . The allegations brought forward against Fegelein had included " murder motivated by greed " . Apparently he had ordered arrests and executions in the Gestapo prison in Warsaw . In addition to this , Fegelein was charged with having had an unlawful sexual relationship with a Polish woman . The woman had become pregnant and Fegelein forced her to have an abortion . Reinhard Heydrich attempted multiple times to investigate the accusations against Fegelein , but each time the attempt was put down by Himmler . 
 Fegelein 's unit took part in anti @-@ partisan fighting against a group of about 100 former Polish soldiers in the area of <unk> – <unk> – Kielce in March and April 1940 . They killed about half the partisans , and the remainder escaped . On 8 April , <unk> 's unit killed 250 Polish men in villages in the area . While in his report he described the behaviour of his troops as " clean and decent " , there were many incidents in this period where his men behaved in an undisciplined way , killing and robbing civilians without any orders . 
 In May and June 1940 , Fegelein , who had been promoted to SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer of the Reserves in the Waffen @-@ SS on 1 March 1940 , participated in the Battle of Belgium and France as a member of the SS @-@ Verfügungstruppe . For his service in these campaigns he was awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class on 15 December 1940 . In March 1941 the SS Totenkopf Reiterstandarte 1 was renamed to 1st SS Cavalry Regiment . 
 = = = War against the Soviet Union = = = 
 With the start of the German invasion of the Soviet Union , which began on 22 June 1941 , Fegelein saw active service on the Eastern Front . His unit was assigned on the 87th Infantry Division on 23 June to cover a gap in the lines of the 9th Army near Białystok . The motorized elements of the 1st SS Cavalry reached the right flank of the operational area on 24 June , but the mounted elements were unable to maintain the pace . The exhausted horses had to be left behind and the men transported to the combat zone in lorries , while the horse @-@ drawn artillery pieces were towed using any available vehicles . The first units to arrive crossed the Narew near Wizna and engaged the Soviets but were unable to break through . They were ordered to retreat and move further north . Infantry elements of the 87th Division captured <unk> Fortress on 26 June , and Fegelein 's cavalry was sent on a reconnaissance mission to the south @-@ east . Himmler , not keen to have his SS units under Wehrmacht control or used in combat other than as reserves , withdrew the SS cavalry from control of the 87th Division on 27 June . The ambitious Fegelein stressed in his reports that he believed his unit was combat ready and had played a bigger role in the operation than they actually had . Ten of his men received the Iron Cross , Second Class for their efforts , and Fegelein was awarded the Iron Cross , First Class . 
 The engagement had demonstrated the shortcomings of the cavalry units in modern mobile warfare , which requires quick redeployments in ever @-@ changing conditions . Fegelein sought to improve this by asking Himmler to combine the 1st and 2nd SS cavalry regiments into a brigade , with additional support units . As a temporary measure , Himmler assigned Fegelein to be in charge of both regiments . Fegelein 's unit was one of several that undertook field training and political indoctrination in the coming weeks . Himmler himself addressed the 1st Cavalry on 5 July , offering the opportunity for any men unwilling to participate in the upcoming " special tasks " to transfer to another unit . Nobody took advantage of this offer , at least partly because it was not made clear that the upcoming work would include the mass shooting of unarmed civilians . 
 On 19 July 1941 Himmler assigned Fegelein 's regiments to the general command of HSSPF Erich von dem Bach @-@ Zelewski for the " systematic combing " of the Pripyat swamps , an operation designed to round up and exterminate Jews , partisans , and civilians in that area of Byelorussian SSR . Himmler 's orders for the operation were passed to Fegelein via SS @-@ <unk> Kurt Knoblauch , who met with him and Bach @-@ Zelewski on 28 July in their new quarters at <unk> in Byelorussia . General instructions were given to " cleanse " the area of partisans and Jewish collaborators . Jewish women and children were to be driven away . Fegelein interpreted these orders as follows : Enemy soldiers in uniform were to be taken prisoner , and those found out of uniform were to be shot . Jewish males , with the exception of a few skilled workers such as doctors and leather workers , would be shot . Fegelein split the territory to be covered into two sections divided by the Pripyat River , with the 1st Regiment taking the northern half and the 2nd Regiment the south . The regiments worked their way from east to west through their assigned territory , and filed daily reports on the number of people killed and taken prisoner . In a meeting with Bach @-@ Zelewski on 31 July , Himmler announced the amalgamation of the two regiments into the SS Cavalry Brigade . Additional units such as a bicycle reconnaissance detachment were formed and added to the brigade 's complement . On 5 August Himmler assigned leadership of the brigade to Fegelein . 
 Himmler notified Fegelein by telegram on 1 August that the numbers killed were far too low . A few days later , Himmler issued regimental order no . 42 , which called for all male Jews over the age of 14 to be killed . The women and children were to be driven into the swamps and drowned . Thus Fegelein 's units were among the first in the Holocaust to wipe out entire Jewish communities . As the water in the swamps was too shallow and some areas had no swamps , it proved impractical to drown the women and children , so they were shot . Fegelein 's final report on the operation , dated 18 September 1941 , states that they killed 14 @,@ 178 Jews , 1 @,@ 001 partisans , 699 Red Army soldiers , with 830 prisoners taken and losses of 17 dead , 36 wounded , and 3 missing . The historian Henning Pieper estimates the actual number of Jews killed was closer to 23 @,@ 700 . 
 Fegelein received the Infantry Assault Badge on 2 October . Four days later , he was again brought before a court for peculation of captured goods . Again the prosecution was halted by Himmler . In mid @-@ October 1941 the brigade left Byelorussia and moved first to <unk> and then on to <unk> by train , where they were subordinated to Army Group Centre . The new operational area had more partisan activity than the Pripyat swamps , with guerrillas who were well organised and difficult to find . Fegelein 's report for the period between 18 October and 18 November 1941 shows 3 @,@ 018 partisans and Red Army soldiers killed and 122 taken prisoner . However , as fewer than 200 weapons were captured , historians Martin <unk> and Henning Pieper conclude that the majority of those killed must have been unarmed civilians . Brigade losses were seven dead and nine wounded . 
 Army Group Centre renewed their offensive on Moscow in mid @-@ November . Fegelein and the SS Cavalry Brigade were held back as an operational reserve in the rearward area of the 9th Army . Massive counter @-@ attacks by the Red Army led to a weakening of the entire German line , and the brigade was called in to fight at the front on 28 December . While Fegelein reported that his forces were the equivalent to one or two divisions , in reality he had only 4 @,@ 428 men in total at this point , of which 1 @,@ 800 were ready for combat . The brigade was deployed at the south @-@ eastern sector of the XXIII Army Corps , where it defended against attacks in the rearward area of the 206th Infantry Division in the Battles of Rzhev . The SS Cavalry Brigade took serious losses , with casualties of up to 60 per cent in some squadrons . 
 On 1 February 1942 Fegelein was promoted to SS @-@ Standartenführer in the Waffen @-@ SS and transferred from the reserve force to active service . Four days later , on 5 February , Fegelein on his own initiative led an attack on a strong enemy group northwest of Chertolino . The attack , carried out in difficult weather conditions , secured an important road junction and the railway station at Chertolino . In a nocturnal attack on 9 February , the brigade encircled and destroyed enemy forces at Chertolino , killing 1 @,@ 800 Red Army combatants . <unk> was captured on 14 February , leading to the annihilation of the enemy units in the Rzhev area . For his leadership in these battles , Fegelein was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 2 March 1942 . Fegelein was then granted home leave and was appointed Inspector of Cavalry and Transportation ( Inspekteur des <unk> und <unk> ) in the SS @-@ Führungshauptamt on 1 May 1942 . In this position he was awarded the Eastern Front Medal and the War Merit Cross 2nd Class with Swords , both on 1 September 1942 . The SS Cavalry Brigade was disbanded in March 1942 and the remaining men and equipment were formed into a battalion @-@ strength unit called Kampfgruppe <unk> , commanded by SS @-@ Sturmbannführer August <unk> . 
 Fegelein was sent back to the front line on 1 December 1942 and on the same day promoted to SS @-@ Oberführer . He was given command of Kampfgruppe " Fegelein " , based in the great bend of the Don . He was wounded in action by Soviet snipers on 21 December and 22 December 1942 . 
 On 20 April 1943 he was appointed commander of the SS Cavalry Division . Fegelein and his division were involved in operations against partisans in May to July 1943 , which included Operation Weichsel , Operation <unk> , and Operation Seydlitz . On 17 May they annihilated a partisan group south west of <unk> . He personally blew up a bunker in the attack . A week later , on 24 May , the division attacked another partisan strongpoint , and no prisoners were taken . During Weichsel ( 27 May – 10 June 1943 ) he reported the unit had killed 4 @,@ 018 persons and deported 18 @,@ 860 , confiscated 21 @,@ 000 cattle , and destroyed 61 villages southwest of Gomel . During <unk> ( 13 – 16 June 1943 ) they destroyed a further 63 villages and ( under direct orders from Hitler ) killed all suspected partisans . During Seydlitz ( 26 June – 27 July 1943 ) he reported the destruction of 96 additional villages , with 5 @,@ 016 killed and 9 @,@ 166 deported , and 19 @,@ 941 cattle confiscated . 
 The division was then deployed in defensive operations against massed Soviet attacks . From 26 August to 15 September the division repulsed five attacks of divisional strength and a further 85 attacks of battalion strength . The heaviest combat occurred on 26 August near <unk> and on 28 August , when the division halted a Soviet breakthrough at Bol <unk> <unk> <unk> . Fegelein led a counterattack on 8 September , recapturing the height 199 @,@ 0 at <unk> <unk> . On 11 September 1943 , during these defensive battles , he was awarded the Close Combat Clasp in bronze . Fegelein was severely wounded on 30 September 1943 and was hospitalized for a few weeks . He received the German Cross in gold on 1 November 1943 . Following his convalescence he was appointed chief of Amt VI — Office for Rider and Driver Training — in the SS @-@ Führungshauptamt on 1 January 1944 . 
 At the same time , Himmler assigned him to Hitler 's headquarters staff as his liaison officer and representative of the SS . He was promoted to the rank of SS @-@ Gruppenführer und Generalleutnant der Waffen @-@ SS on 10 June 1944 . On 20 July 1944 Fegelein was present at the failed attempt on Hitler 's life at the Wolf 's Lair headquarters in Rastenburg , East Prussia , and received a minor wound to his left thigh from the bomb blast . Fegelein often showed around the photographs of the hanged men who had been executed as a result of this failed assassination attempt . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Fegelein 's politically motivated marriage to Gretl Braun , Eva Braun 's sister , took place on 3 June 1944 in Salzburg . Historians Kershaw and Shirer believe he courted Braun as a way to advance his career . Hitler , Himmler , and Martin Bormann acted as witnesses at the ceremony . A two @-@ day celebration was then held at Hitler 's and Bormann 's Obersalzberg mountain homes and the Eagle 's Nest . Fegelein was a known playboy and had many extramarital affairs . Hitler 's secretaries , Christa Schroeder and Traudl Junge , state Fegelein was popular socially , particularly with women . He could be funny , amusing , and charming . After his marriage to Gretl , Eva was glad to have someone in the entourage with whom she could dance and flirt , as Hitler was distant in social situations and refrained from publicly showing affection . Thereafter , Fegelein worked hard to develop a friendship with Hitler 's powerful private secretary , Martin Bormann . Fegelein " never missed " Bormann 's drinking parties and told Junge that the only things that mattered were " his career and a life full of fun . " 
 = = Death = = 
 By early 1945 , Germany 's military situation was on the verge of total collapse . Hitler , presiding over a rapidly disintegrating Third Reich , retreated to his Führerbunker in Berlin on 16 January 1945 . To the Nazi leadership , it was clear that the battle for Berlin would be the final battle of the war . Berlin was bombarded by Soviet artillery for the first time on 20 April 1945 ( Hitler 's birthday ) . By the evening of 21 April , Red Army tanks reached the outskirts of the city . By 27 April , Berlin was cut off from the rest of Germany . 
 On 27 April 1945 , <unk> ( RSD ) deputy commander SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Peter Högl was sent out from the Reich Chancellery to find Fegelein who had abandoned his post at the Führerbunker after deciding he did not want to " join a suicide pact " . Fegelein was caught by the RSD squad in his Berlin apartment , wearing civilian clothes and preparing to flee to Sweden or Switzerland . He was carrying cash — German and foreign — and jewellery , some of which belonged to Braun . Högl also uncovered a briefcase containing documents with evidence of Himmler 's attempted peace negotiations with the Western Allies . According to most accounts , he was intoxicated when arrested and brought back to the Führerbunker . He was kept in a makeshift cell until the evening of 28 April . That night , Hitler was informed of the BBC broadcast of a Reuters news report about Himmler 's attempted negotiations with the western Allies via Count Bernadotte . Hitler flew into a rage about this apparent betrayal and ordered Himmler 's arrest . Sensing a connection between Fegelein 's disappearance and Himmler 's betrayal , Hitler ordered SS @-@ Gruppenführer Heinrich Müller to interrogate Fegelein as to what he knew of Himmler 's plans . Thereafter , according to Otto Günsche ( Hitler 's personal adjutant ) , Hitler ordered that Fegelein be stripped of all rank and to be transferred to Kampfgruppe " Mohnke " to prove his loyalty in combat . However , Günsche and Bormann expressed their concern to Hitler that Fegelein would only desert again . Hitler then ordered Fegelein court @-@ martialed . 
 Journalist James P. O 'Donnell , who conducted extensive interviews in the 1970s , provides one account of what happened next . SS @-@ Brigadeführer Wilhelm Mohnke , who presided over the court martial for desertion , told O 'Donnell that Hitler ordered him to set up a tribunal . Mohnke arranged for a court martial panel , which consisted of generals Wilhelm Burgdorf , Hans Krebs , SS @-@ Gruppenführer Johann Rattenhuber , and himself . Fegelein , still drunk , refused to accept that he had to answer to Hitler , and stated that he was responsible only to Himmler . Fegelein was so drunk that he was crying and vomiting ; he was unable to stand up , and even urinated on the floor . Mohnke was in a quandary , as German military and civilian law both require a defendant to be of sound mind and to understand the charges against them . Although Mohnke was certain Fegelein was " guilty of flagrant desertion " , it was the opinion of the judges that he was in no condition to stand trial , so Mohnke closed the proceedings and turned the defendant over to General Rattenhuber 's security squad . Mohnke never saw Fegelein again . 
 An alternative scenario of Fegelein 's death is based on the 1948 / 49 Soviet NKVD dossier of Hitler written for Joseph Stalin . The dossier is based on the interrogation reports of Günsche and Heinz Linge ( Hitler 's valet ) . This dossier differs in part from the accounts given by Mohnke and Rattenhuber . After the intoxicated Fegelein was arrested and brought back to the Führerbunker , Hitler at first ordered Fegelein to be transferred to Kampfgruppe " Mohnke " to prove his loyalty in combat . Günsche and Bormann expressed their concern to Hitler that Fegelein would desert again . Hitler then ordered Fegelein to be demoted and court @-@ martialed by a court led by Mohnke . At this point the accounts differ , as the NKVD dossier states that Fegelein was court @-@ martialed on the evening of 28 April , by a court headed by Mohnke , SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Alfred Krause , and SS @-@ Sturmbannführer Herbert <unk> . Mohnke and his fellow officers sentenced Fegelein to death . That same evening , Fegelein was shot from behind by a member of the Sicherheitsdienst . Based on this stated chain of events , author Veit Scherzer concluded that Fegelein , according to German law , was deprived of all honours and honorary signs and must therefore be considered a de facto but not de jure recipient of the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . 
 Fegelein 's wife was then in the late stages of pregnancy ( the baby was born in early May ) . Hitler considered releasing him without punishment or assigning him to Mohnke 's troops . Junge — an eye @-@ witness to bunker events — stated that Braun pleaded with Hitler to spare her brother @-@ in @-@ law and tried to justify Fegelein 's actions . However , he was taken to the garden of the Reich Chancellery on 28 April , and was " shot like a dog " . Rochus Misch , who was the last survivor from the Führerbunker , disputed aspects of this account in a 2007 interview with Der Spiegel . According to Misch , Hitler did not order Fegelein 's execution , only his demotion . Misch claimed to know the identity of Fegelein 's killer , but refused to reveal his name . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Historians William L. Shirer and Ian Kershaw characterise Fegelein as cynical and disreputable ; Albert Speer called him " one of the most disgusting people in Hitler 's circle " . Fegelein was an opportunist who ingratiated himself with Himmler , who in return granted him the best assignments — mostly related to cavalry — and rapid promotion through the ranks . The historian Henning Pieper , who studied the period up until March 1942 , notes Fegelein 's lack of formal training as an officer led to deficiencies in the way the SS Cavalry Brigade was prepared for combat . Fegelein repeatedly over @-@ stated the combat readiness of his troops and exaggerated their accomplishments , in Pieper 's opinion in order to be seen as a leader worthy of promotion and honours . Fegelein 's faulty analysis of his brigade 's readiness led to their use in December 1941 through March 1942 in combat situations for which they were unsuitable and untrained . ( However , as the military situation was deteriorating , they would eventually have been thrown into this role regardless . ) By the end of March 1942 , the brigade had suffered casualties of 50 per cent , much higher than army units deployed in the same area . 
 Fegelein 's parents and his brother Waldemar survived the war . Gretl , who inherited some of Eva 's valuable jewellery , also survived the war . She gave birth to a daughter ( named Eva Barbara Fegelein , after her late aunt ) on 5 May 1945 . Eva Fegelein committed suicide on 25 April 1971 after her boyfriend was killed in a car accident . Gretl Braun @-@ Fegelein moved to Munich and remarried in 1954 . She died in 1987 , aged 72 . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Olympic Games Decoration ( 1st Class ) 
 German Equestrian Badge ( gold ) 
 German Sports Badge ( bronze ) 
 SA Sports Badge ( bronze ) 
 Nazi Party Long Service Award ( bronze ) 
 General Assault Badge ( silver ) 
 Infantry Assault Badge ( silver ) 
 Close Combat Clasp ( silver ) 
 Wound Badge ( silver ) 
 Wound Badge of 20 July 1944 ( silver ) 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 15 December 1940 ) 
 1st Class ( 28 June 1941 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 1 November 1943 as SS @-@ Brigadeführer and Generalmajor of the Waffen @-@ SS in the SS @-@ Kavallerie @-@ Division 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 2 March 1942 as SS @-@ Standartenführer and commander of the SS @-@ Kavallerie @-@ Brigade 
 157th Oak Leaves on 22 December 1942 as SS @-@ Oberführer and commander of a Kampfgruppe 
 83rd Swords on 30 July 1944 as SS @-@ Gruppenführer and Generalleutnant of the Waffen @-@ SS and commander of the 8 . SS @-@ Freiwilligen @-@ Kavallerie @-@ Division Florian Geyer 
 The death sentence on 28 April resulted in the loss of all orders , awards , and honorary signs . 
 = = Dates of rank = = 
 Fegelein held various ranks in both the Allgemeine @-@ SS and Waffen @-@ SS . The following table shows that progression was not synchronous . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Green Day = 
 Green Day is an American punk rock band formed in 1986 by vocalist / guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong and bassist Mike Dirnt . For much of the group 's career , the band has been a trio with drummer Tré Cool , who replaced former drummer John Kiffmeyer in 1990 prior to the recording of the band 's second studio album , Kerplunk ( 1992 ) . In 2012 , guitarist Jason White became a full @-@ time member after having performed with the band as a session and touring member since 1999 . 
 Green Day was originally part of the punk scene at the DIY 924 Gilman Street club in Berkeley , California . The band 's early releases were with the independent record label Lookout ! Records . In 1994 , its major label debut Dookie ( released through Reprise Records ) became a breakout success and eventually shipped over 10 million copies in the U.S. Green Day was widely credited , alongside fellow California punk bands Sublime , Bad Religion , The Offspring and Rancid , with popularizing and reviving mainstream interest in punk rock in the United States . 
 Green Day 's three follow @-@ up albums , Insomniac ( 1995 ) , Nimrod ( 1997 ) , and Warning ( 2000 ) did not achieve the massive success of Dookie , though they were still successful , with Insomniac and Nimrod reaching double platinum and Warning achieving platinum status . The band 's rock opera , American Idiot ( 2004 ) , reignited the band 's popularity with a younger generation , selling six million copies in the U.S. The band 's eighth studio album , 21st Century Breakdown , was released in 2009 and achieved the band 's best chart performance to date . 21st Century Breakdown was followed up by a trilogy of albums called ¡ Uno ! , ¡ Dos ! , and ¡ Tré ! , which were released in September , November and December 2012 respectively . 
 Green Day has sold more than 75 million records worldwide . The group has won five Grammy Awards : Best Alternative Album for Dookie , Best Rock Album for American Idiot , Record of the Year for " Boulevard of Broken Dreams " , Best Rock Album for the second time for 21st Century Breakdown and Best Musical Show Album for American Idiot : The Original Broadway Cast Recording . In 2010 , a stage adaptation of American Idiot debuted on Broadway . The musical was nominated for three Tony Awards : Best Musical , Best Scenic Design and Best Lighting Design , losing only the first . Also in 2010 , Green Day was ranked no . 91 in the VH1 list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " . On April 18 , 2015 , the band was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a part of the 2015 class , in the band 's first year of eligibility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Lookout ! years ( 1986 – 1993 ) = = = 
 In 1986 , friends Billie Joe Armstrong and Mike Dirnt , 14 years old at the time , formed a band called Sweet Children . The group 's first live performance took place on October 17 , 1987 , at Rod 's Hickory Pit in Vallejo , California . In 1988 , Armstrong and Dirnt began working with former <unk> drummer John Kiffmeyer , also known as " Al <unk> " . Sean Hughes left the band in 1988 , and Dirnt took over on bass duties . As said in the film Punk 's Not Dead , Armstrong cites the band Operation Ivy ( which featured Tim Armstrong and Matt Freeman of Rancid ) as a major influence , and a group that inspired him to form a band . 
 In 1988 , Larry Livermore , owner of Lookout ! Records , saw the band play an early show and signed the group to his label . In 1989 , the band recorded its debut extended play , 1 @,@ 000 Hours . Before 1 @,@ 000 Hours was released , the group dropped the name Sweet Children ; according to Livermore , this was done to avoid confusion with another local band Sweet Baby . The band adopted the name Green Day , due to the members ' fondness for cannabis . 
 Lookout ! released Green Day 's debut studio album , 39 / Smooth in early 1990 . Green Day recorded two extended plays later that year , Slappy and Sweet Children , the latter of which included older songs that the band had recorded for the Minneapolis independent record label Skene ! Records . In 1991 , Lookout ! Records re @-@ released 39 / Smooth under the name 1 @,@ 039 / <unk> Out Slappy Hours , and added the songs from the band 's first two EPs , Slappy , and 1 @,@ 000 Hours . In late 1990 , shortly after the band 's first nationwide tour , Kiffmeyer left the East Bay area to attend Humboldt State University in Arcata , California . The Lookouts drummer Tré Cool began filling in as a temporary replacement and later Cool 's position as Green Day 's drummer became permanent , which Kiffmeyer " graciously accepted " . The band went on tour for most of 1992 and 1993 , and played a number of shows overseas in Europe . The band 's second studio album Kerplunk sold 50 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. 
 = = = Breakthrough success ( 1994 – 1996 ) = = = 
 Kerplunk 's underground success led to a number of major record labels being interested in signing Green Day , and the band eventually left Lookout ! and signed to Reprise Records after attracting the attention of producer Rob Cavallo . The group was impressed by his work with fellow Californian band The Muffs , and later remarked that Cavallo " was the only person we could really talk to and connect with " . Reflecting on the period , Armstrong told Spin magazine in 1999 , " I couldn 't go back to the punk scene , whether we were the biggest success in the world or the biggest failure ... The only thing I could do was get on my bike and go forward . " After signing with Reprise , the band went to work on recording its major label debut , Dookie . 
 Recorded in three weeks , and released in February 1994 , Dookie became a commercial success , helped by extensive MTV airplay for the videos of the songs " Longview " , " Basket Case " , and " When I Come Around " , all of which reached the number one position on the Modern Rock Tracks charts . At a performance on September 9 , 1994 at Hatch Memorial Shell in Boston , mayhem broke out during the band 's set ( cut short to seven songs ) and by the end of the rampage , 100 people were injured and 45 arrested . The band also joined the lineups of both the Lollapalooza festival and Woodstock ' 94 , where the group started an infamous mud fight . During the concert , a security guard mistook bassist Mike Dirnt for a stage @-@ invading fan and punched out some of his teeth . Viewed by millions by pay @-@ per @-@ view television , the Woodstock 1994 performance further aided Green Day 's growing publicity and recognition , and helped push its album to eventual diamond status . In 1995 , Dookie won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Album and the band was nominated for nine MTV Video Music Awards including Video of the Year . 
 In 1995 , a new single for the Angus soundtrack was released , entitled " <unk> " . The single debuted at number one on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . The song was followed by the band 's fourth studio album , Insomniac , which was released in the fall of 1995 . Insomniac was a much darker and heavier response to the band 's newfound popularity , compared to the more melodic Dookie . The album opened to a warm critical reception , earning 4 out of 5 stars from Rolling Stone , which said " In punk , the good stuff actually unfolds and gains meaning as you listen without sacrificing any of its electric , haywire immediacy . And Green Day are as good as this stuff gets . " The singles released from Insomniac were " Geek Stink Breath " , " Stuck with Me " , " Brain Stew / Jaded " , and " Walking <unk> " . 
 Though the album did not approach the success of Dookie , it sold two million copies in the United States . In addition , the album won the band award nominations for Favorite Artist , Favorite Hard Rock Artist , and Favorite Alternative Artist at the 1996 American Music Awards , and the video for " Walking <unk> " got the band a Grammy nomination for Best Video , Short Form , in addition to a Best Special Effects nomination at the MTV Video Music Awards . After that , the band abruptly cancelled a European tour , citing exhaustion . 
 = = = Middle years and decline in commercial success ( 1997 – 2002 ) = = = 
 After a brief hiatus in 1996 , Green Day began to work on a new album in 1997 . From the outset , both the band and Cavallo agreed that the album had to be different from its previous albums . The result was Nimrod , an experimental deviation from the band 's standard pop @-@ punk brand of music . The new album was released in October 1997 . It provided a variety of music , from pop @-@ punk , surf rock , and ska , to an acoustic ballad . Nimrod entered the charts at number 10 . The success of " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " won the band an MTV Video Award for Best Alternative Video . The song was also used in the second " clip show " episode of Seinfeld and on two episodes of ER . 
 The other singles released from Nimrod were " Nice Guys Finish Last " , " Hitchin ' a Ride " and " Redundant " . The band made a guest appearance in an episode of King of the Hill entitled " The Man Who Shot Cane <unk> " , which aired in 1997 . In late 1997 and most of 1998 , Green Day embarked on a tour in support of Nimrod . In 1999 , guitarist Jason White began supporting the band during concerts as rhythm guitarist . 
 In 2000 , Green Day released its sixth studio album Warning . In support of the album , the band participated in the Warped Tour in 2000 . The band also had an independent tour to support the album in 2001 . Critics ' reviews of the album were varied . AllMusic gave it 4 @.@ 5 / 5 saying " Warning may not be an innovative record per se , but it 's tremendously satisfying . " Rolling Stone was more critical , giving it 3 / 5 , and saying " Warning ... invites the question : Who wants to listen to songs of faith , hope and social commentary from what used to be snot @-@ core 's biggest @-@ selling band ? " Though it produced the hit " Minority " and a smaller hit with " Warning " , some observers were coming to the conclusion that the band was losing relevance , and a decline in popularity followed . While all of Green Day 's previous albums had reached a status of at least double platinum , Warning was only certified platinum . 
 At the 2001 California Music Awards , Green Day won all eight of the awards for which the group was nominated . The group won the awards for Outstanding Album ( Warning ) , Outstanding Punk Rock / Ska Album ( Warning ) , Outstanding Group , Outstanding Male Vocalist , Outstanding Bassist , Outstanding Drummer , Outstanding Songwriter , and Outstanding Artist . 
 The release of two compilation albums , International Superhits ! and Shenanigans , followed Warning . International Superhits and its companion collection of music videos , International <unk> ! . Shenanigans contained some of the band 's b @-@ sides , including " Espionage " , which was featured in the film Austin Powers : The Spy Who Shagged Me and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance . 
 In the spring of 2002 , Green Day co @-@ headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Blink @-@ 182 , which was documented on the DVD Riding in Vans with Boys . 
 = = = American Idiot and renewed success ( 2003 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In the summer of 2003 , the band went into a studio to write and record new material for a new album , tentatively titled Cigarettes and Valentines . After completing 20 tracks , the master recordings were stolen from the studio . Instead of re @-@ recording the stolen tracks , the band decided to abandon the entire project and start over , considering the taken material to be unrepresentative of the band 's best work . It was then revealed that a band called The Network was signed to Armstrong 's record label Adeline Records with little fanfare and information . After the mysterious band released an album called Money Money 2020 , it was rumored that The Network was a Green Day side project , due to the similarities in the bands ' sounds . However , these rumors were never addressed by the band or Adeline Records , except for a statement on the Adeline website discussing an ongoing dispute between the two bands . 
 Green Day collaborated with Iggy Pop on two tracks for his album Skull Ring in November 2003 . On February 1 , 2004 , a new song , a cover of " I Fought the Law " made its debut on a commercial for iTunes during NFL Super Bowl XXXVIII . American Idiot ( 2004 ) , debuted at number one on the Billboard charts , the band 's first album to reach number one , backed by the success of the album 's first single , " American Idiot " . The album was labeled as a punk rock opera which follows the journey of the fictitious " Jesus of Suburbia " . The album depicts modern American life under the control of an idiot ruler who let people be misinformed by the media and a " redneck agenda " . It gives different angles on an everyman , modern icons , and leaders . Released two months before U.S. President George W. Bush was reelected , the album became protest art . American Idiot won the 2005 Grammy for Best Rock Album . The band also won a total of seven out of eight awards for which the group was nominated , including the Viewer 's Choice Award at the MTV Video Music Awards in 2005 . 
 Through 2005 , the band toured in support of the album with nearly 150 dates , which was the longest tour in the band 's career , visiting Japan , Australia , South America and the United Kingdom . While touring for American Idiot , the group filmed and recorded the two concerts at the Milton Keynes National Bowl in England , which was voted " The Best Show On Earth " in a Kerrang ! Magazine Poll . These recordings were released as a live CD and DVD called Bullet in a Bible on November 15 , 2005 . This CD / DVD featured songs from American Idiot as well as songs from all its previous albums , except Kerplunk and 1 @,@ 039 / <unk> Out Slappy Hours . The DVD featured behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the band , and showed how the band prepared to put on the show . The final shows of its 2005 world tour were in Sydney and Melbourne in Australia , on December 14 and 17 , respectively . 
 On August 1 , 2005 Green Day announced that it had rescinded the master rights to its pre @-@ Dookie material from Lookout ! Records , citing a continuing breach of contract regarding unpaid royalties , a complaint shared with other Lookout ! bands . On January 10 , 2006 , the band was awarded a People 's Choice Award as favorite musical group or band . 
 = = = 21st Century Breakdown and American Idiots stage adaptation ( 2007 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Green Day engaged in a number of other smaller projects in the time following the success of American Idiot . The group released an album under the name Foxboro Hot Tubs entitled Stop Drop and Roll ! ! ! In 2008 , the Foxboro Hot Tubs went on a mini @-@ tour to promote the record , hitting tiny Bay Area venues including the Stork Club in Oakland and Toot 's Tavern in Crockett , California . 
 In an interview with Carson Daly , Garbage lead singer Shirley Manson revealed that Butch Vig would be producing Green Day 's forthcoming album . The span of nearly five years between American Idiot and 21st Century Breakdown was the longest gap between studio albums in Green Day 's career . The band had been working on new material since January 2006 . By October 2007 , Armstrong had 45 songs written , but the band showed no further signs of progress until October 2008 , when two videos showing the band recording in the studio with producer Butch Vig were posted on YouTube . The writing and recording process , spanning three years and four recording studios , was finally finished in April 2009 . 
 21st Century Breakdown , was released on May 15 , 2009 . The album received a mainly positive reception from critics , getting an average rating between 3 and 4 stars . After the release , the album reached number one in fourteen countries , being certified gold or platinum in each . 21st Century Breakdown achieved Green Day 's best chart performance to date . The band started playing shows in California in April and early May . These were the group 's first live shows in about three years . Green Day went on a world tour that started in North America in July 2009 and continuing around the world throughout the rest of 2009 and early 2010 . 
 Wal @-@ Mart refused to carry the album as it contains a Parental Advisory sticker and requested that Green Day release a censored edition . The band members did not wish to change any lyrics on the album and responded by stating , " There 's nothing dirty about our record ... They want artists to censor their records in order to be carried in there . We just said no . We 've never done it before . You feel like you 're in 1953 or something . " 
 In 2009 , the band met with award @-@ winning director Michael Mayer and many cast and crew members of the Tony Award @-@ winning musical Spring Awakening to create a stage version of the album American Idiot . American Idiot opened in the Berkeley Repertory Theatre during the end of 2009 . The show features an expanded story of the original album , with new characters such as Will , Extraordinary Girl , and Favorite Son . On April 20 , 2010 , American Idiot opened on Broadway , and Green Day released the soundtrack to the musical , featuring a new song by Green Day entitled " When It 's Time " . In June 2010 the iTunes released " When It 's Time " as a single . 
 During the Spike TV Video Game Awards 2009 , it was announced that Green Day was set to have its own Rock Band video game titled Green Day : Rock Band , as a follow @-@ up to the last band specific Rock Band game , The Beatles : Rock Band . The game features the full albums of Dookie , American Idiot , and 21st Century Breakdown as well as select songs from the rest of Green Day 's discography . 
 During the second leg of the 21st Century Breakdown World Tour the band members stated that they were writing new material . In an interview with Kerrang ! magazine , Armstrong spoke about the possible new album : " We did some demos in Berlin , some in Stockholm , some just outside of Glasgow and some in Amsterdam . We wanted get [ the songs ] down in some early form . " The band members also stated that the group was recording a live album of the tour , featuring the previously unreleased song " Cigarettes and Valentines " . In October 2010 , Dirnt was interviewed by Radio W , mentioning that the group had completed the writing process of the ninth studio album . In the interview , Dirnt also mentioned that a new live album would " most likely " be released . The live CD / DVD and CD / Blu @-@ ray entitled Awesome as Fuck was released on March 22 , 2011 . 
 = = = ¡ Uno ! ¡ Dos ! ¡ Tré ! ( 2011 – 2014 ) = = = 
 During the end of 2011 , the band played several secret shows ( under the name Foxboro Hot Tubs ) whose setlists consisted almost entirely of previously unheard songs . Green Day entered the studio and began recording new material in February 2012 , later announcing a trilogy of albums titled ¡ Uno ! , ¡ Dos ! , and ¡ Tré ! which would be released in the fall of 2012 . The trilogy marked longtime touring guitarist Jason White 's induction as the fourth member of the band . That summer Green Day played several festivals and promotional shows including the Rock en Seine festival in France , the Rock am See festival in Germany , and the Reading Festival in the United Kingdom . 
 ¡ Uno ! , ¡ Dos ! , and ¡ Tré ! were released on September 21 , November 9 , and December 7 , 2012 , respectively and were met with generally positive reviews . On January 22 , 2013 , the band announced that ¡ Cuatro ! , a documentary about the making of ¡ Uno ! , ¡ Dos ! and ¡ Tré ! , would premiere on January 26 in Aspen , Colorado as part of the X Games FILM showcase , and would be released on DVD April 9 , 2013 . Another documentary was announced called Broadway Idiot which focuses on the creation on the American Idiot musical and Armstrong 's run as playing the character of St. Jimmy . On March 10 , 2013 , Green Day began its 99 Revolutions Tour to support the trilogy . In June , Green Day broke Emirates Stadium attendance record with 60 @,@ 000 tickets sold . The band played Dookie from start to finish on several dates on the tour 's European leg , including during the Reading Festival 2013 headline show . 
 <unk> , a compilation album that contains alternate versions and demos of songs from ¡ Uno ! , ¡ Dos ! and ¡ Tré ! recorded during the studio sessions of these albums , was released on April 19 , 2014 , for Record Store Day . It also contains a previously unreleased song called " State of Shock " and an acoustic version of " Stay the Night " , from ¡ Uno ! . 
 = = = Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and twelfth studio album ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 Green Day performed its first concert in a year on April 16 , 2015 . The group first played a set as Sweet Children with John Kiffmeyer , followed by a set as Green Day . On April 18 , 2015 , Green Day were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Fall Out Boy . 
 On April 24 , 2015 , Rob Cavallo revealed Green Day are recording a twelfth studio album . Cavallo claims to have heard " five new songs that Billie has written and demoed " , and that the fans should be " sure that when they do return , the music will be amazing . " 
 On December 24 , 2015 , Green Day released a Christmas song , " Xmas Time of the Year " . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Green Day 's sound is often compared to first wave punk rock bands such as the Ramones , The Clash , Sex Pistols , The Jam , and the Buzzcocks . Stylistically , the group is characterized as punk rock , pop punk and alternative rock . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described Green Day as " punk revivalists who recharged the energy of speedy , catchy three @-@ chord punk @-@ pop songs . " While Armstrong is the primary songwriter , he looks to the other band members for organizational help . Billie Joe Armstrong has mentioned that some of his biggest influences are seminal alternative rock bands Hüsker Dü and The Replacements , and that their influence is particularly noted in the band 's chord changes in songs . Green Day has covered Hüsker Dü 's " Don 't Want to Know If You Are Lonely " as a b @-@ side to the " Warning " single , and the character " Mr. <unk> " in the group 's song " Misery " is a reference to the Replacements song of the same name . Among other influences , Green Day have also cited The Kinks , The Who and power pop pioneers Cheap Trick . English rock musician Noel Gallagher of Oasis complained about the band semi @-@ jokingly , claiming that the band had ripped off his song " Wonderwall " with its song " Boulevard of Broken Dreams " . 
 = = Related projects = = 
 Since 1991 , members of the band have branched out past Green Day , starting other projects with various musicians . Notable projects related to Green Day include Billie Joe Armstrong 's Pinhead Gunpowder with Jason White , The <unk> with Mike Dirnt , and The Network , a collaboration between Green Day and members of the band , Devo in which all members play under fake stage names . Green Day has also released an album titled Stop Drop and Roll ! ! ! on May 20 , 2008 , under the name Foxboro Hot Tubs , which the band uses to book secret shows . In late December 2011 , Armstrong formed a new side band called The Boo along with his wife Adrienne and their two sons . 
 In September 2006 , Green Day collaborated with U2 and producer Rick Rubin to record a cover of the song " The Saints Are Coming " , originally recorded by The Skids , with an accompanying video . The song was recorded to benefit Music Rising , an organization to help raise money for musicians ' instruments lost during Hurricane Katrina , and to bring awareness on the eve of the one @-@ year anniversary of the disaster . In December 2006 , Green Day and NRDC opened a web site in partnership to raise awareness on America 's dependency on oil . 
 Green Day released a cover of the John Lennon song " Working Class Hero " , which was featured on the album Instant Karma : The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur . The band performed the song on the season finale of American Idol . The song was nominated for a Grammy Award in 2008 but lost to The White Stripes ' " Icky Thump " . That summer , the band appeared in a cameo role in The Simpsons Movie , where the band performs the show 's theme song ; Green Day 's version was released as a single on July 23 , 2007 . 
 In 2009 , the band collaborated with theater director Michael Mayer to adapt the group 's rock opera American Idiot into a one @-@ act stage musical that premiered at the Berkeley Rep on September 15 , 2009 . The show then moved to Broadway on April 20 , 2010 . The reviews of American Idiot : The Musical have been positive to mixed . Charles Isherwood of The New York Times wrote an enthusiastic review for the Broadway production . He called the show " a pulsating portrait of wasted youth that invokes all the standard genre conventions ... only to transcend them through the power of its music and the artistry of its execution , the show is as invigorating and ultimately as moving as anything I ’ ve seen on Broadway this season . Or maybe for a few seasons past . " Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald enjoyed the premise of the show but found that " the music and message suffer in a setting where the audience is politely , soberly seated " . 
 Michael <unk> of the Associated Press found the show to be " visually striking [ and ] musically adventurous " , but noted that " the show has the barest wisp of a story and minimal character development " . Paul <unk> in USA Today enjoyed the contradiction that Green Day 's " massively popular , starkly disenchanted album ... would be the feel @-@ good musical of the season " . Time magazine 's Richard Zoglin opined that the score " is as pure a specimen of contemporary punk rock as Broadway has yet encountered , [ yet ] there 's enough variety . ... Where the show fall short is as a fully developed narrative . " He concluded that " American Idiot , despite its earnest huffing and puffing , remains little more than an annotated rock concert . ... Still , [ it ] deserves at least two cheers – for its irresistible musical energy and for opening fresh vistas for that odd couple , rock and Broadway . " Peter Travers from Rolling Stone , in his review of American Idiot , wrote " Though American Idiot carries echoes of such rock musicals as Tommy , Hair , Rent and Spring Awakening , it cuts its own path to the heart . You won ’ t know what hit you . American Idiot knows no limits — it 's a global knockout . " The musical has been nominated for three Tony Awards , including Best Musical and Best Scenic Design . It was also nominated for a number of Drama Desk Awards and Outer Critics Circle Awards . 
 In October 2009 , a Green Day art project was exhibited at <unk> Gallery in London . The exhibition showed artworks created for each of the songs on 21st Century Breakdown , was supported by the band , and led by the group 's manager Pat Magnarella . He explained in an interview that " [ Artists are ] basically like rock bands . Most are creating their art , but don 't know how to promote it . " For Billie Joe Armstrong , " Many of the artists ... show their work on the street , and we feel a strong connection to that type of creative expression . " 
 On April 13 , 2011 , a film version of American Idiot was confirmed . Michael Mayer , director of the Broadway musical , will be directing the film . It will be produced by Green Day , Pat Magnarella ( Green Day 's manager who also produced Bullet in a Bible , Awesome as Fuck , and Heart Like a Hand Grenade ) , Playtone ( Tom Hanks and Gary <unk> ) and Tom Hulce . 
 On January 23 , 2013 , it was announced that a documentary showing Armstrong 's journey from punk rock to Broadway was to be released . Called Broadway Idiot and showing a lot of behind @-@ the @-@ scenes of the American Idiot musical production , the movie was directed by Doug Hamilton , veteran television journalist for CBS News ' 60 Minutes and PBS documentaries such as Nova , Frontline and American Masters . A trailer was released on January 30 , 2013 . The documentary premiered at the South by Southwest Film Festival on March 15 , 2013 . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The band has generated controversy over whether the band 's musical style and major @-@ label status constitutes " true punk " . In reaction to both the style of music and the background of the band , John Lydon , former front man of the 1970s punk band the Sex Pistols commented : 
 So there we are fending off all that and it pisses me off that years later a wank outfit like Green Day hop in and nick all that and attach it to themselves . They didn 't earn their wings to do that and if they were true punk they wouldn 't look anything like they do . 
 Armstrong himself has discussed the group 's status of being a punk band on a major record label , saying " Sometimes I think we 've become totally redundant because we 're this big band now ; we 've made a lot of money – we 're not punk rock any more . But then I think about it and just say , ' You can take us out of a punk rock environment , but you can 't take the punk rock out of us . ' " 
 On September 21 , 2012 , while Green Day was performing at the iHeartRadio music festival , Armstrong stopped while performing " Basket Case " , because he believed the group 's time was being shortened , possibly in order to extend R & B artist Usher 's performance . Angered , Armstrong began ranting while a screen in the rear of the audience was labeled " 1 Minutes Left " , saying " You 're not gonna give me one fucking minute ? You 've gotta be fucking kidding me ! " . He also told the crowd he was not Justin Bieber and labeled the festival as a " joke " . When the screen went blank , Armstrong smashed his guitar , while bassist Mike Dirnt smashed his bass . Armstrong then gave the finger , and declared that Green Day would be back before throwing his microphone down and walking off the stage . Two days later , the band 's representative apologized for the incident on the group 's behalf stating that " Green Day would like everyone to know that their set was not cut short by Clear Channel and to apologize to those they offended at the iHeartRadio Festival in Las Vegas " also adding that Armstrong will be headed to rehab , for abuse of alcohol and prescription pills . However , Dirnt would later say in an interview with Rolling Stone that he agreed with what Armstrong meant by his rant . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 39 / Smooth ( 1990 ) 
 Kerplunk ( 1992 ) 
 Dookie ( 1994 ) 
 Insomniac ( 1995 ) 
 Nimrod ( 1997 ) 
 Warning ( 2000 ) 
 American Idiot ( 2004 ) 
 21st Century Breakdown ( 2009 ) 
 ¡ Uno ! ( 2012 ) 
 ¡ Dos ! ( 2012 ) 
 ¡ Tré ! ( 2012 ) 
 = Great North of Scotland Railway = 
 The Great North of Scotland Railway ( <unk> / <unk> ) was one of the two smallest of the five major Scottish railway companies prior to the 1923 Grouping , operating in the north @-@ east of the country . Formed in 1845 , it carried its first passengers the 39 miles ( 63 km ) from Kittybrewster , in Aberdeen , to Huntly on 20 September 1854 . By 1867 it owned 226 1 ⁄ 4 route miles ( 364 @.@ 1 km ) of line and operated over a further 61 miles ( 98 km ) . 
 The early expansion was followed by a period of forced economy , but in the 1880s the railway was refurbished , express services began to run and by the end of that decade there was a suburban service in Aberdeen . The railway operated its main line between Aberdeen and Keith and two routes west to Elgin , connections could be made at both Keith and Elgin for Highland Railway services to Inverness . There were other junctions with the Highland Railway at Boat of Garten and Portessie , and at Aberdeen connections for journeys south over the Caledonian and North British Railways . Its eventual area encompassed the three Scottish counties of Aberdeenshire , Banffshire and Moray , with short lengths of line in Inverness @-@ shire and Kincardineshire . 
 Fish from the North Sea ports and whisky from the distilleries of Speyside became important goods traffic . The Royal Family used the Deeside Line for travel to and from Balmoral Castle and when they were in residence a daily special ' Messenger Train ' ran from Aberdeen ; for most of the railway 's life this was its only Sunday service . The company ran three hotels , and a network of feeder bus services was developed in the early 20th century . In 1923 , it became part of the London and North Eastern Railway as its Northern Scottish area , passing on 333 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 536 @.@ 7 km ) of line and 122 steam locomotives , most of them 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tender locomotives . Although the railway had several branches , its remoteness has resulted in only its main line remaining today as part of the Aberdeen to Inverness Line . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Half way to Inverness , 1845 – 1858 = = = 
 = = = = Establishment and construction = = = = 
 In 1845 the Great North of Scotland Railway was formed to build a railway from Aberdeen to Inverness . The proposed 108 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 174 @.@ 2 km ) route , which needed few major engineering works , followed the River Don to Inverurie , via Huntly and Keith to a crossing of the River Spey , and then to Elgin and along the coast via Nairn to Inverness . Branch lines to Banff , Portsoy , Garmouth and <unk> would total 30 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 49 @.@ 1 km ) . At the same time the Perth & Inverness Railway proposed a direct route over the Grampian Mountains to Perth , and the Aberdeen , Banff & Elgin Railway suggested a route that followed the coast to better serve the Banffshire and Morayshire fishing ports . Three private bills were presented to Parliament seeking permission to build a railway , but the Aberdeen , Banff & Elgin failed to raise funds , and the Perth & Inverness Railway was rejected because the railway would be at altitudes that approached 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) and needed steep gradients . The Great North of Scotland Railway Act received Royal Assent on 26 June 1846 . 
 In the aftermath of the railway mania railway companies became an unpopular investment and the necessary finance could not be raised . The company suggested at a meeting in November 1849 that whereas £ 650 @,@ 000 was needed for a double @-@ track railway from Aberdeen to Inverness , only £ 375 @,@ 000 would be needed for a single @-@ track railway from Kittybrewster , 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from Aberdeen , to Keith , half way to Inverness . The meeting recommended that the bridges and works be built wide enough for a second track when this was needed . Construction eventually began in November 1852 , albeit to Huntly , 12 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) short of Keith , with William Cubitt as engineer . The severe winter the following year delayed work . Between Inverurie and Aberdeen the line took over the Aberdeenshire Canal , the purchase of which delayed construction as it was necessary to settle the claims of each shareholder individually . 
 = = = = Opening = = = = 
 After an inspection by the Board of Trade , the railway opened to goods on 12 September 1854 and approval for the carriage of passengers was given two days later . The railway was officially opened on 19 September , and two locomotives hauling twenty @-@ five carriages carrying 400 passengers left Kittybrewster at 11 am . The number of passengers had grown to about 650 by the time the train arrived to a celebration at Huntly at 1 : 12 pm . Public services began the following day . 
 There were stations at : 
 Kittybrewster 
 <unk> ( <unk> after 1897 ) 
 Dyce 
 <unk> ( open after 1 December ) 
 Kintore 
 Inverury ( Inverurie after 1866 ) 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> ( open after 1 December ) 
 Insch 
 <unk> ( open after 1 December ) 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Huntly 
 The railway was single track with passing loops at the termini and at Kintore , Inverurie and Insch ; the loop at Kittybrewster was clear of the platform to allow the locomotive to run round the carriages and push them into the station . A daily goods train took up to 3 hours 40 minutes for the 39 miles ( 63 km ) , the goods to Aberdeen also carried passengers and mail and spared cattle a two @-@ day drive to market . Initially there were three passenger services a day taking two hours , fares being 1 3 ⁄ 4 old pence ( d ) a mile for first class and 1 1 ⁄ 4d for third ; on one train a day in each direction it was possible to travel for the statutory fare of 1d a mile . Although cheaper than travelling by coach , these fares and the charges for the transport of goods were considered high but not reduced for thirty years . 
 The railway opened short of rolling stock as only half of the twelve locomotives and twenty @-@ four of forty passenger carriages ordered had arrived . The carriage builders , Brown , Marshall & Co of Birmingham , stated that based on their experience they had expected the line to open at least two months late . The third day after opening to passengers , on 23 September , there was a collision between two trains at Kittybrewster that resulted in the death of a passenger and several serious injuries . The inquiry found that the driver , attempting to make up time after a late start , had over @-@ run previous stations and been approaching the terminus with excessive speed . The driver attempted to select reverse gear to slow the train but had failed to hold on to the lever , which slipped into forward , propelling the train into carriages waiting at the platform . The report also criticised the station staff , who should not have allowed the carriages to be waiting at the station . The layout at Kittybrewster was altered after the accident . 
 = = = = Waterloo , Keith and Inverness = = = = 
 The Aberdeen Railway ( AR ) opened from the south to Ferryhill , south of Aberdeen , in April 1850 . It had been previously arranged that the Aberdeen and Great North would amalgamate , but this was annulled that year and the Aberdeen was seeking alliances with railways to the south . In 1854 the AR opened its Guild Street terminus in Aberdeen and the Great North sought and obtained powers for a 1 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 8 km ) branch that followed the Aberdeenshire Canal from Kittybrewster to a terminus at Waterloo by the docks . The line was opened to goods traffic on 24 September 1855 and passengers on 1 April 1856 . Kittybrewster station was rebuilt with through platforms and the offices moved to Waterloo station from premises at 75 Union Street . The stations were 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) apart and a goods line was built though the docks linking the two railways , worked by horses as steam locomotives were prohibited . 
 The Inverness & Nairn Railway was authorised in 1854 to build a railway from Inverness to Nairn . The Great North , still seeking to reach Inverness , had objected but withdrew after running rights over the railway were promised . The 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) line was opened on 6 November 1855 , and Inverness & Elgin Junction Railway was formed to extend this line to Elgin . The Great North objected again , this time citing the expense of crossing the Spey , but withdrew after it was suggested that the cost of a bridge would be shared . The new company changed its name to Inverness & Aberdeen Junction Railway , but no final undertaking on running rights was made . 
 The 12 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) extension of the Great North to Keith was opened on 10 October 1856 , with two intermediate stations at Rothiemay and Grange . Initially five services a day ran between Aberdeen and Keith , taking between 2 hours 40 minutes and 3 hours 5 minutes , although the number of services was later reduced to four . The route between Nairn and Keith authorised on 21 July 1856 required less earthwork , reducing cost , but had steeper gradients than had originally been proposed , and the Great North contributed £ 40 @,@ 000 towards a bridge over the Spey . The line reached <unk> ( near Forres ) in 1857 , and Keith on 18 August 1858 . Three services a day ran the 108 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 174 @.@ 6 km ) between Aberdeen and Inverness , increasing to five a day east of Keith , and the journey to Inverness took between 5 hours and 55 minutes and 6 hours 30 minutes . The Great North did not insist on running rights west of Keith , but through carriages were probably provided from the start . 
 = = = Expansion , 1854 – 1866 = = = 
 = = = = Formartine and Buchan Railway = = = = 
 Permission to build a line to serve the fishing ports at Peterhead and Fraserburgh was received in 1846 , but this lapsed during the financial collapse that had followed . Two rival bills were presented in 1856 , one by the Formartine and Buchan Railway and backed by the Great North , and another by the Aberdeen , Peterhead & Fraserburgh Railway . Both companies failed to obtain permission for two years , but in 1858 the Formartine and Buchan Railway was successful . A 29 @-@ mile ( 47 km ) long railway from Dyce to Old Deer ( renamed Mintlaw in 1867 ) opened on 18 July 1861 and the main line between Kittybrewster and Dyce was doubled . The branch was extended the 9 miles ( 14 km ) to a station at Peterhead the following year and a 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) long branch north from Maud to Fraserburgh station opened on 24 April 1865 . Three or four services a day ran between Aberdeen , Fraserburgh and Peterhead , with the trains dividing at Maud ; travel times were between 2 1 ⁄ 2 and 2 3 ⁄ 4 hours . The railway was absorbed by the Great North of Scotland Railway on 1 August 1866 . 
 = = = = Alford Valley Railway = = = = 
 The Alford Valley Railway left the main line at Kintore for Alford . The railway was authorised in 1856 with the backing of the Great North ; most of the company 's directors were also on the board of the Great North . The line was steeply graded over a summit at <unk> , at between 1 in 70 and 1 in 75 . The line opened in 1859 with a service of four trains a day calling at Kemnay , Monymusk and Whitehouse . In 1862 the Great North guaranteed the company 's debts and it was subsequently absorbed by the Great North of Scotland Railway on 1 August 1866 . 
 = = = = Inverury and Old Meldrum Junction Railway = = = = 
 The branch from Inverurie , backed by local residents with funding from the Great North , was authorised on 15 June 1855 . The official opening took place on 26 June 1856 with public services starting on 1 July . Journeys took from 18 to 20 minutes to cover the 5 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) to Old Meldrum with a stop at <unk> ; a further station opened in 1866 at <unk> . In June 1858 the line was leased to the Great North for a rental of £ 650 per year . The railway was absorbed by the Great North of Scotland Railway on 1 August 1866 . 
 = = = = Banff , Macduff and Turriff Railways = = = = 
 Plans to reach fishing ports at Macduff and Banff from Inverurie were proposed when the Great North was first suggested , but failed because of the lack of financial support . A different route , from Milton Inveramsay , allowed for a shorter route with easier gradients . Unable to raise sufficient money for a line to the coast , a shorter 18 @-@ mile ( 29 km ) line to Turriff was built . The Great North invested in the railway , and directors sat on the board of the Junction Railway . The new line , together with a junction station at Inveramsay , opened on 5 September 1857 . A separate company , the Banff , Macduff and Turriff Extension Railway , built an extension to a station called Banff and Macduff . The line was operated by the Great North from 4 June 1860 , and served an inconvenient terminus high on a hill 3 ⁄ 4 mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) from Macduff and 1 ⁄ 4 mile ( 400 m ) from the bridge across the River Deveron to Banff . Four trains a day ran from Inveramsay , taking between 1 hour 30 minutes and 1 hour 50 minutes , with connections with services to Aberdeen . Both railways were absorbed by the Great North of Scotland Railway on 1 August 1866 , and the line was extended 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 800 m ) to a new Macduff station in 1872 . 
 = = = = Banff , Portsoy and <unk> Railway = = = = 
 The railway was authorised in 1857 from Grange , on the Great North main line , 16 1 ⁄ 4 miles ( 26 @.@ 2 km ) to Banff , with a 3 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 2 km ) branch from Tillynaught to Portsoy . The chairman of the company , Thomas Bruce , was also deputy chairman of the Inverness & Aberdeen Junction Railway , with the other directors being made up of local men ; most of the investments were raised locally and in small amounts . Most of the line was built with gradients up to 1 in 70 , but the half @-@ mile of 1 in 30 goods line to the harbour at Portsoy was restricted to one locomotive and four wagons . The railway opened on 30 July 1859 , with public services starting on 2 August following a derailment on the opening day . Services connected with the Great North at Grange . With the railway struggling to pay the interest on its debt , in 1863 the Great North took over running the services and the line renamed the Banffshire Railway . The Great North provided three trains a day between Grange and Banff that connected at Tillynaught for Portsoy , and two trains a day along the coast between Banff and Portsoy . Permission for a 14 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 22 @.@ 9 km ) extension from Portsoy to Portgordon was given , but the necessary investment could not be found . Amalgamation with the Great North was authorised in 1866 , but financial problems delayed this until 12 August 1867 , and the Portgordon extension was abandoned . 
 = = = = Keith and Dufftown Railway = = = = 
 The Great North sought to have its own route west of Keith , with Grantown @-@ on @-@ Spey as an objective , where it hoped to meet any possible line between Perth and Inverness . To this end , it invested in the Keith and Dufftown Railway ; this company was incorporated on 27 July 1857 , but lack of money slowed progress . Powers for a longer , but cheaper , route between the two towns were secured on 25 May 1860 . The revised route included steeper gradients than those planned in 1857 ; the maximum gradient was now 1 in 60 instead of 1 in 70 . There was a viaduct over the <unk> of two spans , and there were three intermediate stations : <unk> ( renamed Keith Town in 1897 ) , <unk> ( renamed <unk> in 1862 ) and Drummuir . When the line opened on 21 February 1862 , the trains were worked by the Great North under an agreement dating from the formation of the company . The railway was absorbed by the Great North of Scotland Railway on 1 August 1866 . 
 = = = = Strathspey Railway = = = = 
 With promises of substantial goods traffic of iron and timber and from the local whisky distilleries , extension of the line to Dufftown into Strathspey was sought and obtained on 17 May 1861 . The <unk> Railway was sponsored by the Keith & Dufftown and Great North of Scotland Railways , who appointed directors to the board , and the Great North undertook to run the services . The 32 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 52 @.@ 3 km ) line first headed north to meet an extension of the Morayshire Railway at Strathspey Junction ( called Craigellachie from 1864 ) , before following the River Spey to Abernethy . The Act also permitted a branch to the proposed Inverness & Perth Junction Railway at Grantown @-@ on @-@ Spey . The gradients were not severe , but the route required the Spey and its tributaries to be crossed many times , with three bridges built over the river itself . The line was placed in cuttings greater than 50 feet ( 15 m ) deep , and there was one 68 @-@ yard ( 62 m ) long tunnel . The line was opened on 1 July 1863 to Abernethy ( later called Nethy Bridge ) . The line between Dufftown and Craigellachie became the main line and services continued over the Morayshire Railway , opening up a route between Keith and Elgin independent of the Inverness & Aberdeen Junction Railway ( IAJR ) . The IAJR kept most of the through traffic as its line was more direct , only 18 miles ( 29 km ) instead of 27 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 44 @.@ 3 km ) via the Great North route . The Great North ran four trains a day from Elgin to Keith via Craigellachie , with through carriages or connections for three trains for Aberdeen at Keith . Connections at Elgin were poor because travel over the two routes took a different length of time . 
 The line from Craigellachie became a branch with three trains a day calling at all stations at an average speed of about 16 miles per hour ( 26 km / h ) . The link to Grantown @-@ on @-@ Spey was not built , but on 1 August 1866 services were extended to meet the IAJR ( now the Highland Railway ) at Boat of Garten . The railways met 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Boat and conflict arose over the manning of the <unk> at the junction , with the Highland refusing to make any contribution . For a while between March and June 1868 Great North services terminated at Nethy Bridge , after which separate tracks side by side were provided for both companies to Boat . Prompt connections were available with the Great North at Craigellachie , but there was usually a long wait for connections with the Highland at Boat . The railway 's was absorbed by the Great North of Scotland Railway on 1 August 1866 , and the line 's main source of income came from the local distilleries . 
 = = = = Morayshire Railway = = = = 
 A 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) double @-@ track railway had been proposed from Lossiemouth to Craigellachie in 1841 and necessary permissions granted in 1846 , the route having changed to take advantage of the proposed Great North of Scotland Railway between Elgin and Orton . The financial situation delayed construction , but work eventually started on the section from Lossiemouth to Elgin in 1851 . The 5 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) line opened on 10 August 1852 with a special train from Elgin to festivities in Lossiemouth . Public services started the next day with five services a day , each taking 15 minutes with two request stops . First and second class accommodation was provided at 1 1 ⁄ 2d and 1d a mile . However , it was the Inverness & Aberdeen Junction Railway ( IAJR ) who was to build the line from Elgin to Orton ; permission to build a branch from this line to Rothes was granted to the Morayshire on 14 July 1856 . The IAJR built its own station at Elgin , linked to the Morayshire 's station by a junction to the east . The IAJR opened on 18 August 1858 and the Morayshire Railway started running services on 23 August . 
 Initially the Morayshire ran trains over the IAJR , but its lightweight locomotives struggled with the gradients and proved unreliable , and after six weeks carriages were attached and detached from IAJR trains at Elgin and Orton . Conflict arose over through ticketing , and the directors of the Morayshire responded with plans to build its own line between the two stations . The Great North sponsored the new line and offered to provide services after the lines had been physically connected . Permission was granted on 3 July 1860 , goods were carried from 30 December 1861 and passengers from 1 January 1862 , reducing the travel time from 55 minutes to 45 minutes . The Morayshire station at Elgin was enlarged in anticipation of Great North services , albeit in wood . 
 In 1861 permission was granted to the Morayshire Railway to cross the Spey and join with the Strathspey Railway at Craigellachie . The Morayshire extension and the Strathspey both opened on 1 July 1863 and the Great North provided a service of four trains a day over the line , which gave an alternative route between Keith and Elgin . On 30 July 1866 permission was given to the Morayshire and Great North to amalgamate with agreement , and the loss @-@ making services between Orton and Rothes were withdrawn without notice the following day . It would be August 1881 before the Morayshire became fully part of the Great North . 
 = = = = Aberdeen joint station = = = = 
 The wooden station building at Waterloo was a 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 800 m ) from the Aberdeen and Deeside 's Guild Street station and passengers were conveyed between the termini by omnibus , paid for in the through fare and with forty five minutes being allowed for the transfer . The Great North refused to hold its trains to connect with those arriving at Guild Street and insisted that tickets were purchased at least five minutes before the train was due to depart . The mail train would be held until the Post Office van had arrived and the mail was on board , but the station locked at the advertised departure time to prevent connecting passengers further delaying the train . This inconvenienced passengers , as was pointed out to the general manager during a parliamentary committee meeting by a Member of Parliament who had missed a connection , although his family and luggage had been sent on . The Great North promoted onward traffic by sea and approached the Aberdeen Steam Navigation Company to see if rates could be reduced for through traffic and through ticketing by rail was not available until 1859 , when the Great North joined the Railway Clearing House . 
 A joint line through the Denburn Valley to link the Great North to the south had been planned , and the Great North had approached the railways using the Guild Street station in 1853 and 1857 but were unhappy with the assistance that had been offered . Permission was granted in 1861 to the Inverness & Perth Junction Railway to build a line from Forres , on the Inverness & Aberdeen Junction Railway , direct to Perth . The Great North protested , and won the right for a booking office in Inverness . The line opened in 1863 and in 1865 the Inverness & Perth Junction and Inverness & Aberdeen Junction merged to become the Highland Railway . The Aberdeen Railway , which had now been absorbed by the Scottish North Eastern Railway ( SNER ) , approached the Great North , concerned that the new line had bypassed Aberdeen , but no agreement was reached . 
 The Limpet Mill Scheme was a line presented in an 1862 bill by the nominally independent Scottish Northern Junction Railway , but supported by the SNER . This proposed a 22 @-@ mile ( 35 km ) long railway between Limpet Mill , to the north of Stonehaven on the SNER , to the Great North at Kintore . A junction with the Deeside Railway was also planned , over which the SNER unsuccessfully tried to obtain running rights . Unpopular , this was given permission by parliament , but the Great North succeeded in inserting a clause that this would be suspended if it obtained an Act by 1 September 1863 . The Great North proposed a route , known locally as the <unk> , that was longer but cheaper than the direct route through the Denburn Valley . Despite local opposition , the route was approved by parliament in 1863 , but was revoked the following year when the SNER obtained permission for a railway through the Denburn Valley . The Great North contributed the £ 125 @,@ 000 that its <unk> line would have cost and the SNER contributed £ 70 @,@ 000 out of the £ 90 @,@ 000 it had been prepared to advance the Limpet Mill Scheme . The SNER built the double @-@ track railway , <unk> the Denburn and digging two short tunnels . The joint station opened on 4 November 1867 and consisted of three through tracks , one with a long platform , together with two bay platforms for terminating trains at either end . Two lines to the west were provided for goods traffic , and the stations at Waterloo and Guild Street closed to passengers and became goods terminals . The line to the north of the station passed to the Great North and the 269 @-@ yard ( 246 m ) long Hutcheon Street tunnel became its longest . 
 = = = = Deeside Railway = = = = 
 A railway to serve Deeside was authorised on 16 July 1846 , but it was decided to wait for the Aberdeen Railway to open first . The company survived after the railway mania as the Aberdeen Railway bought a large number of shares . Interest in the line was restored after Prince Albert purchased Balmoral Castle , to which the Royal Family made their first visit in 1848 , and the Aberdeen Railway was able to sell its shares . Investors were still hard to find , but a 16 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 27 @.@ 0 km ) line as far as Banchory was ceremonially opened on 7 September 1853 ; public services began the following day with three trains a day that took about an hour . First class accommodation was available for 1 1 ⁄ 2d a mile , reduced to 1d a mile for third class . Initially services were operated by the Aberdeen Railway to its terminus at Ferryhill , and the Deeside Railway used a horse to shunt wagons at Banchory . In 1854 the Deeside introduced its own rolling stock and ran through to the Aberdeen 's Guild Street station which opened the same year . 
 A new company , the Aboyne Extension , was formed to reach Aboyne . Instead of building two bridges across the Dee , as had been proposed in 1846 , the railway instead took a cheaper but 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) longer route through Lumphanan , and services were extended over the new line on 2 December 1859 . The Aboyne & Braemar Railway was formed to build a line from Aboyne the 28 miles ( 45 km ) to Braemar . The line was to follow the Dee before crossing it 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Braemar , but the plans were modified to terminate the line at Bridge of Gairn with the passenger terminus 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) short at Ballater . This 12 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 1 km ) route opened to Ballater on 17 October 1866 , and the line to Bridge of Gairn remained unfinished . By 1855 there five services a day over the 43 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 69 @.@ 6 km ) long line , taking between 1 hour 50 minutes and 2 1 ⁄ 2 hours . 
 The Royal Family used the line from 1853 to travel to Balmoral Castle ; in September 1866 the British Royal Train used Ballater station nearly a month before public services reached the station . At first Queen Victoria visited once a year , this becoming twice a year after Albert died in 1861 . The number of visits returned to one a year after Edward VII became king in 1901 . From 8 October 1865 a daily ' Messenger Train ' ran when the Royal Family was at Balmoral . First class accommodation was available on these trains ; accompanying servants were charged third class fares . In the late 1850s and early 1860s the Great North and the Scottish North Eastern Railway ( SNER ) were in conflict over the joint station in Aberdeen . Frustrated with lack of progress , the SNER proposed a new line that crossed the Deeside Railway . Whilst in discussions with the SNER about a link from this new line to the Deeside , a lease for the Deeside Railway was offered to the Great North , which was rapidly accepted . The Deeside board accepted the lease by a majority vote on 13 May 1862 , and it was approved by Parliament on 30 July 1866 . The Aboyne & Braemar remained independent , although services were operated by the Great North . 
 = = = = Amalgamation = = = = 
 After opening to Keith in 1854 the Great North of Scotland Railway operated over 54 miles ( 87 km ) of line . Ten years later this had almost quadrupled but more than three @-@ quarters was over leased or subsidiary railways . Eventual amalgamation with many of these railways had been prompted from the start . The necessary authority was sought and on 30 July 1866 the Great North of Scotland Railway ( Amalgamation ) Act received Royal Assent , this Act also permitting the Great North to lease the Deeside Railway . The other companies merged two days later , except the Banffshire and Morayshire , which had started as separate undertakings and were not included in the 1866 Act , although permission for the Banffshire to merge was gained the following year . After the extension of the Deeside opened in 1866 and the merger of the Banffshire the following year the Great North of Scotland Railway owned 226 1 ⁄ 4 route miles ( 364 @.@ 1 km ) of line and operated over a further 61 miles ( 98 km ) . 
 = = = Austerity , 1866 – 1879 = = = 
 In 1855 , the first full year after opening , the Great North of Scotland declared a dividend of 1 1 ⁄ 4 per cent , which rose to 4 1 ⁄ 4 the following year and 5 per cent in 1859 . The dividend reached a maximum of 7 1 ⁄ 4 per cent in 1862 before dropping to 7 per cent the following year and 5 per cent in 1864 , but in 1865 the directors could not pay any dividend on ordinary shares . At the directors ' suggestion a committee was set up to look into their actions ; the report 's main recommendation was the abandonment of the Port Gordon extension . The opening of direct route over the Highland Railway to the south had lost the through mail business , resulting in the withdrawal of Sunday services , and had lost revenue equivalent to a five per cent dividend . Joining the Clearing House system had resulted in the loss of twenty @-@ five per cent of goods traffic income and the conflict over the joint station in Aberdeen had been expensive and resulted in an overpriced lease on the Deeside . The collapse of Overend , Gurney and Company Bank in 1866 meant that for three months the bank rate rose to 10 per cent , making the company 's financial situation worse . 
 The whole board resigned and six members did not seek re @-@ appointment . At the beginning of 1867 the company owed £ 800 @,@ 000 and the new board imposed austerity measures . It would be 1874 before most of the company 's debt was settled and it became possible to pay a dividend again . The only line built in the early 70s was the 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 800 m ) to Macduff and few carriages and no locomotives were built until 1876 . The Deeside Railway merged in 1875 , the Aboyne & Braemar extension to Ballater in January 1876 , and the Morayshire Railway was absorbed in 1880 . After an engine boiler exploded at Nethy Bridge in September 1878 , the inquiry found the testing of boilers infrequent and inadequate . It was sixteen months before the locomotive was repaired . 
 = = = Renaissance , 1879 – 1899 = = = 
 = = = = Renewal and extension = = = = 
 In 1879 the Chairman , Lord Provost Leslie , died and was replaced by William Ferguson of <unk> . The following year both the Secretary and General Manager resigned and William Moffatt was appointed to both posts , and A.G. Reid became Superintendent of the Line . The railway was now paying a dividend and seeing increased traffic , but rolling stock , track , signals and stations all needed replacing in a project that was to cost £ 250 @,@ 000 . By June 1880 the main line was doubled as far as Kintore , and over the next five years 142 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 229 @.@ 3 km ) of iron rail track , much of it without <unk> , was replaced with steel rails and the main line doubled to Inveramsay . The railway had acquired a reputation for running slow trains on a perverse timetable and ill @-@ treating its passengers , and now resolved to address this . By the mid @-@ 1880s services were faster , there was upholstery in third class and the branches saw an accelerated service as a result of running fewer mixed trains . 
 On 27 November 1882 <unk> Bridge on the Macduff Branch near <unk> collapsed as a locomotive hauling five goods wagons , a brake van and four carriages crossed . The locomotive and tender crossed the bridge , but the wagons and carriages fell 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) to the road below , killing five people who had been travelling in the first and second carriages and injuring fifteen others . The Board of Trade report found that the collapse was due to an internal fault in a cast iron beam that had been fitted when the bridge had been built in 1857 . 
 A bill was introduced to parliament in 1881 to extend the line from Portsoy along the Moray Firth to Buckie , to be opposed by the Highland and rejected . The following year both the Great North and Highland railways applied to parliament , the Great North for a 25 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 40 @.@ 6 km ) line from Portsoy along the coast through Buckie to Elgin , and the Highland for a branch from Keith to Buckie and Cullen . Authority was granted , but in the case of the Highland Railway only for a line as far as Portessie , with running rights over the Great North coast line between Buckie and Portsoy and the Great North obtaining reciprocal rights over the Highland railway between Elgin and Forres . The coast line opened in stages , the outer sections from Portsoy to <unk> and Elgin to Garmouth opening in 1884 . The centre section , which involved heavy engineering , with a long viaduct with a central span of 350 feet ( 110 m ) over the Spey at Garmouth and embankments and viaducts at Cullen , opened in May 1886 . The line was served by four trains a day and a fast through train from Aberdeen that reached Elgin in 2 3 ⁄ 4 hours . The Highland Portessie branch had opened in 1884 and the Highland did not exercise its running rights over the Coast Line , thus preventing the Great North running over its lines west of Elgin . 
 The Great North had opened using a system of telegraphic train orders , and as the signalling was being upgraded this was being replaced with electric tablet working over the single line sections . Now express trains had to slow to exchange tokens in a process that frequently left railwaymen injured , so James Manson , the locomotive superintendent , designed an automatic token exchange system based on apparatus used to move cotton in a factory . At first tokens were exchanged at 15 miles per hour ( 24 km / h ) , but soon they were exchanged at line speed . After trialling on the Fraserburgh line , the system was installed on the coast route in May 1889 , and by 1 January 1893 it was in operation on all single @-@ line sections . 
 = = = = Aberdeen to Inverness = = = = 
 The Great North and Highland had agreed in 1865 that Keith would be the exchange point for traffic between the two railways , but in 1886 the Great North had two lines to Elgin that , although longer than the Highland 's direct line , served more populous areas . The coastal route between Keith and Elgin was 87 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 140 @.@ 8 km ) long but had easier gradients than the 80 3 ⁄ 4 miles ( 130 @.@ 0 km ) via Craigellachie . The Highland 's main line south from Inverness was via Forres , the Great North believing that their competitors treated the line to Elgin as a branch . In 1883 a shorter route south from Inverness was promoted by an independent company , the bill defeated in parliament only after the Highland had promised to request authority for a shorter line . The following year , as well as the Highland 's more direct line from Aviemore , the Great North proposed a branch from its Speyside Section to Inverness . The Highland Railway route was chosen , but the Great North won a concession that goods and passengers that could be exchanged at any junction with through bookings and with services conveniently arranged . 
 In 1885 the Great North re @-@ timed the 10 : 10 am Aberdeen service to reach Keith at 11 : 50 am with through carriages that reached Elgin via Craigellachie at 1 pm . This connected with a Highland service at both Keith and Elgin , until the Highland re @-@ timed the train and broke the connection at Elgin . The Great North applied to the Board of Trade for an order for two connections a day at Elgin . This was refused , but in 1886 the Great North and Highland railways came to an agreement to pool receipts from the stations between Grange and Elgin and refer any disputes to an arbiter . The midday Highland train was re @-@ timed to connect with the Great North at Keith and Elgin , and a service connected at Elgin with an Aberdeen train that had divided en route to travel via the coast and Craigellachie . 
 In 1893 the Highland cancelled the traffic agreement and withdrew two connecting trains , complaining that they were unprofitable . One of the trains was reinstated after an appeal was made to the Railway & Canal Commissioners and a frustrated Great North applied to parliament in 1895 for running powers to Inverness , but withdrew after it was agreed that the Railway & Canal Commissioners would arbitrate in the matter . With no judgement by 1897 , the Great North prepared to apply again for running powers over the Highland to Inverness , this time agreeing to double track the line , but the commissioners published their finding before the bill was submitted to parliament . Traffic was to be exchanged at both Elgin and Keith , the services exchanged at Elgin needed to include through carriages from both the Craigellachie and the coast routes , and the timetable had to be approved by the commissioners . The resulting Commissioners ' Service started in 1897 with eight through services , four via the Highland to Keith taking between 4 1 ⁄ 2 and 5 hours , and four with carriages exchanged at Elgin with portions that travelled via Craigellachie and the coast , two of these taking 3 1 ⁄ 2 hours . The 3 pm from Inverness to Aberdeen via Keith took 3 hours 5 minutes . Initially portions for the coast and Craigellachie divided at Huntly , but <unk> Platform was opened at Grange Junction in summer 1898 . The main line was double track to Huntly in 1896 and Keith in 1898 , except for a single @-@ track bridge over the Deveron between <unk> and Rothiemay , which was replaced by a double @-@ track bridge in 1900 . 
 = = = = <unk> and hotels = = = = 
 In 1880 an express was introduced on the Deeside Line , taking 90 minutes to travel from Aberdeen to Ballater ; by 1886 this had reduced to 75 minutes . In 1887 the service between Aberdeen and Dyce had improved with more local trains and new stations ; by the end of that year there were twelve trains a day , eventually becoming twenty trains a day calling at nine stops in twenty minutes . The trains were initially called the Jubilees , as it was Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee , but became known as the <unk> . Suburban services were also introduced between Aberdeen and <unk> on the Deeside Line in 1894 , after the track had been doubled , starting with ten down and nine up trains calling at seven stops in twenty @-@ two minutes . The number of trains was eventually doubled and an additional station provided . 
 In 1891 the company offices were moved from Waterloo to a new building in Guild Street with direct access to the station . The same year the Great North took over the Palace Hotel ( closed after a fire in 1941 ) , near the joint railway station in Aberdeen and modernised it , installing electric lighting and building a covered way between the hotel and station . Encouraged by its success , the company obtained permission in 1893 to build an hotel and golf course at Cruden Bay , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Aberdeen . The hotel was linked to the Great North by the Boddam Branch , a new 15 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile ( 24 @.@ 9 km ) single @-@ track branch from Ellon , on the Buchan section , which served Cruden Bay and fishing town at Boddam . The line opened in 1897 with services from Ellon taking about forty minutes . The hotel opened in 1899 , connected to the railway station by the Cruden Bay Hotel Tramway . This was nearly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) long , with a gauge of 3 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 07 m ) and operated by electric tramcars that took power from an overhead line . Seasonal through services to Aberdeen began in 1899 with an up service in the morning ; for some years an afternoon up service returned in the evening . Excursions for tourists had operated on the Deeside Line from 1881 , later joined by special services on the Strathspey Line and the Coast Line alongside the Moray Firth , promoted as the Scottish Riviera . 
 = = = Maturity , 1900 – 1914 = = = 
 There was interest at the end of the 19th century in using the new Light Railways Act 1896 to approve lines to serve rural areas . The 17 @-@ mile ( 27 km ) long Aberdeenshire Light Railway was independently promoted in 1896 to serve Skene and Echt , with tracks laid along the public roads in Aberdeen . The Great North proposed an alternative Echt Light Railway and a line to Newburgh that would both use the Aberdeen tramway tracks in the city . In 1897 a line from Echt to Aberdeen was approved , but only as far the city outskirts after opposition to laying tracks in the public roads or using the tramways for goods traffic . The plans were changed to connect the line with the Great North at Kittybrewster , but the scheme abandoned after the costs had started to rise . 
 The Great North was granted a Light Railway Order on 8 September 1899 for a 5 1 ⁄ 8 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 2 km ) light railway from Fraserburgh to St Combs . The Order included a clause , unusual for the time , permitting the use of electric traction ; but the company opted for steam traction , and the locomotives were fitted with <unk> as the line was unfenced . Services started on 1 July 1903 , with six trains a day that took 17 minutes to complete the journey . A light railway was proposed to cover the 4 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) from Fraserburgh to <unk> , but the scheme was abandoned after opposition to laying tracks on the public road . 
 Finding its locomotive works at Kittybrewster cramped and inadequate , the Great North began construction on a new works at Inverurie in 1898 , electric lighting being provided in the buildings . The carriage and wagon department moved in 1901 , the locomotive department in 1902 , the offices the following year and the permanent way department in 1905 ; the buildings still stand and are listed Category B. Inverurie station was rebuilt nearer the works in 1902 , and is similarly a Category B building . The Great North built houses nearby for its staff , lit by electricity generated at the works , and the Inverurie Loco Works Football Club was formed by staff in 1902 . 
 The Great North rebuilt Elgin station in 1902 to replace a temporary wooden building dating from the 1860s , a joint structure with the adjacent station having been declined by the Highland Railway . Following negotiations , amalgamation of the Highland and the Great North of Scotland Railways was accepted by the Great North shareholders in early 1906 , but the Highland board withdrew after opposition from a minority of its shareholders . The Aberdeen and Inverness trains were jointly worked after 1908 and locomotives were no longer exchanged at Keith or Elgin ; between 1914 and 1916 the Highland paid the Great North to provide locomotives for all of the services through to Inverness . 
 In spring 1904 the Great North began a motor omnibus service to Braemar , connecting with trains at Ballater . These early buses had solid tyres and a legal speed limit of 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) , but were faster than the horse @-@ drawn coaches they replaced . By 1907 buses connected with Great North train services and conveyed passengers to Strathdon , Midmar , Echt , Cluny Castle and <unk> , between Cock Bridge and <unk> a horse @-@ drawn coach was used as the motor buses could not ascend the steep road . Services from Aberdeen connected with trains at <unk> , where a refreshment room was built . In 1914 the railway had 35 passenger road vehicles that , together with 15 five @-@ ton lorries , worked 159 miles ( 256 km ) daily . 
 Aberdeen joint station was congested , resulting in delayed trains , and the low , open platforms were frequently covered in oily slime due to the large quantities of fish that passed through . Agreement with the Caledonian Railway over rebuilding the station had been reached in 1899 , but the companies fell out over widening the line to the south . Moving the goods station to the east was similarly complex , with conflicts with the harbour commissioners and the town council . In 1908 new platforms on the western side opened and the adjoining station hotel was bought in 1910 . Foundations for the new building were laid in 1913 and the station was largely complete by July 1914 , although outbreak of war delayed further progress and the station was finally completed in 1920 . 
 = = = War and grouping , 1914 – 1922 = = = 
 With Britain 's declaration of war on the German Empire on 4 August 1914 , the government took control of the railways under the Regulation of the Forces Act 1871 . Day @-@ to @-@ day operations were left in the control of local management , but movements necessary for the war were coordinated by a committee of general managers . The Great North of Scotland 's main role was providing a relief route when the Highland Railway route south to Perth was congested , on one Sunday conveying twenty @-@ one troop specials from Keith to Aberdeen . Timber from the forests of the north of Scotland were carried from sidings at Kemnay , <unk> and Nethy Bridge . A total of 609 staff left to serve in the war , and a memorial to the 93 who died in action was erected at the offices in Aberdeen . Services were maintained until 1916 , when staff shortages reduced services , although no lines were closed . 
 The railways were in a poor state after the war , costs having increased , with higher wages , the introduction of an eight @-@ hour day and increased price of coal . A scheme was devised whereby the railways would be grouped into four large companies ; this was approved by parliament as the Railways Act 1921 . At the start of the 20th century the company 's shares had been restructured ; the final dividends were 3 per cent on preferred stock , unaltered from previously , and 1 1 ⁄ 2 per cent on ordinary stock , slightly above average . Before grouping the Great North of Scotland Railway operated 333 1 ⁄ 2 route miles ( 536 @.@ 7 km ) of track . 
 = = = London and North Eastern Railway = = = 
 On 1 January 1923 the Great North of Scotland became an isolated part of the Scottish division of the London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) , the Caledonian to the south and Highland to the west both becoming part of a different group , the London , Midland and Scottish Railway . That summer a sleeping carriage operated between Lossiemouth and London Kings Cross , and a through carriage ran from Edinburgh Waverley to Cruden Bay on Fridays . Sunday services were re @-@ introduced ; from 1928 Aberdeen suburban services ran hourly during the afternoon and evenings . Afterwards the economic situation deteriorated and the railway companies advised the trade unions in 1928 that wages would need to be cut ; this was implemented in August 1930 after the Wall Street Crash the previous year . Economy measures were introduced and unprofitable passenger services withdrawn , the <unk> branch closing on 2 November 1931 and the branch to Cruden Bay and Boddam on 31 October 1932 . Road transport was arranged for guests at the Cruden Bay hotel , from Ellon for the first summer season , and then from Aberdeen . 
 Carriages were transferred in to replace the older four @-@ wheelers , former North Eastern Railway vehicles in 1924 – 25 and fifty former Great Eastern Railway six @-@ wheelers between 1926 and 1929 for the Aberdeen suburban services . By 1936 more up to date Gresley bogie carriages were used on the primary trains . Optimism returned and traffic increased after 1933 , and a luxury rail land cruise , the " Northern Belle " , ran over former Great North lines . However , the Aberdeen <unk> had been losing money for some time as a result of competition from the local buses , and from 5 April 1937 the local services between Aberdeen , Dyce and <unk> were withdrawn and most of the intermediate stations closed . 
 The railways were again placed under government control on 1 September 1939 , and Britain was at war two days later . The Cruden Bay Hotel was used as an army hospital and the tramway ceased operating in 1941 . Handed back to the railway in 1945 , it never reopened . The Palace Hotel burnt down in 1941 . The Station Hotel was used as an admiralty administrative centre , and reopened in 1950 after refurbishment . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 Britain 's railways were nationalised on 1 January 1948 and the former Great North of Scotland Railway lines were placed under the control of the Scottish Region of British Railways . To reduce costs the Alford branch was closed to passengers on 2 January 1950 , followed by the Macduff Branch on 1 October 1951 . 
 The 1955 Modernisation Plan , known formally as the " Modernisation and Re @-@ Equipment of the British Railways " , was published in December 1954 , and with the aim of increasing speed and reliability the steam trains were replaced with electric and diesel traction . In 1958 a battery @-@ electric railcar was introduced on the Deeside Line and a diesel <unk> on the Speyside Section . Diesel Multiple Units ( DMU ) took over services to Peterhead and Fraserburgh in 1959 and from 1960 cross @-@ country types were used on an accelerated Aberdeen to Inverness service that allowed 2 1 ⁄ 2 hours for four stops . By 1961 the only service still using steam locomotives was the branch from Tillynaught to Banff . 
 In 1963 Dr Beeching published his report " The Reshaping of British Railways " , which recommended closing the network 's least used stations and lines . Only the Aberdeen to Keith main line survived , albeit without its stopping services and the remaining former Great North lines closed to passengers . The Lossiemouth and Banff branch closed in 1964 and the following year the St Combs branch , line from Dyce to Peterhead and Fraserburgh and the Speyside section closed and local services to Inverurie were withdrawn . Attempts to save the Deeside section to Banchory failed and it closed in 1966 . On 6 May 1968 services were withdrawn on the Coast Line , the former Great North line via Craigellachie and the local services between Aberdeen and Elgin . The Beeching Report had recommended Inverurie and Insch stations for closure , but these were saved by the subsequent inquiry . 
 The goods service at individual stations was also withdrawn after Beeching 's report . A <unk> depot opened at Aberdeen in 1966 , allowing the Peterhead line to close completely on 7 September 1970 . In 1969 – 70 the line between Aberdeen and Keith was singled , with passing loops , the line to Fraserburgh closing completely in 1979 and that from Keith to Dufftown in 1985 . In the 1969 timetable there were early morning trains between Aberdeen and Inverurie , and five services a day between Aberdeen to Inverness , supplemented by two Aberdeen to Elgin services that by the late 1970s were running through to Inverness . The cross @-@ country DMUs were replaced in 1980 by diesel locomotives hauling Mark I compartment coaches , later Mark II open saloons . These were similarly replaced in the late 1980s and early 1990s by newer DMUs , first the Class 156 Super Sprinter and then Class 158 Express and Class 170 units . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Aberdeen to Inverness Line currently uses the former Great North of Scotland Railway line as far Keith with stations at Dyce , Inverurie , Insch , Huntly and Keith . Eleven trains a day run between Aberdeen and Inverness , taking about 2 1 ⁄ 4 hours , supplemented between Aberdeen and Inverurie by approximately the same number of local trains . In a project scheduled for completion in 2030 , the line is to be improved to allow a regular hourly Aberdeen to Inverness service , additional commuter trains into Inverness and Aberdeen and new stations at Kintore and <unk> , near Inverness airport . 
 Heritage and tourist railways also use the former Great North of Scotland Railway alignment . The Keith and Dufftown Railway runs seasonal services over the 11 miles ( 18 km ) between Keith Town and Dufftown using Class 108 diesel multiple units . The Strathspey Railway operates seasonal services over the former Highland Railway route from Aviemore to Grantown @-@ on @-@ Spey via the joint Highland and Great North Boat of Garten station . The Royal Deeside Railway operates over 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of former Deeside Railway at Milton of <unk> near Banchory during summer weekends and in December , and based at Alford railway station is the Alford Valley Railway , which seasonally operates a 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) narrow gauge railway . 
 Former alignments have been opened as long distance rail trails for pedestrians , cyclists and horses . The 53 @-@ mile ( 85 km ) Formartine and Buchan Way runs from Dyce to Maud before dividing to follow the two branches to Peterhead and Fraserburgh . The Deeside Way is open between Aberdeen and Kincardine O 'Neil and Aboyne and Ballater . 
 <unk> ( The North East of Scotland Transport Partnership ) , the organization responsible for local transport strategy , consider that building new railways along these routes would not be beneficial at the moment but the alignments are protected from development . The Speyside Way , one of Scotland 's Long Distance Routes , mostly follows the route of the Speyside section between Craigellachie and <unk> and Grantown and Nethy Bridge . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 = = = Locomotives = = = 
 = = = = Early locomotives = = = = 
 The first locomotives were 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tender engines , built by Wm Fairbairn in Manchester to the design of the locomotive superintendent Daniel Kinnear Clark . Twelve were ordered for the opening of the first line , seven passenger and five goods . They were all fitted with Clark 's patent smoke preventing system that improved fuel economy and painted green with black borders , and red buffer beams . There was no protection for the driver or fireman and braking was by wooden blocks on the four wheels of the tender . The railway opened with only five locomotives , and within days one had been seriously damaged in the collision at Kittybrewster and a second had a mechanical fault . Two more locomotives had arrived by the end of 1854 , and the order was complete by summer 1855 . Four more passenger locomotives were ordered in 1857 , weatherboards and sanding equipment had been fitted by 1860 , and cabs added in the 1880s . John Folds Ruthven replaced Clark in 1855 and an order was placed with Beyer , Peacock & Co. for two 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank engines to bank trains on the line to Waterloo near Aberdeen harbour . After William Cowan became locomotive superintendent nine more locomotives arrived in 1859 – 61 . These were followed by nine 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s , also built by R. Stephenson & Co . , and delivered between 1862 and 1864 . Six more powerful 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 locomotives arrived from Neilsons in 1866 , and were fitted with a more modern bogie . Three passed to the London and North Eastern Railway after the 1923 Grouping , and No. 45 hauled a train at the Railway Centenary celebrations in 1925 before being scrapped . 
 In 1863 the Great North took over the operation of the Banffshire and Morayshire Railways and absorbed their locomotives . The Banffshire had four locomotives , two 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 tanks , named " Banff " and " Portsoy " , built by Hawthorns of Leith for the line 's opening in 1859 . The other two locomotives were 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 tender engines , one bought secondhand from the Scottish Central Railway , having been built in 1848 by the Vulcan Foundry in Warrington and named " Keith " , and a similar tender engine built by Hawthorns . The Morayshire Railway had started services in 1852 with two 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 0 engines designed by James Samuel and built by Neilsons . The locomotives had proved inadequate and were replaced by two larger 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank engines . The Great North took over the operation of the Deeside Railway in 1866 . Its first two locomotives were 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 tank engines , built by Hawthorns and arrived in 1854 . No. 3 , a tender locomotive , was delivered in 1854 from Dodds & Son of Rotherham , but this had mechanical defects and was never satisfactory . Between 1857 and 1866 four 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 tender locomotives arrived from Hawthorns ; these were similar to the Banffshire 's Nos. 3 and 4 ; the Deeside also bought the Banffshire 's No. 4 in 1864 . One of these locomotives was given a large six @-@ wheeled tender to allow it to haul the Royal Trains from Aberdeen to Ballater without stopping . The tender locomotives were found to be unstable at high speeds were all withdrawn by 1880 . 
 The company 's financial difficulties after 1866 had precluded the purchasing of any more locomotives until six 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 locomotives were built in 1876 by Neilson 's , partly to replace the Deeside locomotives . These had larger boilers and fireboxes than previous locomotives and were the first to be built with cabs . The next twelve locomotives had rounded splashers over the trailing driving wheels , meaning the shape of the cab was different , but retained the brass dome on the firebox , copper capped chimney and had brass bands joining the firebox and boiler . After James Manson became locomotive superintendent in 1883 he introduced a more contemporary design of locomotive , with inside cylinders and doors on the side of cabs and without brass domes or copper chimneys . The first six were built by Kitson & Co in Leeds in 1884 , followed by three similar but lighter in 1885 . The railway had inherited most of its tank engines from the Deeside , Morayshire and Banffshire Railways and these needed replacing , so six arrived in 1884 and three slightly larger the following year . The first tank engines in the country to be fitted with doors on the cabs , these worked on the suburban services and one was fitted with a cowcatcher to work the St Combs Light Railway at Fraserburgh . In 1887 two locomotives were built at Kittybrewster works . Although there was only space for four locomotives in the cramped repair shops the board expected to save £ 300 to £ 400 by building the locomotives themselves . Nine express locomotives with six @-@ wheeled tenders were built by <unk> in 1888 and these were followed by six more with eight @-@ wheeled tenders built by Stephenson & Co , one of which was successfully trialled in 1914 with a superheater . Most of Manson 's later locomotives were subsequently fitted with superheaters , the eight @-@ wheeled tenders being replaced in most cases with six @-@ wheeled tenders during the rebuild . 
 = = = = Class S and later = = = = 
 In 1890 Manson was replaced as locomotive superintendent by James Johnson , the son of Samuel W. Johnson , then locomotive superintendent at the Midland Railway . In 1893 Neilsons delivered six new 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tender locomotives that were more powerful any previous Great North locomotive and the first not to have Clark 's smoke prevention apparatus . Classified as Class S and known for rapid acceleration and sustained high speed , these were the blueprint for the later Great North tender locomotives . Manson had left a design for a 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 tank locomotive and Johnson changed the firebox , boiler and value gear so they were the same as the Class S tender locomotives before ordering nine to work the Deeside Line . These arrived in 1893 and most were transferred to the Aberdeen suburban services in 1900 . 
 William Pickersgill replaced Johnson in 1894 , and between 1895 and 1898 twenty @-@ six new locomotives were purchased from Neilsons . Similar to Johnson 's Class S , they were recorded at speeds of 79 @.@ 66 miles per hour ( 128 @.@ 20 km / h ) and running the 26 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 42 @.@ 6 km ) from <unk> to Dyce in 23 minutes 46 seconds . A further order for ten was placed in 1899 , but train mileage had been reduced and five were sold to the South Eastern & Chatham Railway . Pickersgill saw the works move from Kittybrewster to Inverurie before Thomas Heywood took over in 1914 , three months before the outbreak of war . The railway took over the working of the Aberdeen harbour railway and in 1915 purchased four 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2 tank locomotives from Manning Wardle . After the war , six more locomotives were built in 1920 by the North British Locomotive Company , and two locomotives the following year at Inverurie . Similar to the 1899 locomotives but with Robinson superheaters , these were given names . Heywood changed the livery during the war , and the traditional green being replaced by black lined with yellow and red . 
 On 1 January 1923 the Great North of Scotland became a part of the Scottish division of the London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) , who received a total of 122 locomotives , 100 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tender locomotives and 22 tank engines , all capable of being used on either passenger or goods trains . Forty @-@ four locomotives were still in service when the railway was nationalised in 1948 , and the last two Great North locomotives to be withdrawn were two of the Aberdeen harbour tanks in 1960 . No. 49 , Gordon Highlander was restored to Great North green in 1958 , although it had not previously carried the green livery as it appeared in Heywood 's lined black . It was used on special trains before becoming a static exhibit at the Glasgow Transport Museum in 1965 , and is currently on loan to the Scottish Railway Museum at Bo 'ness . 
 = = = Carriages = = = 
 The first carriages were 9 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) four @-@ wheelers , 21 feet 9 inches ( 6 @.@ 63 m ) long . Painted a dark brown with yellow lining and lettering , they had Newall 's chain brake and a seat for the guard on the roof . Two classes of accommodation were provided : the first class carriages were divided into three compartments each with six upholstered seats and lit by two oil lamps hung between the partitions . Third class passengers were seated on wooden benches in a carriage seating 40 passengers sharing one oil lamp . The Great North never owned any second class carriages . Built by Brown , Marshall & Co , only half the number of carriages ordered had arrived for the start of public services in 1854 . Later the guard 's seat was removed and longer vehicles with six wheels were built . Accommodation for third class passengers was improved in the 1880s and the seats were upholstered . 
 The Westinghouse air brake was trialled on carriages in the 1880s and this became standard in 1891 . As the Highland Railway used vacuum brakes , carriages used on the Aberdeen to Inverness were dual @-@ fitted . The livery changed in the late 1890s , when the upper half was painted cream and the lower purple lake , with gold lining and lettering . Corridor carriages , 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) long on six wheels , lit with electric lamps using Stone 's system and with both classes having access to a lavatory appeared in 1896 . Bogie corridor carriages , 48 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) long and weighing 25 long tons ( 25 t ) were built for the Aberdeen to Inverness express in 1898 with provision for vestibule connections . The Great North also had Royal Saloon carriage that , unusually for the Great North , was built with a clerestory roof . This was 48 @-@ foot ( 15 m ) long , lit by electric lamps and with steam heating , and divided into a first class compartment and an attendant 's coupe , which was fitted with a cooking stove . Later , shorter six @-@ wheeled and bogie compartment carriages were built for secondary services , and communication cords and steam heating were fitted in the early years of the twentieth century . No. 34 , a 6 @-@ wheel carriage built in the 1890s is preserved at the <unk> & Bolton Abbey Steam Railway as part of the Stately Trains collection . 
 In 1905 the Great North introduced two articulated steam railcars . The locomotive unit was mounted on four 3 feet 7 inches ( 1 @.@ 09 m ) wheels , one pair driven and with the Cochran patent boiler that was common on stationary engines , but an unusual design for a locomotive . The saloon carriage accommodated 46 third class passengers on reversible lath @-@ and @-@ space seats and a position for the driver with controls using cables over the carriage roof . The cars were introduced on the Lossiemouth branch and the St Combs Light Railway , but when in motion there was considerable vibration that was uncomfortable for the passengers and caused problems for the steam engine . Before they were withdrawn in 1909 – 10 , one was tried on Deeside suburban services , but had insufficient accommodation and was unable to maintain the schedule . 
 = = Constituent railways = = 
 The Great North of Scotland Railway absorbed the following railways in 1866 : 
 Aberdeen and Turriff Railway had been the Banff , Macduff and Turriff Junction Railway prior to 1859 . The Great North supported the railway , operated the services from opening and was guarantor from 1862 . 
 Banff , Macduff and Turriff Extension Railway extended the Aberdeen and Turriff from Turriff . Services were extended by the Great North over the new line from opening . 
 Most of the Alford Valley Railway 's directors also served on the board of the Great North , who operated services from opening and was guarantor from 1862 . 
 Formartine and Buchan Railway was worked by the Great North from opening in 1861 , with services from Aberdeen . The Great North was guarantor from 1863 . 
 Inverury and Old Meldrum Junction Railway opened in 1856 , the line was leased to the Great North from 1858 . 
 Keith and Dufftown Railway was worked as an extension of the main line , services operated by the Great North from opening in 1862 . 
 Strathspey Railway was sponsored by the Great North , who operated services from opening . 
 These companies operated by the Great North in 1866 were merged later : 
 Banffshire Railway had been Banff , Portsoy and <unk> Railway when it opened in 1859 , the Great North taking over the operation of services from 1863 and the company renamed . Amalgamation was authorised in an 1867 Act . 
 Deeside Railway leased from 1 September 1866 , merged 1 August 1875 . 
 Aboyne & Braemar Railway was the extension of the Deeside to Ballater , and was operated by the Great North from its opening on 17 October 1866 . Merged 31 January 1876 . 
 Morayshire Railway was opened in 1852 , worked by the Great North from 1863 when the extension to Craigellachie opened . The 1866 Act provided for the merging of the two companies when terms where agreed , and the companies were merged in 1880 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = Final Fantasy VII = 
 Final Fantasy VII is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the PlayStation platform . Released in 1997 , it is the seventh installment in the Final Fantasy series and the first in the series to use 3D computer graphics , featuring fully rendered characters on pre @-@ rendered backgrounds . It was also the first game in the main series to be released in Europe . The story follows Cloud Strife , a mercenary who joins the eco @-@ terrorist rebel organization AVALANCHE to stop the world @-@ controlling megacorporation Shinra from draining the life of the planet to use as an energy source . Cloud and his allies become involved in a larger world @-@ threatening conflict and face off against Sephiroth , the main antagonist . 
 Development of Final Fantasy VII began in 1994 . It was originally developed for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , but was moved to the Nintendo 64 ; since the Nintendo 64 's cartridges lacked the required storage capacity for substantial prerendered movie footage , Square moved the game to the CD @-@ ROM based PlayStation . It was directed by Yoshinori Kitase , written by Kazushige Nojima and Kitase , and produced by Hironobu Sakaguchi . The music was composed by Final Fantasy veteran Nobuo Uematsu , while the series ' long @-@ time character designer , Yoshitaka Amano , was replaced by Tetsuya Nomura . 
 Helped by a large pre @-@ release promotional campaign , Final Fantasy VII was a critical and commercial success . It was released in 1997 for the Sony PlayStation , in 1998 for Windows , in 2009 on the PlayStation Network , in 2012 on PC Digital Download , and in 2013 on Steam . In 2014 , the game was released for Android and iPhone devices through the Japan @-@ only streaming service " Dive In " . On December 6 , 2014 , it was announced that Final Fantasy VII would be released on the PlayStation 4 , with upscaled graphics . It has continued to sell solidly , with more than 11 million copies sold by 2015 , making it the best @-@ selling title in the series . Final Fantasy VII has been praised for its graphics , gameplay , music and story . Criticism has primarily pertained to its English localization . The iOS version of Final Fantasy VII was released on August 19 , 2015 , adding touch controls , an auto @-@ save feature and the ability to disable random encounters . This was followed by the PlayStation 4 port with high speed mode finally releasing in December 2015 and on Android in July 2016 . 
 The game is acknowledged for having boosted the sales of PlayStation consoles and popularizing Japanese role @-@ playing video games outside Japan . It is widely considered to be one of the greatest games of all time . The game 's popularity has led to a series of prequels and sequels under the collective title Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . Square Enix announced a high @-@ definition remake of the game at E3 2015 for the PlayStation 4 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with previous installments of the Final Fantasy series , Final Fantasy VII consists primarily of three major areas : an overworld map , field maps , and a battle screen . The overworld map is a 3D model , featuring a scaled @-@ down version of the game 's fictional world , across which the player travels between the game 's locations . As with preceding games in the series , the world map can be traversed by foot , on chocobos and in an airship or sea vessel ( in this case , a submarine and a plane used as a boat ) . It also includes an additional means of transportation — a buggy . 
 On field maps , characters are directed across realistically scaled environments , consisting of 2D pre @-@ rendered backgrounds which represent locations such as towns or forests . Initially , the player is restricted to the city of Midgar , but as the game progresses the entire world becomes accessible . Progression through the game 's storyline is largely developed by way of scripted sequences , although pre @-@ rendered cinematic cutscenes are also used . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Battles , which either occur randomly on the field or are triggered by certain events , pit the player 's party against one or more enemies . Winning the battle by means of defeating all the enemies earns experience , gil , and items . However , if all party members are simultaneously KO 'd or are otherwise unable to battle ( such as by petrification ) , the game ends and the player must resume from their last save file . The battle screen is a 3D representation of an area , such as a building 's interior or an open grassland , in which the player commands the characters in battles against CPU @-@ controlled enemies . While characters are super deformed on maps , the character models are more realistic and normal @-@ scaled in combat . Final Fantasy VII is the first game in the series to have character models with fully rendered polygons , rather than 2D sprites . During battle sequences , the game uses the series ' traditional Active Time Battle ( ATB ) system first featured in Final Fantasy IV . Unlike previous games in the series , which allow 4 @-@ 5 playable characters to participate in battle , Final Fantasy VII only allows three characters per battle . 
 Final Fantasy VII 's skill system is built around the use of Materia — magical orbs composed of condensed Mako ( life energy from the Planet ) , that are placed in special slots on weapons and armor , allowing players to customize their party 's ability to use magic , summons , and special abilities . Materia is divided into five categories ; Green Magic Materia for performing offensive and defensive spells , Yellow Skill Materia which grants new abilities , Red Summon Materia , which lets the character summon powerful deities to aid in battle , Purple Support Materia which gives the equipped character stat boosts , and Blue Junction Materia , which enhances other Materia when placed in connecting slots ( for example , linking Fire Materia with All Materia allows the player to attack all enemies with the Fire spell simultaneously ) . However , most magic @-@ based Materia also lowers an equipped character 's physical attributes . Like the characters , Materia can level up with experience , opening up stronger abilities and functionality , with new Materia created once they reach the maximum level . Summon spells feature in the game , equippable as Materia , with elaborately animated attacks . A modified form of Final Fantasy VI 's " Desperation Attacks " appears in Final Fantasy VII as the " Limit Break . " Every playable character has a bar that gradually fills up as they suffer damage in battle . When the bar is completely filled , the character is able to unleash his or her Limit Break , a special attack which generally inflicts significantly more damage on enemies than normal attacks , or otherwise aids the party in battle . Unlike Materia , each character has their own unique set of Limit Breaks , which are divided into four levels of strength , although one character , Cait Sith , has only two levels . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game 's setting is similar to that of Final Fantasy VI insofar as it is a world with considerably more advanced technology than the first five games in the series . Overall , the game 's technology and society approximates that of an industrial or post @-@ industrial science fiction milieu . The world of Final Fantasy VII , referred to in the game as " The Planet " , but retroactively named " Gaia " , is composed of three main land masses . The eastern continent is home to the city of Midgar , an industrial metropolis that serves as the capital city and hosts the headquarters of the Shinra Electric Power Company , which operates as much of the world 's de facto government . Other locations on the eastern continent are Junon ( Shinra 's major military base ) , Fort Condor ( a fort with a huge condor covering up a Mako reactor on top of it ) , a Chocobo ranch , and Kalm ( a small town inspired by medieval Europe ) . 
 The western continent features the Gold Saucer ( an amusement park with Corel Prison below ) , Costa Del Sol ( a seaside resort ) , Gongaga ( a small town containing the remains of a destroyed Mako reactor ) , Nibelheim ( a town residing at the base of Mt . Nibel ) , Rocket Town ( the location of Shinra 's failed space rocket launch ) , and Cosmo Canyon . The tribe inhabiting Cosmo Canyon emphasize living in harmony with nature and dedicating themselves to the planet 's well @-@ being . Their settlement features an observatory and serves as a research facility for those who wish to participate in a philosophy known as the " Study of Planet Life " , a lifestyle that encourages deference for nature and teaches that the planet has a life and energy of its own . 
 Wutai , a village inspired by pre @-@ modern Japan and China , is located on a large island off the western continent . The northernmost continent is a heavily glaciated landmass , and its few settlements include Bone Village ( an excavation site ) , Icicle Inn ( a ski resort town ) , the mythical " City of the Ancients " , and the Northern Crater , where the game 's climax takes place . There are also underwater locations accessible only by submarine ; for example , a sunken Shinra plane transporter . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The nine main playable characters in Final Fantasy VII are Cloud Strife , an unsociable mercenary who claims to be a former 1st Class member of Shinra 's SOLDIER unit ; Barret Wallace , the leader of the anti @-@ Shinra rebel group AVALANCHE ; Tifa Lockhart , a martial artist and a member of AVALANCHE , also a childhood friend of Cloud 's ; Aerith Gainsborough , a flower merchant who has been pursued by Shinra 's special operations unit , the Turks , since childhood ; Red XIII , a wise lion @-@ like creature who was experimented on by Shinra scientists ; Cait Sith , a fortune @-@ telling robotic cat who rides an animated moogle doll ; Cid Highwind , a pilot whose dreams of being the first man in outer space were not realized ; Yuffie Kisaragi , a young ninja and a skillful thief ; and Vincent Valentine , a former member of Shinra 's Turks unit , who was experimented on 30 years prior to the start of the game . The game 's main antagonist is Sephiroth , a former member of SOLDIER who reappears several years after he was thought dead . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins with Cloud Strife , working as a mercenary for hire , helping the eco terrorist group AVALANCHE in a raid against the Mako reactors surrounding the city of Midgar , which is governed by a company known as Shinra . Barret , the group 's leader , believes the Mako energy the reactors consume to be the planet 's lifeblood , and the reactors are killing the planet . Cloud 's childhood friend , Tifa , is also in the group . Although the first mission is successful , AVALANCHE is ambushed at the next reactor during a subsequent raid . When the reactor explodes , Cloud drops down into Midgar 's slums . He is found by Aerith ( aka Aeris ) , a girl he briefly met selling flowers after his first mission with AVALANCHE . Prompted by the arrival of the Turks , who have been sent to capture Aerith , Cloud agrees to act as her bodyguard and defends her from their assault . Meanwhile , Shinra learns the location of AVALANCHE 's hideout in Sector 7 and subsequently destroys it by dropping the upper plate of Sector 7 onto the slums , killing its population . The Turks also capture Aerith , who is revealed to be the last surviving " Cetra " , an ancient near @-@ dead tribe closely attuned with the planet . President Shinra and Professor Hojo believe Aerith is the key to finding the " Promised Land " , a mythical land of fertility they see as an abundant source of Mako . The remaining AVALANCHE members — Cloud , Barret and Tifa — infiltrate Shinra to rescue Aerith , in the process encountering a specimen simply labeled " Jenova " . Joined by Red XIII , a sentient tiger @-@ like creature on whom Hojo had been conducting experiments , the party rescues Aerith but is captured by the Turks while trying to escape and detained within the building . In the morning , they find their cells open and most of the personnel , including President Shinra , killed : the perpetrator appears to be Sephiroth , a legendary SOLDIER leader who was presumed dead several years <unk> group discovers that the Jenova specimen is also missing , presumed stolen by Sephiroth . 
 While the president 's son , Rufus Shinra , assumes control of the company , the party leaves Midgar and pursues Sephiroth across the planet . They are joined by Cait Sith , a cat @-@ robot secretly controlled by repentant Turk Reeve Tuesti ; Yuffie Kisaragi , a teenage ninja from Wutai ; Vincent Valentine , a former Turk ; and Cid Highwind , a chain @-@ smoking pilot . At a Cetra temple , the party encounters Sephiroth , who reveals his plan : if the world is significantly damaged , the Lifestream , made of pure Mako energy , will gather in an attempt to heal the wound . Sephiroth intends to use the legendary Black Materia to cast a spell called " Meteor " to cause a massive injury , enabling him to merge with the planet 's Mako energy and be reborn as a god . The party drives off Sephiroth , acquiring the Black Materia , but Sephiroth manipulates Cloud into giving him the Materia . While the party recovers from the encounter , Aerith sets off to stop Sephiroth on her own , following him to an ancient Cetra city . The party follows and finds Aerith praying to the planet for aid . Just as they reach her , Sephiroth kills her . Cloud and his allies track Sephiroth to the North Crater . During their journey , they find out that Jenova is an interstellar creature who crashed on the planet roughly two thousand years ago , intent on taking over completely . Attempting to defend itself , the planet created giant monsters called Weapons . While most humans fled , the Cetra managed to defeat Jenova and <unk> its remains . A few decades before the present , the remains of Jenova were unearthed by Professor Gast , a researcher for Shinra . Mistaking Jenova for a Cetra , Gast attempted to clone Jenova , assisted by Hojo . Even though Gast abandoned the project , Hojo successfully managed to use his assistant 's unborn child for the experiment : the baby was Sephiroth . Approximately five years before the present day , while on a Shinra mission with Cloud to Cloud 's and Tifa 's hometown of Nibelheim , Sephiroth encountered Hojo 's failed test subjects and learned of his origins . Mistakenly believing that Jenova and he were Cetra , he was driven insane and destroyed Nibelheim as an act of vengeance on the normal human population . Cloud and Tifa confronted Sephiroth during the massacre , after which Sephiroth vanished , presumed dead until his reappearance in the present day . 
 When the party reaches the Northern Crater to confront Sephiroth for killing Aerith , they learn he is but one among many Jenova clones Hojo created from both animals and humans . Upon reaching Sephiroth , who has been killing and absorbing the Jenova clones to <unk> the " Reunion " of Jenova 's cells , Cloud is manipulated into delivering The Black Materia to a legless Sephiroth chimera ( all such apparitions being the shape @-@ shifter Jenova employing his spectre to achieve this goal ) . The act proves Cloud himself a Jenova clone and unwitting Reunion participant , evidence of which Sephiroth exhibits in memories of the Nibelheim incident featuring a black @-@ haired SOLDIER in Cloud 's place . Instantly Sephiroth summons Meteor , activating the planet 's Weapons , but he blinds them to his posing its prime threat , despite being physically right before their eyes ; the Weapons disperse in search of its source . The ensuing earthquake separates Cloud from his companions and he tumbles into the Lifestream . The rest of the party and the Turks that had followed them to the Crater escape on the airship , the Highwind , where the party members are placed under arrest . As Meteor approaches the planet , the Weapons turn on humanity in an attempt to return as much Mako energy to the Lifestream as possible to aid the planet . Shinra focuses its efforts on protecting humanity from the Weapons and attempting to destroy Meteor directly , which eventually costs the lives of the majority of Shinra 's personnel . Tifa , Barret and the others are sentenced to be executed , but escape . They find a catatonic Cloud at a hospital in a tropical resort , where he washed up following the events at the North Crater . Tifa stays behind to help Cloud recover while the rest of the party continue their fight against Shinra . An attack by the Weapons destroys the island , and Cloud and Tifa both fall into the Lifestream . There , Tifa helps Cloud reconstruct his memories and learns the truth about his past . 
 It is revealed that Cloud was not accepted into SOLDIER and that the SOLDIER in Sephiroth 's visions was Aerith 's first love and Cloud 's friend , Zack Fair . The two were present during the Nibelheim incident , with Cloud managing to critically wound Sephiroth , who only survived through Jenova 's cells : Zack and Cloud were severely wounded and later taken and used by Hojo to perfect his SOLDIER and Jenova experiments . Zack tried escaping with Cloud but was killed by Shinra soldiers . Cloud recovered , took Zack 's sword and made his way to Midgar : Cloud 's aspirations to SOLDIER and Zack 's memories and stories combined , with the help of the Jenova treatment , to create a false personality . Realizing and accepting his past , Cloud is able to recover . After Cloud and Tifa emerge from the Lifestream , the party regroup and learn that Aerith , in her final moments , was attempting to use the White Materia to cast the spell " Holy " , the only means of opposing Meteor . It turns out she was successful in casting the spell , but Sephiroth has been preventing its release . The group decides first to stop the rampage of the Weapons . Alongside this , the party confronts Hojo , revealed to be Sephiroth 's father , as the scientist attempts to aid his son by feeding Mako energy to him . After mutating himself with Jenova cells , he is killed in combat . After this , they launch their final assault on Sephiroth , who is defeated by Cloud after a series of battles . The party escapes from the crater as Holy is released . Holy attempts to block Meteor above Midgar , but Meteor has drawn too close for Holy to combat it alone . Just before Meteor 's impact , the Lifestream rises from the planet to aid Holy in destroying Meteor . Five hundred years later , Red XIII is seen with two cubs looking out over the ruins of Midgar , which are now covered in greenery , showing the planet has healed . 
 = = Development = = 
 Planning sessions for Final Fantasy VII began in 1994 after the release of Final Fantasy VI . At the time , the game was intended to be another 2D project for the Super NES . Series creator Hironobu Sakaguchi originally planned for the story to take place in New York in the year 1999 , and as such , the original script of Final Fantasy VII , which was written by Sakaguchi , was completely different from the finished product . Tetsuya Nomura recalled how Sakaguchi " wanted to do something like a detective story . " The first part of the story involved a " hot blooded " character named " Detective Joe " who was in pursuit of the main characters , after they had blown up the city of Midgar , which had already been developed for the story . The final scenario was written by Kazushige Nojima and Yoshinori Kitase , based on the story by Sakaguchi and Nomura . Masato Kato was brought into the project later and wrote three scenes for the game . 
 However , several of the staff members were working in parallel on Chrono Trigger , and development for Final Fantasy VII was interrupted when the other project became significant enough to require the help of Kitase and other designers . Some of the ideas originally considered for Final Fantasy VII ultimately ended up in Chrono Trigger instead . Other ideas , such as the New York setting and the sorceress character Edea , were kept unused until the later projects Parasite Eve and Final Fantasy VIII respectively . 
 Development resumed in late 1995 , and required the efforts of approximately 120 artists and programmers , using PowerAnimator and Softimage 3D software . The group worked out of both Japan and Square 's new American office in Los Angeles , with the American team primarily responsible for city backgrounds . It was the most expensive video game of its time , with a development budget of around US $ 45 million , equivalent to $ 67 million in 2015 . Kitase was concerned the franchise might be left behind if it did not catch up to the 3D graphics being used in other games , and production began after the completion of a short , experimental tech demo called Final Fantasy SGI for Silicon Graphics Onyx workstations . The demo featured polygon @-@ based 3D renderings of characters from Final Fantasy VI in a real time battle . 
 The experimental SGI demo led the development team to integrate some of the design mechanics into Final Fantasy VII . However , due to the high quantity of motion data , only the CD @-@ ROM format had the capacity for the project 's needs . Nintendo , for whom Square had developed previous titles in the Final Fantasy series , had decided to continue to use cartridges for its upcoming Nintendo 64 console . This eventually led to a dispute that resulted in Square ending its relationship with Nintendo . Instead , they announced on January 12 , 1996 that they would be developing Final Fantasy VII exclusively for Sony 's PlayStation console . Square officials explained that even the 64DD lacked sufficient storage for Final Fantasy VII , as more than thirty 64DD discs would be needed to hold all the game 's data . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 For the first time since having worked on Final Fantasy on the Famicom , Sakaguchi made the gameplay systems a priority over the story , as the team 's main concern during the development of the game was how to implement the 3D . The transition from 2D graphics to 3D environments overlaid on pre @-@ rendered backgrounds was accompanied by a focus on a more realistic presentation . While the extra storage capacity and computer graphics gave the team the means to implement more than 40 minutes of full motion video ( FMV ) movies , this innovation brought with it the added difficulty of ensuring that the inferiority of the in @-@ game graphics in comparison to the FMV sequences was not too obvious . Kitase has described the process of making the in @-@ game environments as detailed as possible to be " a daunting task . " The series ' long @-@ time character designer , Yoshitaka Amano , was opening art workshops and exhibitions in France and New York , which limited his involvement in the game . As a result , Tetsuya Nomura was appointed as the project 's character designer , while Amano aided in the design of the game 's world map . 
 Several of Nomura 's designs changed during development from their initial conceptions . For example , Cloud 's original design of slicked @-@ back black hair with no spikes was intended to serve as a contrast to Sephiroth 's long , flowing silver hair . Nomura feared , however , that such masculinity could prove unpopular with fans , and therefore he changed Cloud 's design to feature a shock of spiky , bright blond hair . Vincent changed from researcher to detective to chemist , and finally to the figure of a former Turk with a tragic past . Nomura has indicated that Cid Highwind 's fighting style resembles that of a Dragoon Knight , a character class which was chosen because his last name is the same as that of two previous Dragoon Knights featured in the Final Fantasy series , Ricard Highwind of Final Fantasy II and Kain Highwind of Final Fantasy IV . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Final Fantasy VII was composed , arranged , and produced by Nobuo Uematsu . Instead of using recorded music and sound effects for the game , Uematsu opted for sequenced audio ( similar to MIDI ) , using the PlayStation 's internal sound chip . Final Fantasy VII was the second game in the series ( after Final Fantasy VI ) to include a track with sampled vocals ; with " One @-@ Winged Angel " , which has been described as Uematsu 's " most recognizable contribution " to the music of the Final Fantasy series . Uematsu said the soundtrack has a feel of " realism " , which prevented him from using " exorbitant , crazy music . " 
 The game 's soundtrack was released as a four @-@ disc set on February 10 , 1997 . A single @-@ disc album of selected tracks from the original soundtrack and three arranged tracks , entitled Final Fantasy VII Reunion Tracks , was released separately . Piano Collections Final Fantasy VII , a piano arrangement of selected tracks , was released in 2003 . Several tracks from the game have been remixed in subsequent Square productions , including Final Fantasy IX , Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII and Kingdom Hearts . In 2012 , music from the soundtrack entered the Classic FM Hall of Fame at number 16 . 
 = = Release = = 
 In early August 1996 , a demonstration disc called " Square 's Preview " was released in Japan as a bonus pack @-@ in with the PlayStation game Tobal No. 1 . The disc contained the earliest playable demo of Final Fantasy VII and previews of other upcoming games such as Bushido Blade and SaGa Frontier . The demo allowed players to play through the first part of Midgar . However , there were some noticeable differences from the final version , namely that Aerith was featured in the initial party and the ability to use Summons had not yet been implemented . 
 The game 's release in North America was preceded by a massive three @-@ month marketing campaign , which consisted of three 30 @-@ second television commercials on major networks , a one @-@ minute long theatrical commercial , a holiday promotion with Pepsi , and printed ads in publications such as Rolling Stone , Details , Spin , Playboy and comic books published by Marvel and DC Comics . Several additions to gameplay and story were made for the game 's North American release , such as easier exchange of materia , arrows highlighting exits on field screens , and an extra cutscene , prompting a re @-@ release in Japan under the title Final Fantasy VII International . On December 18 , 2012 this version was re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box Japanese package . 
 In 1998 , Final Fantasy VII was ported to Windows @-@ based PCs . This re @-@ release featured smoother graphics , and also fixed translation and spelling errors , as well as gameplay @-@ related glitches . However , the PC version suffered from diminished audio quality due to its use of the MIDI format and errors in the display of some FMVs when rendering in hardware mode on certain graphics chipsets . Since the original PC release of the game , fans have created hundreds of mods for the PC version of the game . The most prominent community being the <unk> forum community , featuring various mods including game patches ( for better compatibility with modern Windows and graphics cards ) , PC @-@ PS save game converter , save game editor , game trainers , character models , world map , cutscenes , music , and battle stages . 
 In addition to the PlayStation and PC releases , the game was released onto the PlayStation Network in Japan on April 10 , 2009 , in North America on June 2 , 2009 , and in Europe and Australia on June 4 , 2009 . The Japanese release is the International version . The PSN release of the game was downloaded 100 @,@ 000 times during its first two weeks of release , making it the fastest @-@ selling PlayStation game on the PlayStation Network . 
 On July 4 , 2012 , Square Enix revealed that a PC re @-@ release was forthcoming . It was subsequently released on August 14 . The game features 36 new achievements to be unlocked , optional " Cloud Saves " , and a " Character Booster " feature . This enhanced release for modern PCs was developed by DotEmu and was available exclusively via the Square Enix store . The game can be played at Full HD ( 1920x1080 ) resolution with upscaled original graphics . The release is primarily aimed to port the classic game into a downloadable game to be run on modern Windows OSs ( XP / Vista / 7 ) and DirectX <unk> On July 4 , 2013 , the game was released on the Steam digital distribution platform for Windows PCs . This version of the game was released for iOS devices in mid @-@ 2015 and for PlayStation 4 in December 5 , 2015 and added in a cheats , a feature that is missing on the PC release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Initial reception and sales = = = 
 Final Fantasy VII was both a critical and commercial success , and set several sales records . Within three days of its release in Japan , the game had sold 2 @.@ 3 million copies . This popularity inspired thousands of retailers in North America to break street dates in September to meet public demand for the title . In the game 's debut weekend in North America , it sold 330 @,@ 000 copies , and had reached sales of 500 @,@ 000 units in less than three weeks . The momentum established in the game 's opening weeks continued for several months ; Sony announced the game had sold one million copies in North America by early December , prompting business analyst Edward Williams from <unk> , Crespi , Hardt & Co. to comment , " Sony redefined the role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) category and expanded the conventional audience with the launch of Final Fantasy VII . " As of December 25 , 2005 , the game had sold over 9 @.@ 8 million copies worldwide , making it the highest @-@ selling game in the Final Fantasy series . By the end of 2006 , the bargain reissue of the International version of the game alone had sold over 158 @,@ 000 copies in Japan . Final Fantasy VII is credited as " the game that sold the PlayStation , " as well as allowing role @-@ playing games to find a place in markets outside Japan . As of May 2010 , it had sold 10 million copies worldwide , making it the most popular title in the series in terms of units sold . As of 2015 , the Steam version has sold over 1 million copies , and the game has sold over 11 million units in total . 
 Upon release , the game received widespread acclaim from critics . It was referred to by GameFan as " quite possibly the greatest game ever made , " a quote which continues to feature prominently on the back cover of the game 's jewel case . GameSpot commented that " never before have technology , playability , and narrative combined as well as in Final Fantasy VII , " expressing particular favor toward the game 's graphics , audio , and story . IGN 's Jay <unk> insisted the game 's graphics were " light years beyond anything ever seen on the PlayStation , " and regarded its battle system as its strongest point . Computer and Video Games 's Alex C praised the story , stating that the " many characters that come and go throughout the story are well developed , and players will feel the ups and downs of the protagonists as if it were a film , " and that the " structure of the story is such that , just when you think you 've seen it all , something even more awesome comes along to totally knock your socks off . " Edge noted , " The ‘ interactive movie ’ has long been a dirty term to anyone who values a playable videogame , but FFVII succeeds in coming closer than any title yet , " with the " highly complex , melodramatic story and excellently orchestrated chip music " combining " to make players feel real empathy with the characters , " a " task usually shied away from by the action / comedy @-@ orientated western graphic adventures . " RPGamer praised the game 's soundtrack , both in variety and sheer volume , stating that " Uematsu has done his work exceptionally well " and " is perhaps at his best here . " Electronic Gaming Monthly 's panel of four reviewers gave the game scores of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 each , adding up to a score of 38 out of 40 in total . 
 Reviewers also praised the game 's PC conversion , but criticized it for its lower @-@ quality pre @-@ rendered visuals and audio , and for its framerate and installation problems . Computer Games Magazine said that " [ no ] game in recent memory " had such a " tendency to fail to work in any capacity on multiple [ computers ] . " Computer Gaming World complained that the " music , while beautifully composed , is butchered by being dependent on your sound card , " and Next Generation Magazine found the game 's pre @-@ rendered backgrounds significantly less impressive than those of the PlayStation version . However , the latter magazine found the higher @-@ resolution battle visuals " absolutely stunning , " and Computer Games Magazine said that they " [ show ] off the power of [ a ] PC equipped with a 3D card . " All three magazines concluded by praising the game despite its technical flaws , and PC Gamer summarized that , while " Square apparently did only what was required to get its PlayStation game running under Windows , " Final Fantasy VII is " still a winner on the PC . " 
 Final Fantasy VII has received some negative criticism as well . Square 's announcement that it would be produced for Sony rather than Nintendo and that it would not be based on the Final Fantasy SGI demo was met with discontent among some gamers . Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine ( OPM ) and GameSpot questioned the game 's linear progression . OPM considered the game 's translation " a bit muddy " and felt the summon animations were " repetitive . " RPGamer cited its translation as " packed with typos and other errors which further obscure what is already a very confusing plot . " GamePro also considered the Japanese @-@ to @-@ English translation a significant weakness in the game , and IGN regarded the ability to use only three characters at a time as " the game 's only shortcoming . " 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Final Fantasy VII was given numerous Game of the Year awards in 1997 . It won in the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences ' first annual Interactive Achievement Awards in the categories " Console Adventure Game of the Year " and " Console Role Playing Game of the Year " ( it was also nominated in the categories " Interactive Title of the Year " , " Outstanding Achievement in Art / Graphics " and " Outstanding Achievement in Interactive Design " ) . In the Origins Award , it won in the category " Best Roleplaying Computer Game of 1997 . " It was also awarded the " Readers ' Choice All Systems Game of the Year " , " Readers ' Choice PlayStation Game of the Year " and " Readers ' Choice Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year " by EGM , which also gave it other awards for " Hottest Video Game Babe " ( for Tifa <unk> ) , " Most Hyper for a Game " , " Best Ending " and " Best Print Ad " . 
 Since 1997 , it has been selected by many game magazines as one of the top video games of all time , including as 91st in EGM 's 2001 " 100 Best Games of All Time " , and as fourth in Retro Gamer 's " Top 100 Games " in 2004 . In 2005 , it was ranked as 88th in IGN 's " Top 100 Games of All Time " and as third in PALGN 's " The Greatest 100 Games Ever " . Final Fantasy VII was included in the " The Greatest Games of All Time " list by GameSpot in 2006 , and ranked as second in Empire 's 2006 " 100 Greatest Games of All Time " , as third in Stuff 's " 100 Greatest Games " in 2008 and as 15th in Game Informer 's 2009 " Top 200 Games of All Time " ( down five places from its previous best games of all time list ) . GameSpot placed it at the top of its list of the most influential games ever made in 2001 , and as second in 2002 ; in 2007 , GamePro ranked it 14th on the list of the most important games of all time , and in 2009 it finished in the same place on their list of the most innovative games of all time . In 2012 , Time named it one of " All @-@ TIME 100 Video Games " . 
 It has also appeared in numerous other greatest game lists . In 2007 , Dengeki PlayStation gave it the " Best Story " , " Best RPG " and " Best Overall Game " retrospective awards for games on the original PlayStation . GamePro named it the best RPG title of all time in 2008 , and featured it in their 2010 article " The 30 Best PSN Games . " In 2012 , GamesRadar also ranked it as the sixth saddest game ever . On the other hand , GameSpy ranked it seventh on their 2003 list of the most overrated games ( in 2011 , Destructoid argued " why Final Fantasy VII is not overrated " ) . 
 Final Fantasy VII has often placed at or near the top of many reader polls of all @-@ time best games . It was voted the " Reader 's Choice Game of the Century " in an IGN poll in 2000 and placed second in the " Top 100 Favorite Games of All Time " by Japanese magazine Famitsu in 2006 ( it was also voted as ninth in Famitsu 's 2011 poll of most tear @-@ inducing games of all time ) . Users of GameFAQs voted it the " Best Game Ever " in 2004 and in 2005 , and placed it second in 2009 . In 2008 , readers of Dengeki magazine voted it the best game ever made , as well as the ninth most tear @-@ inducing game of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In addition to the PlayStation and PC releases , the game was released onto the PlayStation Network in Japan on April 10 , 2009 , in North America on June 2 , 2009 , and in Europe and Australia on June 4 , 2009 . The Japanese release is the International version . The PSN release of the game was downloaded 100 @,@ 000 times during its first two weeks of release , making it the fastest @-@ selling PlayStation game on the PlayStation Network . The game has also inspired an unofficial version for the NES by Chinese company Shenzhen Nanjing Technology . This port features the Final Fantasy VII game scaled back to 2D , with some of the side quests removed . On the 5th of December 2015 , an upscaled version of the original game , complete with trophies and integrated cheats , was released on the PS4 . It is based on the enhanced PC version released on Steam in 2013 
 The game 's popularity and open @-@ ended nature also led director Kitase and scenario writer Nojima to establish a plot @-@ related connection between Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . The character Shinra from Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 proposes the concept of extracting the life energy from within the planet Spira . Nojima has stated that Shinra and his proposal are a deliberate nod to the Shinra Company , and that he envisioned the events of Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 as a prequel to those in Final Fantasy VII . The FMV sequences and computer graphics used in Final Fantasy VII allowed Sakaguchi to begin production on the first Final Fantasy film , Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within . The game also introduced settings suffused with modern @-@ to @-@ advanced technology into the Final Fantasy series , a theme continued by Final Fantasy VIII and The Spirits Within . Re @-@ releases of Square games in Japan with bonus features would occur frequently after the release of Final Fantasy VII International . Later titles that would be re @-@ released as international versions include Final Fantasy X ( as " International " ) , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 ( as " International + Last Mission " ) , Kingdom Hearts ( as " Final Mix " ) , Kingdom Hearts II ( as " Final Mix " ) , and Final Fantasy XII ( as " International Zodiac Job System " ) . 
 Several characters from Final Fantasy VII have also made cameo appearances in other Square Enix titles , most notably the fighting game Ehrgeiz and the popular Final Fantasy @-@ Disney crossover series Kingdom Hearts . Additionally , fighting video game Dissidia Final Fantasy includes Final Fantasy VII characters such as Cloud and Sephiroth , and allows players to fight with characters from throughout the Final Fantasy series , and its follow @-@ up , Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy , included Tifa as well . On the November 12 , 2015 , Nintendo Direct , it was announced that Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U would receive Cloud as a downloadable content character in 2015 , along with a stage based on Midgar . Aerith 's death in the game has often been referred as one of the most emotional moments from any video game , while Sephiroth remains one of the most popular villains in video game history . 
 = = = Related media and merchandise = = = 
 Compilation of Final Fantasy VII is the formal title for a series of games , animated features and short stories based in the world of Final Fantasy VII . The series consists of several titles across various platforms , all of which are extensions of the original story . The first title in the Compilation is the mobile game Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , a prequel focusing on the Turks ' activities six years prior to the original game , including their first encounter with AVALANCHE . The CGI film sequel Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children , set two years after the events of the game , was the first title announced in the series , but it was the second to be released . Special DVD editions of the film included Last Order : Final Fantasy VII , an original video animation that recounts the destruction of Nibelheim . Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII and its mobile phone counterpart , Dirge of Cerberus Lost Episode : Final Fantasy VII , are third @-@ person shooters set three years after the events of Final Fantasy VII and one after the events of Advent Children . Dirge focuses on Vincent Valentine , and goes into more detail regarding his backstory than the original Final Fantasy VII . The most recent title is the PlayStation Portable game Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , an action role @-@ playing game that revolves around Zack 's past . Also included in the Compilation is On the Way to a Smile , a collection of seven short stories written by Kazushige Nojima , and set between the end of Final Fantasy VII and the beginning of Advent Children . Originally only three stories were released : " Case of Barret " , " Case of Tifa " and " Case of Denzel " , but with the release of Advent Children Complete , four more stories were written ; " Case of Nanaki " , " Case of Yuffie " , " Case of Shinra " and " Case of Lifestream - White & Black " . 
 Releases not under the Compilation label include , Maiden Who Travels the Planet , which follows Aerith 's journey in the Lifestream after her death at the hands of Sephiroth , taking place concurrently with the second half of the original game . Final Fantasy VII Snowboarding is a mobile port of the snowboard minigame featured in Final Fantasy VII , which contains different course than the original minigame . The game is downloadable on V Cast @-@ compatible mobile phones , and was first made available in 2005 in Japan and North America . Final Fantasy VII G @-@ Bike is a mobile game released for iOS and Android in December 2014 , based on the motorbike minigame featured in FFVII . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 With the announcement and development of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , speculation spread that an enhanced remake of the original Final Fantasy VII would be released for the PlayStation 3 . This speculation was sparked at the 2005 E3 convention by the release of a video featuring the opening sequence of Final Fantasy VII recreated using the PlayStation 3 's graphical capabilities . A high definition remake was officially confirmed at E3 2015 , for the PS4 . The game will be more than a high definition remaster , with director Tetsuya Nomura stating that the game will have changes made to its story and combat system . 
 = Gropecunt Lane = 
 Gropecunt Lane / <unk> <unk> / was a street name found in English towns and cities during the Middle Ages , believed to be a reference to the prostitution centred on those areas ; it was normal practice for a medieval street name to reflect the street 's function or the economic activity taking place within it . Gropecunt , the earliest known use of which is in about 1230 , appears to have been derived as a compound of the words grope and cunt . Streets with that name were often in the busiest parts of medieval towns and cities , and at least one appears to have been an important thoroughfare . 
 Although the name was once common throughout England , changes in attitude resulted in its replacement by more innocuous versions such as Grape Lane . A variation of Gropecunt was last recorded as a street name in 1561 . 
 = = Toponymy = = 
 Variations include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . There were once many such street names in England , but all have now been bowdlerised . In the city of York , for instance , <unk> Lane — <unk> is the Old English word for grope — was renamed as the more acceptable Grape Lane . 
 The first record of the word grope being used in the indecent sense of sexual touching appears in 1380 ; cunt has been used to describe the vulva since at least 1230 , and corresponds to the Old Norse kunta , although its etymology is uncertain . 
 = = Prostitution = = 
 Under its entry for the word cunt , the Oxford English Dictionary reports that a street was listed as <unk> in about 1230 , the first appearance of that name . According to author Angus McIntyre , organised prostitution was well established in London by the middle of the 12th century , initially mainly confined to Southwark in the southeast , but later spreading to other areas such as Smithfield , Shoreditch , Clerkenwell , and Westminster . The practice was often tolerated by the authorities , and there are many historical examples of it being dealt with by regulation rather than by censure : in 1393 the authorities in London allowed prostitutes to work only in Cocks Lane , and in 1285 French prostitutes in Montpellier were confined to a single street . 
 It was normal practice for medieval street names to reflect their function , or the economic activity taking place within them ( especially the commodities available for sale ) , hence the frequency of names such as The Shambles , Silver Street , Fish Street , and <unk> ( pork butchers ) in cities with a medieval history . Prostitution may well have been a normal aspect of medieval urban life ; in A survey of London ( 1598 ) John Stow describes Love Lane as " so called of <unk> " . The more graphic Gropecunt Lane , however , is possibly the most obvious allusion to sexual activity . 
