 = = Possible antecedents = = 
 The historians Dionysius of Halicarnassus and Valerius Maximus , connect the practice of poena cullei with an alleged incident under king Tarquinius Superbus ( legendary reign being 535 – 509 BCE ) . During his reign , the Roman state apparently acquired the so @-@ called Sibylline Oracles , books of prophecy and sacred rituals . The king appointed a couple of priests , the so @-@ called <unk> <unk> , to guard the books , but one of them , Marcus Atilius , was bribed , and in consequence , divulged some of the book 's secrets ( to a certain Sabine foreigner Petronius , according to Valerius ) . For that breach of religion , Tarquinius had him sewn up in a sack and thrown him on the sea . According to Valerius Maximus , it was very long after this event that this punishment was instituted for the crime of parricide as well , whereas Dionysius says that in addition to be suspected of divulging the secret texts , Atilius was , indeed , accused of having killed his own father . 
 The Greek historian Plutarch , however , in his " Life of Romulus " claims that the first case in Roman history where a son killed his own father , happened more than five centuries after the foundation of Rome ( traditional foundation date 753 BCE ) , by a man called Lucius Hostius , who murdered his own father after the wars with Hannibal , that is , after the Second Punic War ( which ended in 201 BCE ) . Plutarch , however , does not specify how Lucius Hostius was executed , or even if he was executed by the Roman state at all . Additionally , he notes that at the time of Romulus and for the first centuries onwards , " parricide " was regarded roughly synonymous for what is now called homicide , and that prior to the times from <unk> Hostius , the murder of one 's own father , ( i.e. , patricide ) , was simply morally " unthinkable " . 
 According to Cloud and other modern professional historians of Roman history , a fundamental shift in the punishment of murderers may have occurred towards the end of the third century BCE , possibly spurred on by specific incidents like that of Lucius Hostius ' murder of his father , and , more generally , occasioned by the concomitant brutalization of society in the wake of the protracted wars with Hannibal . Previously , murderers would have been handed over to the family of the victim to exact their vengeance , whereas from the second century BCE and onwards , the punishment of murderers became the affair of the Roman state , rather than , that is , that the offended family was given full licence in how to mete out what they deemed to be an appropriate punishment to the murderer of a family member . Within that particular context , Cloud points out , specifically , that certain jokes contained in the plays of the early 2nd century dramatist Plautus may be read to refer to the recent introduction of the punishment by the sack for parricides in particular ( without the animals involved ) . 
 Yet another incident prior to the execution of Malleolus is of relevance . Some 30 years before the times of Malleolus , in the upheavals and <unk> caused by the reform program urged on by Tiberius Gracchus , a man called Caius <unk> , an ally of Gracchus , was condemned on some charge , and was shut up in a vessel or jar , to which serpents were added , and he was killed in that manner . 
 = = First BCE legislation = = 
 Two laws documented from the first BCE are principally relevant to Roman murder legislation in general , and legislation on parricide in particular . These are the Lex Cornelia De <unk> , promulgated in the 80s BCE , and the Lex Pompeia de <unk> promulgated about 55 BCE . According to a 19th @-@ century commentator , the relation between these two old laws might have been that it was the Lex Pompeia that specified the poena cullei ( i.e. , sewing the convict up in a sack and throwing him in the water ) as the particular punishment for a parricide , because a direct reference to the " Lex Cornelia " shows that the typical punishment for a poisoner / assassin in general ( rather than for the specific crime of parricide ) was that of deportation / banishment , i.e. , Lex Pompeia makes explicit distinctions for the crime of parricide not present in Lex Cornelia . 
 A support for a possible distinction in the inferred contents of Lex Cornelia and Lex Pompeia from the remaining primary source material , is the one given by the third century CE jurist Aelius Marcianus , as preserved in the sixth century collection of <unk> sayings , the Digest : 
 By the lex Pompeia on parricides it is laid down that if anyone kills his father , his mother , his grandfather , his grandmother , his brother , his sister , first cousin on his father 's side , first cousin on his mother 's side , paternal or maternal uncle , paternal ( or maternal ) aunt , first cousin ( male or female ) by mother 's sister , wife , husband , father @-@ in @-@ law , son @-@ in @-@ law , mother @-@ in @-@ law , ( daughter @-@ in @-@ law ) , stepfather , stepson , stepdaughter , patron , or patroness , or with malicious intent brings this about , shall be liable to the same penalty as that of the lex Cornelia on murderers . And a mother who kills her son or daughter suffers the penalty of the same statute , as does a grandfather who kills a grandson ; and in addition , a person who buys poison to give to his father , even though he is unable to administer it . 
 Modern experts continue to have some disagreements as to the actual meaning of the offence called " parricide " , on the precise relation between the Lex Cornelia and the Lex Pompeia generally , and on the practice and form of the poena cullei specifically . For example , Kyle ( 2012 ) summarizes , in a footnote , one of the contemporary relevant controversies in the following manner : 
 Cloud ( 1971 ) , 42 – 66 , suggests that Pompey 's law on parricide , the Lex Pompeia de <unk> ( Dig . 48 @.@ 9 @.@ 1 ) , probably of 55 or 52 BC defined parricide in terms of the murder of parents or close relatives , assimilated it with other forms of homicide , and suspended the sack and replaced it with the <unk> ; but see Bauman 's cautions , ( 1996 ) 30 – 2 , about whether Pompey changed the nature of the penalty 
 = = Writings of Marcus Tullius Cicero = = 
 Marcus Tullius Cicero , the renowned lawyer , orator and politician from the first century BCE , provides in his copious writings several references to the punishment of poena cullei , but none of the live animals documented within the writings by others from later periods . In his defence speech of 80 BCE for Sextus Roscius ( accused of having murdered his own father ) , he expounds on the symbolic importance of the punishment as follows , for example , as Cicero believed it was devised and designed by the previous Roman generations : 
 They therefore stipulated that parricides should be sewn up in a sack while still alive and thrown into a river . What remarkable wisdom they showed , gentlemen ! Do they not seem to have cut the parricide off and separated him from the whole realm of nature , depriving him at a stroke of sky , sun , water and water – and thus ensuring that he who had killed the man who gave him life should himself be denied the elements from which , it is said , all life derives ? They did not want his body to be exposed to wild animals , in case the animals should turn more savage after coming into contact with such a monstrosity . Nor did they want to throw him naked into a river , for fear that his body , carried down to the sea , might pollute that very element by which all other <unk> are thought to be purified . In short , there is nothing so cheap , or so commonly available that they allowed parricides to share in it . For what is so free as air to the living , earth to the dead , the sea to those tossed by the waves , or the land to those cast to the shores ? Yet these men live , while they can , without being able to draw breath from the open air ; they die without earth touching their bones ; they are tossed by the waves without ever being cleansed ; and in the end they are cast ashore without being granted , even on the rocks , a resting @-@ place in death 
 That the practice of sewing murderers of their parents in sacks and throwing them in the water was still an active type of punishment at Cicero 's time , at least on the provincial level , is made clear within a preserved letter Marcus wrote to his own brother Quintus , who as governor in Asia Minor in the 50s BCE had , in fact , meted out that precise punishment to two locals in Smyrna , as Marcus observes . 
 = = Julio @-@ Claudian Dynasty , the two Senecas and Juvenal = = 
 In whatever form or frequency the punishment of the sack was actually practiced in late Republican Rome or early Imperial Rome , the historian Suetonius , in his biography of Octavian , that is Emperor Augustus ( <unk> BCE – 14 CE ) , notes the following reluctance on the emperor 's part to actively authorize , and effect , that dread penalty : 
 Furthermore , he administered justice not only with the utmost care but also with compassion as is illustrated in the case of a defendant clearly guilty of parricide ; to keep him from being sewn into the sack ( only those who confessed suffered this punishment ) Augustus reportedly asked , " Surely you did not kill your father ? " 
 Quite the opposite mentality seems to have been the case with Emperor Claudius ( <unk> – 54 CE ) For example Emperor <unk> mentor , Seneca the Younger sighed about the times of Claudius as follows : 
 The Emperor Claudius sewed more men into the culleus in five years than history says were sewn up in all previous centuries . We saw more cullei than crucifixions 
 It is also with a writer like Seneca that serpents are mentioned in context with the punishment ; . Even before Seneca the Younger , his father , Seneca the Elder , who lived in the reigns of Augustus , Tiberius and Caligula , indicates in a comment that snakes would be put in the culleus : 
 The postponement of my punishment was unpleasant : waiting for it seem worse than suffering it . I kept imagining the culleus , the snake , the deep 
 The rather later satirist Juvenal ( born , probably , in the 50s CE ) also provides evidence for the monkey , he even pities the monkey , at one point , as an innocent sufferer . Not so with how Emperor Nero was reviled . In one play , Juvenal suggests that for Nero , being put in merely one sack is not good enough . This might , for example , be a reference both to the death of Nero 's mother Agrippina Minor , widely believed to have been murdered on Nero 's orders , and also to how Nero murdered his fatherland . Not only Juvenal thought the sack was the standard by which the appropriate punishment for Nero should be measured ; the statues of Nero were despoiled and vandalized , and according to the Roman historian Suetonius , one statue was draped in a sack given a placard that said " I have done what I could . But you deserve the sack ! " . 
 = = Emperor Hadrian and later jurists = = 
 It is within the law collection Digest 48 @.@ 9 @.@ 9 that perhaps the most famous formulation of the poena cullei is retained , from the sayings of the mid third century CE jurist Modestinus . In Olivia Robinsons translation , it reads : 
 According to the custom of our ancestors , the punishment instituted for parricide was as follows ; A parricide is flogged with blood @-@ colored rods , then sewn up in a sack with a dog , a dunghill cock , a viper , and a monkey ; then the sack is thrown into the depths of the sea . This is the procedure if the sea is close at hand ; otherwise , he is thrown to the beasts , according to the constitution of the deified Hadrian 
 Thus , it is seen in the time of Emperor Hadrian ( <unk> – 138 CE ) , the punishment for parricide was basically made optional , in that the convict might be thrown into the arena instead . Furthermore , a rescript from Hadrian is preserved in the fourth century CE grammarian Dositheus Magister that contains the information that the cart with the sack and its live contents was driven by black oxen . 
 In the time of the late third century CE jurist Paulus , he said that the poena cullei had fallen out of use , and that parricides were either burnt alive or thrown to the beasts instead . 
 However , although Paulus regards the punishment of poena cullei as obsolete in his day , the church father Eusebius , in his " Martyrs of Palestine " notes a case of a Christian man <unk> in Tyre who was " cruelly scourged " and then placed in a raw ox @-@ hide , together with a dog and a venomous serpent and cast in the sea . The incident is said to have taken place in 304 CE . 
 = = Revival by Constantine the Great = = 
 On account of Paulus ' comment , several scholars think the punishment of poena <unk> fell out of use in the third century CE , but the punishment was revived , and made broader ( by including fathers who killed their children as liable to the punishment ) by Emperor Constantine in a rescript from 318 CE . This rescript was retained in the 6th century Codex Justinianus and reads as follows : 
 Emperor Constantine to <unk> , Vicar of Africa . 
 Whoever , secretly or openly , shall hasten the death of a parent , or son or other near relative , whose murder is accounted as parricide , will suffer the penalty of parricide . He will not be punished by the sword , by fire or by some other ordinary form of execution , but he will be sewn up in a sack and , in this dismal prison , have serpents as his companions . Depending on the nature of the locality , he shall be thrown into the neighboring sea or into the river , so that even while living he may be deprived of the enjoyment of the elements , the air being denied him while living and interment in the earth when dead . 
 Given November 16 ( 318 ) . 
 = = Legislation of Justinian = = 
 The Corpus Juris Civilis , the name for the massive body of law promulgated by Emperor Justinian from the 530s CE and onwards , consists of two historical collections of laws and their interpretation ( the Digest , opinions of the pre @-@ eminent lawyers from the past , and the Codex Justinianus , a collection of edicts and rescripts by earlier emperors ) , along with <unk> 's prefatory introduction text for students of Law , Institutes , plus the Novels , Justinian 's own , later edicts . That the earlier collections were meant to be sources for the actual , current practice of law , rather than just being of historical interest , can be seen , for example , from the inclusion , and modification of Modestinus ' famous description of poena cullei ( Digest 48 @.@ 9 @.@ 9 ) , in Justinian 's own law text in Institutes 4 @.@ 18 @.@ 6 . 
 A novel penalty has been devised for a most odious crime by another statute , called the lex Pompeia on parricide , which provides that any person who by secret <unk> or open act shall hasten the death of his parent , or child , or other relation whose murder amounts in law to parricide , or who shall be an instigator or accomplice of such crime , although a stranger , shall suffer the penalty of parricide . This is not execution by the sword or by fire , or any ordinary form of punishment , but the criminal is sewn up in a sack with a dog , a cock , a viper , and an ape , and in this dismal prison is thrown into the sea or a river , according to the nature of the locality , in order that even before death he may begin to be deprived of the enjoyment of the elements , the air being denied him while alive , and interment in the earth when dead . Those who kill persons related to them by kinship or affinity , but whose murder is not parricide , will suffer the penalties of the lex Cornelia on assassination . 
 It is seen that Justinian regards this as a novel enactment of an old law , and that he includes not only the symbolic interpretations of the punishment as found in for example Cicero , but also Constantine 's extension of the penalty to fathers who murders their own children . In Justinian , relative to Constantine , we see the inclusion in the sack of the dog , cock and monkey , not just the serpent ( s ) in Constantine . Some modern historians , such as <unk> Robinson , suspects that the precise wording of the text in the Institutes 4 @.@ 18 @.@ 6 suggests that the claimed reference in Digest 48 @.@ 9 @.@ 9 from Modestinus is actually a sixth CE interpolation into the third century CE law text , rather than being a faithful citation of Modestinus . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The poena cullei was eliminated as the punishment for parricides within the Byzantine Empire in the law code Basilika , promulgated more than 300 years after the times of Justinian , around 892 CE . As Margaret Trenchard @-@ Smith notes , however , in her essay " Insanity , <unk> and <unk> " , that " this does not necessarily denote a softening of attitude . According to the Synopsis <unk> ( an abridged edition of Basilika ) , parricides are to be cast into the flames . " 
 = = German revival in the Middle Ages and beyond = = 
 The penalty of the sack , with the animals included , experienced a revival in parts of late medieval , and early modern Germany ( particularly in Saxony ) . The 14th century commentator on the 13th century compilation of laws / customs <unk> , Johann von Buch , for example , states that the poena cullei is the appropriate punishment for parricides . Some differences evolved within the German ritual , relative to the original Roman ritual , though . Apparently , the rooster was not included , and the serpent might be replaced with a painting of a serpent on a piece of paper and the monkey could be replaced with a cat . Furthermore , the cat and the dog were sometimes physically separated from the person , and the sack itself ( with its two partitions ) was made of linen , rather than of leather . 
 The difference between using linen , rather than leather is that linen soaks easily , and the inhabitants will drown , whereas a watertight leather sack will effect death by suffocation due to lack of air ( or death by a drawn @-@ out drowning process , relative to a comparatively quick one ) , rather than death by drowning . In a 1548 case from Dresden , the intention was to suffocate the culprit ( who had killed his mother ) , rather than drown him . With him into the leather sack was a cat and a dog , and the sack was made airtight by coating it with pitch . However , the sack chosen was too small , and had been overstretched , so as the sack hit the waters after being thrown from the bridge , it ripped open . The cat and the dog managed to swim away and survive , while the criminal ( presumably bound ) " got his punishment rather earlier than had been the intention " , that is , death by drowning instead . 
 The last case where this punishment is , by some , alleged to have been meted out in 1734 , somewhere in Saxony . Another tradition , however , is evidenced from the <unk> city Zittau , where the last case is alleged to have happened in 1749 . In at least one case in Zittau 1712 , a non @-@ venomous <unk> snake was used . The Zittau ritual was to put the victims in a black sack , and keep it under water for no less than six hours . In the mean time , the choir boys in town had the duty to sing the Psalm composed by Martin Luther , " Aus <unk> Not <unk> ich zu dir " ( From deep affliction I cry out to you ) The punishment of the sack was expressly abolished in Saxony in a rescript dated 17 June 1761 
 = = Modern fiction = = 
 In his ( 1991 ) novel Roman Blood , Steven Saylor renders a fictionalized , yet informed , rendition of how the Roman punishment poena cullei might occur . The reference to the punishment is in connection with Cicero 's ( historically correct , and successful ) endeavours to acquit Sextus Roscius of the charge of having murdered his own father . 
 China Miéville 's short story " <unk> " , collected in Three Moments of an Explosion : Stories , is a modern horror story which incorporates the punishment . 
 = No. 6 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 6 Squadron is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) training and bomber squadron . It was formed in 1917 and served as a training unit based in England during World War I. The squadron was disbanded in 1919 but re @-@ formed at the start of 1939 . It subsequently saw combat as a light bomber and maritime patrol squadron during World War II , and took part in the New Guinea Campaign and New Britain Campaign before being disbanded after the war . 
 The squadron was re @-@ raised in 1948 as the RAAF 's bomber operational conversion unit . It has primarily served in this capacity since that time , though it has also maintained a secondary strike capability and was also tasked with reconnaissance duties between 1979 and 1993 . No. 6 Squadron is currently based at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , and has been equipped with Boeing F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet aircraft since January 2011 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 No. 6 Squadron was formed at <unk> , England , on 15 June 1917 as a flying training unit of the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) . The unit was initially designated No. 30 ( Australian Training ) Squadron , Royal Flying Corps and its role was to train fighter pilots for service with No. 2 Squadron of the AFC ( which was designated No. 68 ( Australian ) Squadron RFC at the time ) on the Western Front . 
 The squadron moved to Shawbury the day after it was formed and then to <unk> on 29 June . On 1 September it became part of the 1st Training Wing when that unit was established to command the four AFC training squadrons in England ( the others being No. 5 , No. 7 and No. 8 Squadrons ) . In January 1918 the squadron was redesignated No. 6 Squadron AFC ; the other AFC units were also renamed at this time . No. 6 Squadron moved to Minchinhampton on 25 February . The squadron used several different types of aircraft to train pilots , including the Bristol Scout D , Sopwith 1 ½ Strutter , Sopwith Pup , Avro 504 , Airco <unk> , Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 and Sopwith Camel . While most of these aircraft types were outdated and suitable only for elementary flight training , the S.E.5s , Sopwith Pups and Sopwith Camels were up to date and in service with combat units in France . 
 Like the other units of the 1st Training Wing , No. 6 Squadron continued to train pilots after the end of the war . This was undertaken to keep personnel occupied while they awaited transport back to Australia as well as to strengthen the AFC . No. 6 Squadron was disbanded in March 1919 , and its personnel left Minchinhampton to return to Australia on 6 May that year . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 On 1 January 1939 No. 4 Squadron , which was located at RAAF Station Richmond in the outskirts of Sydney and equipped with Avro Anson patrol aircraft , was redesignated No. 6 Squadron . No. 4 Squadron had been responsible for conducting reconnaissance patrols along Australia 's east coast as well as undertaking training exercises with the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . These duties continued after the squadron was re @-@ designated , and early in 1939 it gained the additional role of providing conversion training on the Anson for new pilots and air gunners . The squadron 's maritime patrol activities were hindered by the limitations of its Ansons ; these aircraft were obsolete and had an inadequate range and bomb load . Following the outbreak of World War II No. 6 Squadron escorted convoys off the Australian east coast and undertook training exercises with the Australian Army and RAN . 
 On 28 April 1939 , an Anson of 6 Squadron crashed near <unk> on the return leg of an air navigation exercise , killing all four crew members . On 18 December 1939 , another Anson crashed on the golf course at Richmond while on a night reconnaissance flight to Point Cook , again killing all five crew members . 
 The squadron 's Ansons were replaced by twelve Mark I Lockheed Hudson light bombers during April and May 1940 . These modern aircraft were much more capable than the Ansons , and had a longer range , higher speed and greater bombload . No. 6 Squadron continued to be based at Richmond , though detachments were made to other airstrips along the east coast when the squadron escorted troop convoys . In August 1940 the squadron conducted long range patrols searching for German raiders which were present in the Tasman Sea , but without success . 
 No. 6 Squadron continued its maritime patrol tasks in the months after the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 . At this time the squadron comprised six aircraft based at Richmond and another four based at RAAF Station Laverton near Melbourne . In late December , eight of the squadron 's Hudsons were dispatched to Malaya to make good the losses suffered by No. 1 and No. 8 Squadrons in the Malayan Campaign . No. 6 Squadron was re @-@ equipped with longer @-@ ranged Mark IV Hudsons by January 1942 . In early January 1942 two of these aircraft were dispatched to undertake an urgent photo reconnaissance of the Japanese base at Truk in the Central Pacific on the orders of Air Vice Marshal William Bostock . One of the aircraft suffered mechanical problems after arriving at the forward airfield at Kavieng in New Ireland from where this operation was to be conducted , but the other successfully overflew Truk on 8 January ; this was the longest photo reconnaissance flight undertaken by land based RAAF aircraft during World War II . On 22 January a flight of four aircraft was detached from No. 6 Squadron and transferred to the newly formed No. 32 Squadron at Port Moresby in New Guinea . The squadron 's maritime patrol role increased in importance from May 1942 when Japanese submarines began operating off the Australian east coast . On 5 June the crew of a No. 6 Squadron Hudson attacked what they believed was a submerged submarine 190 kilometres ( 120 mi ) northeast of Sydney . During mid @-@ 1942 the squadron gave up its Mark IV Hudsons , and was re @-@ equipped with Mark III models . 
 In late August 1942 , No. 6 Squadron moved to Horn Island in the Torres Strait and established a detachment of four aircraft at Milne Bay in New Guinea . The Milne Bay detachment had been formed to provide reconnaissance and bomber support of the Australian garrison there , which was expected to be attacked . Japanese forces landed at Milne Bay on the night of 25 / 26 August , sparking the Battle of Milne Bay which ended in an Allied victory in early September . No. 6 Squadron flew reconnaissance and anti @-@ shipping patrols from the airfields at Milne Bay throughout the battle . The squadron attacked a convoy of three Japanese destroyers and three patrol boats which were carrying reinforcement troops to Milne Bay on 29 August . While the squadron claimed to have damaged a destroyer in this operation , the Japanese force did not actually incur any damage . Following the Allied victory at Milne Bay , No. 6 Squadron Hudsons continued to patrol the region near Milne Bay , and sank a Japanese transport ship near Woodlark Island on 26 September . The Horn Island @-@ based elements of the squadron moved to Wards Strip near the town of Port Moresby in New Guinea on 11 October from where it conducted anti @-@ submarine patrols alongside No. 100 Squadron . For much of November the squadron also supported the Australian Army force engaged in the Kokoda Track campaign by dropping supplies and evacuating sick soldiers . From 6 December until near the end of that month , No. 6 Squadron conducted night bombing raids of the Japanese beachhead at Buna , Sanananda and Gona ; these included an attack on a destroyer off Buna . Towards the end of December the squadron was concentrated at Turnbull Field at Milne Bay from where it undertook reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine patrols . 
 On the night of 17 January 1943 , 24 Japanese aircraft attacked Turnbull Field , destroying one of No. 6 Squadron 's Hudsons and damaging the remainder . While the squadron was unable to conduct any operations for several weeks after this attack , the damaged aircraft were subsequently repaired . In March No. 6 Squadron participated in the Battle of the Bismarck Sea by searching for barges and attacking lifeboats carrying survivors from the Japanese ships which had been sunk . Due to the unit 's high rate of flying activities , No. 6 Squadron 's Hudsons increasingly suffered from mechanical problems , and this may have contributed to a drop in the number of hours flown by the squadron from March 1943 . On 20 July No. 9 Operational Group , which commanded No. 6 Squadron and other RAAF units in New Guinea , banned the squadron 's Hudsons from taking part in any further combat operations due to their poor condition . It was decided at about this time to re @-@ equip the squadron with Australian @-@ built Bristol Beauforts . To effect this change No. 6 Squadron 's Hudson crews flew their aircraft back to Australia and were replaced by new aircrews equipped with Beauforts from September . During this period the squadron 's ground crew were frequently used as labourers as they did not have any aircraft to maintain . 
 After receiving its new aircraft , the squadron was tasked with anti @-@ shipping attacks , and it and No. 100 Squadron cooperated in an attack on a Japanese convoy near Cape St. George on the night of 20 October during which a No. 6 Squadron pilot claimed to have damaged a cruiser . No. 6 Squadron also bombed Japanese positions in New Britain during October in conjunction with No. 100 Squadron . In addition to these offensive operations , the squadron regularly flew anti @-@ submarine patrols to protect Allied shipping . In November the squadron moved to Goodenough Island and became part of No. 71 Wing RAAF alongside No. 8 and No. 100 Squadrons . From November 1943 to March 1944 , No. 6 Squadron took part in attacks on the major Japanese base at Rabaul , and also struck other targets in the region to support the naval and ground forces engaged in the New Britain Campaign . From March the squadron mainly undertook convoy escort and anti @-@ submarine patrols , which proved uneventful . No. 6 Squadron 's operations were hampered by mechanical problems with its Beauforts , which had been issued to the unit after being reconditioned following service with other RAAF squadrons , and this problem continued until October when it received an allocation of recently built aircraft . 
 No. 6 Squadron next saw action in late 1944 . From late October it and the other units of No. 71 Wing conducted attacks on Rabaul and other locations in New Britain to support the Australian 5th Division 's landing at Jacquinot Bay and subsequent operations on the island . Between December 1944 and January 1945 , No. 6 Squadron moved to Dobodura airfield , from where it continued to support Australian Army operations in New Britain and the Aitape – Wewak area of New Guinea . There were few targets within range of Dobodura , however , and the squadron saw little combat during 1945 . Despite the limited nature of the raids conducted from Dobodura , the squadron 's offensive operations were hampered by a shortage of bombs . A detachment of six aircraft was deployed to Tadji between late April and 13 May to participate in attacks on Japanese positions near Wewak alongside Beauforts from No. 7 , No. 8 , No. 15 and No. 100 Squadrons . The squadron conducted little operational flying from late May , and in June its commander recommended in his monthly report that No. 6 Squadron be either disbanded or re @-@ equipped and sent to a more active area . RAAF Headquarters did not respond to this proposal , and many other Australian squadrons were similarly under @-@ employed at the time . The squadron 's last combat operations were undertaken by a detachment of two Beauforts which were deployed to Biak during July ; these aircraft bombed Japanese positions in the area alongside P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks operated by No. 120 ( NEI ) Squadron . Following the end of the war the squadron dropped leaflets to advise Japanese troops that their country had surrendered and continued to make anti @-@ submarine patrols . In September all of the squadron 's aircrew were posted to units located further from Australia and were replaced by aircrew from these squadrons . The squadron also began regular courier flights between Dobodura and Milne Bay during the month . No. 6 Squadron remained at Dobodura until 18 October 1945 , when it returned to Australia and was disbanded at Kingaroy , Queensland on the 31st of the month . The squadron suffered 35 fatalities during World War II . 
 = = = Operational conversion unit = = = 
 On 23 February 1948 , No. 23 Squadron was redesignated No. 6 Squadron . The unit was based at RAAF Base Amberley in Queensland and equipped with Avro Lincoln heavy bombers . No 6 Squadron formed part of No. 82 Wing , and was primarily responsible for training aircrews to serve with the wing 's two front line units ; No. 1 and No. 2 Squadrons . Its training effort was increased from 1950 when No. 1 Squadron was deployed to Malaya as part of Australia 's contribution to the Malayan Emergency . During October that year three of No. 6 Squadron 's Lincolns were deliberately flown through the cloud which resulted from the first British atomic bomb test ( Operation Hurricane ) which took place in the Montebello Islands off Western Australian . These aircraft had the role of determining the level of radioactivity caused by the atomic blast , and No. 6 Squadron performed similar duties for the subsequent British atomic bomb tests at Maralinga , South Australia . Several Lincolns were so heavily contaminated with radioactivity during these flights that they could not be flown again . The squadron lost three Lincolns in one day on 8 April 1953 when one was written off after its undercarriage collapsed while landing at Amberley and a further two were destroyed when they collided on the ground at Cloncurry , Queensland ; no aircrew were injured in these accidents . 
 No. 6 Squadron 's Lincolns were replaced with Canberra jet bombers in early 1955 , and the unit became operational with these aircraft on 11 July . As part of the transition to the Canberra , the squadron 's remaining aircrew were posted to the Lincoln Conversion Flight , which continued to support No. 1 Squadron in Malaya , and replacement aircrew were posted from No. 2 Squadron . The squadron suffered a number of accidents during the next two years in which several Canberras were damaged as a result of defects with the aircraft . No. 6 Squadron continued its training duties with the new aircraft ; these included regular deployments to Darwin in the Northern Territory to participate in air defence exercises as well as training flights to Malaya and New Zealand . In early 1967 most of the squadron 's personnel were transferred to No. 2 Squadron to bring that unit up to its full strength before it deployed to South Vietnam as part of Australia 's commitment to the Vietnam War . From this point onwards , No. 6 Squadron was heavily engaged in training aircrew for service in South Vietnam . 
 During the late 1960s , No. 1 and No. 6 Squadrons were scheduled to be re @-@ equipped with General Dynamics F @-@ 111C strike aircraft from 1968 . Mechanical problems with United States Air Force ( USAF ) F @-@ 111s caused the RAAF to postpone its acceptance of these aircraft , however , leading for a requirement for an interim aircraft to equip both squadrons . McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4 Phantom IIs were leased from the USAF , and No. 6 Squadron was re @-@ equipped with these aircraft between September and October 1970 . The Phantoms proved highly successful , though one was severely damaged on its first flight at Amberley when it attempted an emergency landing and the arrester cable failed . It was repaired by No. 3 Aircraft Depot . No. 6 Squadron 's remaining Phantoms were handed back to the USAF on 4 October 1972 prior to the delivery of the F @-@ 111Cs . 
 No. 6 Squadron 's first F @-@ 111Cs arrived at Amberley on 1 June 1973 , and the unit flew its first sorties with the aircraft on the 13th of the month . The squadron 's main role remained that of an operational conversion unit , though it had a secondary strike role . From August 1979 , No. 6 Squadron gained a photo reconnaissance role when it was issued with four aircraft which had been modified into RF @-@ 111Cs . These four aircraft were concentrated the squadron 's Reconnaissance Flight , which included photo analysts as well as specialised aircrew . Training was conducted in Australia and nearby countries , and the RF @-@ 111Cs occasionally deployed to the United States to take part in exercises held there . In June 1982 No. 6 Squadron was expanded to include a Survey Flight , which undertook photo survey flights in co @-@ operation with the Army 's Royal Australian Survey Corps using a leased Learjet . The flight conducted surveys of south @-@ eastern Australia , northern Australia , Fiji and parts of Indonesia and Malaysia until it was disbanded on 15 May 1987 . 
 In 1993 No. 6 Squadron 's F @-@ 111Cs were replaced by F @-@ 111Gs which had been purchased from the USAF in 1992 to be used for training purposes . This purchase allowed Australia 's F @-@ 111Cs to be used mainly for strike and reconnaissance purposes and extended the type 's expected life in RAAF service . All the F @-@ 111Gs were assigned to No , 6 Squadron , and the unit 's F @-@ 111C and RF @-@ 111C aircraft were transferred to No. 1 Squadron . The squadron typically had seven F @-@ 111Gs operational at any point in time . 
 In 2002 the Australian Government decided to retire the F @-@ 111s in 2010 and replace them with Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II aircraft , which at the time were expected to be delivered from 2012 . As a result of delays to the F @-@ 35 program , the government decided in early 2007 to re @-@ equip both No. 1 and No. 6 Squadrons with Boeing F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornet aircraft on an interim basis . No. 6 Squadron 's F @-@ 111Gs were progressively retired over the next few months as they became due for major servicing , and the last aircraft of this type flew on 3 September . The final F @-@ 111 operational conversion course was completed in mid @-@ 2008 , and all the remaining F @-@ 111Cs and RF @-@ 111Cs were transferred to No. 6 Squadron in November 2008 when No. 1 Squadron began the process of converting to F / A @-@ <unk> . For the next two years the squadron operated as a bomber and reconnaissance unit . No. 6 Squadron 's F @-@ 111s were formally retired in a ceremony held at Amberley on 3 December 2010 and No. 1 Squadron was declared operational with its new aircraft several days later . No. 6 Squadron began to be re @-@ equipped with F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets from January 2011 , and became operational with these aircraft on 1 March that year . The squadron 's first Super Hornet operational conversion course was completed in October 2011 . 
 In May 2013 , the Federal government announced plans to purchase twelve Boeing EA @-@ 18G Growlers to supplement the Super Hornet fleet . No. 6 Squadron is expected to begin taking delivery of the Growlers in 2017 , at which point its Super Hornets will be transferred to No. 1 Squadron . As of 2014 , the squadron was expected to achieve initial operating capability with EA @-@ <unk> in June 2018 and full operating capacity in 2022 . 
 = Glassheart ( song ) = 
 " Glassheart " is a song recorded by British singer @-@ songwriter Leona Lewis for her third studio album of the same name ( 2012 ) . The song was conceptualised by Lewis and frequent collaborator Ryan Tedder at his family home in Denver , Colorado . As she was experiencing a stressful time in her life , Lewis wanted to create an uptempo dance track with Tedder as she felt a ballad would make her more upset . It was co @-@ written by Lewis and Tedder alongside Brent Kutzle , Noel Zancanella , Justin Franks , <unk> Shkreli and Peter Svensson . Production of the song was handled by Tedder and Franks , with the latter credited under his production alias DJ Frank E. It was co @-@ produced by Zancanella , Kutzle and Shkreli . 
 " Glassheart " is an up @-@ tempo dance song that incorporates elements of dubstep , grime and house music . Lyrically , it is about a woman 's fear that her boyfriend will leave her and thus she protects her emotions and her heart from breaking . The song received positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised the musical direction and its grimy , dubstep breakdown . Upon the release of Glassheart , the song debuted at number 27 on the UK Dance Chart due to strong digital download sales during the first week of Glassheart 's release . It debuted at number 167 on the UK Singles Chart . Lewis has performed the song at London nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y and an acoustic version for UK newspaper The Sun 's Biz Sessions . 
 = = Inspiration and development = = 
 According to Lewis , the song was conceptualised when the singer was experiencing a stressful time in her personal life when she visited her friend and co @-@ writer of the song , Ryan Tedder in Denver , Colorado . The aim of the trip was to visit Tedder and his family , as well as conceive ideas and themes for material to be included on Glassheart . Lewis stated that she did not want to sing a ballad which would make her " more sad " , therefore they decided to work on an upbeat dance song instead . She asked Tedder : " Can you give me a song where I can just dance and jump around ? " , to which he replied " What about this ? " as he played a beat which Lewis found " hypnotic " . Despite being in a raw form , Lewis was impressed with the song 's beat , and said " Yes ! We have to do this . " The collaboration with Tedder marks the third album of Lewis ' on which the pair have worked together . They first collaborated on Lewis ' debut studio album , Spirit ( 2007 ) , on the songs " Bleeding Love " and " Take a Bow " . Tedder also co @-@ wrote songs on Lewis ' second studio album , Echo ( 2009 ) , " Happy " , " You Don 't Care " and " Lost then Found " , a collaboration with the group Tedder is a member of , OneRepublic . In addition to the title track on Glassheart , Lewis and Tedder collaborated on the song " Favourite Scar " . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Glassheart " was co @-@ written by Lewis with Tedder , Brent Kutzle , Noel Zancanella , Justin Franks , <unk> Shkreli and Peter Svensson . It was produced by Tedder and Franks , who is credited under his production name DJ Frank E ; the song was co @-@ produced by Zancanella , Kutzle and Shkreli . The song was engineered by Smith Carlson , Mike Freesh and Sam Wheat ; they were in assisted in the process by Tom Hough , while Daniela Rivera provided additional engineering . " Glassheart " was mixed by Phil Tan at the Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta , Georgia ; it was mastered by Colin Leonard at SING Mastering , also in Atlanta , using SING Technology . Instrumentation of the song was provided for by multiple musicians : Shkreli was appointed head of sound design , and was also a drum programmer along with Freesh and Trent <unk> . The guitarist enlisted for the song was <unk> , while Freesh served as the bassist . The pair also provided the synths . All other forms of instrumentation were performed by Tedder . " Glassheart " was recorded at several recording locations around the world , including Patriot Studios , Denver , Colorado ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; Side 3 Studios , Hollywood , California and Metropolis Studios , London , England . 
 " Glassheart " has been described as a dubstep , dance , house and grime song that runs for 3 : 56 ( three minutes , 56 seconds ) . According to Jenna Hally Rubenstein for MTV Buzzworthy , the song consists of a " grimy , hazy beat " , which she compared to " Too Close " ( The <unk> of the Hour , 2011 ) , a song performed by Alex Clare . Lyrically , the song is about Lewis ' fear that her lover will break her heart . According to Lewis , the song is about protecting yourself , your heart , as well as your emotions . She continued to describe the song as " poignant " . The singer went on to reveal that she decided to name the album after the song . Lewis ' " crisp " vocals can be heard above the instrumentation as she " croons about the fragility of her heart " as she performs the chorus lines " So baby if you love me / Let me know / ' Cause everything hurts just like before / You 're about to tear this heart apart / I love you like a glass heart . " The chorus is built on a " transcendent house beat " as Lewis delicately sings the lines " Promise that we 'll never fall apart / And I 'll love you with my Glassheart " . The chorus is then followed by a " euphoric instrumentation [ that ] collapses into a grimy dubstep break . " Rubenstein likened the lyrics to those performed by Blondie on her song " Heart of Glass " ( Parallel Lines , 1978 ) . 
 = = Reception and live performances = = 
 Jenna Hally Rubenstein for MTV Buzzworthy was complimentary of the song , writing that Lewis had " [ upped ] the musical ante big time " . Rubenstein continued to highly praise the inclusion of the dubstep transition due to the fact that she thought she would never " use the words ' dubstep ' and ' Leona Lewis ' in the same sentence . " Caroline Sullivan for The Guardian described the song as " mood elevating with an abrasive grime beat . " Matthew Horton for Virgin Media described the song as " unexpectedly ravey " . Chris Smith for Yahoo ! described the song as a curveball and wrote that he felt it is Lewis ' " first truly club friendly track " . Sam Lanksy for Idolator thought that although song is radio @-@ friendly , it is not " derivative " . 
 Lewis debuted the song at London nightclub G @-@ A @-@ Y on 5 September 2011 ; she performed the song as part of a mini set @-@ list along with " Collide " and " Bleeding Love " . The performance featured Lewis performing a " raunchy " dance routine with partially nude male dancers . Lewis wore a black knee length dress , with a red heart emblem across her chest . Nadia Sam @-@ <unk> for The Sun wrote that the singer had " dumped her demure image " in favour of " her raunchiest @-@ ever dance routine surrounded by muscly bare @-@ chested hunks . " Prior to the release of Glassheart in October 2012 , Lewis performed the acoustic version of the song as part of another mini set @-@ list for British newspaper The Sun 's Biz Sessions , along with the lead single from the album , " Trouble " , and a cover of Alex Clare 's " Too Close " . The singer performed " Glassheart " at the Art on Ice concert in Zurich , Switzerland , on 31 January 2013 . " Glassheart " was performed as the sixteenth song on the set list of Lewis ' 2013 tour called the Glassheart Tour . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Standard edition 
 " Glassheart " – 3 : 56 
 Deluxe edition ( disc 2 ) 
 " Glassheart " ( Acoustic ) – 3 : 46 
 Deluxe edition – iTunes bonus video 
 " Glassheart " ( Live acoustic ) – 3 : 49 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Patriot Studios , Denver , Colorado ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; Side 3 Studios , Hollywood , California ; Metropolis Studios , London England . 
 Mixed at Ninja Beat Club , Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Mastered at SING Mastering , Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Glassheart . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Upon the release of the album , " Glassheart " debut at number 27 on the UK Dance Chart on 21 October 2012 . It also debuted at number 167 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 = Inside Out ( Britney Spears song ) = 
 " Inside Out " is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears , included on her seventh studio album Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) . It was written by Lukasz Gottwald , Jacob Kasher Hindlin , Mathieu Jomphe , Max Martin and Bonnie McKee whilst production was handled by Dr. Luke , Max Martin and Billboard . Musically , " Inside Out " is an electropop song that uses elements of dubstep and R & B , and has been compared to Spears ' previous material on previous albums In the Zone and Circus , as well as the work of Madonna . Lyrically , the song has been described as a " sexy break @-@ up song " , while making references to her previous singles " ... Baby One More Time " and " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " . The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , who commended its production . Due to strong digital sales of the album , " Inside Out " peaked at number fifty @-@ nine on South Korea 's Gaon International Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Inside Out " was written by Jacob Kasher Hindlin and Bonnie McKee , while additional writing and song production was done by Dr. Luke , Martin , and Billboard . A small teaser of the song was unveiled by the singer on February 19 , 2011 . On March 11 , 2011 , it leaked in full online , along with another Femme Fatale track , " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " . The song was also rumored to be the second single of Femme Fatale ; the information was later denied following the online leak of " Till the World Ends " on March 3 , 2011 , which was released instead in the next day . On August 5 , 2011 , Spears posted a poll on her Facebook page asking fans whether her next single should be " Criminal " , " Inside Out " or " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful . " After the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , she revealed to MTV News that " Criminal " was chosen as the fourth single . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Inside Out " is an electropop song that features themes of dubstep and R & B , complimented with " earth @-@ shattering synths " . Lyrically , the " sexy breakup song " , as described by Jocelyn Vena of MTV , opens with Spears singing , " Said you 're gonna be here in a minute / Sitting in the mirror getting pretty / Gotta look my best if we 're gonna break up / Gotta look my best if we 're gonna break up / I can hear you knocking at the front door / And I know exactly what you came for / Trying to say goodbye but it 's hot and heavy / Trying to say goodbye but it 's hot and heavy . " While the couple seems to be on the verge of a breakup , there 's apparently still some sexual tension between them , which is perceived in lines such as " You ... touch me and it 's breaking me down / I 'm telling you , let 's just give it up and get down . " Spears crescendos " So come on / Won 't you give me something to remember / Baby shut your mouth and turn me inside out . " during the chorus section , and then goes on to " Hit me one more time it 's so amazing " and " You 're the only one who 's ever drove me crazy " referencing her first singles " ... Baby One More Time " ( 1998 ) and " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " ( 1999 ) . The song was compared to her earlier work on albums In the Zone ( 2003 ) and Circus ( 2008 ) and it has been compared to that of Madonna 's Ray of Light ( 1998 ) and Music ( 2000 ) . The " futuristic @-@ sounding , slow @-@ grooving tune " was also considered reminiscent of Janet Jackson . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from contemporary music critics . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey noted " Inside Out " is one of the " ten remaining tracks [ of Femme Fatale that ] continue the trend [ of the album 's first two singles ] " , considering the song 's lyrics as " blatantly slutty " and praising " the much @-@ welcomed piano breakdown " . David Buchanan of Consequence of Sound also agreed that " the [ first two ] singles are extraordinarily infectious , as is " Inside Out " , which slows the tempo , simultaneously sending Spears back to basics vocally , and into 2011 sonically . " On her review of Femme Fatale , Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club commented that " songs like the dark , slinky " Inside Out " , the hyper @-@ Euro chant @-@ along " Till The World Ends " , and the strange , flute @-@ assisted digression " Criminal " add texture to the wall @-@ to @-@ wall synth waves and booty bass . " The Guardian 's Alexis Petridis commented that the song " lurches along on [ dubstep ] ' s patent half @-@ speed rhythm . " While Keith Caufield of Billboard considered " Inside Out " " easily a natural pick for ' Femme 's ' third single " , Hannah Rishel of The Daily Collegian said that " in general the song failed to hold my attention . If I heard it on the radio , I probably would change the station . " Thomas Conner of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times also gave the song a negative review , considering it a " weak mid @-@ tempo fare " , along with " Criminal " . Following the release of Femme Fatale , " Inside Out " reached number fifty @-@ nine on South Korea 's Gaon Digital Chart , after selling 7 @,@ 222 digital units of the song alone . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Inside Out " adapted from Femme Fatale liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Kermit Washington = 
 Kermit Alan Washington ( born September 17 , 1951 ) is an American former professional basketball player . Washington is best remembered for punching opposing player Rudy Tomjanovich during an on @-@ court fight in 1977 . His punch nearly killed Tomjanovich , and resulted in severe medical problems that ultimately ended Tomjanovich 's playing career . 
 Washington was not a highly coveted player coming out of high school and barely got into college on an athletic scholarship . He averaged a mere four points per game ( ppg ) during his senior season of high school . He improved rapidly once at American University , and became one of only seven players in NCAA history to average 20 points and 20 rebounds throughout the course of their career . 
 A big defensive forward , Washington was known for his ability to gather rebounds . He averaged 9 @.@ 2 points and 8 @.@ 3 rebounds per game in ten National Basketball Association ( NBA ) seasons and played in the All @-@ Star Game once . Washington was drafted by the Los Angeles Lakers with the fifth overall pick in the 1973 NBA Draft . He played sparingly his first three seasons , and sought the help of retired basketball coach Pete Newell before his fourth season . Under Newell 's tutelage , Washington 's game rapidly improved and he became a starter for several teams . He played for the Lakers , Boston Celtics , San Diego Clippers , Portland Trail Blazers and Golden State Warriors . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kermit Washington 's mother Barbara graduated from Miner 's Teacher 's College ( later subsumed into Howard University ) , where she was an excellent student ; his father Alexander was an X @-@ ray technician . Washington had a rough childhood . When he was three years old , his parents had a fight in which his maternal uncle became involved and in which someone violently attacked his uncle with an iron . His parents soon divorced , with his father awarded custody of the children . His mother , who suffered from bipolar disorder , then took him and his older brother Eric from their father on an ill @-@ advised sojourn for which they were poorly prepared . Struggling to find money to feed the children , she eventually called their father , who came and took them back . His stay with his father did not last long , and he and his brother were passed around to various relatives on both sides of the family . 
 The effect of being shuttled into and out of the homes of family members led to a feeling of not being wanted , which made Washington extremely shy as a youth . The only time he recalls feeling a sense of self @-@ worth was when his great @-@ grandmother on his father 's side had the pair for a while . According to Washington , she loved the boys but was extremely strict , domineering , and at times , physically abusive . After his father remarried , the children moved back in with him and his new wife . Washington felt a sense of optimism for the first time , saying " I thought it was our dream come true . All our lives we had seen nice families on TV . Real ones . Now we were going to be a real family . " However , he again felt unwanted this time by his stepmother . As a small child , Washington said that he had no recollections of ever being hugged , and only felt close to his older brother , Chris . Washington was a poor student who hated school throughout most of his childhood . He had to retake many of his classes in summer school to raise his grades . When he entered high school he played football merely so he could be around a close friend , and have someone to walk home with at night as he was terrified of walking home alone . 
 As a senior in high school , Washington stood 6 ft 4 in ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) but weighed a mere 150 lbs . After some rare positive feedback by his biology teacher , Barbara Thomas , he began to study and put forth a greater effort in that class . He quickly became a solid student in biology but poor in all other subjects . When Thomas became his home room teacher and saw his grades in other classes she encouraged him to try hard in all of his courses . Washington rapidly improved his marks , making the honor roll in his senior year . 
 His basketball performance in high school was unimpressive . He came off the bench to average four points per game ( ppg ) . His stepmother informed him that when he graduated high school he would be thrown out of the house . Chris had been able to leave home on a football scholarship and would later play in the National Football League , but Washington himself had nowhere to go . He trained for three hours a day toward the end of his senior season , and showed up uninvited at a playground game featuring top high school players from Washington and Pennsylvania , where he talked his way into the game . Tom Young , who had recently left his job as an assistant coach at Maryland University to become head coach at American University , saw him play there , and although Washington did not perform particularly well , Young was impressed by his hustle and how he ignored the poor treatment he received from the people who organized the game . 
 = = College years = = 
 During the summer between his senior year of high school and his freshman year of college , Washington grew four inches . He began an intense regimen of weight training , and ran up and down the flights of steps in his seven @-@ story dormitory building wearing a weighted vest to improve his endurance . Washington became more extroverted in college , so much so that he later said his life could be separated into two parts — his pre @-@ college life and his life after college . He has frequently described his college years as " the happiest time in my life . " He began dating his future wife Pat when he was a freshman . They met after she noticed him accidentally scoring four consecutive points for the opposing team in a freshman basketball game . She pursued him even though he often remained silent when she spent time with him . A lot of the emergence of Washington 's personality is credited to Pat , who encouraged him to be more outgoing and overcome his low self @-@ esteem . Washington spent a lot of his free time practicing in the gym . He played playground basketball in the summer , and was on several Urban League teams . He averaged 19 @.@ 4 points and 22 @.@ 3 rebounds on his freshman team at American . Pat helped him with his grades — despite the fact that he had done well his senior year of high school he was still far behind ; he did not even know what a paragraph was when he entered college or how to write a report . 
 He averaged 18 @.@ 6 points on 46 @.@ 8 percent shooting and 20 @.@ 5 rebounds in his first year of varsity basketball . He still played a somewhat unaggressive or " soft " brand of basketball , and it was hurting his chances of being drafted by a professional team . Between his sophomore and junior years he began lifting weights with Trey Coleman , a former football player from the University of Nebraska who was studying as an undergrad at American . Coleman encouraged him to be more aggressive on the court , and Washington told him that it was not in his nature . Coleman admonished him , telling him he could not afford to be " cool " on the court given his talent level if he wanted to join the pro ranks . Washington was named an academic All @-@ American his junior year . He averaged 21 @.@ 0 points on 54 @.@ 4 percent shooting and an NCAA @-@ leading 19 @.@ 8 rebounds in his junior season . He was drafted after his junior season by the New York Nets of the American Basketball Association ( ABA ) and offered a four @-@ year contract for $ 100 @,@ 000 a year , which astonished him . He decided to stay at American with coach Young for his senior season because he felt he owed the school which had given him a chance when he was coming out of a difficult period in high school . He was offered an invite to try for the 1972 Olympic basketball team after the season , but did not make the squad . 
 Washington was one of the best players in the country going into his senior season . He marveled at newspaper reports in the Washington Post that mentioned " coaches of opposing teams and how they were planning to stop Kermit Washington . " He led the nation in rebounding again in his senior season . He was a second team All @-@ American , and helped American into the National Invitation Tournament ( NIT ) . In the last game of his college career , Washington needed to score 39 points to average 20 points and 20 rebounds a game for his career in college . He became extremely nervous before the game and could neither eat nor sleep . The game set American University attendance records , and Washington felt light on his feet when he was introduced before the raucous crowd . He managed to score 40 points and in so doing , became just the seventh player to reach the 20 / 20 mark . He was thrown a party , and there was a campus wide celebration after the game . He graduated with a 3 @.@ 37 GPA and a degree in sociology . Washington was a two @-@ time Academic All @-@ American , who taught courses in social sciences his senior year . 
 = = Professional years = = 
 Washington was drafted fifth overall by the Los Angeles Lakers in the 1973 NBA Draft . A week before the team began training camp , Pat and Kermit were married . They invited neither of their families ; they just drove together to LA 's city hall for the ceremony . He had a difficult time making the transition from college center to NBA power forward . In basketball , many players succeed in high school and college due to superior physical skills , but when they arrive in the professional ranks , they are typically going against players that are often as physically gifted as them . Washington also had played in a primarily zone defense system in college and was not versed in man @-@ to @-@ man defense , which is more common in the NBA . He arrived on a team which had legend Jerry West , who was in the waning stages of a career that would result in him becoming the silhouette seen on the NBA 's logo . Washington admits that he was terrified of West , and felt anxiety every time he made a mistake in front of him . Though healthy , he played in only 45 games and averaged 8 @.@ 9 minutes a game his rookie season . He hurt his back that year but kept quiet about it , fearing he would be " labeled soft . " The injury would bother him the rest of his career . He continued to struggle in his second season , and discovered that finding individual coaching in the professional game at that time was difficult . Between the rigorous schedule , and the coaches assuming players already knew how to play for the most part when they entered the league , no one , including head coach Bill Sharman , was willing to work with him on a one @-@ on @-@ one basis . 
 Entering his fourth season , Washington knew the only thing keeping him in the league was his guaranteed contract and that the Lakers had essentially written him off . The organization felt he had the requisite physical skills , so they ascribed his failure to excel to mental deficiencies . Washington was particularly disturbed when in a game against Golden State , he got into an awkward collision with Rick Barry , upon which Barry remarked : " Listen , you better learn how to play this game . " The criticism especially bothered Washington because he felt Barry 's rebuke was correct . Desperate to improve , he contacted Pete Newell at the recommendation of an agent . Newell was a retired pro and college coach who worked in a front office position with the Lakers , and had drafted Washington when he was then the team 's GM . In truth , while Newell says he felt some responsibility considering he drafted him , he was involved in many player transactions over the course of his long career , and was not especially attached to Washington . He was surprised by this request , however , and unhappy with his new highly marginalized job within the organization , so Newell agreed to meet Washington for individual drills . He scheduled the practices very early in the morning to test Washington 's dedication , thinking a professional athlete would not bother to get up at that hour every day . Washington showed up without complaint and Newell put him through intense training sessions . Newell is often seen as a kind , gentlemanly person , who is considered one of the most important figures in the history of the game of basketball . In private practice , however , he could be an intense , unforgiving teacher , and he was even more unforgiving than usual with Washington as he felt that if he were to offer his services for free he would only do so if the player was willing to train maniacally . 
 Newell had Washington watch tapes of Paul Silas , who was a rebounding forward for the Boston Celtics , and convinced him to have more confidence in his offensive game . He reworked Washington 's game from the ground up , and in so doing established a name for himself as a tremendous coach of big men — he would later conduct a yearly " Big Man Camp " in Hawaii which was attended by hundreds of NBA players . 
 Los Angeles had acquired Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar , and Washington 's style of play complemented him , as Abdul @-@ Jabbar was not an especially physical player . Washington played well , averaging 9 @.@ 7 points and 9 @.@ 3 rebounds ; however , he struggled with tendinitis in his knee the entire season . His wife pleaded with him to sit out some games , but he took painkillers and kept playing . Washington finally tore the patella tendon in a late season game against Denver . " I could feel it tearing inside . I looked down , and my kneecap was hanging on the side of my leg . " Doctors covered his entire leg in a cast and told him his basketball career was most likely over . 
 Newell was the person to bring Washington out of the despair Kermit felt when he heard his playing career was probably over . Newell forced him through even more grueling training sessions the following summer , after some of which , Washington strongly considered quitting . His leg had atrophied from the injury and he was scared of re @-@ injuring it during their training sessions . Newell ignored his pleas and told him that if he ever wanted to play again he had to train more than before and work even harder . Washington came back to play the following season and performed well ; through the first 25 games he was averaging career highs in points ( 11 @.@ 6 ) and rebounds ( 10 @.@ 8 ) . He had been featured in the NBA preview edition of Sports Illustrated ( which was dedicated to enforcers that year ) before the season and was praised therein for his intimidating nature and fighting skills . The magazine had posed Washington shirtless in a boxing stance as part of a picture layout entitled , " Nobody , but Nobody , Is Gonna Hurt My Teammates . " 
 = = = Infamous punch = = = 
 On December 9 , 1977 , during an NBA game between the Lakers and the Houston Rockets , a scuffle broke out between several players at midcourt . 
 The events that precipitated the fight have been frequently debated , and variously interpreted . Two months earlier , on opening night of the season , the Lakers played the Milwaukee Bucks . Bucks center Kent Benson elbowed Abdul @-@ Jabbar in the stomach , and Abdul @-@ Jabbar appeared to be in intense pain . Abdul @-@ Jabbar then punched Benson from behind , breaking Benson 's jaw and his own hand . Washington got into a brawl with several Buffalo Braves players a few games later . In the December game , at the beginning of the game 's second half , Lakers guard Norm Nixon missed a shot . Houston 's Kevin Kunnert and Washington both contended for the rebound , which Kunnert eventually got and passed out to teammate John Lucas . Their battle for the rebound was more physical than usual , however . Abdul @-@ Jabbar became involved and wrestled with Kunnert . As a result , Kermit Washington stayed behind in the backcourt in order to watch over and make sure nothing happened . After the two disengaged , Washington grabbed Kunnert 's shorts in order to prevent him from getting back over on offense quickly . Kunnert threw an elbow that hit Washington on the upper arm and this move spun him around so that he was facing Washington . What happened next is disputed : Washington , several Lakers , and Rocket forward Robert Reid insisted that Kunnert punched him , Kunnert said Washington swung first after he attempted to free himself from Washington 's grasp . The referee who saw the action saw merely a " scuffle " between Kunnert and Abdul @-@ Jabbar followed by the one between Kunnert and Washington then Washington 's punch . Both Washington and Abdul @-@ Jabbar reject this account . 
 Abdul @-@ Jabbar then ran up behind Kunnert and grabbed his arms to try to pull him away from the scuffle . But this only left him defenseless for Washington 's first punch , which hit Kunnert in the head and brought him down on one knee . 
 Washington saw Tomjanovich running toward the altercation . Not knowing that he intended to break up the fight , Washington hit Tomjanovich with a roundhouse punch . The blow , which took Tomjanovich by surprise , fractured his face about one @-@ third of an inch ( 8 mm ) away from his skull and left Tomjanovich unconscious in a pool of blood in the middle of the arena . Abdul @-@ Jabbar likened the sound of the punch to a melon being dropped onto concrete . Tomjanovich had a reputation around the league as a peacemaker . Players involved say that right after Tomjanovich collapsed the absence of sound at the arena , which was filled with shocked fans , was " the loudest silence you have ever heard . " Reporters heard the sound of the punch all the way in the second floor press box , and some rushed to the playing floor in disbelief . 
 Tomjanovich was able to get up and walk around , however , and on the way into the locker room he saw Washington . Tomjanovich says that he became aggressive and asked Washington why he punched him . Washington yelled something inaudible about Kunnert , and they were broken up by two security personnel . Tomjanovich was in no condition to fight despite his aggressiveness ; besides having the bone structure of his face detached from his skull and suffering a cerebral concussion and broken jaw and nose , he was leaking blood and spinal fluid into his skull capsule . His skull was fractured in such a way that Tomjanovich could taste the spinal fluid leaking into his mouth . He later recalled that at the time of the incident , he believed the scoreboard had fallen on him . The doctor who worked on Tomjanovich said " I have seen many people with far less serious injuries not make it " and likened the surgery to Scotch @-@ taping together a badly shattered eggshell . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Worsening matters for Washington , the only available replay of the incident showed just his punch , not the scuffle that preceded it . This made the attack appear unprovoked , and Saturday Night Live , then watched by an average of 30 to 35 million people , replayed the punch countless times as a gag , having cast member Garrett Morris comically defend the punch . It was also the subject of a New York Times editorial and investigated on CBS News by Walter Cronkite . Washington was fined $ 10 @,@ 000 , and suspended for 60 days , missing 26 games ; then the longest suspension for an on @-@ court incident in NBA history . The Rockets were furious . Tomjanovich missed the rest of the season and they felt Washington should at least have done likewise . 
 On @-@ court fights had been all too common in the 1970s , often including bench @-@ clearing brawls . In the season opener , when Abdul @-@ Jabbar punched Benson , no suspension had been levied . However , Washington 's punch resulted in the league enacting strict penalties for on @-@ court fights . Former NBA commissioner David Stern , then the NBA 's chief counsel , later said that the incident made NBA officials realize that " you couldn 't allow men that big and that strong to go around throwing punches at each other . " As of 2010 , any player who attempts to punch another — even if he misses — is automatically ejected from the game , and suspended for at least his team 's next game . The league added a third referee to its game crew after the season ; this referee would have trailed the play and could have called a foul when Washington grabbed Kunnert 's shorts , thereby potentially stopping the play and preventing the melee that succeeded it . 
 Washington received no support from the Lakers front office , aside from a single call the day after the fight from Cooke , and was sent torrents of hate mail filled with racial epithets . He was advised by police not to order room service when he played again , as it was feared he would be poisoned . Larry Fleisher , head of the Players ' Association , wanted Washington to appeal his suspension , an idea which he originally considered , but ultimately rejected . Although many players around the league sympathized with Washington and said that he had a good reputation off the court , he and his wife became ostracized . They had a two @-@ year @-@ old daughter , and Washington 's wife was eight months pregnant with the couple 's first son at the time of the punch . His wife recalls her and the children being treated like pariahs after the incident . Her obstetrician refused her service because she was Washington 's wife , and her friends asked her what kind of person Washington was that he could commit such an act . The only person who contacted them was Newell . Later in the year Washington went to his home with a big screen television which he insisted Newell accept . 
 On December 27 , 1977 , just two weeks after the incident , Washington was traded to the Boston Celtics . Red Auerbach , Boston 's general manager lived in Washington , D.C. area , had been a longtime fan of Washington 's . Pat stayed behind as the couple had two young children , and Washington would be staying in a hotel . While he waited for his reinstatement , which he thought would not occur until the next season , he became depressed and fell out of shape . He pulled himself together , and began running up and down the flights of stairs of the 29 @-@ story hotel . 
 Years later , Jerry West , who was the Lakers coach at the time , told John Feinstein he still wanted Washington on the roster . Then @-@ general manager Bill Sharman said he was " on the fence . " Owner Jack Kent Cooke , however , decided to move on . 
 He started alongside Hall of Fame center Dave Cowens , who enjoyed playing with Washington , remarking , " It 's great fun , you can always hear him grunt when he 's rebounding . " Auerbach said , " Kermit was fighting a battle he couldn 't win . Nothing he could say or do was going to change the way people perceived him because of that moment . I wanted him to feel at home with us , to feel wanted . " Washington won Boston fans over immediately . His acceptance was aided by a glowing article Bob Ryan of The Boston Globe wrote on the player after researching his life and spending some time with him . After the season , Washington took less money to re @-@ sign with the Celtics over the Denver Nuggets . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Washington became involved in one of the more unusual player transactions in NBA history . Celtics owner Irv Levin wanted to move closer to his home and business interests in California but continue to own an NBA team . To solve this problem , he and John Y. Brown , Jr . , owner of the Buffalo Braves , exchanged franchises . Levin then moved the Braves to San Diego , where they were renamed the Clippers . Washington was one of four Celtics sent to San Diego as part of the deal . In November 1978 , San Diego played in Houston . Tomjanovich scored 26 points and collected 11 rebounds while Washington had six and two . Before the game , the Clippers coach , Gene Shue , had suggested to the Rockets coach , Tom Nissalke , that the players shake hands at center court prior to tipoff . Tomjanovich rejected the idea . 
 After a year in San Diego , Washington was traded again . Levin decided to acquire Portland center Bill Walton even though Walton had missed the entire 1978 – 79 season due to broken bones in his foot . Since the Blazers and Clippers could not agree on compensation , the commissioner 's office made the final decision , sending Washington , Kunnert and Randy Smith to Portland in exchange for the center . This became the second time he had been traded along with Kunnert . The center signed with Boston before the 1978 – 79 season even though Washington was on the team because the Celtics offered him the most money . There remained a mostly quiet discord between the two as Washington felt Kunnert never properly acknowledged his role in the fight . 
 Portland had strongly desired Washington , and their general manager Stu Inman , was a close friend of Pete Newell 's . Inman had worked hard through Newell to let Washington know that they intended this to be the last time he was traded . This was important as the media coverage and re @-@ locations had been hard on Pat and the children . To his great relief , the city of Portland welcomed Washington with open arms . Portland had one of the more rabid fan bases in the league , and everywhere Washington went he was treated like a beloved celebrity . 
 During the same off @-@ season , Tomjanovich and the Rockets civil suit vs. the Lakers occurred . Houston 's side argued that Los Angeles had failed to control Washington . During the trial , numerous players and coaches who were at the game testified , while Washington sat at the defense table , listening to himself be portrayed as a dangerous rogue . Kunnert testified during the trial and contradicted Washington 's testimony , angrily branding him a liar . While the two were playing for San Diego , their wives became close friends , but their relationship only worsened over time ; Washington believed the NBA was keeping Kunnert on his team to prevent him from suing him . Jack Ramsay , Portland 's coach , however , said that he chose Kunnert over San Diego center <unk> <unk> when his team was asked by the league to submit a list of players they considered fair compensation for Walton . 
 Washington shared time at the Trail Blazers power forward spot with Maurice Lucas at first , but after Lucas ' trade to the New Jersey Nets , he became the full @-@ time starter . He played three seasons in Portland , during which he earned a spot in the 1980 NBA All @-@ Star Game , after some of the top players sat out due to injury . During that All @-@ Star weekend , which was held in Landover , Maryland , nearby American U. held a halftime ceremony in which they retired Washington 's number . He was named a team captain for the following season . In his post @-@ punch career , numerous players , coaches , and officials noted that he became less aggressive on the court out of fear of getting into another fight ; something he never did . Washington started experiencing pain in his back and knees during the 1980 – 81 season . The pain became unbearable during the 1981 – 82 season , and he retired in January 1982 after missing all but 20 games . In 1987 , after more than five years out of the league , he tried to make a comeback with the Warriors , but lasted only eight games on the roster ( playing in six of them ) before being cut . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Since retiring , Washington has run restaurants and is a founder and operator of a number of charitable organizations . He ran a restaurant in the Portland metropolitan area with former Blazer teammate Kevin Duckworth , called " Le Slam . " The restaurant closed in 2001 . He has also served in a coaching role with Stanford University , and worked at Pete Newell 's fabled " Big Man Camp " for 15 years . In 1995 he founded The 6th Man Foundation , otherwise known as Project Contact Africa . In August 1994 , Washington accompanied a team of doctors and nurses on a humanitarian mission to Goma , Zaire , working in a refugee camp helping victims of the bloody Rwandan Civil War . The stench of death and human waste extended for miles . " It was a sad , sad sight , " Washington later recalled , " a sight I 'll never forget . " 
 After his career , Washington has complained of treatment he has received in relation to his punching of Tomjanovich . Washington has sought to portray himself as a victim of the fight and appears to have exaggerated some of the misfortunes that came his way as a result of it . Washington told The New York Times that he has been refused work as a coach time and again . However , Tom Davis hired him as an assistant coach at Stanford , and Davis wanted to bring him to Iowa when he went to coach there . Washington stayed at Stanford and later quit his assistant coaching position , and he subsequently worked as strength and conditioning coach for the Portland Trail Blazers . 
 Washington also claimed that American University cut off contact with him after he punched Tomjanovich . However , this appears to be a misrepresentation of certain events . When he tried to become athletic director of American in 1995 , the school offered to hire him as assistant to the athletic director , since Washington had no front office experience . When confronted about this Washington stated : " I didn 't see why I couldn 't be the AD so they could use my name out front and then have someone with more experience be my assistant . " John Feinstein and others have suggested that the most lasting damage caused by the fight between Washington and Tomjanovich has been to Washington 's self @-@ image , and his supposed refusal to accept responsibility for his actions in that fight . Pat later said it went deeper than that , as when she met him in college : 
 It was very hard for him to show affection . Sometimes I would ask him directly if he really cared about me , and he would say something like , " I think you 're really nice . " It was hard for him to be more open than that . He had never really been nurtured , never really been loved . I came to believe if I nurtured him enough , if I loved him enough , he would get past all that . But I don 't believe he ever really did . 
 Washington currently lives in the Washington , DC area , where he is employed as a regional representative of the National Basketball Players Association . 
 On May 25 , 2016 , Washington was indicted for allegedly embezzling roughly $ 500 @,@ 000 meant for children in Africa . 
 = Kačić noble family = 
 The Kačić family ( Croatian : Kačići , Hungarian : Kacsics , Latin : Cacich ) was one of the most influential Croatian noble families , and was one of the Croatian " twelve noble tribes " described in the Pacta conventa and <unk> Cartulary . The historical sources refer to members of this family as nobles in the area of the Luka <unk> in the Zadar @-@ Biograd hinterland ( 12th – 16th centuries ) , as the lords ( knezes ) of Omiš ( 12th and 13th centuries ) , and as the lords of the Makarska Riviera ( 15th and 16th centuries ) . Another prominent branch of the family was part of the Hungarian nobility . 
 Family members of the Omiš branch were known for piracy in the Adriatic Sea , clashes with Venice , and were even accused of <unk> heresy . To the Makarska branch belonged the Croatian poet and <unk> monk , Andrija Kačić Miošić , whose work <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Pleasant Conversation of Slavic People , 1756 ) was one of the most popular Croatian literary works for more than a century . Notable members of the Hungarian branch were Bans of Croatia and Slavonia . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The family name most likely derives from the Slavic <unk> ( snake ) , the closest word to the name Kačić . Based on etymology , it is likely that the Hungarian Kačićs ( Kacsics ) are originally of Slavic rather than Hungarian origin . Latin sources also refer to the name as de genere <unk> , generatione Cacich , genus <unk> , <unk> de Cacich , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The Kačić name is distinct from the similarly sounding name of another noble family , Kašić ( <unk> ) , and its derivations ( <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The Kačić 's family can be traced to the Pacta conventa , an agreement dating from 1102 ( or later ) , according to which the Kačićs were one of the twelve Croatian noble tribes ( genus ) who accepted the Hungarian king Coloman as the new king of Croatia . They were represented by comes Juraj Kačić ( <unk> Gurram de genere <unk> ) . According to the <unk> Cartulary , they were one of six tribes which selected bans who , in turn , elected a new king in a case where the prior king died without leaving heirs . 
 The first mention of Kačićs is considered 1165 , when the Byzantine chronicler John Kinnamos said that 57 cities in Croatia and Dalmatia as well the " nation Kačićs " came under the Byzantine rule . The Kačićs were mostly recorded in the scope of sales contracts and lands disputes , or as witnesses . In 1182 , the first explicitly mentioned noblemen as members of the genus Kačić are <unk> Kačić ( 1166 – 82 ) and his son <unk> , previously also <unk> 's father Toljen ( 1164 – 66 ) , the judge of Tinj , <unk> Kačić with sons Juraj and <unk> , <unk> Kačić with sons <unk> and Pribislav , and likely Otra with his son Dragoslav . 
 The Kačić family originated in the Zadar hinterland near the Krka river , and when King Petar Krešimir IV mastered the <unk> , some members of the family likely relocated to the area between the Cetina and Neretva rivers . The social distinction between noble Kačićs in the Zadar @-@ Biograd hinterland and the princely ( knezes ) Kačićs from Omiš remains uncertain , but the two families are considered to be related . The clearest established connection is the noble Hodimir , mentioned in 1207 in a charter of St. Peter 's Church in <unk> near Tinj , whose son Nikola was an Omiš knez . 
 In the 12th and 13th centuries Kačićs possessed lands in the Zadar hinterland , in the wider area of Tinj , Nadin , Kačina Gorica , <unk> and <unk> . From the mid @-@ 14th to 15th century , their holdings expanded to include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Kačina Gorica , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , and the wider area around those villages . The center of the genus was in Nadin , for some Zadar , Nin and possibly Pag , where " <unk> <unk> " is mentioned . According to M. Marković , in the early 11th century , the lands West of Nadin were ruled by the tribe <unk> , while in the East by family Kašić . The family name of the Kačićs can be found in the toponyms Kačina Gorica , <unk> ( alleged second name for <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) and Kačić ( Cacich ) . 
 In the 14th century the family members began to identify themselves by family names with the adjective " de generatione Cacich " . In the next period the Kačićs can be traced through three families . In the 15th to 17th centuries a branch settled in the wider area of Cazin and Bosanska Krupa , where in 1487 there was a dispute between them and the <unk> noble family . The last mention of Nadin Kačićs dates back to 1527 , when <unk> ( Simon ) was in the citadel of Zadar , after pressure from the Ottoman conquest . 
 = = Omiš branch = = 
 The first known knez of Omiš , Nikola , was mentioned , along with his relatives and everyone under his lordship , in a peace treaty with Kotor from 1167 . Knez Nikola 's power and independence was strong enough to have <unk> , the Archbishop of Split , executed in 1180 . Family political influence at that time included Brač and Hvar , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) — also of genus Kačić — as well as the previous Šibenik <unk> ( župan ) . Archbishop <unk> , who also served Byzantine Emperor Manuel I Komnenos as representative governor of Croatia , had become involved in a dispute about an estate around Mosor . A conte Nicola <unk> , who was identified in two dispute settlements of Split during 1178 – 79 , is considered to be the same knez Nikola . In 1190 , Nikola established a peace treaty with Dubrovnik . Like the 1167 treaty with Kotor , the 1190 treaty granted safe and free navigation to Dubrovnik ships from <unk> to <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 The area of Omiš principality seems to have included the islands of Brač , Hvar and Vis , and probably at some point Korčula , but it is uncertain whether the land included coastal <unk> and <unk> to the North and Makarska coast to the South . In the 13th century the center of the principality was Omiš , and with the title of Omiš knez ( comes ) the sources also mentioned the title of knez for the islands . In the 13th century the terms Kačićs ( Kačići ) and residents of Omiš ( Omišani ) are both mentioned , making it sometimes more difficult to reliably identify members of the genus . However , it seems that the princely titles were held only by the Kačićs . They achieved a large degree of independence from the central government and imposed the name of Omiš and Kačić family over the entire region . 
 Kačićs and Omiš citizens made a peace treaty with Venice in 1208 , and the brothers <unk> , Radoš , Dragan , Bogdan and Sinko were mentioned by knez <unk> in the document . However , in the February of 1215 , Kačićs were , for first time , cited for piracy . In 1220 , the Hungarian @-@ Croatian king Andrew II threatened retaliation with the royal army against knez Malduč and his relatives unless the piracy and heresy ended . In May of 1221 , Pope Honorius III sent legate <unk> to the citizens of Split , among other cities , to prevent piracy and defend the Crusaders . In 1222 , the pope sought help from residents of Dubrovnik against the activity of Bosnian heretics and Omiš pirates . His efforts , as well as those of <unk> , Archbishop of Split , resulted in a temporary peace treaty with Kačići Omišani ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 In 1232 , Venetians mentioned that Dubrovnik was not allowed to accept Kačićs and Omišani , and if Venice were to send ships against Kačićs , Dubrovnik must join the Venetians with a ship of at least 50 people . 
 Nikola of Hodimir and Pribislav of Malduč claimed bail in May of 1239 for the Omišani who murdered Dubrovnik nobleman <unk> and looted his ship . They also agreed to pay compensation for personal property that had been looted . In Omiš during the same year , knez Nikola and his relatives made peace between Zachlumia and Split , agreeing to pay for damage earlier in the year when <unk> nephew Toljen ravaged Split . However , compensation for the ravages of Toljen was not paid , leading to conflict in the following year . After an unsuccessful attack on Omiš , the Split army captured Brač in the first half of 1240 . The conflict continued until the peace agreement by which the brothers of Osor left the ships to Split and renounced looting . This was also the time period of the Split potestas Gargano , and Malduč sons Pribislav and Osor in Hvar and Brač . 
 In March of 1244 , the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II threatened conflict with the Omišani over damage incurred along the Apulian coast . In March of 1245 , knez Nikola of Hodimir , with 100 Omiš citizens and knezes Pribislav , Osor , Juraj , Radoš ( son of Bogdan ) , <unk> , and Prodan ( son of Dragan ) , made a treaty with Dubrovnik . According to the 1245 treaty , if the king called upon the Kačićs and Omišani to help in an attack on Dubrovnik , they would respond with the least possible forces . 
 In 1252 – 54 , Juraj helped Stefan Uroš I of Serbia in the war with Dubrovnik , as he was married to Stefan 's daughter . In 1256 , a dispute between knez Osor and the city Trogir about property in the village of <unk> was resolved by king Béla IV and ban Stjepan . In 1258 , when the king confirmed rights to the Omišani , knezes Osor and Radoš were called " kingdom noblemen " . Documents from 1261 @-@ 62 describe an agreement in which Dubrovnik paid blood feud to the relatives of murdered Omišani , who promised not to cause any harm to the Dubrovnik residents . In 1267 – 68 , the Doge warned the citizens of Split about helping Omiš pirates . In 1271 , the pirates looted a ship on which the Archbishop of Trani was traveling to Dubrovnik . A similar incident occurred in 1273 when pirates commanded by <unk> and Saracen looted the ship of bishop <unk> Henrik . 
 Charles I of Naples signed an alliance with Split and Šibenik against Omiš pirates in June and September of 1274 . The citizens of Omiš responded by an alliance with Venice in August , in accordance with a 20 @-@ year peace treaty signed by knezes Radoš , Bogdan , Juraj and Semen . This triggered conflict on the land and sea in 1275 . The activities in the intermediate years are unknown , besides that in April of 1278 the islands of Hvar and Brač recognized Venetian authority , and the Omiš in 1281 . 
 At the end of the 13th century , the Omiš branch of the Kačić family was involved in the politics of more powerful authorities . Their local hereditary oligarchy disappeared , but the Kačićs probably continued to live in the area . The war with Venice at the end of the 1270s and the beginning of the 1280s led to their loss of Omiš in favor of princes from the Šubić noble family . The Omiš Kačićs are mentioned for the last time in 1294 , when the Venetians wrote to Dubrovnik residents seeking compensation from Dubrovnik authorities who had failed to send an armed ship against Omiš pirates . It is not known whether Ivan , son of Matej Kačić , mentioned in Dubrovnik 1285 , was related to the Omišani Kačićs . After that , Kačićs are no longer mentioned . 
 = = = Notable members = = = 
 Nikola Kačić ( Nicola <unk> <unk> ) , ruled c . 1167 – c . 1180 
 <unk> Kačić , Malduč Kačić , Radoš Kačić , Bogdan Kačić 
 Juraj or Đuro Kačić , married the daughter of King Stefan Vladislav of Serbia ( r . 1234 – 1243 ) . 
 = = Makarska branch = = 
 In 15th @-@ century sources , Kačićs appear in the Makarska Riviera ( Krajina ) , most likely as the descendants of Omiš branch Kačićs . According to the genealogy preserved by the most well known member of the family , Andrija Kačić Miošić , one branch of the family went to Hungary , and there fought with Zagar noble family . They returned to Dalmatia , one brother to Zadar , another to Šibenik , and the last two to the Makarska Riviera , where they started building castles in Gradac and <unk> , as well as practicing piracy up to Apulia . 
 The first known member of the Makarska branch was <unk> . According to the genealogy , the family branched out from his son Baran ( second half of the 14th century ) . Baran 's sons Vukašin , <unk> , Andrijaš and Baran were mentioned in historical documents ; Bosnian king Stephen Ostoja , in 1417 , confirmed the rights of his vassals Vukašin , Baran and Juraj <unk> to Makar , Drvenik , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( Gradac ) , which were previously confirmed by Bosnian ban Stephen II Kotromanić and Bosnian king Tvrtko I. 
 In July of 1452 , Grubiša sought for his family and all residents of Krajina to become Venetian vassals . Venice accepted the request , confirmed their old customs , allowed the foundation of fort and port in Makar , and forgave older violence . Thus , the Kačićs and residents of Krajina fought at their own expense between Neretva and Cetina rivers , and gave taxes to Venice . 
 A Venetian confidant on Hvar reported , in 1498 , the Ottoman preparation of 25 ships for sea attack on Krajina and Kačićs . In the next year , they became Ottoman subjects . In 1500 , the Split monarch reported to Venice that Ottomans captured several delegates from Split , and that safely arrived in Mostar only thanks to knez Juraj Marković , an Ottoman subject and Venetian friend . Marković wrote from Makarska to Venice that he was knez for 15 years and always a friend of the Venetians . In the Marković collection and archive , D. <unk> found the Croatian redaction of the Chronicle of the Priest of Duklja . 
 During the Ottoman rule , Kačićs were only partially mentioned , but still lived there . From the beginning of the 17th century , they can again be traced in the documents , but as family members of several branches descending from the coastal princes . In the 17th and 18th centuries , the family continued to branch out and become independent genera . Their names usually carried a combination with " Kačić " , as well had the title of " conte " . 
 According to the genealogy , from Vukašin 's sons <unk> , Grubiša , <unk> and <unk> emerged three branches . Per settlement , <unk> 's descendants are known as Kačićs of Gradac , while those of <unk> and Grubiša are Kačićs of <unk> . From the first branch emerged <unk> , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> ( Peko ) and <unk> ( older <unk> ) , while from the second branch came Miošić , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Descended from Baran 's son <unk> , in <unk> , were Terzić , <unk> ( extinct in the 17th century ) , Marković , and probably <unk> . From Baran 's son Andrijaš emerged <unk> ( <unk> ) , Perić , <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( Bašić ) and <unk> . Kačićs from Makar divided into <unk> and Mitrović . Descended from Baran 's son Baran was the family of <unk> . 
 = = = Notable members = = = 
 <unk> Kačić @-@ <unk> ( 1572 – 1645 ) , bishop of Makarska ( 1615 – 1645 ) 
 Petar Kačić @-@ <unk> ( c . 1606 – 1661 ) , bishop of Makarska ( 1646 – 1660 ) 
 Pavao <unk> Kačić ( died 1721 ) , provincial of Franciscan Province of Bosna <unk> ( 1693 – 1696 ) 
 Antun Kačić ( 1686 – 1745 ) , bishop of Trogir ( 1722 – 1730 ) and archbishop of Split ( 1730 – 1745 ) 
 Andrija Kačić Miošić ( 1704 – 1760 ) , Franciscan and poet 
 Juraj <unk> Terzić Kačić ( 1740 – 1820 ) , canon and poet 
 Pavao Klement Miošić Kačić ( 1786 – 1837 ) , bishop of Split @-@ Makarska ( 1829 – 1837 ) 
 Petar Peko Kačić ( 1830 – 1918 ) , Franciscan and ethnographer 
 = = Hungarian branch = = 
 Several scholars considered that Hungarian Kacsics may have been descendants of Omiš Kačićs . They are mentioned in the early 13th century , in Northern counties Nógrád , <unk> and <unk> . 
 The first mentioned noblemen are brothers Michael Kacsics and Simon Kacsics , the Voivode of Transylvania ( 1209 – 1212 ; 1215 ) and Ban of Slavonia ( 1212 ; somewhere 1213 – 1218 ) . Simon took part in the murder of Queen Gertrude of Merania ( 24 September 1213 ) ; therefore , King Andrew II of Hungary confiscated his possessions . 
 Supporters of the Andrew II in his rebellion against the elder brother and then king Emeric may have included the noble family Kačić . With the new king 's intention of spreading his circle of supporters , some members of the family were probably gifted with estates in Hungary . A relationship between Hungarian and Omiš Kačićs is identified primarily in the mention of <unk> Kačić in a document from 1178 , with father Nikola and brother Jakov , and with brothers Borislav , Bogdan and other family members in a document from 1190 . 
 In the next two or three generations , the genus branched into several lineages and families . First the <unk> , Libercsei , and later Libercsei <unk> , Libercsei <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> / <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Michael 's son <unk> ( 1255 ) held properties at <unk> and Nógrád , and was the founder of genus Libercsei , from which emerged powerful Szécsényi , Geréb of <unk> , and Farkas of <unk> . To the Szécsényi belonged <unk> , Ban of Croatia ( 1366 – 67 ) , while to the Geréb belonged Matthias , also Ban of Croatia ( 1483 – 92 ) . 
 The members of the genus accepted the supremacy of <unk> Csák III , one of the most powerful oligarchs of the kingdom , around 1300 ; only one of them , Thomas Szécsényi became the partisan of King Charles I. Consequently , the king granted him his relatives ' possessions following victories over the oligarch . 
 = = = Notable members = = = 
 Michael Kacsics ( d. after 1228 ) , Voivode of Transylvania ( 1209 – 1212 ) , Ban of Slavonia ( 1212 ) 
 Simon Kacsics ( d. after 1228 ) , Voivode of Transylvania ( 1215 ) , Ban of Slavonia ( 1213 ) 
 Farkas , Master of the cupbearers for the Queen ( 1298 ) , father of Thomas Szécsényi 
 Simon Kacsics ( d. after 1327 ) , Count of the Székelys ( 1321 – 1327 ) 
 <unk> Szécsényi ( d. after 1367 ) , Ban of Croatia ( 1366 – 1367 ) 
 Matthias Geréb ( d . 1489 ) , Ban of Croatia ( 1483 – 1489 ) 
 = Herne Bay , Kent = 
 Herne Bay / <unk> / is a seaside town in Kent , South East England , with a population of 38 @,@ 563 . On the south coast of the Thames Estuary it is 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of Canterbury and 5 miles ( 8 km ) east of Whitstable . It neighbours the ancient villages of Herne and Reculver and is part of the City of Canterbury local government district . Herne Bay 's seafront is home to the world 's first freestanding purpose @-@ built Clock Tower , built in 1837 ; from the late Victorian period until 1978 , the town had the second @-@ longest pier in the United Kingdom . 
 The town began as a small shipping community , receiving goods and passengers from London en route to Canterbury and Dover . The town rose to prominence as a seaside resort during the early 19th century after the building of a pleasure pier and promenade by a group of London investors , and reached its heyday in the late Victorian era . Its popularity as a holiday destination has declined over the past decades , due to the increase in foreign travel and to a lesser degree exposure to flooding that has prevented the town 's redevelopment . 
 = = History = = 
 The town of Herne Bay took its name from the neighbouring village of Herne , two kilometres inland from the bay . The word <unk> , meaning a place on a corner of land , evolved from the Old English <unk> , meaning corner . The village was first recorded in around 1100 as <unk> . The corner may relate to the sharp turn in the minor Roman road between Canterbury and Reculver at Herne . 
 One of the oldest buildings in Herne Bay is the late 18th @-@ century inn , The Ship , which served as the focal point for the small shipping and farming community which first inhabited the town . During this time , passenger and cargo boats regularly ran between Herne Bay and London and boats carrying coal ran from Newcastle . From Herne was easy access by road to the city of Canterbury or to Dover , where further passage by boat could then be obtained across the English Channel to France . 
 The 1801 census recorded Herne Bay , including Herne , as having a population of 1 @,@ 232 . During the early 19th century , a smugglers ' gang operated from the town . The gang were regularly involved in a series of fights with the preventive services until finally being overpowered in the 1820s . In the 1830s , a group of London investors , who recognised Herne Bay 's potential as a seaside resort , built a wooden pier and a promenade on the town 's seafront . This and the subsequent building of a railway station led to the rapid expansion of the town ; between 1831 and 1841 the town 's population grew from 1 @,@ 876 to 3 @,@ 041 . The London businessmen intended to rename the town St Augustine 's , but the name was unpopular with residents and the " Herne Bay " remained . In 1833 , an Act of Parliament established Herne Bay and Herne as separate towns . Local landowner Sir Henry Oxenden donated a piece of ground for the site of the town 's first church , Christ Church , which was opened in 1834 . In 1837 , Mrs Ann <unk> , a wealthy lady from London , donated around £ 4 @,@ 000 to build a 75 feet ( 23 m ) clock tower on the town 's seafront . It is believed to be the first freestanding purpose built clock tower in the world . 
 During the 1840s , steamboats began running between Herne Bay and London . There was a type of beach boat unique to Herne Bay and nearby Thanet , known as the Thanet wherry , a narrow pulling boat about 18 feet ( 5 m ) long . These boats were mainly used for fishing ; however , with the advent of tourism and the decline of fishing , they became mainly used for pleasure trips . A document dated 1840 records the town as having the following schools , all of which are now defunct : Haddington boarding school , Oxenden House , The British School , Prospect Place and Herne Street School . The village of Herne was often called Herne Street around this time . The same document also mentions the still @-@ existing Rodney Head , The Ship and Upper Red Lion inns . 
 In 1912 , the first " Brides in the Bath " murder by George Joseph Smith was committed in Herne Bay . BBC scriptwriter Anthony Coburn , who lived in the resort , was one of people to conceive the idea of a police box as a time machine for Doctor Who . During World War II , a sea @-@ fort was built off the coast of Herne Bay and Whitstable , which is still in existence . The coastal village of Reculver , to the east of Herne Bay , was the site of the testing of the bouncing bomb used by the " Dam Busters " during the war . 
 = = = The pier = = = 
 The original wooden pier had to be dismantled in 1871 after its owners went into liquidation and sea worms had damaged the wood . A shorter 100 metres ( 328 ft ) long iron pier with a theatre and shops at the entrance was built in 1873 . However , it was too short for steamboats to land at . The pier proved to be unprofitable and a replacement longer iron pier with an electric tram began to be built in 1896 . At 3 @,@ 600 feet ( 1 @,@ 097 m ) , this pier was the second longest in the country , behind only the pier at Southend @-@ on @-@ Sea . 
 The town 's heyday as a seaside resort was during the late Victorian era ; the population nearly doubled from 4 @,@ 410 to 8 @,@ 442 between 1881 and 1901 . Much of the resulting late Victorian seafront architecture is still in existence today . In 1910 , a pavilion was added to the landward end of the pier . By 1931 , the town 's population had grown to 14 @,@ 533 . At the beginning of World War II , the army cut two gaps between the landward end of the pier and the seaward terminal as a counter @-@ invasion measure . The pier 's two gaps were bridged for pedestrians however after the war . 
 1963 marked the end of steamboat services from the pier . In 1970 , a fire destroyed the pier 's pavilion and plans began to replace it with a sports centre , which was opened in 1976 by former Prime Minister Edward Heath . The centre section of the pier was torn down by a storm in 1978 , leaving the end of the pier isolated out at sea . It has not been rebuilt due to the cost ; however , residents and businesses in the town have campaigned for its restoration . The sports centre was demolished in 2012 , leaving a bare platform . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Since 1983 , the Member of Parliament for North Thanet , covering northern Thanet and Herne Bay , has been the Conservative Roger Gale . At the 2010 general election , he won a majority of 13 @,@ 528 with 52 @.@ 7 % of the vote in North Thanet . Labour won 21 @.@ 5 % of the vote , Liberal Democrats 19 @.@ 4 % and United Kingdom Independence Party 6 @.@ 5 % . 
 Herne Bay , along with Whitstable and Canterbury , is in the City of Canterbury local government district . The town contains the five electoral wards of Heron , Herne and Broomfield , Greenhill and Eddington , West Bay and Reculver . These wards have thirteen of the fifty seats on the Canterbury City council . As at the 2011 local elections , twelve of those seats were held by the Conservatives and one by the Liberal Democrats . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Herne Bay is centred at 51 ° 22 ′ 14 ″ N 1 ° 7 ′ 37 ″ E in northeast Kent , on the coast of the Thames Estuary . The town is 1 mile ( 2 km ) east of the town of Whitstable and 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of the city of Canterbury . The village of Herne is just to the south , and the village of Reculver is 1 mile ( 2 km ) to the east . The town 's suburbs are Hampton , Greenhill and Studd Hill in the west , Eddington and Broomfield in the south , and Beltinge and Hillborough in the east . The drowned settlement of Hampton @-@ on @-@ Sea once existed beside what is now Hampton . 
 The landscape of the town has been largely influenced by the Plenty Brook , which flows northward through the centre of the town and into the sea . It is thought to have been a much larger stream in ancient times . The coastline has two distinct bays , separated by a jut of land created by silt from the outflow of the brook into the sea . The first buildings in the town were built along the east bay , a short distance from the brook outflow , where the road from Canterbury met the sea . The town has since spread across both bays , across the Plenty Brook valley and onto the relatively high land flanking both sides of the valley . The land to the east of the valley reaches a height of 25 metres ( 82 ft ) above sea level and to the west reaches 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . Cliffs are formed where this high land meets the sea . 
 The rising land beside the coast , between the valley and the eastern cliffs , is known as ' The Downs ' ( no relation to the North or South Downs ) . This area has been named a Site of Scientific Interest and a Special Protection Area for Birds . The whole of the north east Kent coast has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest . The geology of the town consists mainly of London Clay , overlaid with brickearth in the west . The sand and clay of The Downs are subject to landslips . 
 The Plenty Brook now passes through the town 's drainage system , allowing buildings to be built over the top . The brook has been prone to flooding during heavy rain , especially in inland areas , which regularly causes problems for people living in the Eddington area in southern Herne Bay . 
 Stormy weather can cause the sea level by the coast to rise by up to two metres . In the past , this has caused disastrous flooding in the town , the worst in the town 's history being in 1953 . Coastal defences were subsequently constructed including groynes , sea walls and shingle beach . In the 1990s , these defences were deemed to be inadequate and an offshore breakwater , now known as Neptune 's Arm , was built to protect the most vulnerable areas of the town . 
 In east Kent , the warmest time of the year is July and August , when maximum temperatures average around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) ; the coolest months are January and February , when minimum temperatures average around 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) . East Kent 's average maximum and minimum temperatures are around 1 / 2 ° C higher than the national average . Herne Bay is sometimes warmer than other parts of Kent as it is backed by the North Downs to the south . Between 1999 and 2005 , Herne Bay recorded the highest daily temperature in the United Kingdom nine times . East Kent 's average annual rainfall is about 728 mm ( 29 inches ) , the wettest months being October to January . This was lower than the national average annual rainfall of 838 mm ( 33 inches ) , and recent droughts have led to hosepipe bans by Mid Kent Water . 
 = = Demography = = 
 As of the 2001 UK census , Herne Bay area wards had a population of 35 @,@ 188 and a population density of 11 @.@ 3 persons per hectare . 
 Of the town 's 14 @,@ 732 households , 48 @.@ 7 % were married couples living together , 8 @.@ 4 % were cohabiting couples and 8 @.@ 3 % were lone parents . 30 @.@ 2 % of all households were made up of individuals and 20 @.@ 5 % had someone living alone at pensionable age . 27 @.@ 7 % of households included children aged under 16 or a person aged 16 to 18 who was in full @-@ time education . The average household size was 2 @.@ 74 . 
 The ethnicity of the town was 98 @.@ 5 % white , 0 @.@ 6 % mixed race , 0 @.@ 4 % Asian , 0 @.@ 2 % black and 0 @.@ 3 % Chinese or other . The place of birth of residents was 96 @.@ 3 % United Kingdom , 0 @.@ 6 % Republic of Ireland , 0 @.@ 3 % Germany , 0 @.@ 6 % other Western Europe countries , 0 @.@ 2 % Eastern Europe , 0 @.@ 6 % Africa , 0 @.@ 3 % Far East , 0 @.@ 3 % South Asia , 0 @.@ 2 % Middle East , 0 @.@ 2 % North America and 0 @.@ 2 % Oceania . Religion was recorded as 77 @.@ 3 % Christian , 0 @.@ 3 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 2 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 2 % Buddhist , 0 @.@ 1 % Jewish and 0 @.@ 1 % Sikh . 14 @.@ 2 % were recorded as having no religion , 0 @.@ 3 % had an alternative religion and 7 @.@ 4 % did not state their religion . 
 For every 100 females , there were 89 @.@ 9 males . The age distribution was 6 % aged 0 – 4 years , 14 % aged 5 – 15 years , 4 % aged 16 – 19 years , 29 % aged 20 – 44 years , 25 % aged 45 – 64 years and 22 % aged 65 years and over . The town had a high percentage of residents over 65 , compared with the national average of 16 % . As a seaside town , Herne Bay is a popular retirement destination ; many modern retirement complexes are located near the seafront . 
 The economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 was 36 % in full @-@ time employment , 13 % in part @-@ time employment , 9 % self @-@ employed , 3 % unemployed , 2 % students with jobs , 3 % students without jobs , 18 % retired , 7 % looking after home or family , 6 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 % economically inactive for other reasons . This was roughly in line with the national figures , except for the number of people in retirement . This figure nationally was significantly lower at 14 % . Of the town 's residents aged 16 – 74 , 12 % had a higher education qualification or the equivalent , compared with 20 % nationwide . According to Office for National Statistics estimates , during the period of April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in the Herne Bay area was £ 516 ( £ 26 @,@ 906 per year ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The advent of overseas travel and changes to holiday trends eventually caused the town 's economy to decline after the 1960s ; regular flooding of the Plenty Brook prevented redevelopment of the town centre . However , extensive seafront regeneration in the 1990s followed the creation of the Neptune 's Arm sea defence jetty . The jetty has created a small harbour used by leisure boats and from where tourists can take sailing yacht trips to a seal @-@ watching site in the Thames estuary . The Victorian gardens on the seafront were then able to be fully restored . The Central Bandstand , built in 1924 , was refurbished after years of disrepair and closure to the public . A swimming pool and cinema were added to the town centre in the early 1990s . In 2005 , a wind @-@ farm with thirty 2 @.@ 75 MW wind turbines was built 5 miles ( 8 km ) off the coast of Herne Bay and Whitstable , generating a total of 82 @.@ 5 MW of electricity . The recent upgrades by the Council have helped improve the image of the town and raise its profile . It is hoped this will attract new investment in tourism and business by the private sector , and lead to the regeneration of the town 's economy . 
 In 2006 , Canterbury City Council began a public consultation to discuss the regeneration . A concern raised by the council is that the shopping centre is incoherent and fails to attract the tourists that come for the seafront . Other issues raised are the lack of holiday accommodation , car parks and clear pedestrian routes between the three main attractions in the town : the seafront , Memorial park and shopping centre . The council is considering relocating the sports centre from the pier and replacing it with other tourist attractions . 
 As of the 2001 census , the industry of employment of residents of Herne Bay was 19 % retail , 14 % health and social work , 11 % manufacturing , 10 % construction , 9 % real estate , 8 % education , 8 % transport and communications , 5 % public administration , 5 % hotels and restaurants , 4 % finance , 1 % agriculture and 5 % other community , social or Personal Services . Compared to national figures , the town had a relatively high number of workers in the construction and health / social care industries and a relatively low number in manufacturing and real estate . Many residents commute to work outside the town . As of the 2001 UK census , 14 @,@ 711 of the town 's residents were in employment , whereas there were only 8 @,@ 104 jobs within the town . 
 One of the largest employers is the centrally located supermarket , which as of January 2006 was considering further expansion . It is one of the major attractions to the town 's shopping centre , however there are fears that its expansion could lead it to become too dominant , at the cost of smaller shops in the town . Apart from tourism and retail , many jobs are also provided in the manufacturing industry , mainly located in industrial estates on the outskirts of the town , which produce goods such as kitchen furniture and factory machinery . A high number of construction jobs have been created by redevelopment of the seafront , which is expected to continue with the proposed regeneration of the town centre . The elderly population of the town has led to many Health and Social Care jobs at local care homes and at the town 's Queen Victoria Memorial Hospital . As of the 2001 census , 1 @.@ 9 % of the town 's population resided in a medical or care establishment , compared with the national average of only 0 @.@ 8 % . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The seafront has a 2 miles ( 3 km ) shingle beach , which has been awarded a European Blue Flag and the yellow and blue Seaside Award for its safety and cleanliness . The seafront features a Victorian bandstand and gardens , amusement arcades , and children 's play areas . Landmarks by the seafront include the Clock Tower , the sea defence jetty , the off @-@ shore World War II sea fort and the off @-@ shore wind farm . There are seaside cafés , fresh seafood restaurants , guesthouses , beach huts and numerous water @-@ sports facilities . 
 The Memorial Park , situated near the centre of the town , incorporates a children 's play area , a large shallow duck pond often used for remote control boats , basketball and tennis courts and a large expanse of grass for field games . The park has a monument and an ' Avenue of Remembrance ' as memorials to the town 's residents killed during the two world wars . 
 Reculver Country park is home to the cliff top Reculver Towers , the remains of the 12th century St Mary 's Church and its distinctive twin towers . The park also contains the remains of a Roman fort , the remains of a Saxon church , a migrating @-@ bird watching spot and an information centre on the geology , history and wildlife of this area of the coast . Located on the main road between Herne Bay and Canterbury , Wildwood Discovery Park features over fifty species of native British animals , such as deer , badgers , wild boar and wolves . 
 Herne Mill , a late @-@ 18th century Kentish smock mill overlooking the village of Herne from a hilltop , is usually open to visitors on Sunday afternoons between April and September . A concrete funnel @-@ shaped water tower overlooks Herne Bay from the top of <unk> Hill . This water tower is now used as a base for radio transmitters . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Herne Bay railway station is on the Chatham Main Line , which runs between Ramsgate in East Kent and London Victoria . Other stations on this line include Broadstairs , Margate , Whitstable , Faversham , Gillingham , Rochester and Bromley South . Herne Bay is around 1 hour and 40 minutes from London . A National Express coach service also runs between London Victoria and Ramsgate , around every two to three hours during daytime . A selection of trains run to London 's Cannon Street station , primarily for business commuting . 
 There is the Stagecoach in East Kent bus services 4 / 4A / 4B / 6 / 6A / 6B ( branded as ' The Triangle ' ) running every 10 minutes to neighbouring Whitstable and to Canterbury , where many Herne Bay residents go to work and shop . Also an infrequent bus service 7 links Herne Bay to Canterbury but The Triangle routes are more frequent , quick and direct . An hourly bus service 36 runs to the seaside resort of Margate , 13 miles ( 21 km ) to the east of Herne Bay The A299 road , also known as the Thanet Way , runs between Ramsgate and Faversham via Herne Bay and Whitstable . The road merges with the M2 motorway at Faversham . In the late 1990s , the road was converted into a dual carriageway and redirected to avoid passing through urban areas of Herne Bay and Whitstable . 
 = = Education = = 
 Herne Bay 's secondary school is the modern Herne Bay High . It is a mixed ability foundation school with about 1 @,@ 500 students . In 2002 , Herne Bay High was designated a specialist school and Sports College . In 2005 , 14 % of the school 's pupils gained at least five GCSEs at grades A * – C including English and maths , ranking it 107th out of Kent 's 120 secondary schools . Many students commute to schools in other nearby towns , especially to the grammar schools in Faversham , Ramsgate and Canterbury . 
 Herne Bay Junior School , situated in the town centre , has about 500 students . It was originally established in the late Victorian era and was formerly joined with the neighbouring Herne Bay Infant school . In 2006 , Herne Bay Junior School 's Key Stage 2 results ranked 139th out of Kent 's 386 state primary schools . There is one smaller primary school in the area called Grosvenor House , which is a school for pupils permanently excluded from mainstream schooling . 
 The village schools are Herne Primary School , Herne Church of England Junior School , Herne Church of England Infant and Nursery School , <unk> Primary School in Greenhill , Hampton Primary School and Reculver Church of England Primary School . The voluntary controlled Church of England schools are owned by the church but like the other schools , are run by Kent County Council . In 2006 , Reculver Church of England Primary School achieved the best Key Stage 2 performances of the schools in the Herne Bay area , ranking 133rd out of Kent 's 386 state primary schools . 
 Canterbury College @ Herne Bay is a branch of Canterbury College in Herne Bay town centre , which provides a range of short information technology courses to adults . Whitstable Adult education Centre runs adult learning courses at various Herne Bay locations . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The Church of England has two parishes in Herne Bay : Christ Church with St Andrew 's , and St Martin 's with St Peter 's . The Catholic Church of Our Lady of the Sacred Heart is in Sea Street . There are Baptist churches in Spenser Road and in Reynolds Close . There is a United ( Methodist and United Reformed ) Church in Mortimer Street . There is also a United Reformed Church in The Meadows , Broomfield . Herne Bay Salvation Army Corps is based in Pettman Close . The Canopy Church is in South Road . The Beacon Church meets at <unk> School , Greenhill , Herne Bay . Herne Bay Evangelical Free Church meets in <unk> Road . Herne Bay Christian Spiritualist Church is in Avenue Road . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Herne Bay Festival happens every August with ten days of almost every event being free , including live music , performance , creative commissions , cultural treats , family fun , workshops , competitions , walks , talks , exhibitions and family entertainment . 
 Other summer events include Happy Days – a programme of bandstand concerts and family entertainment , Herne Bay Carnival through the town centre , a travelling funfair at the Memorial Park and Herne Bay Bus Rally . Each summer , the council runs a gardening competition , " Herne Bay in Bloom " , which encourages residents and businesses to keep the town looking well presented . 
 The town is home to the Herne Bay Little Theatre , a playmakers drama society and member of the Little Theatre Guild of Great Britain who have a 72 @-@ seat theatre in <unk> Avenue . In 2007 , the theatre won a large grant from the Big Lottery Fund to renovate and extend their building and provide improved disabled access . The theatre also has an active youth theatre and between them , they put on at least eight productions every year including a pantomime . <unk> , a local theatre group , produce three shows a year including an annual pantomime at the King 's Hall theatre . Other groups and touring companies often put productions on at the open @-@ air ' Theatre in the Park ' on the grounds of Strode Park House in Herne . 
 The town 's only cinema , the Kavanagh , is part of a Greco @-@ inspired building that incorporates the Heron 's swimming pool and the council offices . There are a number of drinking venues , especially in the town centre and on the seafront . There are nightclubs , social clubs and many pubs , including one in the recently renovated seafront bandstand . ( As of January 2013 the Bandstand is an Indian Restaurant ) 
 = = Sports = = 
 The town is a popular destination for water sports ; it has clubs for sailing , rowing and yachting . The town has hosted the <unk> powerboat racing championships . Fishing is popular on the pier and Herne Bay Angling Association competes nationally in beach and boat fishing competitions . 
 Herne Bay Hockey Club , Greenhill Gymnastics Club , Herne Bay Cricket Club and Herne Bay Youth Football Club are located at Herne Bay High School , a specialist sports college . The hockey club runs a ladies ' team and five men 's team , the highest of which plays in the Kent Sussex Regional 1st XI League . Herne Bay Cricket Club runs two junior teams , a men 's Sunday team and two men 's Saturday teams ; the Saturday teams play in the Kent Cricket Feeder League East . 
 Herne Bay Youth Football Club has 22 teams , and over 320 players aged 6 to 18 . Four teams play in the Kent Youth League and the remainder in the East Kent Youth Mini Soccer & 11 a Side Leagues . 
 Herne Bay Tennis Club is situated on the outskirts of town and runs multiple teams in the Kent League , East Kent League and Dover & District League . Their facilities include four all @-@ weather courts ( two floodlit ) , up to six astroturf courts and a purpose built clubhouse . The club offers junior coaching and runs regular club nights for players of all ages and abilities . 
 Herne Bay Basketball Club runs teams for men , women and juniors in the East Kent Basketball League . Herne Bay Golf Club has an eighteen @-@ hole course on the outskirts of the town . The Memorial Park contains a sports field , eight tennis courts and a basketball court which can be used free of charge . Herne Bay Bowling Club is situated next to the Memorial Park and hosts several lawn bowls Open Tournaments each year . 
 There is a council owned sports centre — The Bay Sports Arena — opened in September 2011 . There is another privately owned gymnasium in the town centre . Herne Bay Judo Club is located near the railway station and the same venue also holds clubs for table tennis and badminton . There are also two other table @-@ tennis clubs in the town . <unk> karate classes are held at Herne Bay Junior School . 
 Herne Bay Football Club , based at Winch 's Field , play in the Isthmian League Division One South . They were Kent League champions in 1992 , 1994 , 1997 , 1998 and 2012 . Also playing at Winch 's Field is Canterbury City F.C. 
 The town is the founder of the Roller Hockey sport with the " Herne Bay Roller Hockey club " being the first to exist in the world . 
 Herne Bay Judo Club , located next to the town 's railway station , has been active in the town since the 1960s . The club originated underneath the old St Marys college on station road until it moved into the purpose built dojo where it still resides . 
 = = Media = = 
 There are five local weekly newspapers : <unk> , the paid @-@ for Herne Bay Gazette and Herne Bay Times , providing news related only to the town , and the free KM Extra and Canterbury Adscene , providing news on the wider Canterbury district area . The KM Group owns Herne Bay Gazette and KM Extra , while Trinity Mirror owns Herne Bay Times and Canterbury Adscene . KMFM Canterbury is a radio station on frequency <unk> which serves Canterbury , Whitstable and Herne Bay . The station was founded in September 1997 as CTFM , but was rebranded after a takeover by the KM Group . Radio Cabin is a radio station aimed only at Herne Bay listeners . It airs part @-@ time and can only be accessed through the <unk> 15th June 2016 , <unk> announced that Radio Cabin had been successful in their bid to obtain a Community Radio Licence , meaning that they can begin broadcasting on FM within two years . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Due to the town 's traditional seaside appearance , it has often been used as a setting for television programmes and films . The seafront has been featured in programmes such as the ITV period drama Upstairs , Downstairs , the 1984 BBC seaside comedy Cockles , CBBC 's The <unk> and the BBC comedy Little Britain . The town 's railway station was seen in an episode of the 1970s comedy Some Mothers Do ' Ave ' Em . The town has featured in movies such as Ken Russell 's French Dressing , and The Medusa Touch , starring Richard Burton . In fiction , Jeeves from the stories by P. G. Wodehouse regularly holidays at the town , spending much of his time there fishing . Herne Bay was the hometown of the three main characters in the 1990s BBC sitcom , Game On . To celebrate Anthony Coburn 's contribution to the Doctor Who series , BBC South East Today is celebrating 50 years of Doctor Who by screening the first ever episode An Unearthly Child , at the Kings Hall theatre on 22 November 2013 . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Herne Bay is twinned with the towns of : 
 Wimereux in Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais , France ; 
 Waltrop , Germany . 
 Since 1994 , the Herne Bay / Wimereux Twinning Association has aimed to promote friendship between the people of the two towns by organising activities , such as cycling trips and quiz evenings . Herne Bay and Waltrop have been twinned since 1976 , although as at February 2007 , their twinning association was not in operation . However , Herne Bay Rowing club promote friendship with the Waltrop rowing club by organising rowing events and visiting in each other 's towns . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The actor and presenter Bob Holness lived in the town as a child and attended Herne Bay Primary School until moving to Ashford . Nicki Chapman , the judge on the UK television series Popstars and Pop Idol , was born and raised in the town . Originally from London , Daniel <unk> , the subject of the UK documentary The Boy with the Incredible Brain , has now moved to the town . He is an autistic savant with outstanding abilities in mathematics , sequence memorising and language learning . Lydia Cecilia Hill ( 1913 – 1940 ) , known as Cissie Hill , lived at Westcliff ; she was a favourite of Ibrahim of Johor and former dancer . The Yorkshire @-@ born writer Will Scott lived and wrote in Herne Bay until his death in 1964 . During the late 1960s , many successful rock and jazz bands were formed around the city of Canterbury , creating a subgenre of music known as the Canterbury sound . Some of these musicians were residents of Herne Bay , including Dave Sinclair and Richard Coughlan of Caravan , and Kevin Ayers of Soft Machine . George W. M. Reynolds , one of the most popular British authors of the early Victorian era , moved to Herne Bay in 1854 and became one of the town 's Improvement Commissioners . The children 's writer Evelyn Whitaker was born there in 1844 . Héctor García <unk> , the Mayor of Lima in Peru during the 1950s , had part of his schooling at the now defunct Herne Bay International school . Colin Dixon , the depot manager held hostage with his family during the £ 53 million <unk> depot robbery of February 2006 , lived in Herne Bay at the time . 
 Frederick Christian Palmer , known professionally as Fred C. Palmer , was the main public photographer of Herne Bay in the early years of the 20th century . He photographed the detective Edmund Reid , who had hunted for Jack the Ripper and who also lived in the town . Ann <unk> paid for the construction of the Clock Tower . <unk> Palmer , Surveyor to Herne Bay Urban District Council 1891 – 1915 , designed both phases of The King 's Hall in 1904 and 1913 . Gabrielle Davis was Sheriff of Canterbury 2009 – 2010 and helped to save local museums from closure in 2010 . William Matthew Scott ( 1893 – 1964 ) was a local author living at High View Avenue , and architect Ernest Trevor <unk> lived next door to him between 1959 and 1965 . William Sidney Cooper painted local scenes and is buried at Eddington cemetery . H. Kempton Dyson designed the Central Bandstand . 
 = Jake Gyllenhaal = 
 Jacob Benjamin " Jake " Gyllenhaal ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ ən @-@ <unk> ; born December 19 , 1980 ) is an American actor . A member of the Gyllenhaal family and the son of director Stephen Gyllenhaal and screenwriter Naomi Foner , Gyllenhaal began acting as a child with a screen debut in City Slickers ( 1991 ) , followed by roles in A Dangerous Woman ( 1993 ) and Homegrown ( 1998 ) . His breakthrough performance was as Homer Hickam in October Sky ( 1999 ) and he garnered an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Male Lead for playing the title character in the indie cult hit Donnie Darko ( 2001 ) , in which he played a psychologically troubled teenager alongside his older sister , Maggie Gyllenhaal . He subsequently appeared in another indie film , The Good Girl ( 2002 ) and the climate fiction @-@ disaster film The Day After Tomorrow ( 2004 ) , portraying a student caught in a cataclysmic climate event . 
 In 2005 , Gyllenhaal portrayed Anthony " <unk> " Swofford in Jarhead , Gwyneth Paltrow 's love interest in Proof , and Jack Twist in Ang Lee 's Brokeback Mountain . For his performance in Brokeback Mountain , he received critical acclaim and won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role , the Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture , and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor . 
 Gyllenhaal received further recognition for roles in Zodiac ( 2007 ) , Brothers ( 2009 ) , Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time ( 2010 ) , Love & Other Drugs ( 2010 ) , for which he was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy , Source Code ( 2011 ) , End of Watch ( 2012 ) , Prisoners ( 2013 ) , Nightcrawler ( 2014 ) , and Southpaw ( 2015 ) . For Nightcrawler , his performance was widely acclaimed and received rave reviews from critics and he was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama , the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role , and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gyllenhaal was born in Los Angeles , California , the son of film producer and screenwriter Naomi Foner ( née Achs ) and film director Stephen Gyllenhaal . Actress Maggie Gyllenhaal , his older sister , appeared with him in the film Donnie Darko . Gyllenhaal 's father , who was raised as a Swedenborgian , is of Swedish and English descent , and is a descendant of the Swedish noble Gyllenhaal family . Jake 's last ancestor to be born in Sweden was his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , Anders Leonard Gyllenhaal . Jake 's mother was born in New York City , to a Jewish family that emigrated from Russia and Poland . Gyllenhaal has said that he considers himself Jewish . On his 13th birthday , Gyllenhaal performed a " bar mitzvah @-@ like act , without the typical trappings " , volunteering at a homeless shelter because his parents wanted to give him a sense of gratitude for his privileged lifestyle . His parents insisted that he have summer jobs to support himself and he thus worked as a lifeguard and as a busboy at a restaurant operated by a family friend . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 As a child , Gyllenhaal was regularly exposed to filmmaking due to his family 's deep ties to the industry . He made his acting debut as Billy Crystal 's son in the 1991 comedy film City Slickers . His parents did not allow him to appear in the 1992 film The Mighty Ducks because it would have required his leaving home for two months . In subsequent years , his parents allowed him to audition for roles but regularly forbade him to take them if he were chosen . He was allowed to appear in his father 's films several times . Gyllenhaal appeared in the 1993 film A Dangerous Woman ( along with sister Maggie ) ; in " Bop Gun " , a 1994 episode of Homicide : Life on the Street ; and in the 1998 comedy Homegrown . Along with their mother , Jake and Maggie appeared in two episodes of Molto Mario , an Italian cooking show on the Food Network . Prior to his senior year in high school , the only other film not directed by his father , in which Gyllenhaal was allowed to perform , was the 1993 film Josh and <unk> , a little @-@ known children 's adventure . 
 Gyllenhaal graduated from the Harvard @-@ Westlake School in Los Angeles in 1998 , then attended Columbia University , where his sister was a senior and from which his mother had graduated , to study Eastern religions and philosophy . Gyllenhaal dropped out after two years to concentrate on acting but has expressed intentions to eventually finish his degree . Gyllenhaal 's first lead role was in October Sky , Joe Johnston 's 1999 adaptation of the Homer Hickam autobiography Rocket Boys , in which he portrayed a young man from West Virginia striving to win a science scholarship to avoid becoming a coal miner . The film earned $ 32 million and was described in the Sacramento News and Review as Gyllenhaal 's " breakout performance " . 
 = = = 2001 – 04 : From Donnie Darko to the London stage = = = 
 Donnie Darko , Gyllenhaal 's second film , was not a box office success upon its initial 2001 release but eventually became a cult favorite . The film , directed by Richard Kelly , is set in 1988 and stars Gyllenhaal as a troubled teenager who experiences visions of a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall rabbit named Frank who tells him that the world is coming to an end . Gyllenhaal 's performance was well received by critics ; Gary Mairs of Culture Vulture wrote that " Gyllenhaal manages the difficult trick of seeming both blandly normal and profoundly disturbed , often within the same scene . " 
 After the critical success of Donnie Darko , Gyllenhaal 's next role was as Pilot Kelston in 2002 's Highway alongside Jared Leto . His performance was described by one critic as " silly , cliched and straight to video " . Gyllenhaal had more success starring opposite Jennifer Aniston in The Good Girl , which premiered at the 2002 Sundance Film Festival ; he also starred in Lovely & Amazing with Catherine Keener . In both films he plays an unstable character who begins a reckless affair with an older woman . Gyllenhaal later described these as " teenager in transition " roles . Gyllenhaal later starred in the Touchstone Pictures romantic comedy Bubble Boy , which was loosely based on the story of David Vetter . The film portrays the title character 's adventures as he pursues the love of his life before she marries the wrong man . The film was panned by critics , with one calling it an " empty @-@ headed , chaotic , utterly tasteless atrocity " . 
 Following Bubble Boy , Gyllenhaal starred opposite Dustin Hoffman , Susan Sarandon and Ellen Pompeo in Moonlight Mile , as a young man coping with the death of his fiancée and the grief of her parents . The story , which received mixed reviews , is loosely based on writer / director Brad Silberling 's personal experiences following the murder of his girlfriend , Rebecca Schaeffer . 
 Gyllenhaal was almost cast as Spider @-@ Man for Spider @-@ Man 2 due to director Sam Raimi 's concerns about original Spider @-@ Man star Tobey Maguire 's health . Maguire recovered , however , and the sequel was shot without Gyllenhaal . ( The actors — who later played brothers in Brothers — resemble each other enough that Gyllenhaal has jokingly complained about cab drivers often calling him " Spider @-@ Man " . ) Instead , Gyllenhaal starred in the blockbuster The Day After Tomorrow in 2004 , co @-@ starring Dennis Quaid as his father . 
 In his theatrical debut , Gyllenhaal starred on the London stage in Kenneth Lonergan 's revival of This is Our Youth . Gyllenhaal said , " Every actor I look up to has done theatre work , so I knew I had to give it a try . " The play , which had been a critical sensation on Broadway , ran for eight weeks in London 's West End . Gyllenhaal received favorable critical reviews and an Evening Standard Theatre Award in the category " Outstanding Newcomer " . 
 = = = 2005 – present : Brokeback Mountain and subsequent roles = = = 
 In 2005 , Gyllenhaal starred in the critically praised films Proof , Jarhead , and Brokeback Mountain . In Proof , featuring Gwyneth Paltrow and Anthony Hopkins , Gyllenhaal played a graduate student in mathematics who tries to convince Paltrow 's character to publish a revolutionary proof to a problem puzzling the mathematicians ' community . In Jarhead , Gyllenhaal played a violent U.S. Marine during the first Gulf War . He also auditioned to be Batman for one of the biggest blockbusters , Batman Begins and came close to getting the role , but Christian Bale was ultimately chosen for it . 
 In Brokeback Mountain , Gyllenhaal and Heath Ledger play young men who meet as sheep herders and embark upon a sexual relationship that begins in the summer of 1963 and lasts for 20 years . The film was often referred to in the media with the shorthand phrase " the gay cowboy movie " , though there was differing opinion on the sexual orientation of the characters . The film won the Golden Lion prize at the Venice Film Festival . The film went on to win four Golden Globe Awards , four British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Awards , and three Academy Awards . Gyllenhaal was nominated for an Academy Award in the category of Best Supporting Actor for his performance but lost to George Clooney for Syriana . Gyllenhaal also won the Best Supporting Actor BAFTA for the same role and received a Best Supporting Actor nomination and Best Film Ensemble nomination from the Screen Actors Guild . Also for Brokeback Mountain , he and Ledger won an MTV Movie Award for " Best Kiss " in 2006 . Shortly after the 2006 Academy Awards , Gyllenhaal was invited to join the Academy in recognition of his acting career . 
 Gyllenhaal expressed mixed feelings about the experience of being directed by Ang Lee in Brokeback Mountain but generally had more praise than criticism for Lee 's directing style . While complaining of the way Lee tended to disconnect from his actors once filming began , Gyllenhaal praised his encouraging direction of the actors and sensitive approach to the material . At the Directors Guild of America Awards on January 28 , 2006 , Gyllenhaal also praised Lee for " his humbleness and his respect for everyone around him " . 
 When asked about his kissing scenes with Heath Ledger in Brokeback Mountain , Gyllenhaal said , " As an actor , I think we need to embrace the times we feel most uncomfortable . " When asked about the more intimate scenes with Ledger , Gyllenhaal likened them to " doing a sex scene with a woman I 'm not particularly attracted to " . Following the release of Brokeback Mountain , rumors circulated regarding the actor 's sexual orientation . When asked about such gossip during an interview , Gyllenhaal said : 
 " You know it 's flattering when there 's a rumor that says I 'm bisexual . It means I can play more kinds of roles . I 'm open to whatever people want to call me . I 've never really been attracted to men sexually , but I don 't think I would be afraid of it if it happened . " 
 Gyllenhaal narrated the 2005 short animated film The Man Who Walked Between the Towers , based on <unk> Gerstein 's book of the same name about Philippe Petit 's famous stunt . In January 2007 , as host of Saturday Night Live , he put on a sparkly evening dress and sang " And I Am Telling You I 'm Not Going " from the musical Dreamgirls for his opening monologue , dedicating the song to his " unique fan base ... the fans of Brokeback " . 
 In 2007 , Gyllenhaal starred in David Fincher 's mystery thriller Zodiac , which was based on a true story . He played Robert Graysmith , a San Francisco Chronicle cartoonist and author of two books about the Zodiac serial killer . In preparation for his role , Gyllenhaal met Graysmith , and videotaped him to study his mannerisms and behavior . Gyllenhaal starred opposite Meryl Streep , Alan Arkin and Reese Witherspoon in the October 2007 release Rendition , a Gavin Hood @-@ directed political thriller about the U.S. policy of extraordinary rendition . In 2009 , he appeared with Tobey Maguire in Jim Sheridan 's remake of Susanne Bier 's 2004 Danish language film Brothers . In 2008 , it was announced that Gyllenhaal would star in the comedy Nailed , which he filmed in South Carolina with Jessica Biel , as well as Doug Liman 's as yet untitled film about the race for lunar colonization . The following year , Gyllenhaal played the lead role in the movie adaptation of the video game Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time , produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and released by Disney on May 28 , 2010 , and in the romantic comedy Love and Other Drugs , released on November 24 , 2010 , for which he received a Golden Globe Award nomination . 
 In 2012 , Gyllenhaal starred alongside Michael Peña in David Ayer 's film End of Watch about two Los Angeles street cops . The film was released on September 21 , 2012 and received positive reviews , with Roger Ebert saying that " End of Watch is one of the best police movies in recent years , a virtuoso fusion of performances and often startling action " , and Salon.com 's Andrew O 'Hehir stating that the film was " at least the best cop movie since James Gray 's We Own the Night , and very likely since Antoine Fuqua 's memorable Training Day ( which , not coincidentally , was written by Ayer ) " . To train for the role , Gyllenhaal took tactical training and participated in actual police drives with co @-@ star Michael Peña to help establish the language of the characters . 
 In 2013 , Gyllenhaal starred in a dual role of a history teacher and his doppelgänger in the thriller Enemy , and produced and starred in the crime thriller Nightcrawler , receiving a Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for the latter role . In 2015 , he starred in Antoine Fuqua 's sports drama Southpaw , Baltasar <unk> 's Everest , an account of the 1996 Mount Everest disaster , and Jean @-@ Marc Vallee 's romantic comedy @-@ drama Demolition . His film for Tom Ford , Nocturnal Animals , is scheduled for release in late 2016 . 
 He was on the jury for the main competition section of the 2015 Cannes Film Festival . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family and relationships = = = 
 For more on Gyllenhaal 's paternal ancestors , see Gyllenhaal family . 
 The son of director Stephen Gyllenhaal and screenwriter Naomi Foner , Gyllenhaal 's immediate family includes his sister , actress Maggie , who is married to actor Peter Sarsgaard , Gyllenhaal 's co @-@ star in Jarhead and Rendition . In December 2006 , Gyllenhaal and his sister escaped a fire that destroyed <unk> 's Inverness Lodge , a famed lodge and restaurant in Inverness , California , at which they were vacationing . The <unk> were among a dozen or so guests who fled after the fire , sparked by a falling tree , broke out at about 3 a.m. Co @-@ owner and celebrity chef Daniel DeLong said the pair were supportive despite having to brave the wind and cold . " Jake was helping me pull things out of the fire " DeLong said . 
 Gyllenhaal 's niece , Ramona Sarsgaard , was born on October 3 , 2006 . Gyllenhaal has both literal godparents and what he describes as " celebrity godparents " . The late actor and director Paul Newman was his celebrity godfather , and actress Jamie Lee Curtis is both his literal and celebrity godmother . Other godparents of unknown status include a gay couple and cinematographer Robert <unk> . Gyllenhaal himself is the godfather of Matilda Rose Ledger ( born October 28 , 2005 ) , daughter of Heath Ledger and Michelle Williams , both of whom co @-@ starred with him in Brokeback Mountain . 
 Gyllenhaal dated actress Kirsten Dunst for nearly two years , starting in 2002 . He later dated his Rendition co @-@ star Reese Witherspoon from about 2007 to 2009 . He dated singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift from October 2010 until January 2011 , and model Alyssa Miller from July to December 2013 . 
 = = = Politics and other interests = = = 
 Gyllenhaal is politically active . He shot a commercial for Rock the Vote and , along with his sister , visited the University of Southern California to encourage students to vote during the 2004 U.S. election . He also campaigned for Democratic Presidential candidate John Kerry . He has said , however , that " it frustrates me when actors talk politics ; I 'm political and I make choices in my movies that I think are political . I try and say things with what I do . <unk> or wrongly , young actors have all the power . " In an interview for Rendition , he remarked that " it 's a sad time when actors are politicians and politicians are actors " . 
 Raised in a family concerned with social issues , in 2003 Gyllenhaal participated in an advertising campaign by the American Civil Liberties Union , an organization his entire family strongly supports . Environmentally conscious , he recycles regularly , and said in an interview that he spends $ 400 a year to have trees planted in a Mozambique forest , partly to promote the Future Forests program . After filming The Day After Tomorrow , he flew to the Arctic to promote awareness of climate change . Gyllenhaal is the Honorary Chair of the New Eyes For The Needy Advisory Board , and has signed on to help the TV fundraiser Stand Up to Cancer . Gyllenhaal is on the board of directors for the Anti @-@ <unk> Coalition and volunteered in California juvenile detention centers with Scott <unk> . 
 In his spare time , Gyllenhaal enjoys woodworking and cooking . When asked about being a Buddhist , he has said , " I am not a card @-@ carrying Buddhist , but I do try to practice mindfulness " and that it is his goal to meditate every day . 
 On December 19 , 2011 , he was announced as a jury member for the 62nd Berlin International Film Festival that was held in February 2012 . 
 = = Media image = = 
 Gyllenhaal was named one of People magazine 's " 50 Most Beautiful People " in 2006 . He was also listed in People 's " Hottest Bachelors of 2006 " . In response to mainstream press lists like these , thousands of gay and bisexual men were polled for the 2007 and 2008 " AfterElton.com Hot 100 List " . Gyllenhaal was ranked at No.1 in both consecutive years . He was ranked at No.2 on the Gay Wired Magazine poll of male actors who have played gay characters in movies . In April 2012 , Shalom Life ranked him Number 6 on its list of " the 50 most talented , intelligent , funny , and gorgeous Jewish men in the world " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Ekeberg Line = 
 The Ekeberg Line ( Norwegian : Ekebergbanen ) is a 6 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometer ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) long light rail line of the Oslo Tramway which runs from Gamlebyen to Ljabru in Oslo , Norway . Operated by lines 18 and 19 , it serves the area of Nordstrand and the neighborhoods of Ekeberg , Jomfrubråten , Bekkelaget and Ljan . The line is operated by Oslo Sporvognsdrift using SL79 and SL95 trams on contract with Ruter . The line itself is owned by Kollektivtransportproduksjon . At Oslo Hospital , the line connects to the Gamleby Line , which runs to the city center . 
 Proposals for a line in the area were first launched 1897 , but not until 1914 were the necessary permits granted . The line was built and operated by Ekebergbanen . The line opened in 1917 , and connected to the Gamleby Line to reach Stortorvet in the city center . The line differed from the street trams in that it ran in its own right of way and used 1 @,@ 200 volt supply , unlike the 600 volts used in the streets . In the early 1930s , the line was rebuilt to double track and a branch , the Simensbråten Line , was built . The Ekeberg Line was extended to its current terminus in 1941 . In 1948 , the company was taken over by the municipal Oslo Sporveier and operations were integrated in 1965 . The line was nearly closed in 1967 and 1973 , but during the 1970s , the line received new rolling stock and a renovation . Future plans include an extension to Hauketo Station on the Østfold Line and a new route via Bjørvika to the city center . 
 = = Route = = 
 The Ekeberg Line is a 6 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometer ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) long continuation of the Gamleby Line , from which it connects at Oslo Hospital , located near sea level and 2 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) from Stortorvet , the traditional terminus in the city center . The entire line is built as a light rail with its own right @-@ of @-@ way . The line is electrified at 750 volts with overhead wires . It runs up Ekeberg on the east side of Kongsveien , passing Sjømannsskolen at 59 @.@ 5 meters ( 195 ft ) above mean sea level ( AMSL ) and 0 @.@ 8 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) from Oslo Hospital . The next station is Jomfrubråten , which is located 2 @.@ 0 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 115 @.@ 0 meters ( 377 @.@ 3 ft ) AMSL . This is where the Simensbråten Line previously branched off . Past Jomfrubråten , the <unk> Line , while it existed , ran under the Ekeberg Line . 
 The next station is Sportsplassen , located 400 meters ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) further south , at 108 @.@ 9 meters ( 357 ft ) AMSL , followed by Holtet , which is 3 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 115 @.@ 5 meters ( 379 ft ) AMSL . Holtet is the location of the depot and a balloon loop . At Holtet , the line crosses Kongsveien and continues along the west side of Ekebergveien . The next station is Sørli , which is located 4 @.@ 0 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 111 @.@ 7 meters ( 366 ft ) AMSL , followed by Kastellet located 4 @.@ 4 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 7 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 112 @.@ 0 meters ( 367 @.@ 5 ft ) AMSL . The line continues past Bråten , located 4 @.@ 9 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 117 @.@ 6 meters ( 386 ft ) AMSL and past Sæter , located 5 @.@ 6 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 116 @.@ 0 meters ( 380 @.@ 6 ft ) AMSL . Between Sæter and Ljabru is a bridge over Nordstrandsveien which is single tracked . Ljabru is the terminus and is located 7 @.@ 6 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) from Oslo Hospital and at 100 @.@ 0 meters ( 328 @.@ 1 ft ) AMSL . 
 = = Service = = 
 The Ekeberg Line is served by lines 18 and 19 of the Oslo Tramway . Line 19 always runs the full length of the line , while Line 18 does not operate from Ljabru to Holtet during the morning and afternoon . Line 18 connects via the city center to the Ullevål Hageby Line while Line 19 runs onwards along the Briskeby Line . Travel time from Ljabru to Holtet is 7 minutes , to Oslo Hospital is 14 minutes and to <unk> is 20 minutes . Both of the lines run every 10 minutes during the day , every 20 minutes during the evenings and part of the weekends and every 30 minutes during early mornings on weekends . This gives a peak service of every 5 minutes along the Ekeberg Line . The service is provided using high @-@ floor SL79 and low @-@ floor SL95 trams . Because of the lack of a balloon loop at Rikshospitalet , Line 18 must be operated with SL95 units , while SL79 units are used on Line 19 because the <unk> Line does not have a high enough permitted axle load to for the SL95 units . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Nordstrand area of Aker was first served by steam ships from the 1860s , which connected the lower areas to Oslo . In 1879 , the Østfold Line ( then the <unk> Line ) opened in 1879 , giving these areas a regular service unaffected by the weather . In 1897 , a public meeting was held regarding transport in the upper parts of <unk> , the Ekeberg area . On 15 March 1899 , Solicitor Einar Borgen , Engineer A. J. <unk> and Robert Iversen sent an application to build an electric railway from Oslo to Ljan . They were later supplemented with Contractor S. Sørensen . The application was considered in Aker Municipal Council on 14 March 1901 , and placed on hold . It was again considered a year later , this time it was placed on hold because the politicians wanted to see how the new Railway Act would affect the plans . 
 A new application for the same route was made on 16 April 1907 , this time from Solicitor H. M. <unk> , <unk> A. Thune @-@ Larsen , and Works Manager T. <unk> of Kristiania Sporveisselskab ( KSS ) , the company which operated one the city tramways . This time the plans were slightly changed , with the route proposed built with a tramway rather than as a railway . In particular , the line was to connect to the Gamleby Line ( then called the Oslo Line ) of KSS 's network and run up Ekeberg to an intersection between <unk> and <unk> . The plans called for a regular street tram with regular city tram vehicles . At the time , the city limits of Oslo went at Sjømannskolen . The application for the part within Oslo was sent to the city , while for the section outside the city , the application was sent to the Ministry of Labour . Within Oslo , a new line would only have to be built from Oslo Hospital to Sjømannskolen , while from Oslo Hospital to the city center , the line would follow the Gamleby Line . 
 The plans were sent from the ministry to the municipality , whose council passed the plans on 12 November 1908 . Among the conditions were that within five years , the municipality could demand that the line be extended to either Ljabru or Ljan . The concession was again considered on 2 November 1911 , and there it was decided that the concession would be removed if the line was not finished by the end of 1914 . However , in November 1911 , Oslo City Council postponed their permissions while the issue was again made subject to reports on the issue . The report suggested a different route , which ran via <unk> and up <unk> at Ekeberg <unk> . After negotiations , the city agreed to allow the line to follow Kongsveien . 
 The Labour Party rejected the line , stating that they did not want any transport that made it easier to live outside the municipal boundary , to keep tax money within the municipality . The final permission from Oslo City Council was granted after a vote with 49 to 35 in May 1913 . Concession from the ministry was granted from Sjømannsskolen to Ljan on 7 October , and from Oslo Hospital to Sjømannsskolen on 11 December . On 5 June 1914 , permission was granted where the concession was transferred from Thune @-@ Larsen and <unk> to the company Ekebergbanen , which was founded on 27 March 1914 . The company received a share capital of NOK 850 @,@ 000 , later increased to 2 @.@ 5 million . Engineer Jørgen Barth became the first director . 
 Since the application , there had been a technological development within tramways . Barth started working with the plans , and proposed that the line be built as a light rail in its own right @-@ of @-@ way , similar to that of the Holmenkollen Line and the Røa Line on the west side of town . This would allow higher speeds . The plans called for the line to run on the east side of <unk> until Holtet , after which it would cross the road and continue on the west side Ekebergveien , until it reached Nordstrandsveien . The end of the line would have a balloon loop . After the revised plans were approved by the authorities , construction started in August 1914 . Most of the works were finished in 1917 . The original line consisted of double track from Oslo Hospital to Sjømannsskolen , and single track from Sjømannsskolen to Sæter . Holtet received a passing loop , in addition to the line 's depot . The parish hall at Sæter was bought and made a combined station and office . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The company bought five bogie trams . They had pointed ends to ease meeting the shorter trams in the city , and had a low @-@ floor center section , with internal steps . The body and mechanical equipment was built by Skabo Jernbanevognfabrikk , while the electrical components were built by Siemens @-@ <unk> . Capacity was for 40 or 38 seated passengers . In early 1917 , Barth was replaced by H. A. Mørk as director . Trial runs of the tramway started on 11 June 1917 . It was retrospectively decided by the ministry that the official opening date was 1 July . 
 Initially there were two services per hour , but this quickly turned out to be too little . However , because of World War I and problems receiving supplies from Germany , it was not until November that all five trams were delivered and a 15 @-@ minute headway could be introduced . The company also started purchasing land to allow a future double track and widening of the loading gauge to allow for the wide trams used on the Holmenkollen Line . Also four services per hour proved to be too little . The company had chosen to electrify the line at 1 @,@ 200 volts instead of the 600 volts used in the rest of the tram network , so the company could not operate rented trams from other operators . The junction between the two networks at Oslo Hospital had a 10 @-@ meter ( 33 ft ) section without overhead wires . This allowed both of the pantographs to not touch their wire when the current was switched . When changing between the currents , the lighting , heating , compressor and battery chargers all had to be manually changed with a switch . 
 In 1919 , the company ordered seven new trams from Skabo , with electric equipment from Norsk Elektrisk & Brown Boveri ( NEBB ) . These were the first in the country to have Norwegian @-@ built electrical equipment , and also allowed for multiple @-@ unit train control . They were delivered in 1920 and 1921 . In addition , six trailers were built from <unk> Waggonfabrik ( <unk> ) The delivery of new rolling stock required a new depot building at Holtet , two new electric arc transformers and a ticket price increase . The HaWa trailers were delivered in 1925 . However , the two @-@ axled trailers did not give as smooth a ride , and in 1927 the company ordered bogie trailers from Atelier <unk> de Nivelles , which were put into service in 1928 and 1929 . 
 To allow more frequent services , the line needed to be rebuilt to double track . The first section was from Sportsplassen to Holtet , which opened with double track on 16 January 1930 . Next followed the section from Holtet to Kastellet on 12 February 1931 , and finally from Sjømannsskolen to Sportsplassen on 30 September 1931 . This occurred at the same time the Simensbråten Line was built , as a branch from Jomfrubråten to Simensbråten . Construction of the Simensbråten Line started in December 1928 ; and this resulted in the Ekeberg Line past Jomfrubråten being moved . Instead of following the street Kongsveien , it the line was moved to a higher elevation . The double @-@ tracked Ekeberg Line was placed on the new line , while the single @-@ tracked Simensbråten Line would follow the old route along Kongsveien . The Simensbråten Line would thus cross under the Ekeberg Line and then through a curve turn onto its right @-@ of @-@ way . The Simensbråten Line was completed in mid @-@ 1931 and was officially opened on 30 September 1931 . 
 On the city section , the tracks had been gradually rebuilt to allow 2 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 8 ft 2 in ) wide and 15 @-@ meter ( 49 ft ) long trams to run on the tramway , including the Gamleby Line . In 1930 , tram 1003 was rebuilt to that width . It proved too heavy , and Ekebergbanen ordered new trams which were wider . When delivered , they were capable of hauling a 50 @-@ tonne ( 49 @-@ long @-@ ton ; 55 @-@ short @-@ ton ) tram up the hills at 50 kilometres per hour ( 31 mph ) . 
 In 1925 , the Østfold Line was rebuilt to double track , and the section past Hauketo was moved , including the demolishing of the Ljan Viaduct . In June 1926 , Aker Municipality started the process to demand that the line be extended onwards from Sæter . However , Ekebergbanen stated that the rebuilding of the Østfold Line removed the need of the extension . The company instead applied for concession to extend the line 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) southwards towards <unk> on <unk> 's west side . This was rejected by Aker Municipality . In exchange for not being allowed to extend the line , Aker Municipality agreed to not press the issue of their preferred extension for the time being . 
 At the time , Akersbanerne was working on building the Lambertseter Line , which is located further east in Aker . This caused an uproar amongst the residents in the Ekeberg area , who wanted the Ekeberg Line extended , in what became known as the thousand meter , before the construction of the Lambertseter Line . The municipality therefore granted free municipal land and a grant of NOK 50 @,@ 000 for expropriation . Construction started in July 1940 , after having been delayed by the German occupation of Norway . The construction included a new double track from Holtet to Bråten . During the construction at Sæter , the trams turned at Bråten and backed to Sæter , where they used the turning loop . The thousand meter extension to Ljabru opened on 17 September 1941 . 
 World War II and the limitations on fuel gave the Ekeberg Line a large increase in traffic , from four million passengers in 1939 to eight million in 1944 . Unlike many other Norwegian tramways , the tram vehicles were not confiscated and moved to Germany , because no German tramways used both 1 @,@ 200 volts and allowed 2 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 8 ft 2 in ) wide vehicles . A new depot building was built in 1942 and 1943 , which allowed 3 @.@ 2 @-@ meter ( 10 ft ) wide trams . 
 Following the end of the war , it was decided that Oslo and Aker would merge . Ekebergbanen 's concession lasted until 30 June 1947 , which was initially extended on year . In March 1948 , Oslo Sporveier , the municipal company that operated among other things the street tramways , offered to purchase Ekebergbanen . All but eight shares were sold , and from December the board of Ekebergbanen and Oslo Sporveier was identical . However , the company retained its own name , administration , rolling stock and personnel . 
 After the nationalization , the company started a renovation process of the infrastructure and rolling stock . Combined with a municipal policy of low fares , the company started going with a loss . Five new trams were delivered from 1948 to 1952 , and built at the depot at Holtet , with used equipment from some of the older trams . An additional nine new trams were delivered between 1952 and 1955 . Five additional trams were rebuilt from 1955 to 1960 , by which time all the narrow trams had been rebuilt or retired . The use of a unique voltage gave operational difficulties , as fuses could regularly blow at Oslo Hospital if errors were made while switching from the one supply to the other . In addition , all the trams were custom @-@ built with extra equipment with limited spare parts . All the trams delivered during the 1950s were built so they could later be converted to only use 600 volt supply . The depot was expanded in 1952 . 
 = = = Threat of closure and renewal = = = 
 In 1960 , the Oslo City Council voted to close the street tramway and replace all routes with either diesel buses or the Oslo Metro . The specific plans for the Ekeberg Line were not decided , although the line was considered either to be a stand @-@ alone light rail or connected to the metro . From 30 October 1960 , the route for the Ekeberg Line trams in the city changed , so they instead followed the route Schweigaards gate – Vognmannsgata – Jernbanetorget – Kirkeristen to Stortorvet instead of the old route via Grønland and <unk> . From 1963 , the route terminated at Jernbanetorget , after the rest of the route was closed due to the construction of the metro . 
 From 1 July 1965 , Oslo Sporveier took over the operation of the Ekeberg Line , which was numbered Line 16 . Oslo Sporveier took over all employees and rolling stock , but Ekebergbanen remained a holding and real estate company . Immediately following the take @-@ over , Oslo Sporveier introduced a 20 @-@ minute headway and suggested that the line be closed and replaced by buses from 29 October 1967 , when the Østensjø Line of the metro opened . Following the closing of Sagene Ring , there were increased protests against closing the tramway . Traffic had decreased on the Ekeberg Line , but proponents for keeping it stated that this was because Oslo Sporveier had reduced the frequency and moved the end station out of the core of the city center . When the proposal to close the Ekeberg Line was considered by the city council , it was decided that only the <unk> Line was to be closed . 
 In 1960 , the sale of cars in Norway was deregulated and the management of the public transport system was changed to become that of providing services to those who could not drive their own car . The Ekeberg Line lost traffic because it did not operate to the city center , and with the 1960 decision in the city council was it not permissible to lay new tracks to Stortorvet . Therefore , locals suggested that the trams continue along the track from Jernbanetorget to Skøyen , on the west side of town . At first the proposal was rejected by Oslo Sporveier because it was " technically impossible " . 
 From June 1967 , Line 9 , that ran along the Lilleaker Line via the Skøyen Line to the city center and onwards along the Østensjø Line , was truncated to Jernbanetorget , as the Østensjø was converted to a metro line . Calculations showed that if the Lilleaker Line or the Skøyen Line and the Ekeberg Line were connected , between them one tram less would be needed , and the Ekeberg Line would have a service through the city center . After trial runs , the new service to Skøyen was taken into use on 4 May 1969 . 
 In 1973 , Oslo Sporveier again proposed closing the Ekeberg Line . This time the reason was the construction of the Oslo Tunnel and Oslo Central Station , which would involve construction work around Jernbanetorget . This proposal also resulted in a public reactions , and the same arguments from the mid @-@ 1960s were repeated . Again the suggestion to link the Lilleaker Line to the Ekeberg Line were launched . Oslo Sporveier calculated it would cost NOK 3 @.@ 6 million for investments , including rebuilding 20 Gullfisk trams , new rectifiers and new tracks . This was less than the necessary 30 buses needed for conversion to bus services . 
 The last of the older Ekeberg Line trams to Skøyen ran on 5 August 1973 . From the following day , all trams turned at a new balloon loop at Vognmannsgata . Investments included a new track at Holtet Depot , and 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) of new double track in its own right @-@ of @-@ way along <unk> Gunnerus gate from <unk> to Kirkeristen . A double track from Sæter to Ljabru was discarded because there was no need for it . The last of the old trams ran on 22 September , and from 24 September the line was switched from 1 @,@ 200 to 600 volts . Ordinary service with Gullfisk trams from Ljabru to Jar on the Lilleaker Line started on 29 September . The new service involved a 10 @-@ minute headway at daytime and a 20 @-@ minute headway during the evenings . 
 In 1976 , a Gullfisk lost control on the line and derailed near <unk> , causing the tram to be scrapped . From 1977 , Oslo Sporveier also put SM53 trams into service . This was not sufficient , and Oslo Sporveier considered introducing the old Ekeberg Line trams . But this would be costly , as the vehicles would have to be upgraded . Instead , used <unk> trams from the Gothenburg Tramway were put into service . The section from Sæter to Ljabru had since the opening had a signaling system that had worked fine with 15- and 20 @-@ minute headways , but did not work properly with 10 @-@ minute routes . A new system was installed , and proved to work just as poorly as the old system . During 1979 , the section was rebuilt to double track , although the short bridge over Nordstrandsveien was kept single tracked . 
 In 1982 and 1983 , the SL79 articulated trams were introduced on the line . In 1988 , the line to Jar was supplemented with a rush @-@ hour route which connected with the Ullevål Hageby Line west of Oslo . From 28 August 1988 , a service started running from Ljabru and connecting with the Ullevål Hageby Line . Weekend night services started operating from 18 November 1989 . From 1988 to 1991 , the section of the Gamleby Line along Schweigaards gate was rebuilt to light rail standard in its own right @-@ of @-@ way . In this period , the line received new catenary and many stations were renovated . The new section was taken into use on 4 January 1991 . Along with the rest of the tram system the voltage was increased to 750 volts on 4 June 2000 . This allowed the new SL95 low @-@ floor trams to operate on the line . In 2002 the board of Oslo Sporveier proposed closing the Ekeberg Line along with the Kjelsås Line , but this was stopped by the general assembly . 
 = = Future = = 
 The Ekeberg Line is proposed extended from Ljabru to Hauketo Station on the Østfold Line . To routes have been proposed , either along Ekebergveien , or in a tunnel further east . The extension will allow better correspondence southwards , including transfer to the Oslo Commuter Rail and Ruter buses . Financing has been secured through Oslo Package 3 . 
 As part of the Fjord City and redevelopment of Bjørvika , the Ekeberg Line has been proposed to follow a new line on the south side of Oslo Central Station to Jernbanetorget , with stops at <unk> and Bjørvika . As an alternative , it has been proposed that the tracks along Schweigaards gate be kept and that the trams along the Ekeberg Line alternate running via Bjørvika and Schweigaards gate . 
 Upgrades on the southernmost part of the line will take place during 2014 that will shorten journey times . The single track bridge between Sæter and Ljabru over <unk> will be demolished and replaced with a new double track bridge . In addition , two curves on the line will be straightened out . 
 = Japanese cruiser Asama = 
 Asama ( <unk> ) was the lead ship of her class of armored cruisers built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1890s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships herself , the ship was built in Britain . She served in the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 during which she participated in the Battle of Chemulpo Bay and the Battle of the Yellow Sea without damage , although her luck did not hold out during the Battle of Tsushima . Early in World War I , Asama unsuccessfully searched for German commerce raiders until she was severely damaged when she ran aground off the Mexican coast in early 1915 . Repairs took over two years to complete and she was mainly used as a training ship for the rest of her career . The ship made a total of 12 training cruises before she was crippled after running aground again in 1935 . Asama then became a stationary training ship until she was broken up in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The 1896 Naval Expansion Plan was made after the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and included four armored cruisers in addition to four more battleships , all of which had to be ordered from British shipyards as Japan lacked the capability to build them itself . Further consideration of the Russian building program caused the IJN to believe that the battleships ordered under the original plan would not be sufficient to counter the Imperial Russian Navy . Budgetary limitations prevented ordering more battleships and the IJN decided to expand the number of more affordable armored cruisers to be ordered from four to six ships . The revised plan is commonly known as the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " . Unlike most of their contemporaries which were designed for commerce raiding or to defend colonies and trade routes , Asama and her half @-@ sisters were intended as fleet scouts and to be employed in the battleline . 
 The ship was 134 @.@ 72 meters ( 442 ft 0 in ) long overall and 124 @.@ 36 meters ( 408 ft 0 in ) between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 20 @.@ 48 meters ( 67 ft 2 in ) and had an average draft of 7 @.@ 43 meters ( 24 ft 5 in ) . Asama displaced 9 @,@ 710 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 560 long tons ) at normal load and 10 @,@ 519 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 353 long tons ) at deep load . The ship had a metacentric height of 0 @.@ 85 meters ( 2 ft 9 in ) . Her crew consisted of 676 officers and enlisted men . 
 Asama had two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by a dozen cylindrical boilers and the engines were rated at a total of 18 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) . The ship had a designed speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) and reached 22 @.@ 07 knots ( 40 @.@ 87 km / h ; 25 @.@ 40 mph ) during her sea trials from 19 @,@ 000 ihp ( 14 @,@ 000 kW ) . She carried up to 1 @,@ 390 long tons ( 1 @,@ 410 t ) of coal and could steam for 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament for all of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers was four eight @-@ inch guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The secondary armament consisted of 14 Elswick Ordnance Company " Pattern Z " quick @-@ firing ( QF ) , 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . Only four of these guns were not mounted in armored casemates on the main and upper decks and their mounts on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . Asama was also equipped with a dozen QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns and eight QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Yamauchi guns as close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats . The ship was equipped with five 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , one above water in the bow and four submerged tubes , two on each broadside . 
 All of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers used the same armor scheme with some minor differences , of which the most important was that the two Asama @-@ class ships used less tough Harvey armor . The waterline belt ran the full length of the ship and its thickness varied from 178 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) amidships to 89 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) at the bow and stern . It had a height of 2 @.@ 13 meters ( 7 ft 0 in ) , of which 1 @.@ 52 meters ( 5 ft 0 in ) was normally underwater . The upper strake of belt armor was 127 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick and extended from the upper edge of the waterline belt to the main deck . It extended 65 @.@ 42 meters ( 214 ft 8 in ) from the forward to the rear barbette . The Asama class had oblique 127 mm armored bulkheads that closed off the ends of the central armored citadel . 
 The barbettes , gun turrets and the front of the casemates were all 152 @-@ millimeters thick while the sides and rear of the casemates were protected by 51 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . The deck was 51 @-@ millimeters thick and the armor protecting the conning tower was 356 millimeters ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The contract for Asama , named after Mount Asama , was signed on 6 July 1897 with Armstrong Whitworth . The ship had already been laid down at their shipyard in Elswick on 20 October 1896 as a speculative venture . She was launched on 21 March 1898 and completed on 18 March 1899 . Asama left for Japan the next day and arrived in Yokosuka on 17 May . On 30 April 1900 , the ship was used by Emperor Meiji during a fleet review off at Kobe . In August 1902 , Asama was part of the delegation dispatched to Great Britain for the Coronation Review for King Edward VII in Spithead . During the outward leg of this voyage , the ship tested some advanced British radio technology between Malta and Britain . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 At the beginning of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in February 1904 , Asama was assigned to the 2nd Division of the 2nd Fleet , although she was attached to the 4th Division of Rear Admiral Uryū Sotokichi for operations near Seoul , Korea . His ships were tasked to escort transports carrying troops to Chemulpo , Seoul 's port on the west coast , and to destroy the Russian protected cruiser Varyag and gunboat Korietz stationed in Chemulpo as guardships . The troops were successfully unloaded during the night of 8 / 9 February and the Japanese ships left the harbor the following morning to assume positions blocking the exits as international law forbade combat between belligerents in neutral harbors . The Japanese notified the Russians that morning that a state of war existed between their countries after the IJN launched a surprise attack on Port Arthur the previous night . The two Russian ships sortied from the harbor later that morning . Varyag was the target of most of the Japanese fire and Asama hit her at least twice , destroying her bridge and punching a hole below her waterline that caused a serious list . The Russian ships managed to return to port and scuttled themselves that afternoon . Asama was not injured during the engagement and rejoined Vice Admiral Kamimura Hikonojō 's 2nd Division afterwards . 
 In early March , Kamimura was tasked to take the reinforced 2nd Division north and make a diversion off Vladivostok . While scouting for Russian ships in the area , the Japanese cruisers bombarded the harbor and defenses of Vladivostok on 6 March to little effect . Upon their return to Japan a few days later , the 2nd Division was ordered to escort the transports ferrying the Imperial Guards Division to Korea and then to join the ships blockading Port Arthur . Asama was then transferred to Rear Admiral Dewa Shigetō 's 3rd Division . Vice Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō , commander of the Combined Fleet , successfully lured out a portion of the Russian Pacific Squadron on 13 April , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . During this action , Asama engaged the Russian cruisers that preceded the battleships before falling back on Tōgō 's battleships . When Makarov spotted the five Japanese battleships , he turned back for Port Arthur and his flagship ran into the minefield just laid by the Japanese . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , and Makarov was one of the 677 killed . In addition to this loss , the battleship Pobeda was damaged by a mine . 
 On 23 June , the ship was present when the Pacific Squadron sortied in an abortive attempt to reach Vladivostok , but the new squadron commander , Rear Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft , ordered the squadron to return to Port Arthur when it encountered the Japanese battleline shortly before sunset , as he did not wish to engage his numerically superior opponents in a night battle . 
 = = = = Battle of the Yellow Sea = = = = 
 On the morning of 10 August 1904 , Asama was coaling when the Russians sortied from Port Arthur in another attempt to reach Vladivostok . The ship was not in position to join the battle until around 19 : 00 when she opened fire at a range of 9 @,@ 000 meters ( 9 @,@ 800 yd ) from the damaged Russian battleship Poltava . The shell fell short and the Russian cruisers came to the support of the battleship so that by 19 : 25 , Asama hotly engaged with the Russian ships at a range of 7 @,@ 500 meters ( 8 @,@ 200 yd ) . Despite the arrival of the elderly cruisers of Rear Admiral Yamada <unk> 's 5th Division around 19 : 30 , Asama was forced to disengage when the other Russian battleships came within range . The following morning she met up with Tōgō 's 1st Division and then rejoined the 3rd Division . On 14 August , the 3rd Division was ordered to Tsingtao to confirm that the Germans had indeed interned the battleship Tsesarevich and three destroyers that had taken shelter there after the battle . After their return , they were reassigned to the blockade of Port Arthur . 
 On 18 September , Asama and the armored cruiser Iwate were transferred to the 1st Division . When the Imperial Japanese Army began sinking the Russian ships in Port Arthur with large @-@ caliber howitzers in early December , Tōgō ordered the two cruisers home to refit . On 30 December , Asama and the armored cruiser Azuma were ordered north to the Tsugaru Strait . Before the Russian ships from the Baltic Fleet approached Japan , the two cruisers were recalled south and rejoined the armored cruisers of Kamimura 's 2nd Division . 
 = = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = = 
 As the Russian 2nd and 3rd Pacific Squadrons approached Japan on 27 May , having sailed from the Baltic Sea , they were spotted by patrolling Japanese ships early that morning , but visibility was limited and radio reception poor . The preliminary reports were enough to cause Tōgō to order his ships to put to sea and the 2nd Division spotted the Russian ships under the command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky at around 11 : 30 . Kamimura closed to about a range of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) before sheering off under fire to join Tōgō 's battleships . Asama was fifth of six when Tōgō opened fire on the 2nd Pacific Squadron at 14 : 10 and , like most of the ships in the division , engaged the battleship Oslyabya . The cruiser was hit by a 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) shell at 14 : 28 and the shock knocked out her steering mechanism . She fell out of formation for repairs which were completed six minutes later . While she was attempting to rejoin Kamimura , she was struck by two more 12 @-@ inch shells that caused serious flooding , enough to increase her draft by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and reduce her speed . Despite the damage , Asama was able to join the 1st Division at 15 : 15 . The cruiser attempted to rejoin her own division at 15 : 50 . But she was so slowed by her damage and a 6 @-@ inch hit at 16 : 10 that holed the base of her rear funnel , which reduced her boiler draught until repairs were completed 20 minutes later , that the ship could not take station aft of Iwate until 17 : 05 . 
 After 17 : 30 Kamimura led his division in a fruitless pursuit of some of the Russian cruisers , leaving Tōgō 's battleships to their own devices . He abandoned his chase around 18 : 03 and turned northwards to rejoin Tōgō . His ships spotted the rear of the Russian battleline around 18 : 30 and opened fire when the range closed to 8000 – 9000 meters . Nothing is known of any effect on the Russians and they ceased fire by 19 : 30 and rejoined Tōgō at 20 : 08 as night was falling . Asama 's flooding increased overnight and she was forced to stop at 06 : 30 for nearly an hour before continuing . The main body of surviving Russian ships were spotted the next morning and the Japanese ships opened fire around 10 : 30 , staying beyond the range at which the Russian ships could effectively reply . Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov therefore decided to surrender his ships as he could neither return fire nor close the range . The elderly Russian armored cruiser Dmitrii Donskoi was spotted shortly before 18 : 00 and Asama was ordered by Tōgō to join the pursuit in support of the protected cruisers of the 4th Division . By the time the cruiser met up with the 4th Division , night had fallen and Dmitrii Donskoi had taken refuge in shallow water . She was found the following morning by the Japanese , after most of her crew had been disembarked and the ship prepared to be scuttled . The Japanese attempt to seize her was thwarted when the ship capsized and sank . During the battle , Asama was struck by three 12- , two 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) and about seven smaller shells that killed 11 men and wounded 13 more . The ship reached Maizuru Naval Arsenal on 30 May to begin repairs . She carried Emperor Meiji through the fleet during the victory review in Tokyo Bay on 15 September . 
 The ship was assigned to the Training Squadron from 1 June 1910 to 1 April 1911 , during which time she made a training cruise with naval cadets to North and Central American and Hawaii from 16 October 1910 to 6 March 1911 , accompanied by the protected cruiser Kasagi . This was the first of her dozen training cruises that lasted until 1935 and the next lasted from 20 April to 11 August 1914 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 On 14 September 1914 , Asama was departed Yokosuka as part of the 1st South Seas Squadron that searched for Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee 's German East Asia Squadron in the South Sea Islands . On 25 October , the ship was detached and ordered to Honolulu , Hawaii , to prevent the departure of the German gunboat SMS Geier , together with the ex @-@ Russian battleship Hizen . After the gunboat was interned on 8 November , the two ships sailed to rendezvous with the other ships of the American Expeditionary Squadron at Magdalena Bay , Baja California on the 22nd . The squadron then headed south to search along the western coast of South America for German commerce raiders . On 11 December , after the receiving the news of the British victory in the Battle of the Falkland Islands , the squadron moved north to search off the western coast of Central America and then moved north to search Mexican and U.S. waters in January . 
 Asama searched Mazatlán on 28 January and then proceeded to investigate the desolate and waterless bay at Puerto San Bartolomé in Baja California where her captain , Yoshioka <unk> , also intended to recoal from the British collier SS Lena . On 31 January 1915 the ship struck an uncharted rock at the entrance to the bay and was stuck fast . The impact ripped a hole , initially estimated as 15 meters ( 49 ft 3 in ) long , that completely flooded the boiler rooms and put 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 4 ft ) of water in the engine room . After initial attempts to get the ship off the rock failed , her crew began off @-@ loading supplies and set kedge anchors to stabilize the cruiser and prevent further damage to her bottom . The collier SS Boyne arrived that evening and was sent to San Diego to send word of the incident to Japanese authorities as Asama was powerless and Lena lacked a radio . 
 The armored cruiser Izumo , flagship of the squadron commander Rear Admiral Moriyama <unk> , arrived on 12 February and he requested the immediate dispatch of salvage and repair ships . The protected cruiser Chitose and the supply ship SS Konan Maru arrived on 18 March and they were followed the next day by Asama 's sister , Tokiwa , and the repair ship Kamakura Maru . Vice Admiral Tochinai <unk> , who arrived aboard Tokiwa , relieved Moriyama who was due to return home . Salvage efforts began in earnest with the arrival of the repair ship Kantō on 24 March which brought over 250 shipwrights from the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal to assist . By 14 April over 1 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ) of material had been removed from the cruiser and further investigation showed that the forward boiler room had a hole 7 @.@ 8 meters ( 25 @.@ 5 ft ) by 0 @.@ 9 meters ( 3 ft ) and the hole in the aft boiler room measured 2 @.@ 1 meters ( 7 ft ) by 10 @.@ 2 centimeters ( 4 in ) . It was no wonder that , given the state of the ship 's bottom , pumping overboard 6 @,@ 764 metric tons ( 6 @,@ 657 long tons ) of water was not enough to empty the ship of water . On 8 May the ship was successfully refloated at high tide , but she required three more months of work before she could be considered minimally sea worthy . Asama tested her watertight integrity on 21 August outside the bay and she departed at a speed of 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) for the British naval base at Esquimalt , British Columbia , two days later for temporary repairs , escorted by Chitose and Kantō . During the voyage the ship still had to pump some 710 to 810 metric tons ( 700 to 800 long tons ) per hour . The repairs in Esquimalt reduced this figure to a mere 100 metric tons ( 100 long tons ) per hour after the cruiser sailed for Yokosuka on 23 October . She arrived on 18 December and Emperor Taishō received her officers in the Imperial Palace two days later . Permanent repairs , which included the replacement of her boilers by 16 Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers and the removal of her bow torpedo tube , were not completed until March 1917 , Asama served as the flagship of Destroyer Squadron ( Suiraisentai ) 2 from 13 April to 4 August before she was transferred to the Training Squadron on 25 August . Together with Iwate , the ship cruised to the western coasts of North and Central America , Hawaii and the South Sea Islands from 2 March to 6 July 1918 . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war activities = = = 
 After World War I , Asama was used primarily for long range oceanic navigation training by officer candidates . On 21 August 1920 , she began a training voyage to South America and Polynesia that lasted until 2 April 1921 . She was re @-@ designated a 1st class coast defense ship on 1 September 1921 . In 1922 , all of her main deck guns , six 6 @-@ inch and four 12 @-@ pounder guns , were removed and their casemates plated over . In addition all of her QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder guns were removed and a single 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft gun was added . 
 Beginning on 26 June 1922 , Asama resumed making training cruises , usually at two @-@ year intervals , that took her to Australia , Southeast Asia , and the Mediterranean Sea among other places . They came to an end after she ran aground on the night of 13 October 1935 north north @-@ west of the Kurushima Strait in the Inland Sea . Her bottom was badly damaged and she was deemed no longer seaworthy after repairs were completed at Kure Naval Arsenal . The ship was then assigned as a stationary training ship for the Kure Naval Corps on 5 July 1938 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Asama was reclassified as a training ship in July 1942 and was towed to Shimonoseki 5 August 1942 where she became a gunnery training ship . She was disarmed at some point during the Pacific War , only retaining several 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft guns , and she was stricken from the navy list on 30 November 1945 . The ship was scrapped at the <unk> shipyard of the Hitachi Zosen Corporation from 15 August 1946 to 25 March 1947 . 
 = Fawn M. Brodie = 
 Fawn McKay Brodie ( September 15 , 1915 – January 10 , 1981 ) was a biographer and one of the first female professors of history at UCLA , who is best known for Thomas Jefferson : An Intimate History ( 1974 ) , a work of psychobiography , and No Man Knows My History ( 1945 ) , an early and still influential non @-@ hagiographic biography of Joseph Smith , the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement . 
 Raised in Utah in a respected , if impoverished , Latter @-@ day Saint ( LDS Church ) family , Fawn McKay drifted away from Mormonism during her years of graduate work at the University of Chicago . She married the ethnically Jewish national defense expert Bernard Brodie , with whom she had three children . Although Fawn Brodie eventually became one of the first tenured female professors of history at UCLA , she is best known for her five biographies , four of which incorporate insights from Freudian psychology . 
 Brodie 's depiction of Joseph Smith as a fraudulent " genius of improvisation " has been described as both a " beautifully written biography ... the work of a mature scholar [ that ] represented the first genuine effort to come to grips with the contradictory evidence about Smith 's early life " and as a work that presented conjecture as fact . Her best @-@ selling psychobiography of Thomas Jefferson was the first serious study to examine evidence related to accounts that he had taken his slave Sally Hemings as a concubine , and Brodie concluded such accounts were true . According to J. Philipp Rosenberg , Brodie 's study of Richard Nixon 's early career demonstrated a weakness of psychobiography when written by an author who disliked the subject . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fawn McKay was the second of five children of Thomas E. McKay and Fawn Brimhall . Born in Ogden , Utah , she grew up in Huntsville , about ten miles ( 16 km ) east . Both her parents descended from families influential in early Mormonism . Her maternal grandfather , George H. Brimhall , was president of Brigham Young University . Her father , Thomas Evans McKay , was a bishop , president of the LDS Swiss @-@ Austrian mission , and an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles . Brodie 's paternal uncle was David O. McKay , an apostle in the LDS Church when Brodie was born , who later became the ninth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . 
 Despite the prominence of her family in the church , they lived in genteel poverty , their property burdened by unpayable debt . The young Fawn was perpetually embarrassed that their house did not have indoor plumbing . 
 Fawn early demonstrated precociousness . At three she memorized and recited lengthy poems . When a whooping cough epidemic convinced Brodie 's mother to homeschool Fawn 's sister Flora , who was two years older , Fawn more than kept pace . Introduced to school in 1921 , the six @-@ year @-@ old Fawn was advanced to the fourth grade ; when she lost the school spelling bee to a twelve @-@ year @-@ old , " she cried and cried that this bright boy , twice her age , had spelled her down . " At ten she had a poem printed in the LDS youth periodical , The Juvenile Instructor ; at fourteen she was salutatorian of Weber High School . 
 Although Fawn grew to maturity in a rigorously religious environment that included strict Sabbatarianism and evening prayers on her knees , her mother was a closet skeptic who thought the LDS Church a " wonderful social order " but who doubted its dogma . According to Brodie , in the late 1930s , while her father headed Mormon mission activities in German @-@ speaking Europe , her mother became a " thoroughgoing heretic " while accompanying him there . 
 = = Education and marriage = = 
 From 1930 to 1932 Fawn attended Weber College , a two @-@ year institution in Ogden then owned by the LDS Church , where she became an accomplished public speaker and participated in intercollegiate debate . She completed her B.A. in English literature at the University of Utah in 1934 . There she began to question core Mormon beliefs , such as that the Indians had originated in ancient Palestine . After graduation at age nineteen , she returned to teach English at Weber College , where she demonstrated excellent potential . 
 In high school , McKay had begun dating a classmate , Dilworth Jensen . They wrote to each other faithfully during Jensen 's long absence on an LDS mission in Europe . In June 1935 , both McKay and Jensen were accepted for graduate studies at the University of California , Berkeley , and friends assumed they would marry . Her sister Flora McKay had recently eloped with Jensen 's brother , whom the McKays disliked . They encouraged Fawn to attend the University of Chicago rather than marry . McKay seemed to have had " growing doubts about marrying " Jensen . 
 At the University of Chicago , where she earned an M.A. in 1936 , Brodie lost her faith in religion entirely . In 1975 , she recalled , " It was like taking a hot coat off in the summertime . The sense of liberation I had at the University of Chicago was exhilarating . I felt very quickly that I could not go back to the old life , and I never did . " She continued to write to Jensen until shortly before she married Bernard Brodie on her graduation day , August 28 , 1936 . 
 Brodie was a native of Chicago , the son of Latvian Jewish immigrants who was alienated from both his family and his family 's religion . A bright , emotional graduate student in international relations , Brodie eventually became a noted expert in military strategy during the Cold War era . The McKays were horrified at their daughter 's impending marriage ; Dilworth Jensen felt betrayed . David O. McKay went to Chicago to warn his niece of the family 's strong objections . Out of consideration for her mother , Fawn scheduled the wedding in an LDS chapel , but of the McKays , only Fawn 's mother attended . None of Brodie 's family did . 
 = = No Man Knows My History = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Having found temporary employment at the Harper Library of the University of Chicago , Brodie began researching the origins of the Book of Mormon . By mid @-@ 1939 , she confided to her uncle , Dean R. Brimhall ( another ex @-@ Mormon ) , that she intended to write a scholarly biography of Joseph Smith . Progress toward that goal was slowed by the birth of the Brodies ' first child and by three rapid moves , a consequence of her husband 's search for a permanent position . In 1943 Fawn Brodie was encouraged enough by her progress to enter her 300 @-@ page draft in a contest for the Alfred A. Knopf literary fellowship . In May her application was judged the best of the 44 entries . 
 Brodie continued her research at the Library of Congress in Washington , D.C. , where the Brodies had moved for her husband 's work , as well as at the headquarters of the Reorganized LDS Church in Independence , Missouri . Eventually she returned to Utah , where she did research in the LDS Church Archives , gaining access to some highly restricted materials by claiming to be " Brother McKay 's daughter , " a subterfuge that made her feel " guilty as hell . " Her pursuit of little @-@ known documents was not discreet enough , and eventually it attracted the attention of her uncle David O. McKay . After a " painful , acrimonious encounter " with her uncle , Brodie promised never again to consult materials in the Church Archives . 
 Brodie 's research was enlarged by other students of Mormonism , most notably Dale L. Morgan ( 1914 – 1971 ) , who became a lifelong friend , mentor , and sounding board . Brodie completed her biography of Joseph Smith in 1944 , and it was published the following year by Alfred A. Knopf when she was thirty years old . 
 = = = Thesis = = = 
 Its title , No Man Knows My History , alludes to a comment Joseph Smith made in a speech shortly before his assassination in 1844 . Brodie presents the young Joseph as a lazy , good @-@ natured , extroverted , and unsuccessful treasure seeker . In an attempt to improve his family 's fortunes , he developed the notion of golden plates and then the concept of a religious novel , the Book of Mormon . It was based in part on View of the Hebrews , an earlier work by a contemporary clergyman Ethan Smith . Brodie asserts that at first Joseph Smith was a deliberate impostor ; but at some point , in nearly untraceable steps , he became convinced that he was a prophet . She wrote that he never escaped " the memory of the conscious artifice " that created the Book of Mormon . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Non @-@ Mormon reviewers praised either the author 's research , the excellence of her literary style , or both . Newsweek called Brodie 's book " a definitive biography in the finest sense of the word , " and Time praised the author for her " skill and scholarship and admirable detachment . " Other reviews were less positive . Brodie was especially annoyed by the review of novelist Vardis Fisher , who accused her of stating " as indisputable facts what can only be regarded as conjectures supported by doubtful evidence . " Bernard <unk> wrote a mixed review , but he praised the biography as " the best book about the Mormons so far published . " <unk> , who believed Joseph Smith was " paranoid , " said that Brodie had not provided adequate psychological explanations for Smith 's behavior . Brodie also came to believe that a thorough psychological analysis of Smith was essential and that she " hadn 't gone far enough in this direction . " 
 = = = Reaction of the LDS Church = = = 
 Although No Man Knows My History criticized many foundational Mormon beliefs about Joseph Smith , the LDS Church was slow to condemn the work , even as the book went into a second printing . In 1946 , The Improvement Era , an official periodical of the Church , said that many of the book 's citations arose from doubtful sources and that the biography was " of no interest to Latter @-@ day Saints who have correct knowledge of the history of Joseph Smith . " The " Church News " section of the Deseret News had a lengthy critique : it praised the biography 's " fine literary style " and denounced it as " a composite of all anti @-@ Mormon books that have gone before . " In the booklet , " No , Ma 'am , That 's Not History " , the BYU professor and LDS historian and apologist Hugh Nibley challenged Brodie . He asserted that she had cited sources supportive only of her conclusions while conveniently ignoring others . Brodie described the Deseret News pamphlet as " a well @-@ written , clever piece of Mormon propaganda , " but she dismissed the more popular " No , Ma 'am , That 's Not History " as " a flippant and shallow piece . " 
 In May 1946 , the LDS Church excommunicated Brodie . She never tried to regain her membership . Brodie once wrote to a friend that what she suffered from her disillusionment with Mormonism " had to do with the pain I caused my family . The disillusionment itself was ... a liberating experience . " Before No Man Knows My History was published , Brodie sought to comfort her parents , " You brought us all up to revere the truth , which is the noblest ideal a parent can instill in his children , and the fact that we come out on somewhat different roads certainly is no reflection on you . " Brodie 's mother and three sisters were enthusiastic about the book , but Thomas McKay refused to read it . 
 = = Critical success with psychobiography = = 
 = = = Thaddeus Stevens : Scourge of the South = = = 
 Fawn Brodie genuinely enjoyed her roles as wife and mother , believing that rearing children , especially when they were small , was " enormously fulfilling . " Eventually the Brodies had two boys and a girl . Still , Brodie was not content to be without a writing project for long . After some desultory investigation of other possibilities , she settled on a biography of Thaddeus Stevens , a leader of Radical Reconstruction . 
 Brodie believed that previous historians had unduly vilified Stevens , and she enjoyed the prospect of rebuilding a reputation rather than , as in her Joseph Smith biography , tearing one down . Stevens as a champion of black people was a timely interest as the Civil Rights era increased in intensity . Research materials were available at Yale University , where Bernard Brodie was employed . Fawn Brodie wondered how Stevens had been affected psychologically by his physical deformity , a club foot . 
 In the view of students of historiography such as Ernst <unk> , all biographers are to some degree <unk> , and any biography that refused to examine motives , character traits , and the depth of personality would be flat and uninteresting . But Brodie became interested in applying the theories of professional psychoanalysts to the study of historical personalities , a subject especially popular during the mid @-@ twentieth century . At first Brodie was amused at how much psychoanalysis had " become a religion " to its practitioners , but she later become a committed devotee of psychoanalytic theory . Brodie made a number of acquaintances among psychoanalysts , who helped her evaluate Thaddeus Stevens , notably Ralph R. Greenson , with whom she developed a close personal and professional relationship . Both the Brodies also subjected themselves to psychoanalysis , he for insomnia and she for chronic mild depression and sexual problems . ( Bernard 's employer , the RAND Corporation , paid most of the bills . ) Brodie 's interest in psychology during this period was heightened by family problems : her mother attempted suicide three times , the second by cutting herself with a Catholic crucifix and the third ( which succeeded ) by setting herself on fire . 
 The Stevens biography took the better part of a decade to complete . 
 = = = = Reviews = = = = 
 When Brodie published the Stevens book in 1959 , it enjoyed virtually unanimous praise from critics . Major historians of the Civil War and Reconstruction era , including David Herbert Donald and C. Vann Woodward , praised the biography . Donald called Brodie 's psychoanalysis of Stevens " a tour de force . " Most gracious was Richard N. Current , who had written a less favorable account of Stevens that Brodie had earlier criticized . Current not only urged W. W. Norton to republish Brodie 's book in paperback , but wrote a blurb praising the author for writing " more imaginatively " and " more <unk> ... than any other Stevens biographer . " But , Thaddeus Stevens was a commercial failure that sold fewer than fifteen hundred copies before going out of print in less than a year . 
 In 1960 the Brodies spent a year in France , during which Fawn spent considerable energy researching and writing From Crossbow to H @-@ Bomb , a co @-@ authored paperback intended as a college text . It treated the influence of science on military technology . Bernard Brodie had signed the contract with Random House , but his wife did most of the research and writing . 
 = = = The Devil Drives : A Life of Sir Richard Burton = = = 
 When the family returned to California , Alfred Knopf asked Brodie to edit and write a new introduction for Sir Richard Francis Burton 's memoir , The City of the Saints and Across the Rocky Mountains to California ( 1862 ) . Almost immediately she " was lost " to Burton , a man whom she described as " fascinating beyond belief . " She soon planned a full biography . Like Brodie , Burton was an agnostic who was fascinated by religion and all things sexual . Brodie consulted with the psychoanalyst community and used her own free association to make Burton reveal his subconscious . For instance , she noted that immediately before and after Burton wrote about his mother , he talked " about cheating , decapitation , mutilations , <unk> — all the stories and metaphors are violent , negative , and hostile . " 
 = = = = Reviews = = = = 
 The Devil Drives : A Life of Sir Richard Burton was published in May 1967 and was chosen as a featured selection by both the Literary Guild Book Club and the History Book Club . Reviews were again generally positive . The New York Times Book Review promoted it as an " [ e ] <unk> biography of a bizarre man who had a bizarre wife — and life . " 
 = = = Professorship at UCLA = = = 
 The publication of three acclaimed biographies allowed Brodie to become a part @-@ time lecturer in history at the University of California , Los Angeles although she had not earned a Ph.D. ( Both her bachelor 's and master 's degrees were in English . ) As a woman , Brodie met some resistance from the large and overwhelmingly male history faculty , but her specialty in the current field of <unk> aided her original appointment and her eventual promotion to full professor . Brodie taught both larger upper @-@ division lectures in American history and small seminars on American political biography , preferring the latter . 
 = = Thomas Jefferson : An Intimate History = = 
 Thomas Jefferson was a natural subject for Brodie 's fourth biography . One of her courses focused on the United States from 1800 to 1830 , and her seminar in political biography could serve as an appropriate forum for a work @-@ in @-@ progress . Throughout this period , Brodie was attracted to Mormon studies and was importuned by several publishers to write a biography of Brigham Young . The LDS entrepreneur , O.C. Tanner ( 1904 – 1993 ) , offered Brodie $ 10 @,@ 000 in advance to produce a manuscript . Dale Morgan told Brodie that Madeline Reeder McQuown , his closer friend , had nearly completed a huge manuscript on Young . At the time , McQuown ’ s biography was little more than rough drafts of a few early chapters , but Brodie was dissuaded and abandoned Brigham Young for Thomas Jefferson . 
 By May 1968 , Brodie was committed to writing the biography . She understood that it could not be a full account . The study of Jefferson had become a virtual career for several living historians . For instance , Dumas Malone was in the process of completing a six @-@ volume biography of Jefferson , which won the Pulitzer Prize in 1975 . Brodie decided to concentrate on a biography of “ the private man . ” She decided to build on several recently published articles on the historical controversy related to a reported sexual relationship between Jefferson and Sally Hemings , a <unk> slave said to be the half @-@ sister of his late wife . The topic was timely during a period of increased national interest in race , sex , and presidential hypocrisy . Brodie had personal reasons as well , having discovered that her husband had been conducting an extramarital affair . 
 To Brodie , Jefferson ’ s ambiguous posturings on slavery could be explained by his personal life . If he were conducting a 28 @-@ year affair with a slave , then he could not free his slaves because once freed , Virginia law would force them from the state , unless he gained permission from the legislature for them to stay . He could only continue his liaison with Hemings if his slaves remained slaves . Two of the most prominent Jefferson biographers of the twentieth century , Dumas Malone and Merrill Peterson , had relied on Jefferson family testimony by two Randolph grandchildren who named his Carr nephews as fathers . They discounted other evidence about this alleged sexual relationship , including by Madison Hemings in 1873 , who identified Jefferson as his father . The relationship was first reported in 1802 by the journalist James T. Callender when Jefferson was President , after failing to win an appointment by the president . 
 Working from Winthrop Jordan 's Black on White ( 1968 ) , Brodie also used Dumas Malone 's documentation of Jefferson 's activities to correlate his residencies at Monticello with the conception period of each of Sally Hemings ' children , whose births he recorded in the Farm Book . She discovered that Hemings never conceived when Jefferson was not at Monticello , during years when he was often away for months at a time . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 By 1971 Brodie had a $ 15 @,@ 000 advance from her publisher and had presented a summary of her arguments at the annual meeting of the Organization of American Historians . The Jefferson biographer Merrill Peterson " blasted " the paper . She also wrote an article for American Heritage of her work in progress , entitled " The Great Jefferson Taboo , " about her concluding that the Jefferson @-@ Hemings relationship took place . In a change from its usual practice , the magazine included all her notes to show the sources of her conclusions . 
 Brodie and her publisher understood that the biography would be controversial . An in @-@ house editor at W. W. Norton was critical : " Doesn 't [ Brodie ] know about making the theory fit the facts instead of trying to explain the facts to fit the theory ? It 's pretty fascinating , like working out a detective story , but she doesn 't play fair . " 
 Thomas Jefferson : An Intimate History was published in February 1974 , and it was the main spring selection of the Book @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month Club . Brodie tried to ensure that none of the three foremost Jefferson scholars , Dumas Malone , Merrill Peterson , and Julian Boyd , would review the book . Brodie was interviewed on NBC 's Today Show , and the book quickly " became a topic of comment in elite social @-@ literary circles , " as well as among political people . The biography was an immediate commercial success ; it was on the New York Times bestseller list for thirteen weeks . Jefferson sold 80 @,@ 000 copies in hardback , 270 @,@ 000 copies in paperback , and netted Brodie $ 350 @,@ 000 in royalties — adjusted for inflation , more than a million dollars in the early twenty @-@ first century . 
 Literary reviews were generally positive while historians were often critical of Brodie 's speculations . Mainstream historians had long denied the possibility of Jefferson 's relation with Sally Hemings , although such interracial liaisons were so common that by the late eighteenth century , visitors remarked on the numerous white slaves in Virginia and the Upper South . " The Richmond Examiner on September 25 , 1802 , in a rare admission , stated that “ thousands ” of mulatto children were then being born in the South . " Mary Chesnut and Fanny Kemble , educated women of the planter elite , also wrote about many interracial families in the era shortly before the American Civil War . Jefferson had been discreet , protecting his privacy , and he was an icon whom historians were determined to " defend " . 
 Like many previous Jefferson biographers , Brodie developed an intense affection for her protagonist . She claimed that in dreams , she and Jefferson became " man and wife . " Bernard Brodie is supposed to have muttered , " God , I 'm glad that man is out of the house . " Fawn Brodie wondered where one could go after Jefferson , " but down . " 
 After her book was published , Brodie was contacted by some Eston Hemings Jefferson descendants who recognized his name from her account . They discovered that their fathers in the 1940s had decided that , to protect their children from racial discrimination associated with descent from Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson , they would tell the children they were descended from Jefferson 's uncle . All these Jefferson descendants learned in the 1970s of their true descent from Eston Hemings , Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson . Brodie wrote a follow @-@ up article about the Jefferson @-@ Hemings grandchildren in 1976 , entitled " Thomas Jefferson ’ s Unknown Grandchildren : A Study in Historical <unk> " ] , published in October 1976 in American Heritage magazine . Photographs and other documentary material they gave her have been donated to UCLA archives . 
 = = = 1998 Jefferson DNA study and new consensus = = = 
 In 1997 Annette Gordon @-@ Reed published Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings : An American Controversy , in which she analyzed the historiography and noted the bias of historians in assessing conflicting accounts by descendants of the Jefferson family and Hemings family , as well as evidence that they overlooked . To try to resolve the renewed controversy with modern techniques , in 1998 a Y @-@ DNA study of descendants of the Jefferson male line , Eston Hemings ( the youngest son of Sally Hemings ) , the Carr nephews , and Thomas Woodson ( whose family also claimed descent from Jefferson ) was conducted . It found that the Y @-@ DNA of the Eston Hemings descendant matched the rare haplotype of the male Jefferson line . In addition , the tests conclusively found that there was no match between the Carr line and the Hemings descendant . 
 In January 2000 , a research committee commissioned by the Thomas Jefferson Foundation , which operates Monticello , concluded that there was a high probability that Jefferson had been the father of Eston Hemings and likely of all Hemings children listed in the Monticello records . Since then the Foundation has altered exhibits and tour commentary to reflect Jefferson 's paternity of all Hemings ' children and has sponsored new research into the interracial society of Monticello and Charlottesville . Since 2000 , most academics , including biographers such as Joseph Ellis , have agreed with the new consensus . Other historians , including those associated with the Thomas Jefferson Heritage Society , founded after the DNA study , continue to disagree . 
 = = Richard Nixon : The Shaping of His Character = = 
 Brodie considered a range of subjects for a new biography . Brigham Young was a clear field , but she decided not to “ return to old ground . ” Richard Nixon had resigned the presidency shortly after she had finished Jefferson , and Brodie had spoken formally to both students and others about the former president . As a liberal Democrat , Brodie had developed a “ repellent fascination " with Nixon , a man whom she called “ a rattlesnake , ” a “ plain damn liar , ” and a " shabby , pathetic felon . " Although Brodie thought Nixon an imposter like Joseph Smith , she did not believe him to be the “ charming imposter the Mormon leader was . " 
 Her interest in the former president had a personal basis as well . One of her sons had nearly been drafted in 1969 shortly after Nixon had won election on the promise to end the Vietnam War . ( At the last minute , sympathetic physicians had reclassified Bruce Brodie as unfit for military service on the basis of his allergies . ) 
 Also , when Nixon had sought information to discredit Daniel Ellsberg , who had leaked the Pentagon Papers , his operatives had burglarized the office of Ellsberg ’ s psychiatrist , Dr. Lewis Fielding . Ellsberg was a close friend and former RAND associate of Bernard Brodie . Fielding was Fawn Brodie ’ s long @-@ time therapist . Brodie considered “ Nixon the perpetrator of an assault on her privacy . ” 
 Although neither Bernard nor her publisher were enthusiastic about her choice , Brodie began to work on her new project . She resigned her professorship at UCLA in 1977 to devote herself to research , including , for the first time , in oral history collections . Brodie conducted 150 interviews . She tried unsuccessfully to interview Henry Kissinger , whom she knew on a first @-@ name basis — <unk> Nixon for what she described in a letter to him as “ a compassionate and accurate study . ” ( Nixon did not reply . ) Though she could find no evidence , Brodie began to think that he had engaged in a homosexual relationship with his good friend Bebe Rebozo . Her psychoanalyst friends tried to warn her off this topic . 
 = = = Illness = = = 
 In November 1977 , Bernard Brodie was diagnosed with a serious cancer , and Fawn Brodie suspended her research on Nixon : “ That son of a bitch can wait . ” She nursed her husband until his death a year later . Afterward , she struggled with “ a depression from which she would never really emerge . ” Under the circumstances , Nixon ’ s biography seemed “ like a total obscenity . ” 
 While hiking at a family reunion in 1980 , Brodie became unusually tired . She was shortly diagnosed with metastatic lung cancer , although she had never smoked . Between chemotherapy treatments , she pushed ahead to complete the Nixon study , her three children and a daughter @-@ in @-@ law providing moral and editorial support in her time of need . Knowing that she could never complete a full biography , she ended the manuscript with Nixon 's pre @-@ presidential years , lending it an unfinished quality . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Richard Nixon : The Shaping of His Character was published in late 1981 and received reviews less enthusiastic than any of her earlier books . Writing in The New Republic , Godfrey Hodgson questioned both her psychoanalytic approach and her motives : “ [ W ] e are in danger of having the insights of psychotherapy used as a tool for character destruction , certainly for libel , potentially for revenge . ” Sales of the book were disappointing , in part because of the reviews , in part because memoirs by Nixon associates such as Henry Kissinger , John Ehrlichman , and John Dean had recently flooded the market . Perhaps Brodie ’ s book was most influential in stimulating Oliver Stone to create his controversial 1995 movie Nixon . 
 = = Death = = 
 Brodie died nine months before publication of the book . As death neared , the cancer spread to her brain and bones , and Brodie experienced intense pain . During this period , she was visited in the hospital by her brother Thomas , who had remained a practicing Latter @-@ day Saint . Brodie asked him to “ give me a blessing , ” although she had long been estranged from both her brother and the LDS Church . A few days later , Brodie released a note saying that her request for a priesthood blessing should not be misinterpreted as a request to return to the Church . It was Brodie ’ s last signed statement . In accordance with her wishes , friends spread her ashes over the Santa Monica Mountains , which she loved and had successfully helped to protect from real estate development . 
 = = Publications = = 
 No Man Knows My History : The Life of Joseph Smith ( 1945 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 679 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Thaddeus Stevens : Scourge of the South ( 1959 ) ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 The Devil Drives : A Life of Sir Richard Burton ( 1967 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Thomas Jefferson : An Intimate History ( 1974 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Richard Nixon : The Shaping of His Character ( 1981 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 = My Transsexual Summer = 
 My Transsexual Summer is a British television documentary series about seven transgender people in different stages of transition . For five weekends in the summer of 2011 , they stay together in a large holiday home in Bedfordshire , England , where they meet and help each other with some of the struggles that transgender people face . Between these weekend retreats , they go back to their lives and real @-@ world challenges . 
 In the early 2010s , British public @-@ service broadcaster Channel 4 resolved to improve the accuracy and depth of their representation of transgender people . My Transsexual Summer was the first transgender programme they created after making this resolution . Channel 4 broadcast the series in November 2011 . 
 = = Production = = 
 In late 2010 , BBC and Channel 4 management at the Westminster Media Forum admitted that there are " high levels of inaccuracy " in media coverage of transgender people , and that " transgender storylines ... are frequently lacking in breadth and substance . " In March 2011 , Channel 4 became the first company to sign Trans Media Watch 's memorandum of understanding , in which they agreed to " work toward ... increasing positive , well @-@ informed representations of transgender people in the media . " 
 After signing the memorandum , Channel 4 engaged journalist / activist Paris Lees of Trans Media Watch to be a production consultant for the show ; Lees served as consultant for the duration of production . 
 Channel 4 chose the working title Girls Will Be Boys and Boys Will Be Girls . Mark Raphael , the commissioning editor for documentaries , contracted a British production company called Twenty Twenty Productions to make the series . Twenty Twenty was at the time a subsidiary of Shed Media . Former commissioning editor for documentaries Meredith Chambers served as executive producer for Channel 4 , and Sam Whittaker was executive producer for Twenty Twenty . The series producer and director was Helen Richards . 
 Filming began several weeks after the signing of the memorandum , and continued over a period of four months . My Transsexual Summer aired on Channel 4 in November 2011 . 
 = = Participants = = 
 The participants in the programme are four trans women and three trans men from different parts of the British Isles . They range in age from 22 to 52 ; five of the participants are under 30 . 
 Drew @-@ Ashlyn , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old trans woman from Wakefield , has been living as a woman for more than four years . Her family are supportive , but before the show she had never met another trans person — let alone trans people near her own age . Donna is a 25 @-@ year @-@ old from Norwich . She and Drew have both been on hormone replacement therapy ( HRT ) for two years . Sarah ( age 29 ) is from Jersey . She has only recently begun presenting as a woman full @-@ time ; during the course of the show , she comes out to her mother . Karen , from Essex , worked for many years as a police officer , and later as a lorry driver . She divorced in 1985 , and wants to be able to see her daughter again . At age 52 , she is about to undergo <unk> . 
 Lewis ( age 22 ) is from St Helens , Merseyside . Like Drew , he says he has never knowingly met another trans person before . He decided at age 18 to transition , and he has been living as a man for three years . Max is a is 25 @-@ year @-@ old trans man from Tottenham . He is Reform Jewish , and hopes to become a rabbi . Max was living in New Zealand when he began preparing to undergo mastectomy . After seeking help locally , he had the procedure done in Thailand instead . Fox ( age 30 ) is a screen printing artist from Brighton . He started HRT six months ago , and is all @-@ too aware that the hormones are slow to manifest visible changes . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Response = = 
 Before the first episode aired , journalist Patrick Strudwick asked , " Channel 4 , why call your new documentary My Transsexual Summer ? It sounds like gender tourism , a fun little trip to the other side . " Sarah Dean , an entertainment editor for The Huffington Post UK , called the title " sensationalist " . Although Sarah Lake of Trans Media Watch found the title contentious , she defended it by pointing out that transition is a temporary process like coming of age ; even so , she believed the title to be " only slightly better " than the " dire and totally inappropriate " working title , Girls Will Be Boys and Boys Will Be Girls . Her overall assessment was that " although the programme makers undeniably made some compromises to draw in viewers , millions will have enjoyed the company of these seven , shared in their lives and learned a lesson in diversity . … They will now have an entry point to broadening their understanding of the rich and joyful diversity of gender experience , something which has always existed but of which they were previously unaware . " 
 Politician and activist Zoe O 'Connell described some of the wording in the narration as " cringeworthy " , but felt that " it ’ s more than just a step in the right direction , it ’ s a programme that pretty accurately reflected how many trans people carry on with each other in private . " 
 Musician , activist , and writer CN Lester listed some ways in which the show perpetuated misconceptions or otherwise fell short , but still saw it as a turning point in the representation of transgender people on television : " It felt like a game changer . The overall feel of it — of hope , of warmth — that felt totally new to me . And hats off to the seven trans people ... for putting that across . " 
 When the second episode aired , transgender journalist Juliet Jacques posted her thoughts to the New Statesman 's politics blog , The <unk> : " At this point ... the limited level of improvement in trans representation on TV shown by My Transsexual Summer is probably the best we can expect . " She felt the major barriers to better representation to be " producers ' prejudices about what viewers will accept or understand " and extremely narrow bandwidth for " minority subjects " . 
 After seeing the first three episodes , Maxwell <unk> called the series " a disappointment " . One reason for this , he says , is that although " we see ... lovely , endearing transsexuals " portrayed in the show , " what I don ’ t see is anything that is going to make people think or feel any differently about what gender is or how it limits us all in one way or another . " He lamented that expressions of nuance in gender identity and discussions of <unk> were absent from the broadcast edit of the show . 
 After the final episode aired , Juliet Jacques wrote a follow @-@ up article for Time Out . She concludes : " Perhaps in 30 years ' time , My Transsexual Summer will look as dated as [ the 1980 documentary ] A Change of Sex does now . If so , this will be because it has , for all its faults , taken trans @-@ related television in a more positive direction . " 
 = = Participants ' lives after the show = = 
 Less than a month after the final episode of My Transsexual Summer aired , Karen Gale delivered part of Channel 4 's 2011 Alternative Christmas message on Christmas Day . The theme of the broadcast was " Just Be Yourself " . In February 2016 , Karen 's local newspaper , the Romford Recorder , interviewed her about what life was like before she transitioned . 
 After filming the show , Drew @-@ Ashlyn Cunningham made speaking appearances at schools , universities , and youth groups . She became a supporter of Gendered Intelligence ( a nonprofit organisation that aids trans youth ) , and a " celebrity patron " of the 2012 and 2013 National Diversity Awards . In 2012 she became a make @-@ up artist for <unk> , and has also written for Gay Star News . 
 Donna Whitbread is a stage and festival performer . In 2014 , she joined the cast of cabaret act <unk> of London — a company of three trans women plus four male dancers , with choreography by <unk> <unk> . They debuted at the Hippodrome Casino in London 's West End on the 29th of December , and Donna opened the show with a fire breathing act . One year later she announced that she has a role in John Cameron Mitchell 's film adaptation of " How to Talk to Girls at Parties " . 
 After her time with her new friends at the retreat , Sarah Savage was optimistic . " I left the retreat with a different outlook on life , I could feel my confidence growing , slowly . " She appeared on chat shows ITV Breakfast and Live with Gabby in 2011 , and returned to television in March 2013 as a guest on The Alan Titchmarsh Show . She took a job in Brighton , and has a blog that she started during the production of My Transsexual Summer . In the spring of 2013 , she started HRT . 2013 was also the inaugural year of Trans * Pride Brighton , the first transgender pride festival in the UK , and she and Fox Fisher served on the organisation committee . In 2015 Sarah and Fox published a picture book , Are You a Boy or are You a Girl ? , which Sarah wrote and Fox illustrated . " Before I started transitioning , I never wrote , I never ... did anything creative , " said Sarah in a 2013 interview . " For some reason ... living in a female role has allowed me to be more creative . " 
 Lewis Hancox ' fundraising events attracted donations from TV viewers ; among those who gave to the cause were Stephen Fry and Graham Norton . Later that year , Lewis began preparing for a more complicated gender @-@ confirmation surgery : metoidioplasty . 
 Lewis moved to London to study Digital Film and Video at London South Bank University . In 2013 , he and Fox Fisher started the My <unk> project , in which they make short documentaries about transgender people and gender variance . Their production company is called Lucky Tooth Films . The Independent on Sunday placed Lewis and Fox on their Pink List for 2013 , a list of " 101 gay , lesbian , bisexual and transgender people that make a difference " . In 2014 , The Guardian included Lewis on their " 30 under 30 " list of " top young people in digital media " . 
 Maxwell <unk> is a writer , Judaic studies scholar , and trans activist . Since 2011 he has written for various publications on subjects pertaining to gender and Judaism . In 2012 , he started a petition calling on the WHO to delist transsexualism from the International Classification of Diseases . After a period of charity work , he moved to Stockholm to study at <unk> , the European Institute for Jewish Studies in Sweden , on a one @-@ year fellowship . In 2013 , while living in Stockholm , he published some of his plays , as well as a dystopian novella called The People 's Republic of Nowhere . 
 Fox Fisher ( aka Raphael Fox ) continued to work as a freelance screen printer and visual artist . In addition to his creative projects with Lewis and Sarah , Fox began writing for The Huffington Post . Like Sarah , he felt a new creative freedom from transitioning : " It 's easier to make art now because I feel like I 've got a huge chunk of my life out of the way . " 
 = American Pie Presents : Beta House = 
 American Pie Presents : Beta House is a 2007 American sex comedy film released by Universal Pictures . It is the third installment in the American Pie Presents series and the sixth installment in the American Pie franchise . The film concludes a story arc that begins with The Naked Mile ( 2006 ) . John White stars as Erik Stifler , a college freshman who pledges the Beta House fraternity led by his cousin Dwight Stifler ( Steve Talley ) . Christopher McDonald co @-@ stars as Erik 's father and Eugene Levy plays Beta House alumnus Noah Levenstein . 
 Universal commissioned the film after positive commercial reaction to The Naked Mile . Erik Lindsay and W.K. Border , the writer and producer , respectively , as well as four of the five principal cast members from the preceding film returned . Principal photography took place for seven to eight weeks from June 4 , 2007 in Toronto , Canada . 
 American Pie Presents : Beta House was released direct @-@ to @-@ DVD internationally on December 10 , 2007 and in the United States on December 26 , 2007 . The film was a moderate financial success , generating US $ 18 @.@ 55 million in United States sales . It received generally negative reviews from film critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Erik Stifler and Mike " Cooze " <unk> arrive at the University of Michigan as freshmen . Upon arriving at his dorm , Erik meets a girl named Ashley while she is taking a shower in the coed bathrooms . He then meets his new roommate Bobby and his girlfriend Margie while they are having sex . Erik eventually reunites with his cousin , Dwight Stifler , the leader of the Beta House fraternity , who invites Erik , Cooze , and Bobby to a Beta House party . They learn how they can gain eligibility to pledge for the Beta House and meet Wesley , the rush chair of the Beta House who experiences blackouts after drinking alcohol . Erik and Ashley begin dating , but on their first date at a restaurant , Erik accidentally spills hot soup on his legs , so Ashley brings him to her room to clean up . As Ashley rubs lotion on Erik 's thigh , he develops an erection and accidentally ejaculates over her possessions . Erik apologizes and explains to Ashley that his girlfriend Tracy broke up with him , and he has not had sex in four months . 
 Meanwhile , Cooze falls in love with Ashley 's roommate Denise ; however , she is nervous to show him her genitalia and have sex with him , so she instead gives Cooze a <unk> . After talking with Erik , Bobby , and Dwight about Denise , Cooze develops suspicions that Denise might have a penis , so Dwight encourages Cooze to find out . Alongside two other pledges , Erik , Cooze , and Bobby complete fifty tasks to pledge the Beta House , including : getting their posteriors signed by a stripper ; having sex with a professor ; marrying a male friend in Canada ; and placing a live ostrich in the Geek House . After they complete their final task , Edgar , the president of the Geek House , challenges the Beta House to the Greek Olympiad . Beta House alumnus Noah Levenstein returns to campus to officiate the competition . The first competition is won by Beta House as Dwight and Edgar compete in removing girls ' brassieres . Geek House win the next three competitions : a lightsaber duel , catching a greased pig and a two @-@ person " 69 " race . 
 Beta House win the fifth and sixth competitions : a Russian roulette challenge between Dwight and Edgar with aged horse semen ; and a drinking competition won by Wesley . Dwight learns from Rock that Edgar previously had sex with a sheep , so Beta House uses his wool fetish against him in the final striptease challenge with Margie wearing a sheep costume , resulting in the Geek House losing the Greek Olympiad . The Beta House hosts a toga party , while Erik comes up with the idea of a new pledge task for the Beta House : having sex in a movie theater , and he does so with Ashley . Meanwhile , Cooze and Denise finally sleep together , and Cooze discovers that Denise was actually hiding the fact the she ejaculates during sex , much to his excitement . The following morning , Wesley wakes up after a blackout and discovers that he had sex with the Geek House bodybuilder . In a post @-@ credits scene , Edgar instructs a stripper at Silver Dollar to dance with the headpiece of the sheep costume . 
 = = Cast = = 
 John White as Erik Stifler , a freshman pledging the Beta House 
 Steve Talley as Dwight Stifler , the pledge master and leader of the Beta House 
 Jake Siegel as Mike " Cooze " <unk> , Erik 's friend and a freshman pledging the Beta House alongside Erik and Bobby 
 Nic <unk> as Bobby , Erik 's roommate and a freshman pledging the Beta House alongside Erik and Cooze 
 Meghan <unk> as Ashley , Erik 's love interest 
 Eugene Levy as Noah Levenstein , Beta House alumni and the <unk> of the Greek Olympiad 
 Christopher McDonald as Mr. Stifler , Erik 's father 
 Jonathan <unk> as Wesley , a member and the rush chair of the Beta House 
 Bradford Anderson as Jake Parker , a handicapped member of the Geek House 
 Robbie Amell as Nick Anderson , a freshman pledging the Beta House 
 = = Production = = 
 American Pie Presents : The Naked Mile , the second spin @-@ off to the American Pie film series , was a commercial success , and Universal Pictures prepared for a sequel . The Naked Mile 's writer , Erik Lindsay , pitched the film by saying " Look , we 're not going to top Animal House of course , but it 's been 25 years . I was in a fraternity for six years . Let 's just make a straight pledging movie . " Universal gave Lindsay the green light to write Beta House , and also hired Andrew Waller and The Naked Mile 's producer , W. K. Border , as the film 's director and producer , respectively . The film 's screenplay was based on characters by Adam Herz and on aspects of Lindsay 's own life . Lindsay felt that Universal being unworried to make the film similar to Animal House provided " more opportunities to keep the story organic , " which he found the challenge of writing a sequel . 
 The film features the same principal cast as The Naked Mile minus Jessy Schram ; John White , Steve Talley , Christopher McDonald and Eugene Levy reprised their roles from the preceding film , with Levy returning to play Noah Levenstein for the sixth time in the series . Craig <unk> , the president of Universal Studios Home Entertainment , said " we think he [ Levy ] is crucial to this franchise because his character represents the heart of the movie . " Jake Siegel , Jaclyn A. Smith , Dan <unk> , and Jordan Prentice also reprised their roles from The Naked Mile . 
 Principal photography began on June 4 , 2007 and lasted about " seven [ to ] eight weeks . " Filming took place at the University of Toronto , Pinewood Toronto Studios and at the Brass Rail strip club in Toronto . Neo Art & Logic , Rogue Pictures and Universal Pictures produced the film on a budget of less than $ 10 million . The film was intended to be the center of a trilogy beginning with The Naked Mile and although talks for a concluding sequel were made , no such film has yet materialised . 
 = = Release = = 
 American Pie Presents : Beta House was released direct @-@ to @-@ DVD internationally on December 10 , 2007 and in the United States on December 26 , 2007 . It was marketed with the tagline " the most outrageous slice of pie ! " The film was released in two single @-@ disc DVD editions . The R @-@ rated edition included no special features , while the unrated edition included a commentary track , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes clips , deleted scenes and storylines , a fake service announcement , featurettes , outtakes , a mock in @-@ character interview with Noah Levenstein , music videos by God Made Me Funky , and a 30 Rock episode . Through its first four weeks the DVD sold over 534 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , generating $ 12 @.@ 25 million in sales . Universal Pictures expected to sell more than a million units ; sales have since totaled over 898 @,@ 000 units in the United States , with $ 18 @.@ 55 million in revenue . 
 The film received generally negative reviews from film critics . LaRue Cook of Entertainment Weekly graded the film with a " D " and wrote , " what was once a fresh slice of teen comedy has become a slab of stale crudeness . " Scott Weinberg of Moviefone , in his negative review , found the film " slightly more amusing to sit through than the two previous entries " , in particular praising the Star Trek sexual roleplay scene as " extremely effective . " DVD Talk 's Jeffrey Robinson writes that " if anything , it will bore you and leave you wondering why you wasted an hour and a half of your life . " Writing in JoBlo.com , Adam Quigley poked fun at the film 's themes , declaring that " if there 's a lesson to be taken from these films , it 's that women are objects , and should always be treated as such " . IGN 's Hock Teh gave the film 5 / 10 , writing that it " stays very close to the American Pie formula , " while criticizing the story as " devoid of anything remotely semi @-@ compelling or even noteworthy . " Peter Hammond of Maxim describes American Pie Presents : Beta House as " loaded with sex , laughs and raunchy fun , " writing that it " may be the most outrageous slice of pie yet ! " 
 = Raid on Deerfield = 
 The 1704 Raid on Deerfield ( or the Deerfield Massacre ) occurred during Queen Anne 's War on February 29 when French and Native American forces under the command of Jean @-@ Baptiste Hertel de Rouville attacked the English frontier settlement at Deerfield , Massachusetts , just before dawn , burning part of the town , killing 47 villagers , and taking 112 settlers captive to Canada , of whom 60 were later redeemed . 
 Typical of the small scale frontier conflict in Queen Anne 's War , the French @-@ led raid relied on a coalition of French soldiers and a variety of Indian populations , including in the force of about 300 a number of <unk> who had once lived in the Deerfield area . The diversity of personnel , motivations , and material objectives involved in the raid meant that it did not achieve full surprise when they entered the palisaded village . The defenders of some fortified houses in the village successfully held off the raiders until arriving reinforcements prompted their retreat . However , the raid was a clear victory for the French coalition that aimed to take captives and unsettle English colonial frontier society . More than 100 captives were taken , and about 40 percent of the village houses were destroyed . 
 Although predicted , the raid shocked New England colonists , further antagonized relations with the French and their Native American allies , and led to more community war preparedness in frontier settlements . The raid has been immortalized as a part of the early American frontier story , principally due to the account of one of its captives , the Rev. John Williams . He and his family were forced to make the long overland journey to Canada . His young daughter Eunice was adopted by a Mohawk family ; she became assimilated and married a Mohawk man . Williams ' account , The Redeemed Captive , was published in 1707 and was widely popular in the colonies . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the time of the arrival of European colonists in the middle reaches of the Connecticut River valley ( where it presently flows through the state of Massachusetts ) , the area that is now Deerfield , Massachusetts was inhabited by the Algonquian @-@ speaking <unk> nation . In the early 1660s , the Pocumtuc were shattered as a nation due to conflict with the aggressive Mohawk nation . In 1665 villagers from the eastern Massachusetts town of Dedham were given a grant in the area , and acquired land titles of uncertain legality from a variety of Pocumtuc individuals . A village , at first called Pocumtuck , but later Deerfield , was established in the early 1670s . Located in a relatively isolated position on the edge of English settlement , Deerfield was involved in the inevitable frontier conflict between groups of other European settlers and Native Americans . 
 The colonial outpost was a traditional New England subsistence farming community and the majority of Deerfield 's settlers were young families who had moved west in the search of land ; it was not an outpost of rugged , frontier individuals , but English colonial families . Women were not a minority in the frontier community . Rather , women 's labor was essential to the survival of the settlement and its male inhabitants . 
 = = = Previous raids on Deerfield = = = 
 By 1675 the village had grown to number about 200 individuals . In that year , conflict between colonists and Indians in southern New England erupted into what is now known as King Philip 's War . The war involved all of the New England colonies , and resulted in the destruction or severe reduction and pacification of most of its Indian nations as well as inflicting many casualties on the New England colonists . 
 Deerfield was evacuated in September 1675 after a coordinated series of attacks culminating in the Battle of Bloody Brook resulted in the death of about half the village 's adult males . The abandoned village , one of several in the Connecticut River valley abandoned by the English , was briefly reoccupied by the warring Indians . The colonists regrouped , and in 1676 a force of mostly local colonists slaughtered an Indian camp at a site then called <unk> . It is now called Turner 's Falls after William Turner , the English leader who was slain in the action . 
 Ongoing raids by the Mohawk forced many of the remaining Indians to retreat north to French @-@ controlled Canada or to the west . Those going west joined other tribes that had formed a peace of sorts with the authorities of the Province of New York . During King William 's War ( 1688 – 1697 ) , Deerfield was not subjected to major attacks , but the community had 12 residents killed in a series of ambushes and other incidents . Supposedly friendly Indians who were recognized as Pocumtuc were also seen passing through the area , and some of them claimed to have participated in attacks on other frontier communities . 
 Attacks on the frontier communities of what is now southern Maine in the Northeast Coast Campaign ( 1703 ) again put Deerfield residents on the alert . In response to their own losses in the Campaign , the French and natives attacked Deerfield . 
 The town 's palisade , constructed during King William 's War , was rehabilitated and expanded . In August of that year , the local militia commander called out the militia after he received intelligence of " a party of French & Indians from Canada " who were " expected every hour to make some <unk> on ye towns upon Connecticut River . " However , nothing happened until October , when two men were taken from a pasture outside the palisade . Militia were sent to guard the town in response , but these returned to their homes with the advent of winter , which was not thought to be a time for warfare . 
 Minor raids against other communities convinced Governor Joseph Dudley to send 20 men to garrison Deerfield in February . These men , minimally trained militia from other nearby communities , had arrived by the 24th , making for somewhat cramped accommodations within the town 's palisade on the night of February 28 . In addition to these men , the townspeople mustered about 70 men of fighting age ; these forces were all under the command of Captain Jonathan Wells . 
 = = = Organizing the raid = = = 
 The Connecticut River valley had been identified as a potential raiding target by authorities in New France as early as 1702 . The forces for the raid had begun gathering near Montreal as early as May 1703 , as reported with reasonable accuracy in English intelligence reports . However , two incidents intervened that delayed execution of the raid . The first was a rumor that English warships were on the Saint Lawrence River , drawing a significant Indian force to Quebec for its defense . The second was the detachment of some troops , critically including Jean @-@ Baptiste Hertel de Rouville , who was to lead the raid , for operations in Maine ( including a raid against Wells that raised the frontier alarms at Deerfield ) . Hertel de Rouville did not return to Montreal until the fall . 
 The force assembled at Chambly , just south of Montreal , numbered about 250 , and was composed of a diversity of personnel . There were 48 Frenchmen , some of them Canadien militia and others recruits from the troupes de la marine , including four of Hertel de Rouville 's brothers . The French leadership included a number of men with more than 20 years experience in wilderness warfare . The Indian contingent included 200 Abenaki , Iroquois , Wyandot , and Pocumtuc , some of whom sought revenge for incidents that had taken place years earlier . These were joined by another 30 to forty <unk> led by the sachem <unk> as the party moved south toward Deerfield in January and February 1704 , raising the troop size to nearly 300 by the time it reached the Deerfield area in late February . 
 The expedition 's departure was not a very well kept secret . In January 1704 , New York 's Indian agent Pieter Schuyler was warned by the Iroquois of possible action. which he forwarded on to Governor Dudley and Connecticut 's Governor Winthrop ; further warnings came to them in mid @-@ February , although none were specific about the target . 
 = = Raid = = 
 The raiders left most of their equipment and supplies 25 to 30 miles ( 40 to 48 kilometers ) north of the village before establishing a cold camp about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Deerfield on February 28 , 1704 . From this vantage point , they observed the villagers as they prepared for the night . Since the villagers had been alerted to the possibility of a raid , they all took refuge within the palisade , and a guard was posted . 
 The raiders had noticed that snow drifts extended to the top of the palisade ; this greatly simplified their entry into the fortifications just before dawn on February 29 . They carefully approached the village , stopping periodically so that the sentry might confuse the noises they made with more natural sounds . A few men climbed over the palisade via the snow drifts and then opened the north gate to admit the rest . Primary sources vary on the degree of alertness of the village guard that night ; one account claims he fell asleep , while another claims that he discharged his weapon to raise the alarm when the attack began , but that it was not heard by many people . As the Reverend John Williams later recounted , " with horrid shouting and yelling " , the raiders launched their attack " like a flood upon us . " 
 The raiders ' attack probably did not go exactly as they had intended . In attacks on Schenectady , New York and Durham , New Hampshire in the 1690s ( both of which included Hertel de Rouville 's father ) , the raiders had simultaneously attacked all of the houses ; at Deerfield , this did not happen . Historians Haefeli and Sweeney theorize that the failure to launch a coordinated assault was caused by the wide diversity within the attacking force . 
 The raiders swept into the village , and began attacking individual houses . Reverend Williams ' house was among the first to be raided ; Williams ' life was spared when his gunshot misfired , and he was taken prisoner . Two of his children and a servant were slain ; the rest of his family and his other servant were also taken prisoner . Similar scenarios occurred in many of the other houses . The residents of Benoni Stebbins ' house , which was not among the ones attacked early , resisted the raiders ' attacks , which lasted until well after daylight . A second house , near the northwestern corner of the palisade , was also successfully defended . The raiders moved through the village , herding their prisoners to an area just north of the town , rifling houses for items of value , and setting a number of them on fire . 
 As the morning progressed , some of the raiders began moving north with their prisoners , but paused about a mile north of the town to wait for those who had not yet finished in the village . The men in the Stebbins house kept the battle up for two hours ; they were on the verge of surrendering when reinforcements arrived . Early in the raid , young John Sheldon managed to escape over the palisade and began making his way to nearby Hadley to raise the alarm . The fires from the burning houses had been spotted , and " thirty men from Hadley and Hatfield " rushed to Deerfield . Their arrival prompted the remaining raiders to flee ; some of them abandoned their weapons and other supplies in a panic . 
 The sudden departure of the raiders and the arrival of reinforcements raised the spirits of the beleaguered survivors , and about 20 Deerfield men joined the Hadley men in chasing after the fleeing raiders . The English and the raiders skirmished in the meadows just north of the village , where the English reported " killing and wounding many of them " . However , the pursuit was conducted rashly , and the English soon ran into an ambush prepared by the raiders who had left the village earlier . Of the 50 or so men that gave chase , nine were killed and several more were wounded . After the ambush they retreated back to the village , and the raiders headed north with their prisoners . 
 As the alarm spread to the south , reinforcements continued to arrive in the village . By midnight , 80 men from Northampton and Springfield had arrived , and men from Connecticut swelled the force to 250 by the end of the next day . After debating over what action to take , they decided that the difficulties of pursuit were not worth the risks . Leaving a strong garrison in the village , most of the militia returned to their homes . 
 The raiders destroyed 17 of the village 's 41 homes , and looted many of the others . Out of the 291 people in Deerfield on the night of the attack only 126 remained in town the next day . They killed 44 residents of Deerfield : 10 men , 9 women , and 25 children , five garrison soldiers , and seven Hadley men . Of those who died inside the village , 15 died of fire @-@ related causes ; most of the rest were killed by edged or blunt weapons . The raid ’ s casualties were dictated by the raider ’ s goals to intimidate the village and to take valuable captives to French Canada . A large portion of the slain were infant children who were not likely to survive the ensuing trip to Canada . They took 109 villagers captive ; this represented forty per cent of the village population . They also took captive three Frenchmen who had been living among the villagers . The raiders also suffered losses , although reports vary . New France 's Governor @-@ General Philippe de Rigaud Vaudreuil reported the expedition only lost 11 men , and 22 were wounded , including Hertel de Rouville and one of his brothers . John Williams heard from French soldiers during his captivity that more than 40 French and Indian soldiers were lost ; Haefeli and Sweeney believe the lower French figures are more credible , especially when compared to casualties incurred in other raids . A majority of the captives taken were women and children who French and Indian captors viewed as being more likely than adult males to successfully integrate into native communities and a new life in French Canada . 
 = = Captivity and ransom = = 
 For the 109 English captives , the raid was only the beginning of their troubles . The raiders intended to take them to Canada , a 300 @-@ mile ( 480 km ) journey , in the middle of winter . Many of the captives were ill @-@ prepared for this , and the raiders were short on provisions . The raiders consequently engaged in a common practice : they killed those captives when it was clear they were unable to keep up . Williams commented on the savage cruelty of the Indian raiders ; although most killings were " not random or wanton , " none of those killed would have " needed to " be killed had they not been taken in the first place . Most ( though not all ) of the slain were the slow and vulnerable who could not keep up with the party and would likely have died less quickly en route . Only 89 of the captives survived the ordeal . Survival chances correlated with age and gender : infants and young children fared the worst , and older children and teenagers ( all 21 of whom survived the ordeal ) fared the best . Adult men fared better than adult women , especially pregnant women , and those with small children . 
 In the first few days several of the captives escaped . Hertel de Rouville instructed Reverend Williams to inform the others that recaptured escapees would be tortured ; there were no further escapes . ( The threat was not an empty one — it was known to have happened on other raids . ) The French leader 's troubles were not only with his captives . The Indians had some disagreements among themselves concerning the disposition of the captives , which at times threatened to come to blows . A council held on the third day resolved these disagreements sufficiently that the trek could continue . 
 According to John Williams ' account of his captivity , most of the party traveled up the frozen Connecticut River , then up the Wells River and down the Winooski River to Lake Champlain . From there they made their way to Chambly , at which point most of the force dispersed . The captives accompanied their captors to their respective villages . Williams ' wife Eunice , weak after having given birth just six weeks earlier , was one of the first to be killed during the trek ; her body was recovered and reburied in the Deerfield cemetery . 
 Calls went out from the governors of the northern colonies for action against the French colonies . Governor Dudley wrote that " the destruction of <unk> [ sic ] and Port Royal [ would ] put all the <unk> stores into Her Majesty 's hands , and forever make an end of an Indian War " , the frontier between Deerfield and Wells was fortified by upwards of 2 @,@ 000 men , and the bounty for Indian scalps was more than doubled , from £ 40 to £ 100 . Dudley promptly organized a retaliatory raid against Acadia ( present @-@ day Nova Scotia ) . In the summer of 1704 , New Englanders under the leadership of Benjamin Church raided Acadian villages at <unk> ( present @-@ day Castine , Maine ) , Passamaquoddy Bay ( present @-@ day St. Stephen , New Brunswick ) , Grand Pré , <unk> , and Beaubassin ( all in present @-@ day Nova Scotia ) . Church 's instructions included the taking of prisoners to exchange for those taken at Deerfield , and specifically forbade him to attack the fortified capital , Port Royal . 
 Deerfield and other communities collected funds to ransom the captives . French authorities and colonists also worked to extricate the captives from their Indian captors . Within a year 's time , most of the captives were in French hands , a product of frontier commerce in humans that was fairly common at the time on both sides . The French and converted Indians worked to convert their captives to Roman Catholicism , with modest success . While adult captives proved fairly resistant to proselytizing , children were more receptive or likely to accept conversion under duress . 
 Some of the younger captives , however , were not ransomed , as they were adopted into the tribes . Such was the case with Williams ' daughter Eunice , who was eight years old when captured . She became thoroughly assimilated in her Mohawk family , and married a Mohawk man when she was 16 . She did not see her family of origin again until much later and always returned to Kahnawake . Other captives also remained by choice in Canadian and Native communities such as Kahnawake for the rest of their lives . 
 Negotiations for the release and exchange of captives began in late 1704 , and continued until late 1706 . They became entangled in unrelated issues ( like the English capture of French privateer Pierre <unk> dit Baptiste ) , and larger concerns , including the possibility of a wider @-@ ranging treaty of neutrality between the French and English colonies . <unk> in part by Deerfield residents John Sheldon and John Wells , some captives ( including Noel Doiron ) were returned to Boston in August 1706 . Governor Dudley , who needed the successful return of the captives for political reason , then released the French captives , including Baptiste ; the remaining captives who chose to return were back in Boston by November 1706 . 
 Many of the younger captives were adopted into the Indian tribes or French Canadian society . Thirty six Deerfield captives , mostly children and teenagers at the time of the raid , remained permanently . Those who stayed were not compelled by force , but rather by newly formed religious ties and family bonds . Captive experience was largely dictated by gender as well as age . Young women most easily and readily assimilated into Indian and French Canadian societies . Nine girls remained as opposed to only five boys . These choices reflect the larger frontier pattern of incorporation of young women into Indian and Canadian society . These young women remained , not because of compulsion , fascination with the outdoor adventure , or the strangeness of life in a foreign society , but because they transitioned into established lives in new communities and formed bonds of family , religion , and language . In fact , more than half of young female captives who remained settled in Montreal where " the lives of these former Deerfield residents differed very little in their broad outlines from their former neighbors . " Whether in New France or in Deerfield these women generally were part of frontier agricultural communities where they tended to marry in their early twenties and have six or seven children . Other female captives remained in Native communities such as Kahnawake . These women remained because of bonds of religion and family . While European males castigated the " slavery " of Indian women , captive women from this time commonly chose to remain in Native society rather than return to colonial English settlements . 
 John Williams wrote a captivity narrative , The Redeemed Captive Returning to Zion , about his experience , which was published in 1707 . Williams ' narrative was published during ongoing ransom negotiations and pressed for greater activity to return the Deerfield captives . Written with assistance from prominent Boston Puritan minister Reverend Cotton Mather , the book framed the raid , captivity , and border relations with the French and Indians in terms of providential history and God ’ s purpose for Puritans . The work was widely distributed in the 18th and 19th centuries , and continues to be published today ( see Further Reading below ) . Williams ' work was one of the reasons this raid , unlike similar others of the time , was remembered and became an element in the American frontier story . Williams ' work transformed the captivity narrative into a celebration of individual heroism and the triumph of Protestant values against savage and " Popish " enemies . 
 = = Legacy and historical memory = = 
 Deerfield holds a " special place in American history . " As Mary Rowlandson 's popular captivity narrative The Sovereignty and Goodness of God did a generation earlier , the sensational tale stressed reliance on God 's mercy and " kept alive the spirit of the Puritan mission " in eighteenth century New England . Williams ' account heightened tensions between English settlers and Native Americans and their French allies and led to more war preparedness among settler communities . 
 The events at Deerfield were not commonly described as a massacre until the 19th century . Reverend John Taylor 's 1804 centennial memorial sermon first termed the events at Deerfield a " massacre . " Previous eighteenth @-@ century accounts emphasized the physical destruction and described the raid as " the assault on , " " the destruction of , " or " mischief at " Deerfield . Viewing the raid as a " massacre , " 19th century New Englanders began to remember the attack as part of the larger narrative and celebration of American frontier spirit . Persisting into the twentieth century , American historical memory has tended to view Deerfield in line with Frederick Turner 's Frontier Thesis as a singular Indian attack against a community of individualistic frontiersmen . Re @-@ popularized and exposed to a national audience in the mid @-@ twentieth century with the establishment of Historic Deerfield , the raid was contextualized in a celebration of exceptional American individual ambition . This view has served as a partial justification for the removal of Native Americans and has obscured both the larger patterns of border conflict and tensions and the family based structure of Deerfield and similar marginal settlements . Although popularly remembered as a tale of the triumph of rugged Protestant male individualism , the raid is better understood not along the lines of Turner 's thesis , but as an account of the strong factors of community life and cross @-@ cultural interaction in border communities . 
 An 1875 legend recounts the attack as an attempt by the French to regain a bell , supposedly destined for Quebec , but pirated and sold to Deerfield . The legend continues that this was a " historical fact known to almost all school children . " However , the story , which is a common Kahnawake tale , was refuted as early as 1882 and does not appear to have significantly affected American perception of the raid . 
 Canadians and native Americans who are less influenced by Williams ' narrative and Turner 's thesis , have given the raid a more ambivalent place in memory . Canadians view the raid not as a massacre and mass abduction but as a successful local application of guerilla techniques in the broader context of international war and stress the successful integration of hundreds of captives taken in similar conflicts during Queen Anne 's War . Similarly , most Native American records justify the action in a larger military and cultural context and remain largely unconcerned with the particular event . 
 A portion of the original village of Deerfield has been preserved as a living history museum , Historic Deerfield ; among its relics is a door bearing tomahawk marks from the 1704 raid . The raid is commemorated there on the weekend closest to February 29 . Moving towards a more inclusive Historic Deerfield 's yearly reenactment and educational programs treat " massacre " as a " dirty word " and stress Deerfield as a place to study cultural interaction and difference at society 's borders . 
 In addition , The Ransom of Mercy Carter by Caroline B. Cooney , a historical fiction novel , commemorates this event through the eyes of a young Deerfield girl . 
 = United States v. White Mountain Apache Tribe = 
 United States v. White Mountain Apache Tribe , 537 U.S. 465 ( 2003 ) , was a case in which the Supreme Court of the United States held in a 5 – 4 decision that when the federal government used land or property held in trust for an Indian tribe , it had the duty to maintain that land or property and was liable for any damages for a breach of that duty . In the 1870s , the White Mountain Apache Tribe was placed on a reservation in Arizona . The case involved Fort Apache , a collection of buildings on the reservation which were transferred to the tribe by the United States Congress in 1960 . 
 Although the tribe owned the Fort Apache buildings , they were held in trust and used exclusively by the federal government for an Indian school . This was a continuation of the building 's use from when the federal government retained title . As more schools were built at other Indian reservations , attendance dropped at the Fort Apache school . The tribe began to plan for use of the buildings and sought designation as a historic site . When the federal government wanted to turn the property over to the tribe for use , the tribe found that the property had deteriorated and sued for damages to the property . The trial court denied the tribe 's claim , but the Circuit Court of Appeals reversed , holding that the federal government had a duty to take care of the property . The government then appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court , arguing that the tribe could not make a claim without Congressional authorization . The tribe argued that the 1960 act created the trust and authorized damages . 
 The Supreme Court affirmed the appellate court , holding that the federal government used the property it held in trust , and that it therefore had a duty to maintain the property . Justice Ginsburg issued a concurring opinion , while Justice Thomas dissented . The loss led the government to settle with the tribe for $ 12 million . The buildings are managed by the Fort Apache Heritage Foundation and the case , along with several others define the Indian Trust Doctrine . The case has been widely discussed in legal literature and books , primarily in the area of Indian trusts . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 In 1869 Major John Green led a force to the White River area and recommended that an outpost be established there . In 1870 Fort Apache was established by the United States Army in Arizona and remained an active military installation until 1922 , when it was transferred to the Department of the Interior ( DOI ) . A series of Executive Orders by President Ulysses S. Grant from 1871 to 1877 established the Fort Apache Indian Reservation , with the actual fort being held by the government as fee simple land . From 1897 to 1922 the fort was in the middle of the reservation . Under the terms of the transfer , 400 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 km2 ) were set aside for the Theodore Roosevelt Indian School . 
 The school initially housed 250 Navajo and Hopi children , and additional buildings were constructed to accommodate them . Between 1933 and 1939 , the Bureau of Indian Affairs ( BIA ) used the site for its regional trachoma school , using both laboratory animals and Indian children for experiments to treat the eye disease . During World War II , the school taught students from a good number of southwestern tribes . During the 1950s , as the tribe was fighting against termination , the emphasis of the school was on vocational and technical training . Beginning in 1960 , the BIA contracted for schools to be built near other tribes , and attendance at the school started to drop . 
 In 1960 , Congress provided that Fort Apache was to be held in trust for the White Mountain Apache Tribe , but allowed the DOI to use the property for " administrative or school purposes . " By the 1970s , most of the other tribes had obtained their own schools , and the school normally had fewer than 100 students . With the reduction in the number of students , the BIA budget for Fort Apache also dropped , causing deferred maintenance and the demolition of several buildings . 
 The tribe resolved to place the site on the National Historic Registry . In 1976 , the National Park Service designated the site as a National Historic Site . By 1993 , the tribe had adopted a master plan to try to preserve the buildings and commissioned a study to determine what the cost would be to restore the property . The U.S. government acknowledged that some of the thirty @-@ five buildings were in poor shape , but maintained that the rest were properly maintained . In 1998 , the site was designated by the World Monuments Fund as one of the 100 most endangered sites . 
 = = = Federal Claims Court = = = 
 In 1999 , the tribe filed suit in the United States Court of Federal Claims , seeking $ 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in damages for breach of trust by DOI . The tribe argued that the United States had exclusive control over the buildings and allowed them to fall into disrepair , a violation of the trust relationship established by the 1960 statute . Additionally , the tribe claimed that the Snyder Act and the National Historic Preservation Act applied in this case . The Snyder Act deals with appropriations to the BIA , and the National Historic Preservation Act discussed federal assistance for preservation programs . The United States moved for dismissal on the basis of lack of subject matter jurisdiction and failure to state a claim . In addition , the United States claimed that the statute of limitations had run under both the Tucker Act and the Indian Tucker Act , the acts governing claims in the Federal Court of Claims . The trial court dismissed the suit on the failure to state a claim . 
 = = = Federal Circuit Court of Appeals = = = 
 The tribe then appealed the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit . The appellate court found that various federal laws required the DOI and BIA to maintain historic buildings and to maintain Indian trust properties , but that they did not authorize monetary damages . The court then looked to the 1960 act and determined that this act did create a trust relationship that could be enforced with monetary damages . This was based on common law , with the court referencing the Restatement ( Second ) of Trusts to outline that a trust requires a trustee ( the United States ) , a beneficiary ( the tribe ) , and a trust body ( the land and buildings ) . The court noted that both parties agreed that there was a trust , but not that damages were authorized . The court held that where the United States had control over the use and maintenance of the buildings to the exclusion of the tribe , a fiduciary duty was created that authorized the tribe to seek monetary damages . The court then reversed and remanded the decision of the trial court . The United States appealed , and the Supreme Court granted certiorari . 
 = = Supreme Court = = 
 = = = Arguments = = = 
 Gregory G. Garre , Assistant Solicitor General argued the case for the United States . As the petitioner , Garre argued that the 1960 act did not authorize monetary damages for a breach of trust duties . Their position was that while a trust was formed , the tribe could not make a claim for damages without explicit congressional authorization . Further , he argued , the exclusive control does not create liability ; only the explicit language of statutes and regulations could allow monetary damages . The position of the United States was that " in trust " meant was that the land was not subject to alienation or to state taxation . 
 Robert C. <unk> , an attorney from Arizona , argued the case for the White Mountain Apache Tribe . As respondent , <unk> argued that the 1960 act , by using the term " trust " , did create liability for monetary damages . Since a trust was formed by law , the Indian Tucker Act allowed a lawsuit for damages to go forward . The tribe noted that the trust relationship was " one of the primary cornerstones of Indian law " . The National Congress of American Indians filed an amicus curiae brief supporting the tribe . 
 = = = Opinion of the Court = = = 
 Justice David Souter delivered the opinion of the court . Souter noted that any suit against the United States required a clear waiver of sovereign immunity and held that a waiver was granted by the Indian Tucker Act if there were statutory grounds in another federal statute or regulation . Souter then noted the difference between a " limited " or bare trust obligation , as was outlined in United States v. Mitchell I ( Mitchell I ) , and those which could impose fiduciary duties and carry monetary damages , as outlined in United States v. Mitchell II ( Mitchell II ) . In Mitchell I , the United States held the land in trust to prevent alienation and to exempt the land from state taxation , but the tribe occupied and controlled the property . In such cases , the government did not have a fiduciary duty . In Mitchell II , the United States also held the land in trust , but actively controlled the property through comprehensive timber management regulations . Here , the government did have a fiduciary duty to the tribe . 
 Souter stated that the 1960 act set up a trust in the same manner as Mitchell I and then went beyond that to allow the United States to use the land and buildings for a school and administrative purposes . This control was at least as great as that exercised over the timber in Mitchell II . Since the government had exclusive use and control of the property , it could " not allow it to fall into ruin on his watch . " 
 The three defenses presented by the United States were deemed without merit . First , the concept that the 1960 act " carved out " the buildings used by the government goes against the plain language of the statute . Second , the fact that the statute does not explicitly state that the government is subject to monetary damages is also without merit . Souter noted that , were the court to accept that reasoning , it would require that the court to overturn Mitchell II , which it was not prepared to do . Instead , the court will continue to use a " fair inference " from the law to determine if damages are authorized . Finally , the United States argued that the only appropriate relief would be injunctive relief instead of damages . Souter stated that this was clearly wrong and merely postponed the cost to the government to repair the buildings . 
 The court affirmed the decision of the Circuit Court and remanded it to the Court of Federal Claims for actions consistent with the ruling . Souter was joined in the majority opinion by Justices Stevens , O 'Connor , Ginsburg , and Breyer . 
 = = = Concurrence = = = 
 Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg concurred in the opinion of the majority . Ginsburg expanded on the differences between the lack of liability under Mitchell I and the imposition of damages to compensate " for the harm caused by maladministration of the property . " She stated that the opinion of the court was consent with other cases , such as Mitchell II and United States v. Navajo Nation , where the government has exercised control in a " manner irreconcilable with its caretaker obligations " . Ginsburg stated that the government had clearly failed its caretaker duties . Ginsburg was joined by Justice Breyer in the concurrence . 
 = = = Dissent = = = 
 Justice Clarence Thomas dissented , joined by Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia and Kennedy . Thomas stated that the test has always been if the statute in question could be " fairly interpreted " to allow monetary damages . He stated that the majority had devised a new test : whether liability could be allowed on a " fair inference " of congressional authorization . Thomas believed that Mitchell I was the proper case to compare with this one , as none of the detailed control and responsibilities present in Mitchell II were present in this case . He further said that without a clear and unambiguous intent by Congress to make the United States liable , there could be no finding of monetary damages . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 The loss in court prompted the federal government to settle with the tribe for approximately $ 12 million in 2005 . In 2007 , the government transferred 27 buildings to the tribe along with the $ 12 million , plus interest . They are managed by the Fort Apache Heritage Foundation , a nonprofit corporation chartered by the tribe . The case , together with Mitchell I , Mitchell II , and the Navajo Nation , define the state of the Indian Trust Doctrine . The United States has subsequently taken various actions to reduce the government 's exposure to trust claims by tribes . 
 = = = Law reviews and books = = = 
 The case has been cited in numerous law reviews . Some of these were critical of the majority approach , stating that it went beyond the plain meaning of the text to open up the federal government to liability where none existed . Other reviews merely analyzed the decision and how it affected government @-@ tribe trust cases . Alex <unk> <unk> opined that the case was almost unique , and he did not foresee that it would be significant for other tribes . 
 As with law reviews , the case has been cited in numerous books , especially those dealing with federal litigation or Indian law . It has been cited extensively in regards to the trust relationship between BIA and the tribes , and has been used as an example of the fiduciary duty held by the government . 
 = Majestic @-@ class battleship = 
 The Majestic class of nine pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1890s under the Spencer Programme , named after the First Lord of the Admiralty , John Poyntz Spencer . With nine units commissioned , they were the largest class of battleships in history in terms of the number of member ships . The nine ships , HMS Majestic , Caesar , Hannibal , Illustrious , Jupiter , Magnificent , Mars , Prince George , and Victorious , were built between 1894 and 1898 as part of a programme to strengthen the Royal Navy versus its two traditional rivals , France and Russia . This continued the naval re @-@ armament initiatives begun by the Naval Defence Act 1889 . 
 The Majestics introduced a number of significant improvements to British battleship design , including armoured gun shields for the barbette @-@ mounted main battery guns . The ships were armed with a main battery of four BL 12 @-@ inch Mark VIII guns , the first large @-@ calibre weapon in the Royal Navy to use smokeless propellant , which made it superior in almost all respects to earlier , larger guns . They were also the first British ships to incorporate Harvey armour , which allowed them to carry a much more comprehensive level of protection . The ships proved to be among the most successful designs of their day , and they were widely copied in foreign navies , including the Japanese Shikishima class and the battleship Mikasa , which were both modified versions of the Majestic design . 
 The nine ships served in a variety of roles throughout their careers . They primarily served in the Channel Fleet , though several took rotations in the Mediterranean Fleet , and Victorious served on the China Station in 1900 – 02 . No longer frontline ships by the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , the vessels were used to protect the crossing of the British Expeditionary Force and various points on the British coast . In 1915 , several of the ships were disarmed , their guns going to equip the Lord Clive @-@ class monitors . The disarmed battleships were used as troop ships during the Dardanelles Campaign , and Prince George and Majestic were used to bombard enemy positions before Majestic was torpedoed by a German U @-@ boat . The surviving ships were employed in secondary roles from 1915 onwards , and after the war , all were sold for scrapping in 1920 – 22 . Only one , Prince George , avoided the breakers ' yards by wrecking off Camperduin . 
 = = Design = = 
 In 1891 , Rear Admiral Jackie Fisher , then the Controller of the Royal Navy , issued a request for a new battleship design based on the Royal Sovereign class , but that incorporated a recently designed 12 in ( 305 mm ) gun and Harvey armour , which was significantly stronger than compound armour . The Director of Naval Construction , William Henry White , prepared a preliminary design for a 12 @,@ 500 @-@ tonne ( 12 @,@ 300 @-@ long @-@ ton ) ship armed with four of the 12 in guns and protected with an armour belt that was 9 inches ( 229 mm ) thick . White submitted the design on 27 January 1892 to the Board . Due to the greater resilience that Harvey armour provided , less of it could be used for the same level of protection , allowing for significant weight reduction . As a result , the protection scheme was made stronger and more comprehensive than in the Royal Sovereigns , while minimising increased displacement . This included the fitting of fully enclosed armoured gun shields for the main battery guns . 
 The Board approved the design and intended to lay down three ships under the 1892 programme , but work on the 12 in gun was taking longer than predicted , and so construction was delayed to the 1893 programme . By that time , the third ship of what was to be the Majestic class was redesigned as a second @-@ class battleship , Renown , leaving only two ships to be laid down under the 1893 estimates . By August 1893 , however , the public perceived the strength of the Royal Navy to have fallen relative to its traditional rivals , the French and Russian navies . John Spencer , the First Lord of the Admiralty , proposed a large naval expansion plan referred to as the Spencer Programme that included seven more Majestic @-@ class battleships to soothe public opinion . 
 The Majestics were to be a benchmark for all successor pre @-@ dreadnoughts . While the preceding Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships had revolutionised and stabilised British battleship design by introducing the high @-@ freeboard battleship with four main @-@ battery guns in twin mountings in barbettes fore and aft , it was the Majestics that settled on the 12 in main battery and began the practice of mounting armoured gunhouses over the barbettes ; these gunhouses , although very different from the old @-@ style , heavy , circular gun turrets that preceded them , would themselves become known as " turrets " and became the standard on warships worldwide . The Majestic class , the largest class of battleships ever built , were some of the most successful battleships of their time , and they were widely copied . Indeed , the Japanese Shikishima class and the battleship Mikasa were based directly on the Majestics . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The Majestics were 390 feet ( 120 m ) long between perpendiculars and 421 feet ( 128 m ) long overall . They had a beam of 75 ft ( 23 m ) and a draught of 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . They displaced up to 16 @,@ 060 t ( 15 @,@ 810 long tons ; 17 @,@ 700 short tons ) at full combat load . The ships had a freeboard of 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) forward , 17 ft 3 in ( 5 @.@ 26 m ) amidships , and 18 ft 6 in ( 5 @.@ 64 m ) aft . Their hulls were divided into numerous watertight compartments , with 72 compartments inside the armoured citadel and 78 outside it . A double bottom extended for much of the length of the hull . They were fitted with two pole masts , each with two fighting tops . Except for Caesar , Hannibal , and Illustrious , they had a new design in which the bridge was mounted around the base of the foremast behind the conning tower to prevent a battle @-@ damaged bridge from collapsing around the tower . 
 The Majestics were considered good seaboats , in large part due to their high freeboard , with an easy roll and good steamers , although they suffered from high fuel consumption . They were nevertheless very manoeuvrable . They had a transverse metacentric height of 3 @.@ 7 ft ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) at full load . The ships had a crew of 672 – 794 officers and enlisted men , and this number varied between ships and over the course of their careers . Each ship carried a variety of smaller boats , usually including three steam pinnaces , one 42 @-@ foot ( 13 m ) steam launch , two 34 ft ( 10 m ) cutters , two 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) whalers , three gigs of between 24 to 32 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 to 9 @.@ 8 m ) , one 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) skiff dinghy , and one 13 ft 6 in ( 4 @.@ 11 m ) raft . The ships were equipped with six 24 @-@ inch ( 610 mm ) searchlights , with four on the bridge and one on each mast . All nine ships received Type I wireless transmitters in 1909 – 10 . 
 During the sea trials for the preceding battleship Royal Sovereign , the ship 's engineers learned that the engines might fail at high levels of forced draught ; as a result , the Majestics were designed to reach the same maximum speed with a more powerful engine . This allowed the engineers a wider margin of safety at maximum speed . Their propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines , each driving a single four @-@ bladed screw . Steam was provided by eight coal @-@ fired , single @-@ ended Scotch marine boilers , which were trunked into a pair of funnels placed side by side . Their engines were rated at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) at normal draught , and they provided a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . At forced draught , they could reach 12 @,@ 000 ihp ( 8 @,@ 900 kW ) and 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . By 1908 , the ships had been re @-@ boilered with mixed <unk> and oil @-@ fired models . The ships carried 1 @,@ 100 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 100 long tons ; 1 @,@ 200 short tons ) of coal normally , and additional spaces allowed for up to 1 @,@ 900 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 900 long tons ; 2 @,@ 100 short tons ) to be stored . With the installation of the new boilers , oil storage amounting to 400 to 500 tonnes ( 390 to 490 long tons ; 440 to 550 short tons ) was added . At a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) , the ships could steam for 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) . At 14 @.@ 6 knots ( 27 @.@ 0 km / h ; 16 @.@ 8 mph ) , their cruising radius fell to 4 @,@ 420 nmi ( 8 @,@ 190 km ; 5 @,@ 090 mi ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Majestic and her sisters were armed with four BL 12 @-@ inch Mk VIII 35 @-@ calibre guns in twin turrets , one forward and one aft . This calibre would become the standard for all future British battleship classes . They were the first new British battleships to mount a 12 @-@ inch main battery since the 1880s . The new gun was a significant improvement on the 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) gun which had been fitted on the Admiral and Royal Sovereign classes that preceded the Majestics , in terms of ballistics and strength of the gun itself , and it was significantly lighter . The 12 in gun had a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 500 feet per second ( 760 m / s ) — a significant increase over the 13 @.@ 5 in gun owing to the use of smokeless propellant — and it could fire a 850 @-@ pound ( 390 kg ) shell with a range of 13 @,@ 900 yards ( 12 @,@ 700 m ) . 
 The turrets were placed on pear @-@ shaped barbettes ; the first six ships had this arrangement , but the last two , Caesar and Illustrious , had circular barbettes . The BII mountings in the first six ships allowed all @-@ around loading from the supply of ready ammunition kept in the turret , but the guns had to return to the centerline to bring ammunition up from the magazines , as the ammunition hoists did not rotate with the turret . Caesar and Illustrious , with their circular barbettes , had <unk> mountings with rotating hoists , and these allowed all @-@ around loading from the magazines . Both the BII and <unk> mounts had a range of elevation from − 5 degrees to 13 @.@ 5 degrees , with the loading angle at maximum elevation . During World War I , four of the Majestics were disarmed , and these guns were used to arm eight Lord Clive @-@ class monitors . A further two turrets from Illustrious were later emplaced as coastal guns on the Tyne . 
 The saving in weight from the main battery allowed the Majestic class to carry a secondary battery of twelve QF ( quick @-@ firing ) 6 @-@ inch 40 @-@ calibre guns , a larger secondary armament than in previous classes . These were mounted in casemates in two gun decks amidships , and they fired a 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 205 ft / s ( 672 m / s ) . Elevated at 15 degrees , they could hit targets out to 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) . The ships also carried sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder Mk I guns and twelve QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk I guns . These were placed in a variety of mounts , including in casemates , on the main battery turret roofs , and in the fighting tops . The ships were also equipped with five 18 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged in the ship 's hull , with the last in a deck @-@ mounted launcher in the stern . The Woolwich Arsenal manufactured the torpedoes , which were the Mark IV model ; these carried a 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) warhead and had a range of 750 yards ( 690 m ) at a speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The armoured belt on the Majestic class consisted of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of Harvey steel , which allowed equal protection with less cost in weight compared to previous types of armour . This allowed the ships to have a deeper and lighter belt than previous battleships without any loss in protection . The belt armour extended for 220 feet ( 67 m ) along the hull ; it covered 5 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) above the waterline and 9 ft 6 in ( 2 @.@ 90 m ) below . The belt was connected , via the barbettes , by a 14 in ( 356 mm ) thick transverse bulkhead forward and a 12 in thick bulkhead aft . The ship 's armoured deck was 3 in ( 76 mm ) thick on the central portion , with 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick sloped sides that connected to the bottom edge of the belt armour . This arrangement required any shell that penetrated the belt to also pass through the deck before it could reach the ship 's vitals . The deck was reduced to 2 @.@ 5 in ( 64 mm ) toward the bow and stern . 
 The barbettes for the main battery were protected with 14 in of armour on their exposed sides above the armoured deck , while the portion that was masked below the deck was reduced to 7 in ( 178 mm ) . The gunhouses for the main battery had 10 in ( 254 mm ) thick faces , 5 @.@ 5 in ( 140 mm ) thick sides , 4 in ( 100 mm ) rears , and 2 in thick roofs . The secondary guns ' casemates were 6 in thick , with 2 in thick sides and rears to protect the gun crews from splinters . A mantlet that was 6 in thick covered the stern torpedo tube . The forward conning tower had 14 in of steel on the sides , except for the rear @-@ facing side , which was reduced to 12 in . The aft conning tower had much thinner armour protection , with 3 in on all sides . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 Majestic , Magnificent , Jupiter , Mars , Prince George , and Hannibal served in the Channel Fleet from their commissioning , with Magnificent as the flagship from 1895 . They were present at the Diamond Jubilee for Queen Victoria in June 1897 and took part in the Coronation Review for King Edward VII in August 1902 , along with Hannibal . Caesar and Illustrious instead went to the Mediterranean Fleet , remaining there until 1903 and 1904 , respectively , when they returned to Britain to join their sisters in the Channel Fleet . Victorious served briefly in the Mediterranean Fleet in 1897 before being transferred to the China Station in 1898 , remaining there until 1900 . The ship then returned for another stint in the Mediterranean Fleet from 1900 to 1903 , and in 1904 she joined her sisters in the Channel Fleet . In 1906 , Majestic was paid off ; the following year she and Magnificent were recommissioned into the Nore Division . At the same time , Caesar , Victorious , and Mars went to the Devonport Division , while Hannibal , Prince George , Jupiter , and Illustrious went to the Portsmouth Division . 
 In March 1912 , Caesar was reduced to reserve in the 4th Squadron , Home Fleet . Later that year , Majestic , Prince George , and Illustrious were assigned to the 7th Battle Squadron ( BS ) . Following Britain 's entry into World War I in August 1914 , Caesar and Jupiter were assigned to the 7th BS , which was in turn assigned to the Channel Fleet and tasked with protecting the British Expeditionary Force as it crossed the English Channel to France . At the same time , Hannibal , Mars , Magnificent , and Victorious were assigned to the 9th Battle Squadron and stationed in the Humber to protect the British coast . Illustrious was instead used as a guard ship for the Grand Fleet , and was initially based at Loch Ewe . 
 In early 1915 , Majestic and Prince George took part in the Dardanelles Campaign against the Ottoman Empire ; they bombarded Ottoman positions around the Dardanelles until May , when Majestic was torpedoed and sunk by the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 21 off Cape Helles . At around the same time , Prince George was hit by a shell from an Ottoman coastal battery , requiring repairs at Malta . Hannibal , Magnificent , Victorious , and Mars were laid up in early 1915 and had their 12 in guns removed to arm the Lord Clive @-@ class monitors . Illustrious was similarly disarmed , with two of her guns going to the Tyne Turrets . Hannibal , Magnificent , and Mars were then used as troop ships during the operations off the Dardanelles . In late 1915 after the conclusion of the Dardanelles Campaign , Hannibal was stationed in Egypt as a depot ship , while Magnificent and Mars returned to Britain to be used as an ammunition ship and a depot ship , respectively . 
 Victorious was converted into a repair ship in 1915 – 16 and based in Scapa Flow , the main base of the Grand Fleet . Jupiter was transferred to the Suez Canal Patrol in mid @-@ 1915 , before returning to Devonport in late 1916 to be paid off . By 1916 , Illustrious had been converted into a storeship and based in Chatham ; she was joined there by Prince George , by then converted into a barracks ship . From December 1914 to September 1918 , Caesar was employed as a guard ship , first at Gibraltar and then in the North America and West Indies Station . She served in the Adriatic Squadron in September 1918 , and then in the Aegean Squadron in October . After the war , she supported the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War in the Black Sea as a depot ship ; she was the last British pre @-@ dreadnought to serve overseas in any capacity . 
 Hannibal and Jupiter were sold in January 1920 and thereafter broken up in Italy and Britain , respectively . Illustrious followed her sisters to the breakers in June 1920 , being scrapped at Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness . Caesar was paid off in April 1920 and eventually sold for scrapping in Germany in July 1922 . Magnificent and Mars were sold for scrap in May 1921 and broken up at Inverkeithing and Briton Ferry , respectively . Prince George was sold for scrapping in Germany in September , but while en route she ran aground off Camperduin . Victorious was renamed Indus II in 1920 and eventually sold for scrap in December 1922 . 
 = Product Recall = 
 " Product Recall " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office . The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , the company deals with the consequences of an offending watermark that appeared on several reams of paper . Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) holds a poorly attended press conference , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) and Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) head to a high school that printed their prom invitations on the paper to apologize , and Creed frames an employee at the paper mill to keep his job . 
 The episode was written by Justin Spitzer and Brent Forrester , and was directed by Randall Einhorn , the series director of photography . The cast found the scene in which Jim impersonates Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) to be hilarious and had trouble keeping straight faces , forcing multiple takes . The episode first aired in the United States on April 26 , 2007 on NBC , during sweeps week . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by an estimated 7 @.@ 56 million viewers , earning a ratings share of 3 @.@ 9 / 11 among adults . It garnered generally positive critical reception , particularly regarding Jim and Dwight 's impressions of each other . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In the cold open , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) shows up at work imitating Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) by wearing large glasses , a short sleeved shirt and hair split on his forehead . Jim asks Dwight mocking questions and brings up topics Dwight frequently mentions , such as " bears " . 
 The Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin is thrown into damage control mode when reams of paper with an obscene watermark depicting " the image of a beloved cartoon duck performing unspeakable acts upon a certain cartoon mouse that a lot of people like " are shipped to customers . Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) trains the accountants to handle customer support calls , while Jim and Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) are sent to calm a school principal ( Jim Jansen ) that used the affected paper to print prom invitations . At the school , Andy is horrified to discover that his girlfriend is actually a high school student . Creed Bratton ( played by the actor of the same name ) , who failed to catch the error , saves his quality assurance job by framing an employee who works at the paper mill . 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) stages an apology press conference , attended by just one local news reporter , where he presents Barbara Allen ( Lisa Darr ) , an angry customer , with a novelty check for free paper . She instead demands Michael 's resignation , but he refuses . When Allen threatens to call the Better Business Bureau he snaps back that he will call the " Ungrateful <unk> Hotline " . Now facing further damage control , Michael instead makes an " apology video " in which he reiterates that the incident was not his fault and that he has become an " escape goat " . 
 In the final credits sequence , Dwight shows up to the office imitating Jim , but it backfires when his Jim @-@ styled appearance and wardrobe are met with compliments from his co @-@ workers . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Product Recall " was penned by staff writer Justin Spitzer and consulting producer Brent Forrester . It was the second Office episode to be directed by Randall Einhorn , a former director of Survivor who also worked as the series ' director of photography . In early 2007 , series co @-@ creator Greg Daniels explained to an audience at Paleyfest that Einhorn 's direction had become " a character in the show because [ he ] has an enormous amount of judgment / leeway about where he 's looking . And often [ what ] adds a tremendous amount of comedy is the choosing to look over there and see what that person thinks and back and forth . He 's definitely a hidden character on the show . " 
 In an April 2007 blog post for TV Guide , actress Kate Flannery , who plays Meredith Palmer , called Jim 's impression of Dwight " one of the funniest scenes that I have ever witnessed . " She recalled that Krasinski and Wilson enjoyed filming the scene , and that the whole cast was laughing during it , necessitating many takes . The scene was first intended for the season 's twenty @-@ second episode , " Women 's Appreciation " , before it was moved to " Product Recall " due to time constraints . 
 The third season DVD contains several scenes that were deleted from the final cut of the episode . These include Kelly annoyingly answering calls with the same response , Dwight contacting CNN , Kelly training the accountants , Creed admitting that he faked his own death for tax reasons , Michael explaining his apology to angry business owner Barbara Allen , Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) and Kelly arguing , Jim talking to a high school student , and more scenes of Michael filming his apology video . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When imitating Dwight , Jim says " Bears , beets , Battlestar Galactica , " the last term being a reference to the re @-@ imagined science fiction television series . Later , while driving Andy begins a rendition of " Drift Away " , and Jim sings " The Lion Sleeps Tonight " to cheer him up . Kelly and Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) have a conversation pretending to be Bridget Jones and the Crocodile Hunter , respectively . Michael worries that Newsweek and CNN will pick up the cartoon scandal story from The Scranton Times . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Product Recall " first aired in the United States on April 26 , 2007 during the month 's sweeps week . According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by an estimated 7 @.@ 56 million viewers . It earned a ratings share of 3 @.@ 9 / 11 among adults , meaning that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . For its timeslot , the episode finished in second place among adults behind Survivor : Fiji and in first place among men aged 18 – 34 . Among adults , The Office finished in nineteenth place for the week . 
 IGN 's Brian Zoromski rated " Product Recall " with 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 , an indication of a " good " episode . He thought it held " a hit @-@ and @-@ miss mix of laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments and scenes that didn 't work quite as well , " but praised the obscene cartoon premise for being " hilarious " . Zoromski also criticized the episode for being unrealistic , as Michael dealt with the problem rather than Corporate . He selected Creed and Jim for particular praise , especially liking Jim 's Dwight impression . 
 Like Zoromski , Abby West of Entertainment Weekly critiqued the episode for not involving Corporate , complaining " How could such a public @-@ relations nightmare not lead to a visit or a phone call from Jan ? " West did however praise Jim and Dwight 's impressions of each other as " perfect " <unk> . Writing for AOL TV , Jay Black called " Product Recall " " wonderful " and highlighted the Jim @-@ Dwight impersonations and Andy 's discomfort upon discovering his girlfriend was a high school student . Black did however criticize Michael 's press conference as " over @-@ the @-@ top in an annoying way " and Creed 's actions as " way over the line " and " despicable " . Television Without Pity graded the episode with an A – . 
 = Russell family ( Passions ) = 
 The Russell Family is a fictional family that appeared on the American television soap opera Passions , which aired on NBC ( 1999 – 2007 ) and later on DirecTV ( 2007 – 08 ) . It followed the romantic and supernatural adventures that occurred in the fictional , New England , coastal town of Harmony . The family was created by the soap 's creator James E. Reilly ; it originally consisted of four characters — the married couple Eve Russell and T. C. Russell , and their children , Whitney and Simone Russell . The Russells are one of the four core families in Harmony ; they are characterized by their friendship with the Bennetts and Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds , and their feud with the Cranes . As the series progressed , four more characters were added to the family : Eve 's vengeful , adoptive sister Liz Sanbourne ; Eve 's child with Julian Crane , Vincent Clarkson ; Whitney 's husband and Liz 's son , Chad Harris @-@ Crane ; and Eve 's aunt Irma Johnson . A majority of the characters left during the show 's transition from NBC to DirecTV , leaving Eve and Vincent as the only representatives of the Russell family in the series finale . 
 The characters initially received negative feedback for their representation of a middle @-@ class , African @-@ American family . They also received mixed feedback from the cast members , with some praising the roles as expanding the images of African @-@ American characters on television while others felt they were not used to their full potential . Despite the criticism , the cast was frequently nominated for NAACP Image Awards and prominently featured in a series of public service announcement for Black History Month in 2003 . The Russell family also garnered media and critical attention for its storylines involving various LGBT topics : Chad Harris @-@ Crane 's affair with Vincent and subsequent confusion about his sexual orientation , Simone 's coming out as lesbian to her family , and the revelation that Vincent was intersex . While the show 's treatment of sexual and gender identity has received mixed feedback among critics , Passions won the award for Outstanding Daily Drama at the 17th GLAAD Media Awards for its portrayal of Simone 's sexuality . 
 = = Creation and development = = 
 Along with the Bennetts , the Cranes , and the Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds , the Russells are one of the four core families created by the soap 's creator James E. Reilly and were prominently featured on the soap opera since its premiere on July 5 , 1999 . Sheraton Kalouria , senior vice president of NBC 's daytime programming , said the decision to create and cast two minority families — the African @-@ American Russells and the Hispanic Lopez @-@ Fitzgeralds — was a conscious effort to simulate the diversity of the United States . Kalouria said the cast reflected the show 's " truly color @-@ blind storytelling " . Rodney Van Johnson , who played T. C. Russell , expressed an appreciation for the show 's representation of " a full African @-@ American family " that tell serious storylines on daytime television rather than being " just a flash in the pan " . Johnson said the Russell family received a large response from African @-@ American viewers . An article in Jet described each member of the Russell family as having an " integral part of the show " rather than being token characters . An official press release from NBC said the Russell family had " a strong presence in the community " of Harmony . 
 Other Passions ' cast members also commented on the representation of each family member as acting contrary to racial stereotypes ; Tracey Ross said her character Eve is " just a person " and is not purely defined by her race , and Charles Divins , who played Chad Harris @-@ Crane , said the show 's treatment of the Russells as " a strong African American family " was " refreshing " . Amelia Marshall said the creation of seven African @-@ American roles allowed each character to be unique : 
 It 's an awful lot of fun to be going to all these dark and extreme places . I finally realized that there are seven African @-@ Americans on this show and I don 't have to be the flag @-@ bearer for African @-@ Americans . I can just be an actress given a crazy bitch to play and play it to the best of my ability . I don 't have to say , ' I don 't want to represent my people like that . ' We 'll let the Eve character be upstanding , even though she 's got shades . It 's so much fun to just deal with acting the part and not deal with the politics of it . 
 During the soap opera 's final years , Johnson expressed disappointment when the show began " taking out the people of color " , such as Amelia Marshall , Brook Kerr , and himself ; he also said it was an obvious sign that " this thing is going down " . Johnson identified racial diversity as one of the biggest draws to the show , but added the African @-@ American actors were not used to their full potential . Following the exits of Johnson , Kerr , and Doe in 2007 , Tracey Ross and Phillip Jeanmarie were the only representations of the Russells in the series finale . 
 = = Core family members = = 
 = = = Eve Russell = = = 
 Eve Russell is the matriarch of the Russell family and a respected doctor at Harmony Hospital . Her early storylines focus on her attempts to keep her past alcohol and drug abuse , and her relationship and child with Julian Crane secret from her family and the rest of Harmony . Following the revelation of her past , she was mainly characterized through the rekindling of her romance with Julian and her tense relationship with their son Vincent Clarkson . Ross identified Eve as " a contradiction inside an enigma " , and based her performance on Catherine Halsey from Ayn Rand 's 1943 novel The Fountainhead and Eve White from the 1957 film The Three Faces of Eve . She also compared the relationship between Julian and Eve to that between Romeo and Juliet . 
 Eve was played by Tracey Ross for the series ' entire run . In 2003 , actresses Amanda Maiden and Kimberly Kevon Williams played Eve in flashbacks . Critics praised Ross ' performances as Eve for broadening the representation of African @-@ American characters on television . Ross 's portrayal of the character was also warmly received by viewers , who frequently rated her their favorite Passions actress in Soap Opera Digest polls . Eve and Julian 's relationship was seen positively by fans , who referred to the couple as " Evian . " TV Guide listed Eve and Julian as one of the best soap @-@ opera supercouples , praising the chemistry between Ross and Masters . Soap Opera Weekly referred to the pairing as " the Odd Couple of Passions " . 
 = = = T. C. Russell = = = 
 T. C. Russell is the patriarch of the Russell family . He is characterized by his violent temper and hatred of Julian Crane for supposedly injuring him in a hit @-@ and @-@ run attack , and destroying his chances of becoming a professional tennis player . T. C. is initially portrayed as a harsh and unforgiving parent ; he pushes Whitney to train to be a tennis champion as he once wanted to be and disapproves of her relationship with Chad Harris @-@ Crane as a distraction . He also uses violence against Simone when she reveals she is a lesbian . T. C. files for divorce from Eve after learning about her past relationship with Julian , her responsibility for the car crash that ended his tennis career , and her brief romance and engagement with her adoptive sister Liz Sanbourne . The show humanizes T. C. and softens his temper during his recovery from a stroke ; his final storylines focus on his attempts to rebuild his relationship with his ex @-@ wife and children . In 2007 , he moves to New Orleans to help Whitney with her pregnancy and to reconnect with Simone . T. C. does not appear in the show after its transition to DirecTV , and he is neither seen or mentioned in the series finale . 
 T. C. was portrayed by Rodney Van Johnson from July 5 , 1999 to June 19 , 2007 ; Johnson was dropped to recurring status in December 2006 before his last appearance in June 2007 . On March 19 , 2001 , Jenny Gaona played the character in flashbacks . Despite being one of the original 25 contract cast members , Johnson criticized the show for not properly using his character , claiming that he was often regulated to " the angry black man . " He expressed disappointment that his storylines were less developed than the rest of the cast , specifically naming how the mystery around his secret shed was later retconned as " there was nothing in the shed that was substantial " . He negatively compared T. C. to his previous role as Trey Stark on The Young and the Restless , saying that " I was used well " as Trey . Johnson added the character gave him a negative stigma that limited his future opportunities for auditions . T. C. ' s relationship with Eve and Johnson 's chemistry with Ross did not receive much attention from the fans and media . Other Passions cast members and representatives commented on the preference for Julian over T. C. ; Masters said his character Julian should " just kick T. C. out of his house " and beat him with a 4x4 and a spokesperson from the show pushed Julian and Eve 's romance to the forefront as " a new supercouple in Harmony " without any mention of T. C. 
