 = = = Simone Russell = = = 
 Simone Russell is the youngest daughter of Eve and T. C. Russell , and is initially always seen in her older sister 's shadow . She is first introduced as a part of a love triangle with Whitney and Chad , and an accomplice to Kay 's schemes to seduce Miguel Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald . Simone receives more prominence after she announces she is a lesbian and begins a relationship with Rae Thomas . T. C. physically beats her after hearing about her relationship with Rae , but after much resistance , her family eventually support her sexual identity . After learning Vincent killed Rae , Simone decides to leave Harmony with her sister to help her settle in New Orleans , and with her pregnancy . Simone does not physically appear on screen after the show moved from NBC to DirecTV , but she is referenced through her letter to Kay before her marriage to Miguel . Simone was portrayed by three actresses over the course of the show : Lena Cardwell , Chrystee Pharris , and Cathy Jenéen Doe . 
 The program made history by being the first daytime serial to show two women having sex in bed . She is also the first African @-@ American lesbian character to appear in a daytime serial . When discussing the decision to portray Simone as a lesbian , Kalouria emphasized " sexual identity isn 't a passing fancy " and " this is where [ Simone ] is ... I can assure you we 're not going to make light of this particular topic . " The storyline about Simone 's lesbianism received mixed feedback from critics and media outlets . Simone 's lesbianism and Cathy Jenéen Doe 's performance received mixed feedback from critics and media outlets . Passions won the award for Outstanding Daily Drama at the 17th GLAAD Media Awards for its portrayal of Simone 's sexuality and her relationship with Rae . Despite the award , Sarah Warn , former editor of entertainment website AfterEllen.com , criticized the lesbian reveal as having " reduced Simone to a one @-@ dimensional character who happened to sleep with a girl . " 
 = = = Whitney Russell = = = 
 Whitney Russell is the eldest daughter of Eve and T. C. Russell . Whitney was portrayed by Brook Kerr from the series ' debut on July 5 , 1999 , to September 7 , 2007 . In 2005 , <unk> Siobhan Phillips portrayed the character in flashbacks . She is introduced as a close friend of Theresa Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald Crane ( Lindsay Hartley ) , but she became prominent on the show as the love interest of Chad Harris @-@ Crane . Chad is incorrectly identified as Eve and Julian 's son , and his relationship with Whitney is judged to be incestuous . Whitney 's confusion about her relationship with Chad and her shame at possibly committing incest escalates after she becomes pregnant and gives birth to their son , Miles Harris @-@ Crane . Whitney briefly becomes estranged from Chad and Harmony , and become a nun to absolve herself of the sin of incest . The discovery of Chad 's birth certificate proves the couple are not blood relatives ; they resume their relationship and eventually get married . Whitney leaves Chad after discovering his affair with Vincent Clarkson . Their later reconciliation is cut short when he is murdered by Alistair Crane . Following Chad 's death , Whitney moves to New Orleans to raise Miles and her unborn child with the help of Simone . Whitney does not appear on screen after the show moved from NBC to DirecTV , but she is referenced in a telephone call to police chief Sam Bennett and Simone 's letter to her best friend Kay Bennett . 
 Media outlets and fans frequently speculated on the exact nature of Whitney 's relationship with Chad . The incest storyline led media outlets to sensationalize Harmony as the place where " half @-@ siblings sleep with one another " . Soap Opera Digest listed the 2006 revelation that Whitney and Chad were not related by blood as one of Passions ' most shocking secrets . Kerr described the uncertain relationship between the two characters as allowing her to act the character in new and different ways . 
 = = = Vincent Clarkson = = = 
 Vincent Clarkson , also known by the alter ego Valerie Davis , is Eve and Julian 's child ; he is later revealed to be the blackmailer and serial rapist of the show 's 2007 summertime extravaganza . His actions are later clarified as a result of Alistair Crane 's orders . In the show 's final episode on NBC , Vincent is revealed to be intersex and Valerie Davis is shown as his alter ego . After the program moved to DirecTV , Vincent 's storylines focus on his plan to torment Eve out of revenge for failing to prevent his abduction at birth , his sexual relationship with Julian , and his pregnancy with his father 's child . Vincent teams up with Viki Chatsworth to kill everyone in Harmony at the rehearsal for a mass wedding between Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Fancy Crane , Noah Bennett and Paloma Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , Miguel Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Kay Bennett , and Edna Wallace and Norma Bates . Vincent and Viki are arrested after Tabitha Lenox sacrifices her magic to revive everyone . 
 Vincent was portrayed by Phillip Jeanmarie from December 26 , 2006 – July 18 , 2008 ; Valerie Davis was played by Daphnée Duplaix from December 16 , 2004 – May 28 , 2008 and temporarily by Siena Goines from January 30 , 2007 – April 3 , 2007 . The character received mixed reactions from the show 's cast members . Jeanmarie praised James E. Reilly for " being bold but at the same time having a tongue in cheek approach to his story telling " , and stated the character represented the way Passions " pushed the boundaries and limits of what other soap operas didn 't dare to do " . Alternatively , Tracey Ross said the storyline of Vincent giving birth to his father 's child made her " physically nauseous " and she could only complete the delivery scenes after the show 's acting coach Maria O 'Brien convinced her of " the comedic possibilities " . Critics also had a mixed response to the character . Jamey Giddens of Daytime Confidential praised Phillip Jeanmarie as deserving an Emmy for making Vincent 's outlandish situations believable . However , Herndon L. Davis of Windy City Times criticized the show 's representation of Vincent 's sexual relationship with Chad as " a down @-@ low storyline which involved an African @-@ American man but eventually turned it into an outrageous intersex serial killer storyline " . 
 = = Extended family = = 
 = = = Chad Harris @-@ Crane = = = 
 Chad Harris @-@ Crane is the main love interest and later husband of Whitney Russell ; he is also the father of Miles Davis Harris @-@ Crane and an additional child . Chad 's early appearances focus on his search for his biological parents and his love triangle with sisters Whitney and Simone . Chad is initially believed to be Eve and Julian 's child , which would make his relationship with Whitney incestuous . Chad 's birth certificate later proves he was conceived when Alistair Crane raped Eve 's adoptive sister Liz Sanbourne . He reunites with Whitney without the stigma of incest . During his separation from Whitney , Chad initiates a sexual relationship with Vincent Clarkson and continues it after his marriage . He is unaware he is committing incest because he is Vincent 's half @-@ uncle , adoptive half @-@ cousin , and half @-@ brother @-@ in @-@ law . After catching Chad having sex with Vincent , Whitney files for divorce ; they later begin to reconcile through helping Theresa Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Ethan Winthrop reunite as a couple . Their potential reconciliation is cut short when Chad is murdered by Alistair . 
 Chad was portrayed by two actors over the course of the show : Donn Swaby and Charles Divins . Divins credited the over @-@ the @-@ top qualities of his character 's storylines for inspiring his performances : he said , " People watch soaps as an escape . People need drama . Whether you love it or hate it , people will talk about it . " Joel McHale from E ! ' s weekly television series The Soup turned a scene in which Chad insisted he was " not gay " despite his affair with Vincent into a running gag by referring to the character as " Not Gay Chad " . During the show 's season five premiere , Charles Divins ( who was the principal actor to play Chad during the storylines focusing on the character 's sexuality ) made a cameo to explain to McHale that he was not his character and was neither dead nor gay . After Divins leaves the shot , McHale asks " so your character sleeps with transsexuals ? " in reference to the reveal that Vincent was intersex . 
 = = = Liz Sanbourne = = = 
 Liz Sanbourne is the antagonist and foil to her adoptive sister Eve Russell . Initially identified only by her first name , Liz is first seen as the owner of a resort on the fictional St. Lisa 's Island , located near Bermuda and the Bermuda Triangle . Liz is still in love with her former boyfriend Brian O 'Leary . Her early appearances center on her attempts to reunite amnesiac Sheridan Crane with Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , despite Brian 's interest in her . When Liz arrives in Harmony , it is revealed that Liz is Eve 's half @-@ sister , and is later retconned to become her adoptive sister . Liz exposes Eve 's past relationship with Julian Crane , inadvertently leading them to reunite and proving Chad Harris @-@ Crane and Whitney Russell were not committing incest by her identification as Chad 's mother . Liz harbors a deep desire for revenge against Eve for unknowingly abandoning her in an abusive household . Liz also seeks vengeance against the Crane family after being raped by Alistair and later forced to undergo surgery that made her barren . Liz leaves the show in February 2006 , abandoning her vengeance against Eve , Julian , and Alistair to find a new life for herself . An article on Metacritic noted that Marshall " was let go due to budget cuts . " Media outlets ' questions about the nature of Liz 's exit arose from the slashing of the soap opera 's budget by " a reported $ 4 @-@ to- $ 5 million " to secure its renewal . 
 Liz was portrayed by actress Amelia Marshall from October 3 , 2001 to February 17 , 2006 . In 2003 , Arreale Davis and Taquel Graves played the character in flashbacks . Amelia Marshall was hired for the role because of her past work with James E. Reilly on Guiding Light . In an interview with Soap Talk , Marshall said , " I just love the fact that he saw me and realized that I could be such a witch " . In 2003 , actresses Arreale Davis and Taquel Graves played the character in flashbacks . 
 = = = Irma Johnson = = = 
 Irma Johnson is the sister of the late Warren Johnson and aunt of Eve Russell . When she was young , Eve had a close relationship with her aunt because of their love of gospel music . Irma is portrayed as being proud of Eve 's singing in the church 's choir ; she discouraged Eve from singing jazz and blues music , calling them sinful . Their relationship became strained when Irma saw a drugged and intoxicated Eve singing in a seedy Boston jazz club and cavorting with several men . Irma disowns Eve when she discovers her relationship with Julian — who is white — and her pregnancy with his child . Eve and Irma did not speak for nearly twenty years . Eve paid for Irma to live in a retirement home , but told everyone she had no living relatives in an attempt to keep her past secret . 
 In 2004 , Eve 's vengeful , adoptive sister Liz Sanbourne discovers Irma 's existence and brings her to Harmony to destroy Eve 's life by revealing her past to her family . Irma tells them Eve was once a prostitute and drug addict while living in Boston and was involved in a relationship with Julian , who is T. C. ' s sworn enemy . The revelations destroy Eve and T. C. ' s marriage . Despite her Christian upbringing , Irma is often foul @-@ mouthed ; she frequently calls Eve a whore or a slut . When Eve 's daughter Simone tells Irma she is a lesbian , Irma — who has previously been kind to her — tells Simone homosexuality is vile and disgusting , and orders her to leave and never come back . 
 Irma was portrayed by actress Marla Gibbs on a recurring basis in 2004 and 2005 . Gibbs called Irma " real mean " and " terrible " , and expressed surprise at fans ' positive feedback for the character . 
 = = In other media = = 
 The Russell family received further attention when the actors participated in public service announcements ( PSAs ) to celebrate the achievements of African Americans including Sidney Poitier , Marian Anderson , Alex Haley , Thurgood Marshall , Condoleezza Rice , and Bill Cosby in commemoration of Black History Month . The PSAs ran on NBC stations throughout February 2003 . Sheraton Kalouria said the PSA campaign was " another example of Passions ' commitment to diversity and inclusion " alongside its featuring of a racially diverse cast . Tracey Ross and Rodney Van Johnson also made cameo appearances as Eve Russell and T. C. Russell in the series finale of the NBC primetime drama Providence , marking one of the first daytime / primetime crossovers . 
 Following DirecTV 's decision to not renew the show , Passions partnered with Premiere Props to hold a public two @-@ day estate sale of props and costumes from the show . Stacey Ward , a director of NBCUniversal , pitched the auction as " an opportunity to own a piece of their favorite show " . Several items related to the Russell family were offered for sale , including Vincent 's disguise as the " Blackmailer " ( without the mask ) and Eve 's medical coat splattered with blood from her botched surgery on Julian . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The show initially received negative reviews for its lack of development and focus on the Russells in comparison to the other families . Television critic Hal Boedeker of the Orlando Sentinel criticized the show for relegating the Russell family to " spend [ ing ] most of their time listening to the problems of the white Bennetts " and questioned its attempt at " racial progress " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker wrote the Russells only served to represent the fact that " Harmony also seems to contain exactly one black family " . Alternatively , David Alexander Nahmod of the Bay Area Reporter praised the show for " present [ ing ] an almost utopian picture of racial harmony in the town of Harmony " by not showing racial inequality or strife . 
 The actors were nominated for various awards based on their performances . Kerr was nominated for Outstanding Younger Lead Actress , and alongside co @-@ stars Lindsay Hartley and Justin Hartley for Favorite Triangle at the 2005 Soap Opera Digest Awards . Doe was listed as a pre @-@ nominee for the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for the 34th Daytime Emmy Awards alongside co @-@ star Emily Harper , but was not chosen as one of the final nominees . 
 The actors were also frequently nominated for NAACP Image Awards . Ross received eight nominations for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series and won the award at the 38th NAACP Image Awards for her portrayal of Eve . Ross has cited Eve as expanding the TV representation of African @-@ Americans and interracial relationships . For her performance as Whitney , Kerr was nominated for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series at the 39th NAACP Image Awards . Gibbs received positive feedback for her performance as Irma ; she earned a nomination for the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Daytime Drama Series at the 37th NAACP Image Awards . 
 Despite the focus on an African @-@ American family , Lynette Rice of Entertainment Weekly said the show failed to attract the " hard @-@ to @-@ reach audience [ of ] African @-@ American women " ; Sheraton Kalouria said " quite frankly , many of them aren 't aware Passions is even on . " 
 = Uncle Tupelo = 
 Uncle Tupelo was an alternative country music group from Belleville , Illinois , active between 1987 and 1994 . Jay Farrar , Jeff Tweedy , and Mike Heidorn formed the band after the lead singer of their previous band , The Primitives , left to attend college . The trio recorded three albums for Rockville Records , before signing with Sire Records and expanding to a five @-@ piece . Shortly after the release of the band 's major label debut album Anodyne , Farrar announced his decision to leave the band due to a soured relationship with his co @-@ songwriter Tweedy . Uncle Tupelo split on May 1 , 1994 , after completing a farewell tour . Following the breakup , Farrar formed Son Volt with Heidorn , while the remaining members continued as Wilco . 
 Although Uncle Tupelo broke up before it achieved commercial success , the band is renowned for its impact on the alternative country music scene . The group 's first album , No Depression , became a byword for the genre and was widely influential . Uncle Tupelo 's sound was unlike popular country music of the time , drawing inspiration from styles as diverse as the hardcore punk of The Minutemen and the country instrumentation and harmony of the Carter Family and Hank Williams . Farrar and Tweedy 's lyrics frequently referred to Middle America and the working class of Belleville . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The Plebes and The Primitives = = = 
 Jay Farrar , along with his brothers Wade and Dade , played in an early 1980s garage band named The Plebes . Hailing from Belleville , Illinois , The Plebes sought to enter a battle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ bands competition but needed another high school student as a member to perform . They invited Jeff Tweedy , a high school friend of Jay Farrar , to join the band and play with them for the show . Despite a lack of skill with his instrument , Tweedy played an important role in the band by booking early gigs . While The Plebes had been playing music in a rockabilly style , Tweedy wanted to play punk rock like the music that he originally heard the group perform . This caused tensions between Tweedy and Dade Farrar , who left the band two months after Tweedy joined . 
 Before leaving the band in 1984 , Dade Farrar introduced its members to Mike Heidorn , the younger brother of his girlfriend ; Heidorn then joined the group as their drummer . The Plebes then decided to change its name to The Primitives , a reference to a 1965 song by psychedelic rock group The Groupies . Due to the unpopularity of punk rock in the St. Louis area , The Primitives began to play blues @-@ oriented garage rock at fast tempos . They performed regularly at a wedding hall in <unk> , Illinois , where Tweedy 's mother Jo Ann would collect the cover fee . They also performed regularly at B St Bar in Belleville with bands such as The Newsboys ( later Sammy and the <unk> ) , Charlie <unk> , and The Symptoms . Wade Farrar was the lead singer of the band , but his commitment to Southern Illinois University and an attempted enlistment in the United States Army meant he was only able to dedicate a small amount of time to the group . Additionally , Heidorn broke his collarbone during a concert in 1986 , which caused the band to go on hiatus . Jay Farrar and Tweedy continued to write songs and perform at Heidorn 's house while he recovered , and by 1987 they had restarted the group . The Primitives temporarily added Tony Mayr as a bassist so that Tweedy could play guitar , but a month later the band decided to keep Tweedy on bass and remain a three @-@ piece . To avoid confusion with a successful British band also named The Primitives , they decided to change their name once again , to Uncle Tupelo . Although they performed only 1960s cover songs as The Primitives , the trio decided to take a new approach and write their own music under their new name . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 The Primitives renamed itself Uncle Tupelo after a character in a cartoon drawn by Chuck Wagner , a friend of the band 's members . The name was created by combining two randomly chosen words from the dictionary ; inspired by the name , Wagner drew a picture of an old , fat Elvis . The trio recorded a four @-@ song demo tape , which won them supporting roles at the concerts of artists such as Johnny Thunders and Warren Zevon . Tweedy met Tony Margherita while moonlighting as a record clerk in St. Louis . After attending a pair of the band 's concerts , Margherita offered to become its manager . Uncle Tupelo began to play regular shows at Cicero 's Basement — a bar close to the campus of Washington University . Bands playing in a similar style , including Brian Henneman 's Chicken Truck , often played at the venue , which by late 1988 was considered to have been the origin of a new music scene . The band temporarily expanded to a four @-@ piece with the addition of the guitarist Alex Mutrux , but soon reverted to a trio . 
 Uncle Tupelo recorded its first tracks in the attic studio of future Chicago punk producer Matt Allison in Champaign , Illinois . The demo Not Forever , Just for Now includes the songs " I Got Drunk " and " Screen Door " , as well as early versions of several songs that would appear on their first studio album . The CMJ New Music Report gave the tape a rave review , and called Uncle Tupelo the best unsigned band of the year . The accolade attracted the attention of independent labels , and the band decided to sign with Jay Fialkov and Debbie Southwood @-@ Smith of Giant Records ( who offered to book them at CBGB in New York City ) . Explaining the decision , the band said that " [ our ] original goals don 't get distorted with an independent label . " 
 = = = Recordings on Rockville Records = = = 
 Shortly after Uncle Tupelo 's signing , Giant Records changed its name to Rockville Records . The band 's first album for Rockville No Depression , was recorded over ten days in January 1990 , at Fort Apache South recording studio in Boston , Massachusetts . The album 's thematic structure revolved around their lives as adolescents in Belleville ; examples are songs about wanting to avoid factory work and songs about fearing a potential Persian Gulf War military draft . Impressed by their previous work on Dinosaur Jr . ' s Bug , the band wanted Paul Kolderie and Sean Slade to produce the album . Slade let Farrar play on the same 1961 Gibson Les Paul SG Junior that J. Mascis originally played on Bug . The album was released on June 21 , 1990 , and the band celebrated by playing at Cicero 's for two nights . 
 In between tours , Farrar , Tweedy and Heidorn formed a country cover band named Coffee Creek , along with Brian Henneman ( later a member of The Bottle Rockets ) . Henneman impressed Uncle Tupelo , and he was invited to be a guitar technician and occasional multi @-@ instrumentalist for the band . While Farrar and Heidorn would avoid drinking too much after shows , Tweedy would continue drinking throughout the night . Although Tweedy stopped after he began dating Sue Miller in 1991 , a significant communication gap had already been opened between Tweedy and Farrar . 
 By March 1991 , No Depression had sold an estimated 15 @,@ 000 copies , and was featured in a Rolling Stone article about rising stars . However , Rockville Records refused to pay the band any royalties for the album , a theme that would continue for the remainder of the band 's contract . Over seventeen days the band recorded a second album at Long View Farm in rural North Brookfield , Massachusetts . Still Feel Gone , with a more layered sound , was also produced by Kolderie and Slade , with contributions by Slade , Henneman , Rich Gilbert , Chris Bess of Enormous Richard , and Gary Louris of The Jayhawks . The band was disappointed with the production of the album and decided to discontinue working with Kolderie and Slade . Soon afterward , Uncle Tupelo recorded " Shaking Hands ( Soldier 's Joy ) " on Michelle Shocked 's album Arkansas Traveler and joined her on the accompanying tour with Taj Mahal and The Band . However , the tour only lasted for a few shows because of managerial problems between Shocked and The Band . 
 Alternative rock had broken into the mainstream by 1992 , and an album released in that style was expected to earn the group a major @-@ label record deal . However , Uncle Tupelo didn 't want to follow in the footsteps of groups such as Nirvana , and decided to play country and folk songs " as a big ' fuck you ' to the rock scene " . Peter Buck , guitarist for R.E.M. , saw the trio perform at the 40 Watt Club in Athens , Georgia and sought them out after the show . Buck was impressed with a version of " Atomic Power " that the band played , and offered his services for their next album . Over a span of five days , Buck produced the group 's next album , March 16 – 20 , 1992 . Buck allowed them to stay in his house during the sessions , and charged no money for his services . Brian Henneman 's role was increased for this album , and he taught himself how to play mandolin and bouzouki . Despite turning away from the style of popular alternative rock , major labels began to show significant interest in Uncle Tupelo after March 16 – 20 , 1992 was released . The album sold more than their two previous recordings combined , although Rockville was displeased that it did not conform to the style of popular alternative rock . 
 = = = Major label contract = = = 
 In 1992 , Joe McEwen of Sire Records began to pursue the band . McEwen , who brought notable acts such as Dinosaur Jr and Shawn Colvin to Sire , had been interested in them since hearing the Not Forever , Just for Now demo tape . At the urging of Gary Louris , McEwen offered Uncle Tupelo a contract . Band manager Tony Margherita invoked the $ 50 @,@ 000 escape clause he had put in their Rockville contract , freeing the band to sign a seven @-@ year deal with Sire . The deal required two albums , and specified a budget of $ 150 @,@ 000 for their first . 
 Around the time of the recording of March 16 – 20 , 1992 , Mike Heidorn had secured a steady job at a Belleville newspaper company and was dating a woman who had two children from a previous marriage . Uncle Tupelo had planned a tour of Europe , but Heidorn wanted to stay in Belleville with his girlfriend , whom he married in August 1992 . 
 The band held auditions prior to the promotional tour for March 16 – 20 , 1992 , and two candidates stood out : Bill Belzer and Ken Coomer . Although singers Jay Farrar and Jeff Tweedy agreed that Coomer was the better drummer , they were intimidated by his six @-@ foot @-@ four stature and long dreadlocks . The band selected Belzer as Heidorn 's replacement , but he only stayed with the band for six months . Tweedy explained Belzer 's departure : 
 We had Belzer in the band for six months . I want to believe it was purely musical , and I honestly believe that it wasn 't working musically . I also believe that we weren 't emotionally mature enough to be close friends with a gay person at that point in our lives ... And Bill was and is a very proud and righteous gay person , very open about his homosexuality . 
 After touring Europe opening for Sugar , the band replaced Belzer with Coomer . The band also experimented with new members : John Stirratt replaced Brian Henneman ( who left to form The Bottle Rockets ) while Max Johnston , the brother of Michelle Shocked , joined as a live mandolin and violin performer . Stirratt became a full @-@ time bassist , allowing Tweedy to perform more songs with the guitar . 
 Now a five @-@ piece , Uncle Tupelo recorded their major label debut at Cedar Creek studio in Austin , Texas in early 1993 . Anodyne consisted of live @-@ in @-@ the @-@ studio recordings and included a duet with Farrar and Doug Sahm of the Sir Douglas Quintet . The album sold 150 @,@ 000 copies , and was their only entry on the Billboard Heatseekers chart . The group toured until the end of the year , finishing with a sold out concert at Tramps in New York City . Because of their concert draw , major executives at Sire began to see the band as a potential hit . 
 In 1993 , the band contributed a cover of Creedence Clearwater Revival 's track " Effigy " to the AIDS @-@ Benefit album No Alternative produced by the Red Hot Organization . 
 = = = Breakup = = = 
 With the addition of Stirratt , Coomer , and Johnston just prior to the recording of Anodyne , Farrar and Tweedy 's relationship became more tumultuous , leading to verbal altercations after concerts . In one account , Tweedy recalled : 
 Around this time , I would say something into a microphone onstage , and afterward [ Farrar would ] pull me aside and say , " Don 't you ever fucking talk into that microphone again . " He would misconstrue me talking into the microphone as more evidence of my out @-@ of @-@ control , rampant ego , more evidence of me feeling like I didn 't have to be so fucking afraid anymore . 
 Tweedy felt the new members gave him a new opportunity to contribute to the band , but Farrar felt disdain for Tweedy 's new carefree attitude . Years later , Farrar would claim that he had been tempted to quit the band after seeing Tweedy stroking the hair of Farrar 's girlfriend , an act which he believed to have been a proposition . In January 1994 , Farrar called manager Tony Margherita to inform him of his decision to leave the band . Farrar told Margherita that he was no longer having fun , and didn 't want to work with Tweedy anymore . Soon after the breakup , Farrar explained his departure : " It just seemed like it reached a point where Jeff and I really weren 't compatible . It had ceased to be a symbiotic songwriting relationship , probably after the first record . " 
 Tweedy was enraged that he heard the news secondhand from Margherita , since Farrar decided not to tell him in person . The following day , the two singers engaged in a verbal confrontation . As a favor to Margherita — who had spent a substantial amount of money to keep the band running — Farrar agreed to a final tour with Uncle Tupelo in North America . Tweedy and Farrar again engaged in a shouting match two weeks into the tour , due to Farrar 's refusal to sing harmony on any of Tweedy 's songs . The band made its first appearance on national television during the tour when they were featured on Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . Sire had requested that the band perform " The Long Cut " on the show , which further irked Farrar since the song was written and sung by Tweedy . Uncle Tupelo 's last concert was May 1 , 1994 , at Mississippi Nights in St. Louis , Missouri . Tweedy and Farrar each performed nine songs during the concert , and Mike Heidorn performed as drummer during the encore . 
 = = = Post @-@ breakup = = = 
 Following Uncle Tupelo 's final tour , Tweedy encouraged his bandmates to join him in a new group , while Farrar searched for members for a band of his own . Tweedy was able to retain the rest of the Uncle Tupelo lineup , and created Wilco . Wilco began rehearsing a few days after the final Uncle Tupelo concert , and by August 1994 they were in the recording studio for their first album , A.M .. Farrar asked Jim Boquist to join his new band , Son Volt ; Boquist was a multi @-@ instrumentalist who had performed with Joe Henry as the opening act on Uncle Tupelo 's last tour . Boquist also recruited his brother Dave , and Farrar convinced Mike Heidorn to leave Belleville to join the group . Farrar 's new four @-@ piece began recording their debut album Trace in November 1994 . 
 Wilco signed to Reprise Records while Son Volt signed with Warner Bros. Records . Son Volt had an early college rock hit with " Drown " from the album Trace , but Wilco maintained a more commercially successful career in the years to follow . Regarding the possibility of a reunion , Mike Heidorn reported in a PopMatters interview that " nothing 's ever for sure , but I would have to say , ' No such thing ' " . Farrar said that he does not want the band to get back together , while Tweedy said that he believes that a reunion would not be productive musically . 
 Farrar and Tweedy sued Rockville Records and Dutch East India Trading CEO Barry Tenenbaum in 2000 over royalties that the label allegedly owed them , winning reparations from Tenenbaum and the joint rights to Uncle Tupelo 's first three albums . After securing the rights , the band released a compilation entitled 89 / 93 : An Anthology . In 2003 , Uncle Tupelo re @-@ issued their first three albums , which before the lawsuit had cumulatively sold over 200 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Influences = = 
 As The Primitives , Tweedy and Farrar were highly influenced by punk bands such as The Ramones and The Sex Pistols . However , they began to listen to country music because punk rock was not well received in the Belleville and St. Louis music scenes . While they originally were introduced to country by their parents , it wasn 't until this time that they began to listen to it for leisure . Farrar typically wrote songs about Middle America , while Tweedy wrote about more mainstream topics such as relationships . Farrar took influence from authors such as Kurt Vonnegut and Jack Kerouac , whom he read while working at his mother 's bookstore . As the lead singer of Uncle Tupelo , Farrar 's lyrics would be front @-@ and @-@ center during performances , but the band 's musical style was mostly driven by Tweedy and Heidorn ( seen in the music 's Minutemen @-@ influenced start @-@ stop arrangement ) . Jeff Tweedy said in an interview with the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch : 
 We probably have more influences than we know what to do with . We have two main styles that have been influences . For instance , we like Black Flag as much as early Bob Dylan and Dinosaur Jr. as much as Hank Williams ... To us , hard @-@ core punk is also folk music . We draw a close parallel between the two . We 'll play both in the same set if we get a chance . We don 't have any biases as far as music is concerned . 
 Tweedy in particular was inspired by the Minutemen , and wrote a song about D. Boon following Boon 's death in a van accident . The band has released songs originally performed by Creedence Clearwater Revival , The Carter Family , Lead Belly , Gram Parsons , The Soft Boys , The Louvin Brothers , Texas Tornados , and The Stooges . Releasing March 16 – 20 , 1992 when alternative music was breaking through was a move inspired by Neil Young 's decision to release the challenging albums On the Beach and Tonight 's the Night immediately after the commercially successful Harvest . Critic Michael Corcoran likened the band 's musical style to " Bob Mould fronting Soul Asylum on a speeded @-@ up version of a Gram Parsons song . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Uncle Tupelo is credited as one of the founders of the alternative country genre , a blend of alternative rock and traditional country music . While the genre eventually became associated with solo artists such as Gram Parsons and Lyle Lovett , Uncle Tupelo is considered the first alternative country band . Some media outlets like the BBC have even suggested that they were the genre 's sole creator . However , Tweedy and Heidorn dispute this claim , and Farrar says that there is no difference between alternative country and other genres such as roots rock . Heidorn commented in a Country Standard Time interview : 
 It 's strange to hear Uncle Tupelo mentioned because what we were doing was in such a long line of musical history . People are wrong in starting with us and saying we started anything because we were just picking up the ball , starting with Woody Guthrie and on to the early ' 60s and the Flying Burrito Brothers that we were influenced by . We didn 't start a genre . We contributed to a long line of fairly good music . That 's the way we looked at it at the time — doing what was right for the song . 
 The band 's first three albums influenced contemporary roots rock artists such as Richmond Fontaine and Whiskeytown . Uncle Tupelo 's usage of distorted guitars to play a style of music that was known for its earnestness became a lasting trend in 1990s modern rock . Jason Ankeny wrote in Allmusic that : 
 With the release of their 1990 debut LP , No Depression , the Belleville , IL , trio Uncle Tupelo launched more than simply their own career — by fusing the simplicity and honesty of country music with the bracing fury of punk , they kick @-@ started a revolution which reverberated throughout the American underground . 
 Their 1990 album No Depression lent its name to an influential alternative country periodical . Due to the influence of the album and periodical , the term " No Depression " became a byword for alternative country — particularly for bands with punk rock influence . The alternative country movement played an important role in the success of future traditionalist country acts such as Robbie Fulks and Shelby Lynne . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 = = = Demo tapes = = = 
 All demo tapes are self @-@ released on cassette . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Contributions = = = 
 Uncle Tupelo also recorded a one @-@ hour radio special that was released by Legacy Records in 2003 . Legacy only distributed the CD , entitled The Long Cut : A One Hour Radio Special , to non @-@ commercial radio stations as a way to promote the re @-@ issues of the band 's studio albums . The special is hosted by Lauren Frey and features interviews by Farrar , Tweedy , and Heidorn . 
 = Welsh Corgi = 
 The Welsh Corgi ( / <unk> / ; Welsh for " dwarf dog " ) is a small type of herding dog that originated in Wales . Two separate breeds are recognized : the Pembroke Welsh Corgi and the Cardigan Welsh Corgi . Historically , the Pembroke has been attributed to the influx of dogs alongside Flemish weavers from around the 10th century , while the Cardigan is attributed to the dogs brought with Norse settlers , in particular a common ancestor of the Swedish <unk> . A certain degree of inbreeding between the two types has been suggested to explain the similarities between the two . 
 The Pembroke is the more popular breed of dog , with the Cardigan Welsh Corgi appearing on The Kennel Club 's list of Vulnerable Native Breeds . There are several physical differences between the two types according to the breed standards , with the Cardigan being a larger overall dog , both in weight and in height . Traditionally , the tails were of different shapes , but docking had been previously used . With regards to their health , according to a 2004 survey , they both had similar life spans although kidney or urethral conditions are more likely in the Pembrokes . Furthermore , Pembroke Corgis were more likely to have eye problems than the Cardigan breed . Welsh Corgis have strong ties to Queen Elizabeth II , who has personally owned more than 30 dogs , either Pembrokes or Corgi / Dachshund crosses . 
 = = History = = 
 Welsh Corgis have historically been used as herding dogs , specifically for cattle . They are of the type of herding dog referred to as " <unk> " , meaning that they would nip at the heels of the larger animals to keep them on the move . Both Pembrokeshire and Cardigan were historically agricultural areas of Wales . The combination of the low height off the ground and innate agility of Welsh Corgis would allow them to avoid the hooves of cattle . The term " corgi " means either cur dog or dwarf dog in the Welsh language , which was not intended as an insult to the dog 's means , rather as a purely descriptive term . There is also a folk legend that says corgis were a gift from the woodland fairies , and that the breed 's markings were left on its coat by fairy harnesses and saddles . 
 The geographical distance between the two areas of which the modern breeds are named , may have resulted in separate evolution of the breeds . Different tales have been told of the Corgi 's origin , with some believing that the two modern breeds expected to have evolved as part of a shared ancestry , while others attribute the importation of the Pembroke Welsh Corgi to Flemish weavers from around the 10th century . Further theories on the origin of the Pembroke variety suggest that they may have originated from central European herding breeds from the area around modern Germany . Depending on the time period that these dogs were imported to Wales , they could have been either the extinct Deutsches <unk> , or the Dachshund breed . 
 The Cardigan Welsh Corgi has been attributed to the influences of Nordic settlers in the region . Dogs of similar dimensions exist in modern Scandinavia , called the Swedish <unk> , and it is claimed by some historians that these two breeds share a common ancestor . Farmers in Cardigan began to switch from cattle to sheep in the late 19th century , but the existing breed was unsuited to working the sheep flocks . Crosses began to take place with the Welsh Sheepdog , and this is where the merle colour pattern originated from in the breed . The subsequent similarities between the two types of Welsh Corgis have been attributed to cross breeding between the two , or simply selected breeding from farmers who wished to have the Cardigan variety appear closer in nature to the Pembroke breed . 
 The first recorded date for corgis appearing in the show ring in Wales is 1925 . Captain J.P. Howell called together a meeting of breeders of both the Pembroke and the Cardigan varieties , and formed the Welsh Corgi Club with an initial membership of 59 members . A general breed standard was drawn up , and Corgis began to appear in conformation shows . Until this point , neither breed had been specifically bred for looks . They were primarily interested in the Pembroke variety , although those from Cardigan did also appear . At this point the breeds were referred to as the Pembrokeshire and Cardiganshire varieties , later becoming shortened as time passed . There were a number of rows between breeders of the two types in early shows , as judges who were breeders of one type would often favour them in deciding who won in certain classes . The Welsh Corgi appeared at Cruft 's for the first time in 1927 . 
 The first Championship was granted at a Cardiff show in 1928 , with the prize awarded to a red and white Pembroke bitch named Shan Fach . The breeds continued to be judged together until 1934 , when The Kennel Club recognised each breed separately . In that initial registration , some 59 Cardigans and 240 Pembrokes were listed in the pedigree books . The decisions about which breed each dog formed part of was left to the owners on some occasions , who had the freedom to choose whichever they felt was the most appropriate . The first dog to be named Best in Show at an open conformation show was Ch . Bowhit Pivot . 
 Cardigan Welsh Corgis continued to be rarer than Pembrokes , with only 11 registrations made in 1940 . Both breeds survived the Second World War , although the Cardigans registered with the Kennel Club numbered only 61 by the end of the war . Pembrokes became very popular during the post war years in the United Kingdom ; in 1953 it was ranked as the fourth most popular breed by the Kennel Club , behind the English Cocker Spaniel , the German Shepherd and the Pekingese . In 1955 , the reserve Best in Show at Crufts was the Pembroke Welsh Corgi <unk> <unk> Mint , who was beaten by the Standard Poodle Ch . Tzigane <unk> of <unk> . The Corgi breeds declined in popularity , with veterinary physician Brian Singleton 's view in The Times in 1963 suggesting this was due to issues with their temperament . 
 When the Kennel Club created their list of Vulnerable Native Breeds in 2006 , the Cardigan Welsh Corgi was among those breeds . This list is for those breeds which register less than 300 dogs in any one year ; there had been 84 Cardigan Corgis registered in 2006 . After an initial increase , this declined to 46 in 2010 but then rose to the highest numbers since the list began in 2015 , with a total of 124 puppies registered . In 2013 , the Pembroke Welsh Corgi was also added , as there had been only 241 puppies registered that year . While the Kennel Club blamed this on the importation of foreign dog breeds , The Daily Telegraph blamed the decline on the ban on tail docking introduced six years prior . However , 2015 saw an increase of 34 % in the number of Pembroke registrations with the popularity of Corgis on Instagram credited for the change . Pembrokes were subsequently removed from the Vulnerable Native Breeds list in 2016 . 
 = = = In America = = = 
 In 1933 the first Welsh Corgis were brought to the United States by American breeder Mrs. Lewis Roesler , for her <unk> Kennels in the Berkshire Hills of Massachusetts . She had previously been well known for breeding Old English <unk> . Roesler purchased a Pembroke bitch , Little Madam , at London 's Paddington Station for £ 12 . Wanting a mate for the dog , she visited several Corgi kennels and bought a dog called Captain William Lewis . The American Kennel Club ( AKC ) first registered Welsh Corgis in 1934 , as a single breed , and Little Madam was the first registered animal of the breed . The first litter was registered later that year , by Mr E.M. Tidd in Oakland , California , from a bitch named Toots who he had purchased in Canada . 
 Tidd imported Ch . Bowhit Pivot for his breeding lines in 1935 , registering him with the AKC as Sierra Bowhit Pivot . In addition to his British titles , he became the first Corgi to be awarded Champion status in America and the first such dog to be named Best of Group at a conformation show in the United States . A month after those achievements , Little Madam repeated his victories . The Pembroke Welsh Corgi club was formed in 1937 , and the first show was held at Geraldine Rockefeller Dodge 's <unk> Farms in New Jersey . Following the Second World War , imports were brought from the United Kingdom , including Rozavel Uncle Sam who dominated the show circuit for Corgis . In 1949 , he became the first Pembroke winner of Best in Show at an open conformation show in America . By 1998 , the Pembroke Welsh Corgi had become the 37th most popular breed of dog in the United States . 
 A pair of Cardigan Welsh Corgis were imported to America in 1931 , but the first member of the breed to be registered with the AKC was Blodwen of <unk> in 1935 . They have never had the draw in the United States given to the Corgis of the Pembroke type . In 1997 , some 752 Cardigan Welsh Corgis were registered with the AKC , compared to 8 @,@ 281 of the Pembrokes . 
 = = Modern breeds = = 
 There are two breeds of Welsh Corgis , the Cardigan and the Pembroke , each named for the county in Wales where it originated . The dogs share several similar traits , such as their coats , which are water resistant and shed on average twice a year . The body of the Cardigan is slightly longer than that of the Pembroke ; both breeds have short legs , placing their bodies close to the ground . But they are not as square in outline as a typical Terrier , or have an elongated body as great as that of a Dachshund . There are only minor differences in the shape of the head , both appear fox @-@ like . The head of a Cardigan Welsh Corgi is typically larger than that of an equivalent Pembroke , and has a larger nose . It can take a few days following birth for the true colour of a Corgi 's coat to appear , and this is particularly evident in those with tricolour or black and tan markings . 
 Corgis in the modern era often compete in dog agility trials , obedience , showmanship , flyball , tracking , and herding events . Herding instincts and trainability can be measured at non @-@ competitive herding tests . Cardigan and Pembroke corgis exhibiting basic herding instincts can be trained to compete in herding trials – known colloquially as a " mad run " . Welsh Corgis were once used to guard children . 
 = = = Cardigan Welsh Corgi = = = 
 The differences between the two breeds include bone structure , body length , and size . Cardigans are the larger of the two breeds , with large rounded ears and a 12 inches ( 30 cm ) long fox @-@ like , flowing tail set in line with the body . Though the Cardigan is allowed more colours than the Pembroke , white should not predominate in its coat . The Cardigan is a double @-@ coated dog where the outer coat is dense , slightly harsh in texture , and of medium length . The dog 's undercoat is short , soft , and thick . According to the breed standard , the breed stands between 10 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 27 – 32 cm ) at the withers , and should weigh between 30 – 38 pounds ( 14 – 17 kg ) . The skeletal structure of the Cardigan differs from the Pembroke , in that there is a more exaggerated bend in the front two legs , which fits around the ribcage of the animal . In addition , the Cardigan is more heavily set than the Pembroke , with denser bone mass . 
 There are a greater number of colours of coat present in the Cardigan breed than the Pembroke , with the breed standard allowing for a variety of shades of red , sable and brindle . White markings are expected on this breed of Corgi , and one with a black coat is allowed to have tan or brindle points under conformation show rules . Merle markings are present in the breed , although this is normally restricted to blue merle . There are several disqualification criteria in the breed standard for the purpose of conformation showing . This would include drop ears , a white coat , blue eyes or non @-@ solid black noses in dogs without merle colouration . 
 = = = Pembroke Welsh Corgi = = = 
 Pembrokes feature pointed ears , and are somewhat smaller in stature than the Cardigan . They are low @-@ set , intelligent , strong and sturdy with stamina sufficient to work a day on the farm . The common height at the withers is between 10 – 12 inches ( 25 – 30 cm ) , while a dog of this breed should weigh more than 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) , and a bitch 25 pounds ( 11 kg ) . The tail is shorter than that of a Cardigan , which can be accomplished through breeding or docking . Historically , the Pembroke was a breed with a natural bob tail ( a very short tail ) , and today , if the Pembroke has a tail at all , it is usually curly . Due to the advent of tail docking in dogs , the bob tail was not aggressively pursued , with breeders focusing instead on other characteristics , and the tail artificially shortened if need be . Given that some countries now ban docking , some breeders are again attempting to select dogs with the genes for natural bob tails . 
 Fewer colours of coat appear in the Pembroke breed . These include red , sable , tan , fawn and black , each of which can be with or without white markings . Plain white or grey coats can also be seen , but these would be considered to be a serious fault for the purposes of conformation shows . However , the Pembroke Welsh Corgi has no specific disqualification criteria present in the breed standard . 
 = = Health = = 
 According to the Kennel Club Purebred Dog Health Survey conducted in 2004 , the two breeds had similar average lifespans with the Pembrokes having a median age at death of 12 years and three months , whereas the Cardigan Welsh Corgi had a median age at death of 12 years and two months . The main causes of death were similar in both breeds , with the primary cause being canine cancer and old age . However , the Pembroke breed showed a higher proportion of deaths attributed to either kidney failure or a urethral obstruction . 
 The survey showed that the breeds suffer from similar rates of ongoing health conditions , with one exception . Whereas more than a quarter of Pembroke Welsh Corgis surveyed suffered from some type of eye condition , only 6 @.@ 1 % of the Cardigan Corgis did . Eye conditions typical in the Corgi breeds include progressive retinal atrophy , which occurs more often in dogs over six years of age , and canine glaucoma , which again is more common in older dogs . Similar percentages in the survey were seen in both breeds for issues relating to reproduction , such as dogs requiring caesarian sections and having false pregnancies . Further similarities were also seen related to <unk> issues , including arthritis . However , Hip dysplasia , common in some types of dogs , is rare in the Corgi breeds . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Queen Elizabeth II has long been associated with Welsh Corgis . After a visit to Thomas Thynne , 5th Marquess of Bath in 1933 , Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret made it well known to their family that they liked the Corgis owned by the Marquess . Their father , Prince Albert , Duke of York ( later George VI ) , purchased the Pembroke Corgi Rozavel Golden Eagle , from the Rozavel kennels in Surrey . It was renamed Dookie . 
 Princess Elizabeth was then given a Pembroke Corgi of her own , named Susan , for her 18th birthday in 1944 . She had a strong connection to the dog , which was hidden under rugs in the Royal Carriage following her wedding to Prince Philip . Susan became the progenitor of the Corgis owned by the Royal Household since . The Queen has bred ten generations of dogs from Susan , owning personally more than 30 of the dogs which were either pure @-@ bred Pembroke Welsh Corgis or crossbreed Corgi / <unk> called <unk> . 
 Corgis have also appeared on screen , stage and in novels . Corgis as characters were incorporated into the storybook fantasies Corgiville Fair , The Great Corgiville Kidnapping , and Corgiville Christmas of American author and illustrator Tasha Tudor . In 1961 , a Corgi featured in the Walt Disney film , Little Dog Lost , which led to an increase in popularity for the breed within the United States . A theatrical adaptation took place of Welsh author Roald Dahl 's The BFG which toured the UK in 1991 required several different Corgis to perform on stage as those of Queen Elizabeth . 
 In the anime Cowboy Bebop , the main characters have a super @-@ intelligent Pembroke Welsh Corgi , Ein , on their ship . The Top Shelf graphic novel <unk> plays on the folklore tradition of the Corgi as a <unk> draft animal . It features the " <unk> " ( fairy @-@ like beings ) who live in close relationship with the land and their <unk> friends , who are based on and resemble the Welsh Corgi breeds . 
 = Civil Air Patrol = 
 The Civil Air Patrol ( CAP ) is a congressionally chartered , federally supported non @-@ profit corporation that serves as the official civilian auxiliary of the United States Air Force ( USAF ) . CAP is a volunteer organization with an aviation @-@ minded membership that includes people from all backgrounds , lifestyles , and occupations . It performs three congressionally assigned key missions : emergency services , which includes search and rescue ( by air and ground ) and disaster relief operations ; aerospace education for youth and the general public ; and cadet programs for teenage youth . In addition , CAP has recently been tasked with homeland security and courier service missions . CAP also performs non @-@ auxiliary missions for various governmental and private agencies , such as local law enforcement and the American Red Cross . The program is established as an organization by Title 10 of the United States Code and its purposes defined by Title 36 . 
 Membership in the organization consists of cadets ranging from 12 to just under 21 years of age , and senior members 18 years of age and up . These two groups each have the opportunity to participate in a wide variety of pursuits ; the cadet program contributes to the development of the former group with a structured syllabus and an organization based upon United States Air Force ranks and pay grades , while the older members serve as instructors , supervisors , and operators . All members wear uniforms while performing their duties . 
 Nationwide , CAP is a major operator of single @-@ engine general aviation aircraft , used in the execution of its various missions , including orientation flights for cadets and the provision of significant emergency services capabilities . Because of these extensive flying opportunities , many CAP members become licensed pilots . 
 The hierarchical and military auxiliary organization is headed by the National Headquarters ( with authority over the national organization ) followed by eight regional commands and 52 wings ( each of the 50 states plus Washington , D.C. and Puerto Rico ) . Each wing supervises the individual groups and squadrons that comprise the basic operational unit of the organization . 
 = = History = = 
 Civil Air Patrol was conceived in the late 1930s by aviation advocate Gill Robb Wilson , who foresaw general aviation 's potential to supplement America 's military operations . With the help of New York Mayor Fiorello H. LaGuardia , in his capacity as then @-@ Director of the Office of Civilian Defense , CAP was created with Administrative Order 9 , signed by LaGuardia on 1 December 1941 and published 8 December 1941 . The Civil Air Patrol had 90 days to prove themselves to Congress . Major General John F. Curry was appointed as the first national commander . Texas oilman David Harold Byrd was a co @-@ founder of CAP . 
 During World War II , CAP was seen as a way to use America 's civilian aviation resources to aid the war effort instead of grounding them . The organization assumed many missions including anti @-@ submarine patrol and warfare , border patrols , and courier services . During World War II CAP 's coastal patrol flew 24 million miles , found 173 enemy U @-@ boats , attacked 57 , hit 10 and sank two , dropping a total of 83 bombs and depth charges throughout the conflict . By the end of the war , 64 CAP members had lost their lives in the line of duty . 
 After the end of World War II , CAP became the civilian auxiliary of the United States Air Force , and its incorporating charter declared that it would never again be involved in direct combat activities , but would be of a benevolent nature . The " supervisory " USAF organization overseeing CAP has changed several times . This has included the former Continental Air Command in 1959 , the former Headquarters Command , USAF in 1968 , to the Air University ( AU ) in 1976 . Following Air University 's reassignment as a subordinate command to the Air Education and Training Command ( <unk> ) in 1993 , USAF oversight of CAP has flowed from <unk> at the 4 @-@ star level , to AU at the 3 @-@ star level , to AU 's Jeanne M. Holm Center for Officer <unk> and Citizen Development at the 1 @-@ star level , to a subordinate unit of 1st Air Force at the 3 @-@ star level with Civil Air Patrol @-@ U.S. Air Force as a stand alone unit lead at the Colonel ( O @-@ 6 ) level . Since its incorporation charter , CAP has maintained its relationship with the USAF , and has continued its three congressionally mandated missions . 
 During the 113th United States Congress , both the United States Senate and the United States House of Representatives voted to pass S. 309 , a bill that would award the Congressional Gold Medal to the World War II members of the Civil Air Patrol . The medal would be presented " in recognition of their military service and exemplary record during World War II . " 
 = = Missions = = 
 Civil Air Patrol has three congressionally mandated missions : emergency services , aerospace education and cadet programs . 
 = = = Emergency services = = = 
 Civil Air Patrol covers several emergency services areas . The principal categories include search and rescue missions , disaster relief , humanitarian services , and United States Air Force support . Other services , such as homeland security and actions against drug @-@ trafficking operations , are becoming increasingly important . 
 Civil Air Patrol is well known for its search activities in conjunction with search and rescue ( SAR ) operations . CAP is involved with approximately three quarters of all aerial inland SAR missions directed by the United States Air Force Rescue Coordination Center at Tyndall Air Force Base , Florida . Outside of the continental United States , CAP directly supports the Joint Rescue Coordination Centers in Alaska , Hawaii , and Puerto Rico . CAP is credited with saving an average of 100 lives per year . 
 CAP is active in disaster relief operations , especially in areas such as Florida , Mississippi and Louisiana that are frequently struck by hurricanes as well as Oklahoma and Texas which are frequented by large , damaging tornadoes . CAP aircrews and ground personnel provide transportation for cargo and officials , aerial imagery to aid emergency managers in assessing damage , and donations of personnel and equipment to local , state and federal disaster relief organizations during times of need . In 2004 , several hurricanes hit the southeast coast of the United States , with Florida being the worst damaged ; CAP was instrumental in providing help to affected areas . 
 Civil Air Patrol conducts humanitarian service missions , usually in support of the Red Cross . CAP aircrews transport time @-@ sensitive medical materials , including blood and human tissue , when other means of transportation ( such as ambulances ) are not practical or possible . Following the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City when all general aviation was grounded , one of the first planes to fly over the World Trade Center site was a CAP aircraft taking photographs . 
 CAP performs several missions that are not combat @-@ related in support of the United States Air Force , including damage assessment , transportation of officials , communications support and low @-@ altitude route surveys . The CAP fleet is used in training exercises to prepare USAF pilots to intercept enemy aircraft over the Continental United States . Civil Air Patrol aircraft are flown into restricted airspace , where United States Air Force pilots may practice high @-@ speed intercepts . 
 As a humanitarian service organization , CAP assists federal , state and local agencies in preparing for and responding to homeland security needs . 
 The Red Cross , Salvation Army and other civilian agencies frequently ask Civil Air Patrol aircraft to transport vital supplies including medical technicians , medication , and other vital supplies . They often rely on CAP to provide airlift and communications for disaster relief operations . CAP also assists the United States Coast Guard and Coast Guard Auxiliary . 
 Civil Air Patrol assists the U.S. Customs and Border Protection , Drug Enforcement Administration , and United States Forest Service in the War on Drugs . In 2005 , CAP flew over 12 @,@ 000 hours in support of this mission and led these agencies to the confiscation of illegal substances valued at over US $ 400 million . Civil Air Patrol makes extensive use of the Airborne Real @-@ time Cueing Hyperspectral Enhanced Reconnaissance system , mounted on the Gippsland GA8 Airvan . The system is able to evaluate spectral signatures given off by certain objects , allowing the system to identify , for example , a possible marijuana crop . 
 = = = Aerospace education = = = 
 The Aerospace Education Program provides aviation related education and educational activities for members , including formal , graded courses about all aspects of aviation including flight physics , dynamics , history , and application . Courses covering the space program , and new technologies and advances in aviation and space exploration , are also available . There are several programs for CAP pilots to improve their flying skills and earn Federal Aviation Administration ratings . 
 The Cadet Program has a mandatory aerospace education program ; in order to progress , a cadet must take a number of courses and tests relating to aviation . Cadets also have educational opportunities through museum tours , National Cadet Special Activities , military and civilian orientation rides , and guest speakers . 
 Senior members may study aerospace through the Senior Member Professional Development Program . CAP encourages its senior members to learn about aviation and its history , although this is not mandatory . Those who complete the Aerospace Education Program for Senior Members may earn the Charles E. " Chuck " Yeager Aerospace Education Award . 
 Through outreach programs , including the External Aerospace Education program , CAP helps school teachers integrate aviation and aerospace into the classroom by providing seminars , course materials and through sponsorship of the National Congress on Aviation and Space Education . Members also provide their communities with resources for better management of airports and other aviation @-@ related facilities , and promote the benefits of such facilities . The organization also works with other groups , such as the Boy Scouts of America , the Girl Scouts of the USA and 4 @-@ H to fulfill the education goal set down in the organization 's Congressional charter — to " encourage and foster civil aviation in local communities . " 
 = = = Cadet programs = = = 
 Civil Air Patrol 's first cadet program was started during World War II in 1942 as a way to provide training for future pilots . Since then , the program has flourished , combining aerospace education with leadership and career training . 
 Today , CAP cadets are those members who join from age 12 through age 18 . Cadets who turn 18 may either become a senior member or remain a cadet until their 21st birthday at their own discretion . Cadets who join the military and wish to remain in CAP must become senior members when they begin active duty . Cadets who join the National Guard or Reserve may remain cadets until they are activated for a purpose other than training . 
 As a cadet progresses through the cadet program , he / she earns various achievements by successfully passing both Leadership and Aerospace Education tests . Test questions are derived from reading materials supplied to cadets , but the program is also designed to allow cadets to fill ever increasing leadership roles that are pertinent to their Leadership Studies questions . 
 As cadets advance through the ranks , they also progress through four stages of development . The first phase , The Learning Phase , introduces cadets to the CAP program , and cadets who pass all requirements receive the Wright Brothers award . The second phase , The Leadership Phase , begins placing more responsibility on cadets as leaders of newer cadets . Cadets who complete The Leadership Phase receive their Mitchell Award , and are eligible for advanced promotion upon enlisting in the military . The third phase , The Command Phase , places cadets directly in command of other cadets , allowing cadets to accomplish tasks through their staff members for the first time . Cadets who complete The Command Phase are awarded the Earhart Award . The Executive Phase is the last phase of the cadet program , and focus cadets on the operations of an entire unit . Cadets completing The Executive Phase are awarded the Eaker Award . The highest cadet award is the Spaatz Award and is awarded upon passing an extensive cumulative test . 
 As cadets progress through the program , they are placed in charge of lower ranking cadets . Cadets aren 't given full reign over the others , but instead are expected to instruct classes and mentor each other . Senior members , the adults of the program , also play a large role in mentoring and evaluating cadets . The numerous awards , achievements , and opportunities available to Civil Air Patrol cadets allows them to foster their leadership in an academic and forgiving environment . 
 Civil Air Patrol also has several cadet squadrons located in middle schools . CAP 's School Enrichment Program ( formerly known as Middle School Initiative ) is a ready @-@ to @-@ use program for teachers and other mentors conduct leadership training through Aerospace Education classes . Students are introduced to the principles of flight , model rocketry , and also leadership . CAP 's SEP program is similar to a Junior ROTC program . CAP has 47 units located in Middle School classrooms throughout the country . 
 The Cadet Program is overseen and administered by senior members , who generally specialize in the Cadet Program . For composite squadrons ( which has Senior Member programs as well ) , the Cadet Commander 's chain of command passes through the Deputy Commander for Cadets before reaching the squadron commander , with the Cadet Commander reporting directly to the squadron commander in cadet squadrons .. There are ' Director of Cadet Programs ' positions at all command levels higher than squadron . In addition to the Deputy Commander for Cadets , squadrons also have a Leadership Officer , a senior member whose job is to see to the military aspects of the cadet program , such as uniforms , customs and courtesies . 
 = = Membership = = 
 As of 31 August 2013 , CAP had 60 @,@ 760 members — 34 @,@ 740 senior members and 26 @,@ 020 cadets — in over 1 @,@ 600 local units in all fifty states , Washington , D.C. , Puerto Rico and at numerous overseas United States Air Force installations . CAP members are civilians and are not paid by the United States government for their service . Rather , members are responsible for paying annual membership fees , and must pay for their own uniforms and other related expenses . 
 Senior membership is open to all U.S. citizens , and resident aliens aged 18 and over who are able to pass an FBI background check . There is no upper age limit , nor membership restrictions for physical disabilities , due to the number of different tasks which members may be called on to perform . Cadet membership is open to those aged between 12 and 18 who maintain satisfactory progress in school , as determined by the cadet 's unit commander ; upon their 18th birthday , cadets may become senior members or remain in the Cadet Program until they are 21 . 
 The Civil Air Patrol motto , to which all members ascribe , is " Semper <unk> " , Latin for " Always Vigilant " . All CAP members are also obligated by their service to the organization to abide by its core values : integrity , respect , excellence , and volunteer service . 
 = = = Senior members = = = 
 Senior members are members who joined CAP for the first time past the age of 18 , or who are former cadets who transferred to the senior member program , which must happen by the cadet 's 21st birthday . Senior members who have not yet turned 21 years are eligible for flight officer grades , which include flight officer , technical flight officer , and senior flight officer . There is no mandatory retirement age for CAP members , and there are no physical requirements for joining . Members may enter retired status after twenty years of service . The only physical requirements an officer must follow are the grooming and weight standards required of members who wear the United States Air Force @-@ style uniforms ( these do not apply to members who choose to wear those uniform designs unique to Civil Air Patrol ) . 
 Officer grades up to lieutenant colonel reflect progression in training and organizational seniority , rather than command authority . Because of this , it is not uncommon for senior members commanding groups and squadrons to have members of superior grades serving under them . Current , retired and former members of the United States Armed Forces may be promoted directly to the CAP grade equivalent to their military grade , although some choose to follow the same standards as non @-@ prior @-@ service members . Except for a few exceptional cases , senior members are only promoted to the grade of CAP colonel upon appointment as wing commander , responsible for the administration of CAP units across an entire state . Former military enlisted personnel may choose to retain their grade as senior members , with grades E @-@ 4 ( CAP sergeant ) through E @-@ 9 ( CAP chief master sergeant ) available . Current CAP National Commander Maj Gen Carr has recently unveiled plans to restructure the CAP NCO program to allow individuals to ' enlist ' as an NCO and progress through a specific professional development program . According to an <unk> article on the subject , " The current design of the NCO corps in the CAP only allows former active @-@ duty NCOs to be a part of the corps , with no upgrade training for promotion within the ranks . The newly signed corps structure will mirror the Air Force NCO force structure with an established process to promote and develop NCOs . " 
 Senior members are provided with an optional Senior Member Professional Development program and are encouraged to progress within it . The professional development program consists of five levels , corresponding with grades from second lieutenant to lieutenant colonel . Each level of development has components of leadership training , corporate familiarization and aerospace education , as well as professional development within chosen " Specialty Tracks " . There are many Specialty Tracks and they are designed both to support the organization and to provide opportunities for senior members to take advantage of skills they have from their private lives . Available Specialty Tracks include Logistics , Communications , Cadet Programs , Public Affairs , Legal , Administration , Emergency Services , Finance , and many more . Additionally senior members with specific civilian professional qualifications may be awarded grade on the basis of their professional qualifications . Examples include FAA Certified Flight Instructors , Certified Ground Instructors , attorneys , medical professionals , Certified Public Accountants , clergy , and licensed educators or administrators who are often promoted directly to first lieutenant or captain . 
 = = = Cadet members = = = 
 Civil Air Patrol 's cadet program is a traditional military @-@ style cadet program , and is one of the three main missions of the Civil Air Patrol . CAP cadets wear modified versions of United States Air Force uniforms , hold rank and grade , and practice military customs and courtesies . They are required to maintain physical fitness standards , and are tested on their knowledge of leadership and aerospace subjects at each promotion opportunity . 
 = = = = Concept = = = = 
 The current CAP Cadet Program was designed by John V. " Jack " Sorenson who held the position of Civil Air Patrol 's Director of Aerospace Education in the 1960s . This program is composed of four phases ( Learning , Leadership , Command , and Executive ) each of which is divided into several achievements . Achievements generally correspond to grade promotions , while phases are tied to levels of responsibility . The Cadet Program operates at a local unit ( squadron ) level with weekly meetings and weekend activities , but also has national and wing @-@ sponsored events , including week @-@ long and multi @-@ week summer activities and camps . 
 As cadets progress through the program , they are given additional responsibility for scheduling , teaching , guiding and commanding the other cadets in their units . They also assist their senior staff in executing the Cadet Program . It is not unusual for a cadet officer to command an encampment of hundreds of junior Cadets . Cadets are given many opportunities to lead and to follow ; they may hold leadership positions at squadron and wing activities , and are often involved in planning these activities . Cadets may complete paperwork , command other cadets , and teach at weekly meetings and at weekend and summer events . The U.S. Congress stated in the Recruiting , Retention , and Reservist Promotion Act of 2000 that CAP and similar programs " provide significant benefits for the Armed Forces , including significant public relations benefits " . 
 = = = = Cadet program awards and grade structure = = = = 
 Cadets have a rank structure similar to the United States Air Force enlisted and officer grades , excluding those of general officers . A cadet starts as a cadet airman basic , and is promoted as he or she completes each achievement . Unlike the regular armed forces , where it is possible to enter as either directly as a commissioned following completion of some form of officer training ( service academy , college ROTC , or OCS / OTS , etc . ) , or enlist and eventually advance to non @-@ commissioned officer or petty officer status , a CAP cadet must be promoted through every CAP cadet enlisted grade in order to achieve the rank of CAP cadet second lieutenant . To complete an achievement , a cadet must pass a physical fitness test as well as two written tests , one for leadership and one for aerospace education . The only exceptions to this rule are the promotions to cadet airman and cadet staff sergeant , which have no aerospace test . For some achievements , an additional test of drill proficiency is required . In the new promotion system , effective as of 2010 , there is a drill test for all CAP cadet enlisted grades . 
 The milestones in the Civil Air Patrol Cadet Program are the Wright brothers Award , the General Billy Mitchell Award , the Amelia Earhart Award , the General Ira C. Eaker Award and the General Carl A. Spaatz Award . As of 27 August 2013 , 1 @,@ 905 Spaatz Awards had been earned since the first was awarded to Cadet Douglas Roach in 1964 . Cadet Roach went on to a United States Air Force career and later became a pilot in the US Air Force Thunderbirds aerial demonstration team . 
 Each milestone award in Civil Air Patrol confers upon a cadet various benefits . Upon earning the Mitchell Award and the grade of cadet second lieutenant , a cadet is eligible for promotion the rank of airman first class ( E @-@ 3 ) upon enlistment in the United States Air Force . A cadet earning the Earhart Award and being promoted to C / Capt and , if age 17 or older , may be selected to attend the International Air Cadet Exchange . 
 According to the CAP <unk> website , the percentages for cadets receiving the milestone awards are estimated to be as follows : 
 Mitchell : 15 % 
 Earhart : 5 % 
 Eaker : 2 % 
 Spaatz : ≈ 0 @.@ 5 % 
 Cadets that transfer to the senior member side between the ages of 18 and 20 receive the grade of flight officer ( if the highest cadet award earned was the Mitchell ) , technical flight officer ( if the highest cadet award earned was the Earhart ) or senior flight officer ( if the highest cadet award earned was the Spaatz ) . If the cadet waits until their 21st birthday , at which point they are required to transfer to the senior member program , they are eligible for the grade of second lieutenant ( if the highest cadet award was the Mitchell ) , first lieutenant ( if the highest cadet award was the Earhart ) , or captain ( if the highest cadet award was the Spaatz ) . 
 = = = = Activities = = = = 
 Cadets under the age of 18 are eligible for ten orientation flights in Civil Air Patrol aircraft , including five glider and airplane flights . Glider flights can be replaced by " powered " flights at the discretion of the Wing Commander , depending on the availability of the aircraft . Cadets over 18 years of age can still participate in military orientation flights , and some CAP wings have flight academies where cadets can learn to fly . The United States Air Force and United States Army also frequently schedule orientation flights for CAP cadets in transport aircraft such as the KC @-@ 135 Stratotanker , KC @-@ 10 Extender , C @-@ 130 Hercules and the C @-@ 17 Globemaster III or , in the case of the Army , UH @-@ 60 Black Hawk and CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopters . 
 Civil Air Patrol 's core cadet activity is the summer encampment . Typically a <unk> to ten @-@ day @-@ long event , cadets are put into an intense , military @-@ structured environment similar in certain respects to USAF Basic Military Training ( BMT ) for enlisted personnel , or the first few weeks of USAFA 4th class cadet training , college Air Force ROTC summer Field Training , or USAF Officer Training School for officers , with emphasis on physically and mentally demanding tasks and required classes and activities . These classes include aerospace education , United States Air Force organization , cadet programs , and drug demand reduction . Activities include the classroom courses , physical training , leadership development , and drill & ceremonies . <unk> are usually held at the wing ( state ) level and , when available are usually at military installations , preferably active United States Air Force , Air Force Reserve Command or Air National Guard installations , with military support . 
 The Region Cadet Leadership Schools ( <unk> ) provide training to increase knowledge , skills , and attitudes as they pertain to leadership and management . To be eligible to attend , cadets must be serving in , or preparing to enter , cadet leadership positions within their squadron . <unk> are conducted at region level , or at wing level with region approval . The <unk> programs are more or less modeled on USAFA upper classmen programs , the college Air Force ROTC Professional Officer Course ( <unk> ) and latter stages of OTS . One variation on this theme are CAP Cadet Non @-@ Commissioned Officer Schools and Academies , which are cadet NCO schools designed to teach basic leadership and principles to cadet leaders during their earlier duty positions in the cadet program . 
 = = = = Oath = = = = 
 Cadets ascribe to the following oath during their membership : 
 I pledge that I will serve faithfully in the Civil Air Patrol Cadet Program , and that I will attend meetings regularly , participate actively in unit activities , obey my officers , wear my uniform properly , and advance my education and training rapidly to prepare myself to be of service to my community , state , and nation . 
 One requirement for promotion in the Cadet Program is the ability to recite this oath , verbatim , from memory . 
 = = Relationship to the military = = 
 While CAP is chartered by Congress and is the auxiliary of the Air Force , it is not an operating reserve component under the United States Air Force or the federal government . As stated by 10 U.S.C. § 9442 , the Secretary of the Air Force may use the services of the Civil Air Patrol to fulfill the non @-@ combat programs and missions of the Department of the Air Force . Additionally , the Civil Air Patrol shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the United States with respect to any act or omission of the Civil Air Patrol , including any member of the Civil Air Patrol , in carrying out a mission assigned by the Secretary of the Air Force . 
 Civil Air Patrol members are not subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice and do not have command or authority over any members of the United States military . Similarly , military officers have no command authority over CAP members . As part of recognition of CAP 's service to the USAF , however , senior members in the grade of second lieutenant and above are allowed to wear " U.S. " collar insignia as an official part of their dress blue uniform . All CAP members are required to render military courtesies to all members of the US military and those of friendly foreign nations ; however , as CAP officers are not commissioned by the President of the United States , military personnel are not required to render military courtesies to CAP personnel , though this can be done as a courtesy . CAP members are expected to render military courtesies to one another , though the implementation of this varies widely . Some squadrons are more military @-@ orientated , with saluting and addressing by rank , while others are more informal . 
 Although CAP retains the title " United States Air Force Auxiliary " , 10 U.S.C. § 9442 clarifies that this auxiliary status is only applicable when CAP members and resources are on a United States Air Force @-@ assigned mission with an Air Force @-@ assigned mission number . When CAP resources are engaged in a USAF mission they are reimbursed by the Air Force for communications expenses , fuel and oil , and a share of aircraft maintenance expenses . In addition , CAP members are covered by the Federal Employees Compensation Act ( <unk> ) in the event of injury while participating in the mission . At all other times , such as when aiding civilian authorities , the CAP remains and acts as a private , non @-@ profit corporation . 
 The USAF 's Air Combat Command ( ACC ) , through 1st Air Force , is the parent command of CAP . In October 2002 , the USAF announced plans to move CAP " operational " mission activities from the Air Force 's operations directorate ( <unk> / A3 ) to the Air Force 's newly created homeland security directorate 
 In an announcement on 28 August 2015 by Gen. Mark Welsh , Air Force Chief of Staff , the Civil Air Patrol is included in the U.S. Air Force 's definition of the " total force " . To accomplish this , the USAF updated Doctrine Volume 2 , Leadership , to expand the descriptions of total force and " Airmen " to consist of regular , Guard , Reserve , civilian and auxiliary members . Part of that Total Force inclusion was a realignment in the responsible command which moved Civil Air Patrol @-@ U.S. Air Force ( CAP @-@ USAF ) from Air Education and Training Command through the Jeanne M. Holm Center for Officer Accession and Citizen Development at Maxwell AFB , Alabama , to Air Combat Command through 1st Air Force . This change took place on 24 June 2016 . 
 = = = Uniforms = = = 
 Civil Air Patrol 's uniforms provide a distinctive and standard set of uniform items intended to provide a positive public image , build morale , and enhance the professionalism of the organization 's membership . 
 CAP members wear uniforms similar to the U.S. Air Force 's uniforms worn with distinctive emblems , insignia and badges to identify them as CAP members ; these are categorized as " USAF @-@ style uniforms " . USAF @-@ style uniforms may be worn by all cadets under age 18 , and by cadets over age 18 and senior members who meet height and weight standards set by CAP 's uniform manual . In addition , CAP has a series of what are categorized as " Corporate @-@ style uniforms " which may be worn by all senior members , and also by those cadets over age 18 who do not meet height and weight standards set for the USAF @-@ style uniform . 
 Uniforms are categorized in CAP 's uniform manual by the environment in which the uniform is to be worn or the work to be accomplished . 
 These uniform types are composed of : 
 United States Air Force @-@ style uniforms : 
 Service Dress Uniform ( Class A ) – the United States Air Force 's service dress uniform , consisting of dark blue trousers , light blue shirt with tie , dark blue jacket , and a flight or service cap . Rank is indicated on CAP @-@ distinctive gray shoulder marks ( for senior member officers ) or sleeve stripes ( for senior member non @-@ commissioned officers ) . Cadet ranks are shown by shoulder marks or pin @-@ on insignia . 
 Blue Service Uniform ( Class B ) – identical to the service dress uniform , except without the dark blue jacket . The tie is optional when in short sleeves . Cadet enlisted and NCOs wear metal grade insignia on the collar . 
 Airman Battle Uniform - the current style United States Air Force field uniform , with dark blue name tapes , silver text , metal insignia on the collar for enlisted grade cadets , and cloth insignia for cadet officers and senior members . 
 Battle Dress Uniform ( BDU ) - the old style United States Air Force " woodland camouflage " field uniform , with ultramarine name tapes , metal insignia on the collar for enlisted grade cadets , and cloth insignia for cadet officers and senior members . 
 Flight Duty Uniform - green Nomex one @-@ piece CWU 27 / P flight suit worn by United States Air Force flight crews , styled in a manner similar to Air Mobility Command flight crews , but with CAP insignia . This is worn by CAP flight personnel only . 
 Mess Dress Uniform – the dark blue United States Air Force mess dress uniform with CAP @-@ distinctive insignia and sleeve braid . This is worn by senior members only . 
 Corporate @-@ style ( " CAP distinctive " ) uniforms : 
 Corporate Field Uniform – a Navy Blue version of the battle dress uniform . 
 Aviator Shirt Uniform – an aviator white shirt with shoulder marks , and gray trousers . 
 Corporate Flight Duty Uniform – a dark blue version of the one @-@ piece flight suit in either Nomex or cotton material . This is worn by CAP flight personnel only . 
 Corporate Service Dress Uniform – a dark blue blazer jacket worn with a white shirt , gray trousers , and a CAP or United States Air Force tie . 
 Corporate Working Uniform – a dark blue short @-@ sleeve golf shirt with the CAP seal screened or embroidered on the chest , and gray trousers . This is only worn by senior members . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Civil Air Patrol operates and maintains fixed @-@ wing aircraft , training gliders , ground vehicles , and a national radio communications network . 
 Civil Air Patrol owns and operates a fleet not to exceed 550 single @-@ engine aircraft , predominantly Cessna 172 Skyhawk and Cessna 182 <unk> aircraft . The aircraft are in a phased refurbishment program which began in 2008 , replacing engines , interior , avionics , and paint at a lower cost than new purchases . 
 In 2003 , the Australian designed and built eight @-@ seat Gippsland GA8 Airvan was added to the corporate fleet . 16 of Civil Air Patrol 's fleet of 18 <unk> carry the Airborne Real @-@ time Cueing Hyperspectral Enhanced Reconnaissance ( ARCHER ) system , which can be used to search for aircraft wreckage based on its spectral signature . Other aircraft types include the Cessna 206 and the Maule MT @-@ 235 . CAP also has a number of gliders , such as the L @-@ 23 Super @-@ <unk> , the Schleicher ASK 21 and the Schweizer SGS 2 @-@ 33 , used mainly for cadet orientation flights . 
 In addition to CAP 's own corporate fleet , many member @-@ owned aircraft are made available for official tasking by CAP 's volunteers should the need arise . Aircraft on search missions are generally crewed by at least three qualified aircrew members : a Mission Pilot , responsible for the safe flying of the aircraft ; a mission observer , responsible for navigation , communications and coordination of the mission as well as ground observation ; and a mission scanner who is responsible for looking for crash sites and damage clues . Additionally , the mission scanner may double as an Satellite Digital Imaging System ( SDIS ) operator . Larger aircraft may have additional scanners aboard , providing greater visual coverage . Because of the additional ARCHER equipment , the crew of a Civil Air Patrol GA8 Airvan may also include an operator of the ARCHER system , depending upon the requirements of the mission and the capabilities of the aircraft . 
 CAP owns over 1 @,@ 000 vehicles ( mostly vans for carrying personnel ) and assigns them to units for use in the organization 's missions . Members who use their own vehicles are reimbursed for fuel , oil and communications costs during a USAF @-@ assigned emergency services mission . 
 CAP operates a national radio network of HF ( SSB ) and VHF ( FM ) radio repeaters . There are over 500 of these repeaters strategically located across the United States . Radio communications are now facilitated under <unk> specifications , to which Civil Air Patrol directorates have applied even more stringent standards . CAP 's radio network is designed for use during a national or regional emergency when existing telephone and Internet communications infrastructure is not available . Outside of such emergencies , most of CAP 's internal communications are conducted on the Internet . CAP frequencies and specific repeater locations are designated by the Department of Defense as Unclassified – For Official Use Only information , and as such may only be released to those individuals who have a recognized " need @-@ to @-@ know . " 
 Some aircraft in the CAP fleet are equipped with the SDIS . This system allows CAP to send back real @-@ time images of a disaster or crash site to anyone with an e @-@ mail address , allowing the mission coordinators to make more informed decisions . There are approximately 100 federally funded SDIS systems strategically located across the United States , with more than 20 additional systems funded by state and local governments . 
 The ARCHER imaging system , mounted aboard the GA8 Airvan , uses visible and near @-@ infrared light to examine the surface of the Earth and find suspected crash sites , evaluate areas affected by disasters , or examine foliage from an airborne perspective in order to flag possible marijuana plantations . Both the SDIS and ARCHER systems were used to great success in the response to Hurricane Katrina ; ARCHER may be used in coordination with the SDIS system . 
 A hand @-@ held radio direction finder , the L @-@ <unk> Little L @-@ Per , is used by ground teams to search for downed aircraft . The ground teams carry equipment on their person that they use while in the field . This equipment includes flashlights , signal mirrors , tactical vests , safety vests , and food that will last them at least 24 hours . The equipment carried by ground teams varies much by the mission at hand . Urban Direction Finding ( UDF ) missions necessitate only a small kit of gear . But intensive mountain search and rescue can require packs that provide for up to 72 hours of operational supplies and tool for the location , rescue and extraction of lost or crashed parties . This gear includes the above , plus additional water , meals , and survival gear . Although a standardized list is provided by the national command , many teams modify the list to match the needs of the mission . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Civil Air Patrol is organized along a military model , with a streamlined and strictly hierarchical chain of command . There are several distinct echelons in this structure : National Headquarters , regions , wings , and squadrons or flights . An additional group echelon may be used that is placed between the wing and the squadrons / flights , at the wing commander 's discretion . 
 Civil Air Patrol is headed by a national commander , currently Major General Joseph Vazquez . The organization is governed by a board of governors , established by federal law in 2001 and consisting of 11 members : four Civil Air Patrol members ( currently the national commander , national vice commander , and two members @-@ at @-@ large appointed by the CAP National Executive Committee ) , four United States Air Force representatives appointed by the Secretary of the Air Force , and three members from the aviation community jointly appointed by the CAP national commander and the Secretary of the Air Force . The board of governors generally meets two or three times annually and primarily provides strategic vision and guidance to the volunteer leadership and corporate staff . The volunteer leadership consists of the national commander and his staff , comprising a Vice Commander , Chief of Staff , National Legal Officer , National comptroller , the Chief of the CAP Chaplain Service , and the CAP Inspector General . The national commander holds the grade of CAP major general ; the national vice commander holds the grade of CAP brigadier general . The rest of the national commander 's staff hold the grade of CAP colonel . 
 CAP National Headquarters is located at Maxwell Air Force Base outside Montgomery , Alabama . The headquarters employs a professional staff of over 100 and is led by the CAP Executive Director ( analogous to a corporate chief operating officer ) , who reports to the board of governors . The national headquarters staff provides program management for the organization and membership support for the 1 @,@ 700 + volunteer field units across the country . 
 Below the national headquarters level there are eight geographic regions and a handful of overseas squadrons at various military installations worldwide . Each region , commanded by a CAP colonel , encompasses several statewide organizations referred to as wings . The eight regions are the Northeast , Middle East , Southeast , Great Lakes , Southwest , North Central , Rocky Mountain , and Pacific Regions . 
 The CAP units in each of the fifty states , and Puerto Rico and the District of Columbia , are coordinated by the CAP wing for that state ; each wing has a commander who is a CAP colonel and the sole corporate officer for each state . Each wing commander oversees a wing headquarters staff made up of experienced volunteer members . Larger wings may have an optional subordinate echelon of groups , at the discretion of the wing commander . Each Group encompasses at least five squadrons or flights . 
 Local units are called squadrons . A squadron is broken into flights . Squadrons are the main functioning body of Civil Air Patrol . Civil Air Patrol squadrons are designated as either cadet , senior , or composite squadrons . A CAP composite squadron consists of both cadets and senior members , who may be involved in any of the three missions of Civil Air Patrol . Composite squadrons have two deputy commanders to assist the squadron commander : a Deputy Commander for Seniors and a Deputy Commander for Cadets . A senior squadron includes only senior members , who participate in the emergency services or aerospace education missions of Civil Air Patrol . A cadet squadron is largely made up of cadets , with a small number of senior members as necessary for supervision of cadets and the proper execution of the cadet program . Overseas squadrons operate independently of this structure , reporting directly to the National Headquarters . 
 A CAP flight is a semi @-@ independent unit that is used mainly as a stepping @-@ stone for a new unit until they are large enough to be designated a squadron . Due to their transitory nature , there are very few flights within the CAP structure at any one time . A flight will be assigned to a squadron ' parent ' , and it is the job of the flight and squadron commanders to work together to build the flight into a full and independent squadron .. Flights are also used as temporary units within a squadron . These flights are dismissed after the activity or meeting they were created for . A flight within a squadron is assigned a letter , so a flight could be designated " Charlie Flight , Thunderbolt Squadron " , for example . In larger squadrons , flights are permanent subunits and cadets are assigned to them . 
 Headquarters Civil Air Patrol @-@ U.S. Air Force ( CAP @-@ USAF ) is an active duty unit that operates under the joint jurisdiction of CAP National Headquarters and the USAF Air Combat Command , 1st Air Force . Commanded by an <unk> @-@ rated Air Force Colonel , HQ CAP @-@ USAF consists of approximately 75 active duty Air Force , Air Force Reserve , Air National Guard , and civilian United States Air Force personnel ( with all of the Air Force civil service personnel at CAP @-@ USAF also being CAP members ) , 22 of whom are stationed at National Headquarters , staff CAP @-@ USAF . These members advise , assist , and oversee Civil Air Patrol 's operations and provide liaison between CAP and the USAF . As of August 2014 , the commander of CAP @-@ USAF is Colonel Michael D. <unk> , USAF . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Civil Air Patrol is a non @-@ profit corporation established by Public Law 79 @-@ 476 . It receives its funding from four major sources : membership dues , corporate donations , Congressional appropriations , and private donations . 
 Squadron and group financial support comes from donations and fundraising . Some units charge their own membership dues above and beyond CAP membership dues . These donations and fund raisers are how the squadrons and groups pay for their equipment , rent for facilities , and activities at the local level . 
 Today , apart from member dues , Civil Air Patrol receives funding from donations and grants from individuals , foundations and corporations ; from grants and payments from state governments for patrolling and other tasks as agreed by memorandums of understanding ; and from federal funding for reimbursement of fuel , oil and maintenance plus capital expenses for aircraft , vehicles and communications equipment . 
 There are few paid positions in Civil Air Patrol . Most are located at National Headquarters , although some wings have paid administrators or accountants . During 2011 , Civil Air Patrol had 182 paid employees . 
 = Washington State Route 224 = 
 State Route 224 ( SR 224 ) is a 10 @.@ 15 @-@ mile ( 16 @.@ 33 km ) long state highway located entirely in Benton County , Washington , United States . The highway serves to connect SR 225 to Interstate 82 ( I @-@ 82 ) and U.S. Route 12 ( US 12 ) , and to link Benton City to West Richland and Richland . Before the 1964 state highway renumbering the highway was numbered Secondary State Highway 3R . SR 224 is a lightly traveled rural highway except through Richland , where an average of 16 @,@ 000 cars traveled the highway daily in 2009 . The Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) is currently studying plans to alleviate traffic congestion at the western terminus of the highway , with plans ranging from moving the exit ramp from I @-@ 82 , creating a roundabout , or adding a traffic light . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 224 begins at an interchange with I @-@ 82 in southern Benton City . After only 0 @.@ 05 mi ( 80 m ) , SR 224 intersects SR 225 and turns east along Kennedy Road . After passing a park and ride lot on the south side of the highway , the road turns back to the north on Van <unk> Street , paralleling the Yakima River , slowly turning northeast through a rural area of Benton County . After passing through farmland SR 224 becomes the main east @-@ west thoroughfare of West Richland . Exiting the town , the highway passes over the Yakima River and enters Richland . Before the highway terminates at an intersection with SR 240 southeast of the Richland Airport , the highway crosses over a single track belonging to the Port of Benton and managed by Tri @-@ City Railroad . Van <unk> Street continues east from the terminus of SR 224 for another 1 @.@ 7 miles ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) , turning south as Hains Avenue at the Columbia River . 
 The highway is primarily a two @-@ lane road between Benton City and West Richland . The road expands to four lanes in West Richland , a width the highway remains to its terminus in Richland . Speed limits posted on the highway range from 30 miles per hour ( 48 km / h ) to 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) . 
 Every year WSDOT conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2009 , WSDOT calculated that as few as 3 @,@ 200 cars traveled through the intersection at Keene Road , west of West Richland , and as many as 16 @,@ 000 cars at the eastern terminus . 
 = = History = = 
 A roadway has connected Benton City to Richland since at least 1926 , while a road with an alignment more similar to that of the current highway first appeared on maps in 1939 , with termini at the concurrent highways U.S. Route 410 and PSH 3 . The highway now known as SR 224 was numbered Secondary State Highway 3R ( SSH 3R ) between 1937 and the 1964 state highway renumbering , which abolished the Primary and Secondary highway numbers , replacing them with Sign Route numbers , later renamed State Routes . 
 The twin set of bridges that carry I @-@ 82 over the highway at the western terminus were built in 1973 , which was during the initial construction of I @-@ 82 through southern Washington . The current bridge that carries SR 224 over the Yakima River was constructed in 1993 , replacing the original bridge on the highway . 
 = = Future = = 
 WSDOT is studying several different proposed changes to the SR 224 / SR 225 intersection to improve traffic flow . Several proposals have been introduced to alleviate the situation , including replacing the stop sign at the intersection with a traffic light , reconfiguring the intersection and the off ramp from I @-@ 82 , and implementing several options featuring roundabouts . WSDOT favors the roundabout options and estimates costs will range between $ 2 and $ 7 @.@ 4 million to construct . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Benton County . 
 = Exercise Vigilant Eagle = 
 Exercise Vigilant Eagle is a series of trilateral military exercises involving the armed forces of Canada , Russia , and the United States . The exercise is designed to prepare the Russian Air Force and the North American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) to undertake coordinated air intercept missions against hijacked civilian aircraft . Four such exercises have been held . 
 = = Background = = 
 Billed by its Russian , American , and Canadian participants as a first @-@ of @-@ its @-@ kind exercise for the former Cold War adversaries , Vigilant Eagle was described by Russian Air Force Col. Alexander <unk> as a means to " develop procedures and bring the relationship between our countries closer together to unite our countries in the fight against terrorism ” . The groundwork for Vigilant Eagle was laid in a June 2003 meeting in St. Petersburg , Russia between President of the United States George W. Bush and President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin . Coming less than two years after the September 11 attacks , and in the aftermath of an increase in Russian @-@ American tensions resulting from the 2003 invasion of Iraq , the meeting saw progress in developing informal comity for bilateral cooperation in areas of anti @-@ terrorism . 
 = = Exercises = = 
 = = = Vigilant Eagle 2010 = = = 
 The first Vigilant Eagle exercise was planned for 2008 but postponed until 2010 due to the South Ossetia War . According to the U.S. government , that exercise marked " the first live @-@ flying event between Russia and the United States since the Second World War . " 
 = = = Vigilant Eagle 2011 = = = 
 A second Exercise Vigilant Eagle was held in 2011 . In the exercise scenario , a U.S. civilian airliner operating near the Russia @-@ United States northern border was seized by terrorists and flown towards Russia . The scenario was then repeated in reverse , with an aircraft originating in Russian airspace violating NORAD 's Alaskan Air Defense Sector where it was intercepted and " repelled from North American airspace . " 
 The exercise tested the ability of the Federal Aviation Administration to contact both Russian Air Force and NORAD authorities and of NORAD and the Russian Air Force to effectively liaise with each other in tracking and intercepting the hijacked aircraft . The aircraft used to represent the U.S. airliner was a civilian @-@ crewed passenger aircraft chartered from Global Aviation . 
 = = = Vigilant Eagle 2012 = = = 
 Vigilant Eagle 2012 was a command post exercise ( <unk> ) held in 2012 that , for the first time , did not include live @-@ flying aircraft , instead using computer simulations . 
 = = = Vigilant Eagle 2013 = = = 
 Exercise Vigilant Eagle 2013 was conducted in August of 2013 . The exercise again involved a live @-@ flying element with CF @-@ 18s of the Royal Canadian Air Force intercepting a civilian airliner west of Mount McKinley after the aircraft reported a " hijacking " following take @-@ off from Ted Stevens International Airport . The mission was then handed off to the Russian Air Force as the aircraft passed over the international boundary . After completion of the mission , the exercise was repeated in reverse with a Russia @-@ originating aircraft reporting a " hijacking " on an approach toward the international boundary . 
 = = Future exercises = = 
 A planned Vigilant Eagle 2014 was suspended due to tensions between the United States and Canada on one side , and the Russian Federation on the other , over the War in Donbass . The exercise would have involved , for the first time , the Japan Air Self Defense Force . According to American and Canadian officials , the exercises were canceled at their initiative . 
 = Criss Angel = 
 Christopher Nicholas <unk> ( born December 19 , 1967 ) , better known by the stage name Criss Angel , is an American magician and illusionist . Angel began his career in New York City , before moving his base of operations to the Las Vegas Valley . He is known for starring in the television and stage show Criss Angel Mindfreak and his previous live performance illusion show Criss Angel Believe in collaboration with Cirque du Soleil at the Luxor casino in Las Vegas . The show generated $ 150 million in tourist revenue to Las Vegas in 2010 , but has since been replaced by Mindfreak LIVE on 11 May 2016 ( this new show is still part produced by Cirque , however the directive rights are entirely with Criss Angel ) . He also starred in the television series Believe on Spike TV , the television show Phenomenon , and the 2014 stage show Criss Angel Magicjam . 
 Angel has been on primetime television for more hours than any other magician in history , between his television series and various specials on cable and network television . He also holds multiple world @-@ records made during his magic performances , and was named Magician of the Decade in 2009 and Magician of the Century in 2010 by the International Magicians Society . In addition to his career as an illusionist , Angel was the lead singer for his industrial band Angeldust , which released five albums between 1998 and 2003 . He also authored the book Mindfreak : Secret Revelations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Criss Angel was born on December 19 , 1967 , at Hempstead General Hospital in Hempstead , on Long Island , New York . He is of Greek descent . Angel was raised in <unk> until fourth grade , when his family moved to East Meadow , New York . His father , John <unk> , owned a restaurant and doughnut shop . He developed an interest in magic at age seven and performed his first show at the age of twelve , for which he was paid $ 10 . His main early influence was Harry Houdini . By fourteen , Angel was performing throughout high school at restaurants in East Meadow , including the Wine Gallery . Angel 's first major illusion was making his mother float in their family den . Early in his career he was helped by animal breeder and reality @-@ television host Marc Morrone , who helped Angel find and train a set of doves for his act . 
 By the time he graduated from East Meadow High School , he had decided to pursue a career as a professional magician instead of attending college as his parents wanted . According to Biography Channel , " Angel hit the road and began touring with other traveling performance acts . Between traveling and performing , he attempted to further his education in his own by studying the history of magic in public libraries . He also studied the art of mysticism , music , martial arts and even dance . " 
 = = Early career = = 
 Angel has said that , " I stayed away from magicians when I was younger because I didn 't want to think like them and wanted to create my own style . " His first television appearance was in 1994 , where he performed as a part of a one @-@ hour ABC primetime special entitled Secrets . One of the early supporters of Angel was horror director Clive Barker . In 1995 , Barker asked Angel to work with him on his film Lord of Illusions . He also later recorded the intro to Angel 's album World of Illusion : System One . Barker said of Angel in the mid @-@ 1990s that , " Criss Angel is extraordinary , a spectacular mix of visionary magic . This is the future , and it can ’ t come quickly enough . " In 1998 , Angel performed a ten @-@ minute show over the course of the " World of Illusion " conference in Madison Square Garden , performing sixty shows per day . 
 Angel also starred in the 1997 television movie The Science of Magic and its 2003 sequel The Science of Magic II . Criss Angel Mindfreak , which would later become Angel 's first television series , was originally an off @-@ Broadway show by Angel , which in 2001 was picked up by the World Underground Theatre . When not performing the show , Angel worked the streets promoting the show to pedestrians . Criss Angel Mindfreak ran for more than 600 performances between 2001 and 2003 at the World Underground Theater in Times Square . His twenty @-@ four hours in a tank of water set a world record for the longest amount of time for a human to be completely submerged under water . This performance would also become a part of his first television special . 
 Angel has also been known to actively discourage a belief in mediumship , stating that there is no way for mediums to speak with people beyond the dead . He has said , " If somebody 's doing that for entertainment purposes , that 's one thing . But if they claim to be communicating with the dead , I don 't care if they 're from my hometown , I don 't care if they 're my family members : I 'll expose them and tell them what they really are . " 
 = = = Water torture cell in Times Square , 2002 = = = 
 In August 2002 , Angel spent 24 hours shackled underwater in a phone booth @-@ sized water torture cell near the WWE entertainment store in New York 's Times Square , WWE corporation being the owners of the World Underground Theatre where Angel had been performing his stage show . To prepare for the trick , he practiced in a neighbor 's backyard swimming pool next to his mother 's house in East Meadow , New York . Prior to the performance he had only managed to spend 12 consecutive hours in the water . He fasted for twenty @-@ four hours before the performance to make it through the period without need to exit and use the washroom . During the trick he went through sixteen oxygen tanks . After the trick he was required to remove his own shackles and chains before exiting the water . Within an hour , his skin began to react substantially to the water . 
 At the end of the performance , according to Ted <unk> , " Before he emerged from the phone @-@ booth sized contraption of clear plastic and steel , Angel yanked out the air hose that allowed him to breathe . Then assistants pulled a black curtain over the 220 @-@ gallon ( 832 @-@ liter ) chamber to block the view of television cameras and about 100 people gathered outside the window in which he was displayed . Under cover , Angel apparently escaped from the shackles that bound his arms , legs and neck , before pulling himself from the watery chamber with a celebratory scream . " Upon successfully completing the trick , he was described as having " skin crinkled and his eyes bloodshot " , and upon emerging from the tank he was taken to St. Clare 's Hospital and treated for severe dehydration . He reported afterwards that he had suffered from overheating , jaw fatigue , and semi @-@ consciousness while in the tank . 
 = = Television specials and promotional appearances ( 2002 @-@ 2005 ) = = 
 On October 20 , 2002 , Angel performed in the ABC Family television special named Criss Angel Mindfreak : Postmodern illusionist , an hour @-@ long performance and tribute to Harry Houdini . The special aired again on December 24 , 2002 on Channel 4 in the UK . The Birmingham Evening Mail reviewed the show , writing , " Criss Angel is currently making a name for himself as a more provocative , darker alternative to [ other illusionists ] . He walks the streets of New York , hypnotising passers @-@ by , turning cups of take @-@ away coffee into cockroaches and suspending himself from the ceiling by inserting hooks into his back . The piece de resistance of all these mind games is an update of the Houdini underwater trick - an attempt to stay in a ( cell ) tank of water for 24 hours , padlocked and restrained . All seems to be going well , until the filter system breaks down and the water begins to heat up . " 
 On October 31 , 2003 SciFi Channel aired the one @-@ hour special Supernatural starring Angel . Kate O 'Hare said of the special that , " Filmed in part at Universal Theme Park in Orlando , Fla . , " Supernatural " finds Angel crawling up buildings , passing a quarter through his skin , spontaneously combusting and having otherworldly creatures burst from his chest . " When asked about his process in creating television specials , Angel said that , " I like to have my hand in everything on my TV specials . I 'm the executive producer ; I direct it ; I create it . I write all the music for my TV specials and my live performances . It 's on my label . I write it ; I produce it . " During the special Angel performed stunts including lighting himself on fire and making a tarantula emerge from a pedestrian 's soda can . In 2003 , Angel was also featured in the two @-@ hour TBS special Made in Japan . 
 In early 2003 , Angel performed at the release of the new branding for Miller Lite beer in Milwaukee , Wisconsin on the 80th anniversary of Houdini 's last performance in that city . For the performance , he was suspended ten stories in the air and bound in a straitjacket , from which he escaped . He also performed an illusion at Ozzfest in 2005 . During this period Angel also earned money selling signed merchandise , making up to $ 50 @,@ 000 a day . 
 = = Criss Angel Mindfreak television series = = 
 In 2005 , Criss Angel became the creator , director , and executive producer of the A & E Network show Criss Angel Mindfreak , and had entered production in January . Seasons 1 and 2 were filmed at The Aladdin in Las Vegas , with Season 3 at the Luxor Las Vegas . Premiering on July 20 , 2005 , the show 's illusions have included walking on water , levitating , walking up the side of Luxor Hotel ( in the light of 39 focused lamps that can be seen from space ) , floating between two buildings , causing a Lamborghini to disappear , surviving in an exploding C4 Crate , cutting himself in half in full view of an audience and getting run over by a steamroller while lying on a bed of broken glass . 
 The first season of the show was released on DVD after it completed its on @-@ screen run . The show also released its Halloween special , along with two special episodes , on an additional one @-@ disc DVD offering . The show returned for a second season in May 2006 , and was named one of the best shows of the summer by the Tulsa World newspaper . The show was renewed for a third season in July 2006 ; as of that third season the show was A & E 's number one rated show , with more than 1 @.@ 5 million viewers . That year he promoted the show with a performance where he was suspended within a cube encased in concrete above Times Square , escaping from the block before it was set to crash to the ground . Magic effects creator Sean Field stated of Angel this year that , " Criss Angel is the biggest name in magic since Houdini ... No other magician has invaded pop culture to the degree that Criss Angel has . He has changed the image of magic and made it cool . " The show became one of the most popular foreign television shows in parts of Asia , including China . 
 The television show was noted as a part of the mid @-@ 2000s films , television , and books that drove a resurgence of the public popularity of magic . Criss Angel Mindfreak was the first weekly magic television show to air in forty years . Daily Variety reviewed the premiere writing , " The stunts alone are impressive . But what makes the show fascinating are the down @-@ home touches in which we see the kid from New York , who first honed his magic skills at the age of 6 . Keenly aware of the camera at all times , Angel manages to offer some personality , especially where family is involved . Viewers follow the illusionist as he contemplates new and more dangerous stunts , while his crew , including his often @-@ fretful brothers , offer insight as to what , other than ego , drives someone in this profession . " 
 The show ran from 2005 until 2010 , at which point he had been featured for more hours on primetime television than any other magician in history . Other tricks performed in the show included making an elephant disappear and the performance of séances as well as other tricks in order to teach his audience about con men and how to avoid scams intended to manipulate money out of people . 
 In July 2008 , Angel escaped from a beachside hotel before its demolition in front of a crowd of about 50 @,@ 000 people , an illusion that also aired on the television program . After the illusion , Angel showed the audience step by step how he achieved the escape . He first picked open a set of handcuffs that had him shackled to a balcony railing . He then smashed the window of the room in order to enter the hotel , and picked padlocks on both the room 's internal door and the door to the stairwell . The escape was initially supposed to occur via a ladder that dangled above the hotel 's roof 30 seconds before collapse , after picking through five locks on the roof 's door . Instead , Angel emerged from the rubble after the collapse , claiming that the initial plan was always to escape via the helicopter . The total time allotted for the entire illusion was 4 minutes , with dynamite located on the first , second , and fourth floors of the building . 
 = = Criss Angel Believe = = 
 = = = Stage show = = = 
 In 2006 , Angel partnered with Cirque du Soleil to produce the stage show Criss Angel Believe ( stylized as " Criss Angel BeLIEve " ) , premiering the show at the Luxor Las Vegas on September 26 , 2008 . It became the bestselling live magic show in the world . The name of the show was taken from Harry Houdini , for the mythology of Houdini choosing the word " believe " as the codeword for communicating with Houdini after his death . Luxor 's parent company , MGM Mirage , financed the show with $ 100 million . 
 After several delays , the show was set for a gala opening on October 31 , 2008 , with preview shows in late September on the 82nd anniversary of Harry Houdini 's death . The initial preview received mixed reactions and reviews . Reporters for the Las Vegas Sun , Los Angeles Times , and Las Vegas Review Journal cited a lack of the magic Angel is known for , as well as a confusing and uninteresting theme . They also opined that neither Angel nor Cirque du Soleil were able to perform to their capabilities during these initial performances . On the positive side , the Las Vegas Sun later quoted Star Pulse , stating , " He has created a live show that is everything a perfect magic performance should be — and then some . It ’ s not just remarkable magic — it ’ s transcendent art that won ’ t just blow your mind ; it will quite possibly change your life . " 
 In April 2009 , Angel ended a performance of Believe by " hurling obscene insults " at blogger Perez Hilton , an audience member . Hilton reportedly had texted to his fans during the performance that the show was " unbelievably BAD " and that he 'd " rather be getting a root canal " , and word had gotten back to Angel by the end of the performance . Cirque du Soleil later apologized to Hilton for Angel 's remarks . 
 In 2010 , the Las Vegas Sun critic John <unk> , after being unimpressed by the initial show , said Believe had improved by reducing the narrative elements and focusing on the magic . In 2011 , the Toronto Star wrote : “ The show is easily the most exciting thing now on stage in Vegas ! ” That year the show attracted an estimated $ 150 million in ticket sales . The show currently has a ten @-@ year performance contract that runs through 2019 , and was the best selling magic show in Las Vegas as of 2013 . 
 = = = Television series = = = 
 The stage show celebrated its fifth anniversary of appearing on stage in October 2013 . That month a cable television series based upon the show entitled Criss Angel BeLIEve was broadcast on Spike TV . The first season included eleven one @-@ hour episodes , including 118 different illusions . Guests on the show include Ludacris , Ice @-@ T , Randy Couture and Shaquille O ’ Neal . When asked about the three years between the last episode of Mindfreak and his return to television , Angel stated that , " I didn ’ t take long at all to go back to television . It was my choice to work on the live Cirque show and to get that where I wanted it to be . 
 " Now that that show is just humming and doing amazing business — it ’ s the # 1 bestselling magic show in the world as far as ticket sales and the perception that people are experiencing and coming back to see it multiple times — I felt it was in a great place and I could think about television again . Obviously , “ Believe ” will continue to evolve until its last performance because I always want to add new magic , I ’ m always tweaking and transforming it . I missed being on television , I had something new creatively to say , and Spike became the perfect home to do it . " Endemol purchased the foreign distribution rights for the show , and was the " most @-@ watched new original series [ on Spike TV ] in more than 18 months " according to the Hollywood Reporter . 
 In the episode " Lord of Illusions — Death Premonition " , Angel paid homage to Clive Barker , the director of the horror movie of the same name . In the episode , Angel performed the closing stunt from the film , in which he laid beneath a circle of suspended swords , and predicted the correct order of six falling swords to avoid becoming stabbed through his body after their release . The swords were selected by the audience with the help of a randomly bouncing ball . According to the Las Vegas Sun , " Criss is the only , and first , magician in the world granted permission from the inventor and filmmaker to re @-@ create the film ’ s death @-@ defying stunt . " 
 For another episode for the series filmed in New York City he was asked by the NYPD not to pre @-@ announce the performance , as crowd control for some Angel performances had become a concern for the police . This trick saw Angel hanging his feet , while bound with two <unk> and a noose around his neck which were attached to metal weights . While he was successful in the trick , Angel tore his shoulder muscles and this required surgery in January 2014 . This resulted in the temporary closing of the Believe stage show between January and April 2014 , while he was recovering from the surgery and returning to performance shape . He did however host a new stage show featuring other magicians between February and March 2014 in lieu of performing in his own show . Clips from the show also became the most watched YouTube magic clips in the history of the site , with more than 15 million views . 
 In the show , Angel revealed the secrets behind some of his illusions to the audience . This included the Lord of Illusions trick , where he revealed that he had the swords in a preset order so that he could avoid them . The episode featuring this illusion also includes a meeting between Angel and his team discussing a problem with the trick and how to ensure it doesn 't happen again . 
 = = Phenomenon = = 
 Starting in October 2007 , he appeared as a judge on Phenomenon with Uri Geller . In a CNN interview about the show , he told Larry King " no one has the ability , that I 'm aware of , to do anything supernatural , psychic , talk to the dead . And that was what I said I was going to do with Phenomenon . If somebody goes on that show and claims to have supernatural psychic ability , I 'm going to bust [ him ] live and on television . " 
 On the October 31 , 2007 episode of the reality show Phenomenon , <unk> Jim Callahan performed a summoning , purportedly of author Raymond Hill , to help discover the contents of a locked box . Although fellow judge Uri Geller praised the performance , Angel called it " comical " and subsequently challenged both Callahan and Geller to guess the contents of two envelopes he pulled out of his pocket , offering a million dollars of his own money to whoever could do so . This led to an argument between Callahan and Angel , during which Callahan walked toward Angel and called him an " ideological bigot " , with the two pulled apart as the show promptly went to a commercial break . Angel has since revealed the contents of one envelope and at the unveiling he challenged Geller one more time . Geller responded , " Although we were born one day apart - I was born on the 20th of December and you on the 19th - a lot of years between us - 40 years , you were one year old when I came out with my spoon bending ... " Criss Angel cut him off at this point , saying , " I guess this is a ' no , ' " and proceeded to open the envelope . The envelope contained an index card with the numbers " 911 " printed on it for September 11 , 2001 . Angel 's explanation was this : " If on 9 @-@ 10 somebody could have predicted that 9 @-@ 11 was going to happen , they could have saved thousands of lives " . The other envelope 's contents were scheduled to be revealed on the first episode of Season 4 of Criss Angel : Mindfreak . 
 = = Stage shows = = 
 = = = Criss Angel Magicjam = = = 
 The temporary replacement show for Believe was entitled Criss Angel Magicjam , which was performed in the same Luxor theatre . According to the Las Vegas Sun , the show included , " Longtime Las Vegas comedy @-@ illusionist Nathan Burton ; Banachek , the world ’ s premiere mentalist ; and new female magician <unk> Lambert , who has been prominently featured in the Spike series ... joined by grandmaster manipulators Jason Byrne and Tony Clarke , supreme close @-@ up artist Armando Vera and the magic comedy of Russ Merlin . " The production was written and directed by Criss Angel . In January 2014 , Angel announced that he planned on taking Criss Angel Magicjam on a North American tour during the summer of 2014 . The show also featured Angel 's own illusions , which he performed for about 40 minutes of the show . Robin Leach said of the show that , " Magicjam is great fun and a high @-@ energy show packed with mind @-@ blowing magic . " 
 = = = Mindfreak Live ! = = = 
 In 2014 , Angel premiered the stage show Mindfreak LIVE ! The touring show features illusions from Angel himself , which received positive reviews . The demonstrations used in the show were developed in Angel 's illusion laboratory in Las Vegas , located in a 60 @,@ 000 square foot warehouse . His international touring with the show marked the first time that Angel had travelled with his show in about six years . The premiere show of the performance occurred at Foxwoods Resort Casino in Connecticut during November 2014 . 
 = = = The <unk> = = = 
 The <unk> premiered in June 2015 at the Foxwoods Resort Casino 's The Fox Theater , with Criss Angel serving as creator , director and executive producer . Performers for the show include illusionist Landon Swank , magician <unk> Lambert , escape artist Spencer <unk> , mentalist Banachek , dog <unk> Johnny Dominguez , magician Stefan , and close up magician Adrian Vega . Robin Leach reviewed the show as having " overwhelming positive reactions " and wrote that it contained " the most mind @-@ blowing magic spectacle that ’ s playing anywhere " . Angel has stated that the show is a culmination of ten years of development , which he began in 2005 , and is intended as a global touring show and as a premiering venue for several new illusions from each magician . 
 = = Variety show appearances and guest spots = = 
 Angel has made numerous special television guest appearances on WWE Raw , including acting as guest star on March 8 , 2010 . He also appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show , including the premiere episode of its 24th season . During a 2007 episode of the show , he successfully guessed the number between 1 and 100 he asked Winfrey to think of without telling him . Angel has appeared on other talk shows including The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , The Megan Mullally Show , The Ellen DeGeneres Show , AVN Awards Show 2007 and Larry King Live on CNN . He was also a guest on the The Tonight Show , Late Show with David Letterman , America 's Got Talent , and The Rosie O 'Donnell Show . He also made a guest acting appearance on the hit television shows CSI : NY , Las Vegas and Rules of Engagement . In 2011 , Angel also appeared in an Orville <unk> Pop @-@ Up Bowl popcorn commercial . 
 In May 2005 , Angel introduced honoree Ozzy Osbourne at the VH1 Rock Honors awards , biting the head off a bat as a part of the introduction in homage to Osbourne 's early career onstage antics . At the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards , Criss Angel performed an illusion as a part of the musical performance by Britney Spears and helped to plan her stage show , which opened the television broadcast . He was also hired as the illusionist for the planned 2009 Michael Jackson O2 arena concerts before Jackson 's death . In 2013 , Angel had a cameo in the feature film The Incredible Burt <unk> , and Jim Carrey 's character in the movie " Steve Gray " has been said to be modeled after Angel . There is a wax statue of Angel in the Madame Tussauds wax museum in Las Vegas . 
 = = Other projects = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Angel was the frontman for the heavy metal band Angel and collaborated with industrial rock musician <unk> Scott for Angeldust . Angeldust released its debut album Musical <unk> From the World of Illusion in 1998 . He later released the albums System 1 , System 2 , and System 3 . In 2003 , he released the album Supernatural . His musical style continues to be in the heavy metal style , though when describing his musical style he has said , " There are elements where it 's more electronic , and there are orchestrated sections . I decided to take it in different places because I 'm inspired by emotion and by giving people a connection , a sense of a feeling — whether it 's excitement or crying or being happy . " He also produced soundtracks for his television series Mindfreak , including collaborations with members of Korn and Godsmack . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Angel is the author of the book Mindfreak : Secret Revelations , published by <unk> in 2007 . Mindfreak : Secret Revelations appeared on the Los Angeles Times bestseller list that year . According to the Las Vegas Sun , " The 295 @-@ page book details the early beginnings of his career , memorable demonstrations from his TV show and personal reflections . " Secret Revelations " also contains several pictures and provides step @-@ by @-@ step instructions for 40 of his basic <unk> . Laura Morton helped the magician write the book . " California Bookwatch wrote that it " tells of Criss Angel 's evolution as a performance artist , magician and musician , charting his rise to fame beginning at age 6 and adding details of his life and his artistic philosophy and influences ... His survey covers the ' <unk> ' which allow him to push for excellence in very different worlds " . 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 Criss Angel is the most watched magician in Internet history since the late 2000s . His clip , " Walk on Water " , had received more than 39 million views by 2010 , and more than 46 million by 2013 . By early 2013 , his videos had achieved more than 200 million views . Another highly watched clip is " Rip Bodies Apart " taken from the premiere episode of BeLIEve , which had more than twelve million views within a month . 
 = = = Toys = = = 
 In 2010 , Angel partnered with <unk> to release the Criss Angel Magic Collection , which contained six Mindfreak Magic Tricks instructions , 250 tricks , and a magic kit for children . The product was backed by $ 50 million in marketing . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Angel won the International Magician Society 's Magician of the Year award in 2001 , 2004 , 2005 , 2007 and 2008 , in addition to its " Magician of the Decade " title in 2009 and " Magician of the Century " title in 2010 . He was the 22nd recipient of the Louie Award for outstanding achievement in the art of magic . He has also appeared on the covers of Magic and Genii magazines . In 2008 , Angel was one of the inaugural nominees for the Harry Houdini Award , awarded by the Harry Houdini Museum . Angel is the youngest magician to ever be inducted into the International Magician Society 's Magic Hall of Fame . He is also the only man to have won the Merlin Magician of the Year award on two occasions , in 2001 and 2004 . In 2011 , he was awarded the World Magic Legacy Awards ' Living Legend award . He is a member of the 2017 Walk of Fame class , and will receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = = World records = = = 
 Angel is the holder of several world records , including the longest time submerged under water and the fastest time to escape from a straitjacket at two minutes and thirty seconds , the longest body suspension at 5 hours 42 minutes , and the fastest time to perform the " Metamorphosis " illusion at less than one second . He is also the holder of the Guinness world record for " The most people to disappear in an illusion " , for making 100 people disappear on May 26 , 2010 during a performance of Believe at the Luxor . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2002 , Angel married his longtime girlfriend JoAnn <unk> . The couple filed for divorce four years later . Although Angel was seen with his wife in the buried alive illusion ( season 1 , episode 6 , 2005 ) and the body suspension illusion ( season 1 , episode 5 , 2005 ) , she was not credited as his wife ; rather , she was listed as " Criss 's Girl " . In November 2008 , Angel began dating Holly Madison , former girlfriend of Hugh Hefner . The relationship ended in February 2009 . He proposed to Sandra Gonzalez on September 7 , 2011 in Cabo San Lucas during a sunset dinner . 
 As of 2010 , Big Bear Choppers had produced seven custom @-@ made motorcycles for Angel , who featured the motorcycle designers on his show Criss Angel Mindfreak . He also had a Harley Davidson motorcycle built by Orange County Choppers , which he rode in the intro filmed for Criss Angel Mindfreak . As a philanthropist , Angel created the Believe Foundation ' Believe Anything is Possible ' , and was awarded the Make @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation award for most supportive celebrity on May 19 , 2010 . He was also awarded the foundation 's Chris Greicius Celebrity Award in 2007 . As of 2016 , Angel 's business interests made about $ 70 million in revenues annually . 
 = Bat 'leth = 
 The bat 'leth ( Klingon : betleH , pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a double sided scimitar / hook sword / deer horn knives hybrid @-@ edged weapon with a curved blade , four points and handholds on the back . It was designed and created by Star Trek : The Next Generation visual effects producer Dan Curry for the Star Trek franchise , where it is the characteristic melee weapon of Klingons . Curry has called the bat 'leth " one of the iconic images associated with the show " . It has spawned a smaller version , which became known as the " mek 'leth " ( Klingon : <unk> ) . Bat 'leths have become an enduring symbol of the franchise among fans and are occasionally referenced in other media . 
 = = Description = = 
 A bat 'leth is a curved blade approximately 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) long , with two spiked protrusions at each end and three handholds along the back which can be used to twist and spin the blade rapidly . 
 Dan Curry created the bat 'leth in 1990 for Worf , a character played by Michael Dorn in Star Trek : The Next Generation after receiving approval from producer Rick Berman . Curry based it on the " Chinese fighting crescent " . Curry — a martial artist — also developed a fighting style similar to t 'ai chi ch 'uan for the use of the weapon . In 1995 , he developed a smaller version of the bat 'leth , the " mek 'leth " — which is based on a Northern Tibetan cavalry sword . He designed the weapon for Dorn to use when Worf joined the crew of Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Mek 'leths are intended for one @-@ handed use and shaped like a scimitar ; it is about half the length of the full @-@ size bat 'leth . 
 = = Use in Star Trek = = 
 In Star Trek lore , the Klingon Kahless created the bat 'leth around 625 A.D. According to Klingon mythology , he formed the blade by dropping a length of his hair into some lava from inside the Kri <unk> Volcano , then cooling , shaping , and hardening it in the lake of <unk> . He then united Qo 'noS , the Klingon homeworld by killing a tyrant named Molor with the weapon , which became known as the " Sword of Kahless " . The sword was later stolen by a species called the Hur <unk> during their invasion of Qo 'noS . In the Deep Space Nine episode " The Sword of Kahless " , Worf and another Klingon named Kor rediscover the artifact , but it is eventually transported into space to prevent them from using it to attack each other . The Sword of Kahless differs from normal bat 'leths as it has five points and one handhold compared to four points and three handholds . 
 In the Klingon language , the bat 'leth was originally referred to as <unk> <unk> , then was shortened to betleH . The word " bat 'leth " means " Sword of Honor " . Bat 'leths are made of a reinforced metal called <unk> and are normally 116 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 81 ft ) long and weigh 5 @.@ 3 kilograms ( 12 lb ) . 
 The bat 'leth appeared in 29 television episodes across the Star Trek franchise in Star Trek : The Next Generation , Star Trek : Voyager , Star Trek : Deep Space Nine and Star Trek : Enterprise . The Bat 'leth was also used in the 1994 film Star Trek Generations . The mek 'leth appeared in the television series Deep Space Nine and in the 1996 film Star Trek : First Contact . The Sword of Kahless appeared in the 2000 video game Star Trek : Armada and normal bat 'leths appeared in the 1996 video game Star Trek : Klingon . Some of the bat 'leth 's uses were in the debut episode " Reunion " , where Worf teaches his son Alexander how to use one . Worf used a bat 'leth to kill Duras — a Klingon who killed Worf 's mate K <unk> . Notable uses of the weapon occurred in the Voyager episode " Barge of the Dead " — in which Tuvok uses a bat 'leth to teach B 'Elanna Torres about her Klingon heritage , and in the Deep Space Nine episode " Tacking into the Wind " — in which Worf kills the leader of the Klingon High Council , Gowron in a bat 'leth duel to give the Klingon Chancellorship to General Martok . 
 = = Cultural legacy = = 
 The bat 'leth is considered an iconic image of the Star Trek universe . Replicas are widespread and are considered collectibles by some and a part of Klingon costume . A number of outlets , including replica merchants , weapons dealers and pawn shops sell them . Ronald D. Moore , who has worked on Star Trek and Battlestar Galactica , displays one in his office . However , due to the dangers of real bat 'leths , no officially licensed replicas of the weapon are available from either Curry or Paramount Pictures . 
 The rise in the popularity of the bat 'leth has led to the formation of martial arts teams aiming to develop a martial art distinct from the one Curry initially developed . Such teams have incorporated moves from ju @-@ jitsu , kendo , <unk> and nunchaku . Bat 'leth competitions have been held at conventions such as <unk> and <unk> . 
 The bat 'leth has appeared in television programs outside the Star Trek franchise . In 2002 , it was seen in Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode " The Other Guys " . In 2005 , a bat 'leth was in the background of the US detective series Monk episode " Mr. Monk vs. the Cobra " . In 2010 , one was seen in the " Chuck Versus the Beard " episode of American comedy series Chuck . In 2011 , a bat 'leth was used in American situation comedy The Big Bang Theory episode " The Zarnecki Incursion " . 
 = = Legality = = 
 Replicas of the bat 'leth are often made of metal and can be dangerous . A British police spokesman said that stainless steel bat 'leth could " literally , take someone 's head off " . Media reports documenting instances of replica bat 'leths being used in crimes have referred to the weapon as a " double @-@ pointed Klingon crescent @-@ shaped sword " , a " Klingon @-@ type sword " , a " Star Trek Klingon @-@ type sword " or as a " double @-@ pointed scimitar " . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , it is legal to possess a bat 'leth on private property ; however , they may be seized if they are considered to be " potential evidence of a criminal lifestyle . " They are classed as weapons , which makes it illegal to carry one in a public place . A replica bat 'leth was surrendered to Gloucestershire Constabulary as part of the 2006 knife amnesty in the UK . In 2008 , a miniature bat 'leth was seized in Oxford after a 17 @-@ year @-@ old was caught trying to smuggle it into a College . Police described the weapon as " most horrendous " . The person was arrested and sentenced to six months in a young offenders ' institution . In 2009 , a man from Billingham , County Durham , was arrested for possession of a miniature bat 'leth in a public street . In the court documents , it was referred to as a " multi @-@ bladed sword " , and the judge said " I 've never seen anything like it in my life before . " The accused pleaded guilty at Teesside Crown Court , and he was later sentenced to thirteen weeks in prison . The court ordered that the bat 'leth was to be forfeited and destroyed . A custom @-@ made bat 'leth was seized in 2009 in Accrington , Lancashire . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The legality of the bat 'leth in the United States differs between states . In 2009 , a replica bat 'leth was used in Colorado Springs , Colorado , in two armed robberies . The Colorado Springs Police Department said that it was a deadly weapon . In New Jersey , bat 'leths are considered weapons and are liable to be seized . The Federal Bureau of Investigation discovered and seized a bat 'leth as part of a cache of weapons in connection with a $ 4 million Medicare fraud investigation in 2010 . 
 = Education and Democracy : The Meaning of Alexander Meiklejohn = 
 Education and Democracy : The Meaning of Alexander Meiklejohn , 1872 – 1964 is the first full biography of Alexander Meiklejohn written by Adam R. Nelson and published by the University of Wisconsin Press in 2001 . The title is not a complete biography but draws from five archives to show Meiklejohn through his own words . A popular figure in the early 20th century who has since faded , Meiklejohn was a philosopher and university president who championed unified knowledge , idealism , and Great Books curricula . The book is split into five sections based on the locations in which Meiklejohn lived : his undergrad , faculty , and administrative years at Brown University , his presidency of Amherst College , his time with the University of Wisconsin Experimental College , and his experience with adult education and free speech advocacy at Berkeley . Nelson portrays Meiklejohn as " contradictory , paradoxical , and quixotic " as he grapples with how to encourage students to pursue freedom and how a teacher can teach this while respecting student freedom . 
 Reviewers noted the clarity of Nelson 's intellectual contextualization of Meiklejohn 's work , but wanted additional information about what Meiklejohn thought about comparable programs , educational precedents , and luminaries in the field . Other reviewers marked the book 's balance , completeness , and importance in resurfacing Meiklejohn as a major figure in the history of American education . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Education and Democracy : The Meaning of Alexander Meiklejohn , 1872 – 1964 is a biography of Alexander Meiklejohn written by Adam R. Nelson and published by the University of Wisconsin Press in 2001 . In lieu of writing a definitive account of Meiklejohn 's life , Nelson portrayed Meiklejohn through the subject 's own language to let him " speak for himself " . Nelson draws on five archives detailed in copious quotations and a 65 @-@ page notes and annotated bibliography appendix . While Meiklejohn was popular in the early 20th century and best known for his stance on academic freedom , he had become a marginal figure by the time this book was published . The book was the first full biography written on Meiklejohn , preceded only by dissertations and a 1981 " short ' biographical study ' " that introduced Meiklejohn 's written work . Nelson 's title is a response to John Dewey 's Democracy and Education . It intends to show the contrast of Meiklejohn 's idealism opposite Dewey 's pragmatism . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The work is split into five parts based on the places in which Meiklejohn lived : his undergraduate education at Brown University , his later administrative work there , his presidency of Amherst College , his University of Wisconsin Experimental College , and his work with adult education and other actions in Berkeley . At the core of Meiklejohn 's effort to create systems that promote democratic citizenship , Nelson argues , is " the paradox of Socratic teaching " : how a teacher can make a student want freedom and how a teacher can teach this while respecting the student 's freedom in practice . 
 Meiklejohn was born in Great Britain and raised in Rhode Island . He attended Brown and Cornell University , and later returned to the former as a popular ethics professor and its consequent dean of admissions . In place of the popular elective system and science curriculum , he championed a Kantian style of education with unified knowledge , moral development , and pursuit of ideals , and a style of democratic governance where students would lead and reason through their own education . Meiklejohn saw democracy as something imparted and reconsidered by passing generations , and that it was borne in " strong discussions around agreed terms " . His suggested curriculum for a unified knowledge included one or two years of ancient Greek classics and added years of enlightenment or modern American classics . 
 Meiklejohn became Amherst College 's president in 1912 . Meiklejohn developed a legacy of autocratic treatment of faculty , drastic overspending , and that of a college hermetically detached from demands of the outside world . He was ousted after lying about faculty appointments , whereupon he opened the Experimental College at the University of Wisconsin , a two @-@ year Great Books program with readings from ancient Greece and modern America . There , too , he treated the program as unaccountable to outside influence , and did not produce reports of their work or build rapport with the outside Wisconsin community . The program quickly closed for reasons attributed to Meiklejohn 's <unk> and not <unk> design . Meiklejohn then opened a Great Books adult education program in San Francisco where students similarly self @-@ governed and led their own education . As funding dissipated at the outset of World War II , the students chose to shutter the school before " compromising " their ideals . Meiklejohn became an advocate of free speech as an absolute right differentiated from physical action . His stances on this and democracy influenced the United States Supreme Court and the aims of UNESCO . 
 Nelson portrays Meiklejohn as " contradictory , paradoxical , and quixotic " . Despite believing in free thought and the primacy of student choice in determining their own education , he held incontrovertible stances . Nelson compares Meiklejohn to fellow educator Woodrow Wilson : " idealists who occasionally allowed the enthusiasm of their vision to impede the integrity of their leadership " . Meiklejohn 's students often defied his wishes , overturning a ban of professional baseball student players at Brown , enlisting in the army at Amherst , and choosing anarchy over student government at Wisconsin . Meiklejohn was an idealist who shunned the pragmatism of figures like John Dewey . Meiklejohn 's idealism required charismatic and " demanding " tutors for any student who agreed to the minimum of open @-@ minded participation in seminar . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The biography is considered the first on Meiklejohn . Reviewers noted the clarity of Nelson 's intellectual contextualization of Meiklejohn 's work , but wanted additional information about what Meiklejohn thought about comparable programs , educational precedents , and luminaries in the field . Other reviewers marked the book 's balance , completeness , and importance in resurfacing Meiklejohn as a major figure in the history of American education . 
 Dominique Marshall ( Labour / Le Travail ) compared Nelson 's clear presentation of Meiklejohn 's philosophy to Meiklejohn 's own accessible practice of philosophy . Marshall described Nelson 's intellectual and political contextualization surrounding the eras of Meiklejohn 's life as having " surprising variety " . Mary Ann <unk> ( The Journal of American History ) thought that the book was not riveting , as par for the genre , but that the work was " thoughtful and compelling " . She affirmed Meiklejohn 's importance for his experiments and attempts to make educational programs capable of producing a democratic society . <unk> praised Nelson 's use of student quotes and his analysis of Meiklejohn 's written work , but wanted for more context , such as how Meiklejohn compared with other educational figures in higher education , how other contemporary Great Books programs impacted his thought , and where he stood in the overall history of American education . Marshall too remained curious about Meiklejohn 's views on the family 's role in civic education . <unk> Wu ( Education Review ) complained of too much intellectual context in areas and of unresolved contradictions in Meiklejohn 's metaphysical claims . 
 Scot Guenter ( American Studies ) considered the biography " particularly timely " for the post @-@ September 11 relevance of Meiklejohn 's democratic experiments in the face of the privatization of higher education , and of Meiklejohn 's courage towards free speech . He wrote that Meiklejohn 's views on curriculum would arouse " needed " reflection in college instructors , and that the book 's audience should include university administration and those interested in civil liberties as well as historians and philosophers of education . Guenter appreciated how Nelson presented the shortcomings of Meiklejohn 's ego and spendthrift lifestyle . Robert Sherman , writing for the History of Education Quarterly and reflecting on the depth of the appendices , struggled to consider " how such a work could be more complete " . He wrote through Louis Menand that Meiklejohn 's " certitude [ led ] to violence " and that by letting him speak for himself , Nelson made the French philosopher Charles <unk> 's point that only individuals are certain and that there is no greater certainty . Guenter added that the biography read best in the parts where Nelson was clearly inspired by Meiklejohn 's zeal and idealism , particularly the " What Does the First Amendment Mean ? " chapter , which Guenter considered essential reading . 
 = Turn Left ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Turn Left " is the eleventh episode of the fourth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was written by showrunner Russell T Davies and broadcast on BBC One on 21 June 2008 . 
 David Tennant only makes a small contribution to this " Doctor @-@ lite " episode as the Tenth Doctor . The story instead focuses on the Doctor 's companion , Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) and her encounters with former companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) . The episode 's narrative focuses on an alternative history where the Doctor dies during the events of the 2006 Christmas special " The Runaway Bride " . The episode depicts a dystopia caused by the Doctor 's death , leaving Rose to convince Donna to save the world . The beginning and end of the episode take place in the show 's normal continuity , and features a cliffhanger that leads directly into the series finale " The Stolen Earth " . 
 Davies ' writing and Tate 's performance were acclaimed , and the episode was praised for its depiction of dystopia in a scene , characterised by the internment of a foreign citizen . The episode was the fourth most @-@ watched programme in the week it was broadcast , with 8 @.@ 1 million viewers , and the Appreciation Index of the episode was 88 , considered excellent . The episode was one of two Doctor Who stories in the fourth series to be nominated for a Hugo Award in the Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form category . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with the Doctor and Donna exploring a marketplace on the planet Shan Shen . Donna is approached by a fortune teller who convinces her to get a free reading . The fortune teller helps Donna recall the event that led to her meeting the Doctor . Donna was at a street corner with her mother Sylvia and they were arguing over which way to turn . Donna wanted to turn left and take a job as temp at the security firm H. C. Clements while Sylvia wanted her to turn right and take a job as a secretary at a friend 's business . The fortune teller gives Donna the chance to choose again and encourages her to turn right this time . As she turns right , a large beetle attaches itself to her back . 
 Donna 's decision creates an alternate universe with major changes in history . In this world , turning right meant that Donna never met the Doctor and could not convince him to flee after killing the Racnoss children in " The Runaway Bride " . As a result , the Doctor drowns in the resulting flood , and is unable to intervene in several other events that drastically affect the Earth . Changes include the deaths of Sarah Jane Smith and Martha Jones in the events of " Smith and Jones " , London is destroyed and millions die when the Titanic slams into Buckingham Palace during " Voyage of the Damned " , instantly transforming England into a third world country . Sixty million people in the United States die from the breeding of the Adipose in " Partners in Crime " , and the Torchwood team is killed ( except Jack Harkness , who is unable to die ) defeating the Sontaran invasion that occurred during " The Poison Sky " . 
 Donna and her family are spared from dying in the destruction of London when Rose Tyler appears and convinces Donna to leave London in time though she never identifies herself to Donna . As a result of the Titanic crash , many Londoners have been displaced and are assigned cramped living quarters and live under martial law . Rose appears to Donna again and tells her that she needs Donna to come with her , but that doing so will result in Donna dying . Donna refuses , and Rose tells her that she will be back in three weeks . Three weeks later , Donna and Wilfred are using his telescope when they realise that the stars are disappearing from the sky . This convinces Donna that she must go with Rose , and she gives in and leaves . Rose takes her to UNIT and explains that the stars are going out in every universe . She explains that she has been able to travel between universes again because the walls of reality are collapsing , and the Doctor is the only one who can stop it . 
 Donna is taken to a dying TARDIS , which UNIT has managed to connect a crude time machine to . Rose uses energy from the TARDIS to show Donna the beetle on her back , but tells her they do not know what it is . She insists that Donna travel back to the day she made the fateful turn and choose to turn left again . Donna is transported back too far away to contact her past self directly . Instead she makes the decision to walk out in front of a passing truck and let it hit her , causing a traffic jam that will force her past self to turn left . As Donna lies on the ground dying , Rose whispers a message into her ear for the Doctor . The Donna in the car makes the left turn , and the alternate universe disappears . The beetle falls off of Donna 's back , and the fortune teller runs away after uttering some terrified words about what Donna will become . 
 The Doctor hears Donna scream and turns up in the booth . After examining the beetle , the Doctor comments on how it was odd for an alternate universe to form around her , explaining that the beetle worked for The Trickster with the job of changing people 's lives in various ways . His remarks cause Donna to recall Rose and her message , which she delivers to the Doctor . Rose told her two words , " Bad Wolf " . A panicked Doctor , realising who Donna must have met , runs out of the room to find the words " Bad Wolf " written everywhere once again . He rushes into the TARDIS only to hear the cloister bell , and announces that the universe is in danger . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The episode revisits the events of several previous episodes : " The Runaway Bride " , " Smith and Jones " , " Voyage of the Damned " , " Partners in Crime " and " The Poison Sky " . It is shown that the Doctor , had he faced the Racnoss without Donna , would have actually died permanently . Some of the disasters the Doctor stopped would have happened without anyone to stop them , while many of his former companions and their friends would have died stepping in his place . 
 Bad Wolf , a recurring theme through series 1 , is revisited here in the form of a message from Rose as a warning to the Doctor about the end of the universe . The words , not seen since " The Parting of the Ways " , appear again everywhere in the alien market , including all over the TARDIS . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Cast notes = = = 
 Chipo Chung previously appeared as <unk> , the assistant of Professor Yana , in the Series 3 episode " Utopia " . Ben Righton also reprised his role as medical student Oliver Morgenstern , his last appearance being in " Smith and Jones " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Turn Left " is a " Doctor @-@ lite " episode : a low @-@ budget production that features the Doctor in a reduced role . Instead of the episode also featuring Donna in a reduced role , " Turn Left " was written to complement " Midnight " : " Midnight " featured the Doctor in the central role and " Turn Left " focused on Donna and Rose . The episode was written by the show 's head writer and executive producer , Russell T Davies . He compared the main concept of the episode — life without the Doctor — to the 1998 film Sliding Doors . Davies hoped to pose a question to the viewer : " does the Doctor cause or prevent death ? " . The episode focuses on the scale of deaths without the Doctor ; the implicit death toll surprised Davies when he wrote the script . Lead actor David Tennant cited the deaths that surrounded his character as a major part of the Doctor 's guilt . The episode 's tone phrase was " life during wartime " ; Davies reflected his description by comparing the labour camps foreigners such as Rocco Colasanto ( Joseph Long ) were sent to with the Nazi concentration camps of World War II — most notably Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau — through script directions and Wilf 's expository dialogue : 
 There 's an open army truck in the street , 2 soldiers standing by . All the Colasanto family in the back - Old Mamma , 2 women and 1 man in their 50s , 1 woman and 1 man in their 30s , 2 teenagers , 1 kid . All subdued . Wilf stands back , watching . Grim . 
 Donna : Oh , but why d 'you have to go ? 
 Mr Colasanto : Is the new law ! England for the English , etcetera . They can 't send us home , the oceans are closed , they build labour camps ! 
 Donna : I know , but labour doing what ? There aren 't any jobs . 
 Mr Colasanto : Sewing , digging , is good ! Now stop it before I kiss you too much - Wilfred ! My capitano ! 
 He gives Wilf a salute . Wilf salutes back . Both grave . Then Mr Colasanto heads for the truck . Donna goes to stand next to Wilf . 
 Donna : It 's gonna be quiet without him . Still , we 've got more room . 
 Wilf : Labour camps . That 's what they called them last time . 
 Donna : ... what d 'you mean ? 
 Wilf : It 's happening again . 
 Donna : What is ? 
 She looks at the truck . Mr Colasanto is hugging his wife . And the pretence has fallen away . Both are crying . 
 Davies emphasised developing the characters of Rose Tyler and Donna ; Susie Liggat , the episode 's producer , thought Rose describing Donna as " the most important woman in the whole of creation " was therapeutic for the former character and Donna 's realisation that she must die was intended as the epitome of the character 's maturation . 
 A key component of the episode is the return of Rose Tyler , portrayed by Billie Piper . Piper 's return was planned during filming of the second series ; in January 2006 , Piper made a pact promising to return to film several more episodes . Davies and Piper cited her other projects — specifically , her roles as Belle de Jour in Secret Diary of a Call Girl , the eponymous character in the BBC adaptations of Philip Pullman 's Sally Lockhart quartet , and Fanny Price in the ITV adaptation of Mansfield Park — to explain that her departure was permanent . Davies created the expectation of Rose 's return by mentioning her in dialogue and featuring Piper in cameo appearances in " Partners in Crime " , " The Poison Sky " , and " Midnight " . 
 Davies started writing the episode on 27 October 2007 . He was several weeks behind schedule and had to decline an appearance at the National Television Awards four days later to hand the script in on time . He described writing the script as " a lot harder to rip through because it needs so much construction " : he admitted that the opening scene could have been three times longer than his written version , itself longer than any opening scene he ever wrote . He was cautious that his script did not clash with Steven Moffat 's two @-@ part story " Silence in the Library " and " Forest of the Dead " — then scheduled to be aired as the ninth and tenth episodes — because it also contained a parallel world . Davies was delayed due to the death of Howard Attfield , who portrayed Donna 's father Geoff , and the difficulty of writing Rose 's expository dialogue ; he had to rush the script 's ending to ensure it was ready to film . He finished the script on 2 November so the rest of the production team could prepare the episode for filming . 
 Davies explained the episode 's climax — the effects of Rose 's warning — in the companion episode of Doctor Who Confidential . The words caused no inherent harm ; " Bad Wolf " acts as a warning sign for the Doctor , and Rose 's invocation of the phrase signals that the parallel universes Rose and the Doctor inhabit are collapsing into each other . Davies declined to state whether the episode was part of the series finale ; he preferred to stay out of the imminent fan debate . The episode was described by Doctor Who Magazine as " partly acting as a prelude to the two @-@ part series climax " . 
 = = = Time Beetle = = = 
 The " Time Beetle " , which was responsible for the creation of the alternate universe , was described in the episode 's script as " a huge black beetle ... shiny carapace , spindly black legs moving and flexing , mandibles clacking together " . Its design was influenced by the Giant Spider of Metebelis 3 that clung to Sarah Jane Smith 's back in Planet of the Spiders . The beetle 's normal Earth @-@ like appearance was deliberate ; prosthetic designer <unk> Gorton thought that familiarity would ease the narrative and cited the cat nuns from " New Earth " and the Judoon from " Smith and Jones " as examples . The prosthetic was made using fibreglass and fitted on a harness in order not to burden Catherine Tate 's performance . The episode 's director Graeme Harper explained in the episode 's commentary that only psychic characters such as Lucius from " The Fires of Pompeii " were aware of the beetle 's existence . 
 The Doctor refers to this creature as one of the " Trickster 's brigade " ; the Trickster ( Paul Marc Davis ) is a recurring enemy in Doctor Who spin @-@ off series The Sarah Jane Adventures whose modus operandi is to alter history by changing pivotal moments . Russell T Davies explicitly links the Time Beetle to this villain from Sarah Jane , and in Doctor Who Confidential , a clip from the Sarah Jane episode in which the Trickster threatens to go after the Doctor is shown . The events of this episode amount to his fulfillment of that promise . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was primarily filmed in the seventh production block between 26 November and 8 December 2007 , alongside filming of " Midnight " . The first scenes were filmed in Bay Chambers , Cardiff ; the housing office where Donna 's family was relocated to Leeds was filmed in a storage area adjacent to the photocopying business . The following evening saw filming of Rose and Donna 's first meeting in Butetown , Cardiff . Scenes set on " Monday 25 [ June 2007 ] " — specifically , Donna preparing to turn at the junction , and her future self racing to ensure she turns left — were filmed between 27 November and 29 November , in the order they were aired . A double had to portray Tate in the car ; Tate did not have a driving licence . Donna 's race to prevent herself from turning right was filmed on St Isan Road in Cardiff , which was locked off for safety concerns . During the evenings of the 27th and the 28th , scenes on Wilfred 's allotment in Leeds were filmed ; and on 29 November , Rose 's second meeting with Donna and Piper 's cameo in " Partners in Crime " were filmed . 
 The first studio scene — Donna in the fortune teller 's room — was filmed on 30 November 2007 , on a redressed Torchwood Hub set at the show 's Upper Boat Studios . The outdoor scenes in Shan Shen — comprising Tennant 's entire contribution to the episode — were filmed on 1 December 2007 in <unk> and near the Cardiff Royal Infirmary . The shoot was marred by difficulties : rain delayed redressing the alley from the <unk> banners and posters to the Bad Wolf versions ; and several extras left at lunchtime because of a misunderstanding over their payment . The final scene filmed on the day was the Doctor 's examination of the Time Beetle in the fortune teller 's room . The scenes in the country hotel were filmed at Egerton Grey Country House Hotel in <unk> on 3 December 2007 . 
 The scenes in the terraced street in Leeds were filmed in Machen Street , Penarth , on 4 December and 5 December . The cast listened to The Pogues ' " The Wild Rover " and Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " before singing the songs themselves . Graeme Harper decided to focus on Jacqueline King in the scene when her character , Sylvia Noble , stares <unk> in a despondent manner as Donna talks to her ; Harper considered the scene to be " Jacqueline 's moment " and thought the scene would be more powerful if the focus was kept on one character . The outdoor scenes were filmed on 5 December : the Colasanto family being sent to a labour camp was filmed during the day ; and the ATMOS devices ejecting exhaust fumes was filmed in the evening . 
 Filming continued with a night shoot on 6 December ; scenes inside and outside the pub on Christmas Day were filmed in The Conway pub in <unk> before relocating to a nearby park to film scenes contemporary with the events of " The Poison Sky " . Thompson Park was originally scheduled for the shoot ; the location was changed at short notice to Sophia Gardens because Tate was suffering from a mild case of influenza . The final scenes to be filmed — the scenes in the makeshift UNIT base — were filmed in a decommissioned steel factory in Pontypool , on 7 December and 8 December . Filming for the episode was completed with pick @-@ up shots in January 2008 . 
 Because the episode had a low budget , it relies heavily on stock footage and pre @-@ existing graphics : the Titanic 's descent into Buckingham Palace and the American television report of the populace being transformed into Adipose utilised footage from " Voyage of the Damned " and " Partners in Crime " , respectively ; and images of the Racnoss Webstar and the ignited sky were already created by The Mill . The episode 's small budget impeded production ; Davies wanted the TARDIS prop to be on fire until he was reminded that he was writing " the cheap episode " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Turn Left " was watched by 8 @.@ 09 million viewers — 35 % share of the total television audience — and received an Appreciation Index score of 88 : considered Excellent . It was the fourth most @-@ watched programme of the week , the highest position a regular episode of Doctor Who had ever achieved to that point : the 2007 Christmas special " Voyage of the Damned " was the second most @-@ watched television program on Christmas Day ; and " The Stolen Earth " and " Journey 's End " were second and first , respectively . Among readers of Doctor Who Magazine , the episode was voted the second @-@ best story of the fourth series , behind " The Stolen Earth " and " Journey 's End " , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 81 / 10 ; and the episode was the fourth best @-@ received episode of the fourth series among members of the Doctor Who Forum , with an approval rating of 88 @.@ 0 % . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 = = = = Monsters Within = = = = 
 Stephen James Walker , a writer of reference works on Doctor Who , included an extensive analysis and review of the episode in his " unauthorised guide to Doctor Who 's fourth series " , Monsters Within . Walker attributed the episode 's origin as an allusion to other prominent alternate history works , such as It 's a Wonderful Life and Sliding Doors , and applauded the mention of the Trickster as an " unexpected but welcome cross @-@ franchise reference " . He was surprised that the format of a " companion @-@ lite " episode followed by a " Doctor @-@ lite " episode had not been attempted before because he thought it was an " ideal compromise " . He thought that Tate portrayed the " unenlightened " version of Donna far better than in " The Runaway Bride " , describing her acting as " far removed from the totally unappealing character she was to start with " . Most of his analysis of Donna was in conjunction with analysis of Davies ' writing ; he lauded the parallels between the maturation of Donna in the fourth series and of the alternate Donna in " Turn Left " as " brilliant writing " . 
 Walker dedicated a large portion of his analysis to Rose . He thought that Billie Piper was " distinctly below par " , citing her gaunt and malnourished appearance , new hairstyle , and slight lisp as reasons why her acting was not her finest . He criticised her role in the episode as been " far less well worked out " than Donna 's , being inquisitive about several concepts : why Rose was shocked when she heard the Doctor had died , but later being knowledgeable about Donna 's history and destiny ; whether if Rose was travelling between universes or just time @-@ travelling ; why Rose herself didn 't convince Donna to turn left instead of sending Donna on a suicide mission ; why Rose didn 't change her clothes between her appearances ; and why Rose refused to tell anyone her name . He noted the allusion to the concept of the power of names previously referred to in " The Shakespeare Code " , " Last of the Time Lords " , and " Silence in the Library " , but ultimately theorised that the reason was so Davies could set up the episode 's cliffhanger . 
 Walker described the episode as " quite adult [ for a family drama ] , venturing into some unexpectedly dark territory at times " . He commended Davies for " highlighting the contrasting aspects of human nature " in the aftermath of the disaster : the positive side represented by Wilfred 's " Blitz spirit " and the " good humoured " and " morale @-@ boosting " sing @-@ along ; and the negative side is represented by resentment from the Nobles ' new neighbours , Sylvia 's depression , and , most notably , the internment of foreign citizens in labour camps . He continued by comparing Colasanto 's internment to Donna calling him Mussolini several scenes before ; he felt that the internment cast the jibe in an " even worse light " . Walker thought that the country 's transformation into a fascist dictatorship was a " veiled political point " written by Davies ; he cited " the population of the Daily Mail @-@ reading home counties forced to experience living as refugees and asylum seekers " and UNIT troops aiming at unarmed civilians as reasons why the episode was " the most subversive [ the show ] has ever been " . 
 Closing , Walker congratulated director Graeme Harper for demonstrating " his incredible versatility " in directing the vastly different " The Unicorn and the Wasp " and " Turn Left " , and wrote that any concerns about the plot were " overshadowed " by the script 's " inventiveness , intelligence , and sheer boldness " . He finished by calling the episode " one of the most extraordinary in Doctor Who 's long history " . Walker ranked the story as his fifth @-@ favourite episode of the fourth series : between " Silence in the Library " and " Midnight " . 
 = = = = Critical reception = = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics , many citing the power of Tate 's performance . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy gave the episode four stars out of five . Comparing it to Sliding Doors and discussing the trope of alternate histories , he thought the concept was overused , but " an intriguing endeavour " and that Davies balanced frivolity and " bleak darkness " . Describing the writing as " powerful ... for a family show ... Wilf poignantly remembers the similar horrors he has experienced in the last World War " . Of Piper 's acting , he compared her accent to " [ having ] her mouth numbed with local anaesthetic " . 
 Mark Wright of The Stage gave a favourable review of the episode . He referred to his review of " Midnight " , when he said that it was Davies ' best script so far and wondered if Davies would better it with the last three episodes , and wrote that the episode " possibly just nudges ahead " of " Midnight " . Wright explained that " Turn Left " struck resonance with him because the episode highlighted how important the Doctor is to the fictional universe . His review praised Tate 's acting as Donna before she met the Doctor as a " real character performance " which exemplified Tate 's multi @-@ faceted portrayal . His main points of criticism were the appearance of Rose and the Time Beetle prosthetic : he was " non @-@ <unk> " about Rose 's reappearance , but he admitted that Piper was an " integral part of the early success of new Who " ; and he thought the prosthetic beetle was " an unconvincing lump of plastic " and was reminiscent of the classic series ' low budget . He closed his review by saying the episode " says as much about Doctor Who ’ s past as well as its future " , and looked forward to the last two episodes of the series . 
 Travis Fickett of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 8 / 10 rating . Characterising the episode as " the quiet before the storm , the seemingly innocuous bottle episode that ends up being the precursor to a slam @-@ bang conclusion " , he wrote that the episode " gets the job done " , specifically praising Tate for her ability to " carry the weight of the episode " . He highlighted the cliffhanger of the scene — when the Doctor realises that Donna met Rose , and subsequently deduces the universe is in danger — as the best moment in the episode ; he wrote that it was " a great moment , and sets up a premise suitably large for Davies ' farewell episodes . " He criticised two major points of the episode : he thought the beetle prosthetic did not look convincing , and undermined Donna 's questions of why people were looking at her back ; and he thought the episode was Davies ' highlight reel , reminiscent of someone reminding the viewer of an event and then moving to the next slide . Closing , he wrote that there was a sense that " something was missing from the proceedings " , but commented that the episode " serves as a good set up for the two @-@ part climax of season four " . 
 Simon Brew of cult television blog Den of Geek said " Turn Left " was " really really good " . It allowed Tate and Cribbins to act more flexibly ; and that other supporting actors could learn from Cribbins ' contribution to the episode . Brew was critical of Piper 's acting , the beetle prosthetic , and that Tate occasionally acted like characters from her eponymous show . " This was still an intriguing episode , very well handled . The continual shifts in the tone of the script worked a treat , as every time it looked like things were being allowed to lighten , things once again took a turn for the worse . And it ’ s setting up a potentially corking concluding double bill , for not only the series , but also RTD ’ s four @-@ season story arc . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Turn Left " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Scelidosaurus = 
 Scelidosaurus ( / <unk> / ; with the intended meaning of " limb lizard " , from Greek <unk> / <unk> meaning ' rib of beef ' and sauros / σαυρος meaning ' lizard ' ) is a genus of herbivorous armoured ornithischian dinosaur from the Jurassic of England . 
 Scelidosaurus lived during the Early Jurassic Period , during the Sinemurian to Pliensbachian stages around 191 million years ago . This genus and related genera at the time lived on the supercontinent Laurasia . Its fossils have been found near Charmouth in Dorset , England , and are known for their excellent preservation . Scelidosaurus has been called the earliest complete dinosaur . It is the most completely known dinosaur of the British Isles . Despite this , a modern description is still lacking . After initial finds in the 1850s , comparative anatomist Richard Owen named and described Scelidosaurus in 1859 . Only one species , Scelidosaurus harrisonii named by Owen in 1861 , is considered valid today , although one other species has been proposed in 1996 . 
 Scelidosaurus was about 4 metres ( 13 ft ) long . It was a largely quadrupedal animal , feeding on low scrubby plants , the parts of which were bitten off by the small , elongated head to be processed in the large gut . Scelidosaurus was lightly armoured , protected by long horizontal rows of keeled oval scutes , that stretched along the neck , back and tail . 
 One of the oldest known and most " primitive " of the thyreophorans , the exact placement of Scelidosaurus within this group has been the subject of debate for nearly 150 years . This was not helped by the limited additional knowledge about the early evolution of armoured dinosaurs . Today most evidence indicates that Scelidosaurus is a basal member of the Thyreophora , more basal than , and ancestral to , the two more advanced clades of <unk> , Stegosauridae and Ankylosauria . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Size and posture = = = 
 A full @-@ grown Scelidosaurus was rather small compared to most later non @-@ avian dinosaurs , but it was a medium @-@ sized species in the Early Jurassic . Some scientists have estimated a length of 4 metres ( 13 ft ) . In 2010 , Gregory S. Paul gave a body length of 3 @.@ 8 metres ( 12 @.@ 5 ft ) and a weight of 270 kilogrammes . Scelidosaurus was quadrupedal , with the hindlimbs longer than the forelimbs . It may have reared up on its hind legs to browse on foliage from trees , but its arms were relatively long , indicating a mostly quadrupedal posture . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The head of Scelidosaurus was small , about twenty centimetres long , and elongated . The skull was low in side view and triangular in top view , longer than it was wide , similar to that of earlier ornithischians . The snout , largely formed by the nasal bones , was flat on top . Scelidosaurus still had the five pairs of fenestrae ( skull openings ) seen in basal ornithischians : apart from the nostrils and eye sockets which are present in all basal dinosaurs , the fenestra <unk> and the upper and lower temporal fenestrae were not closed or overgrown , as with many later armoured forms . In fact , the upper temporal fenestrae were very large , forming conspicuous round openings in the top of the rear skull , serving as attachment areas for the powerful muscles that closed the lower jaws . The eye socket was slightly overshadowed in its front part by the prefrontal bone . Behind it , the upper rim of the eye socket was formed by the supraorbital bone . A study by Susannah Maidment e.a. concluded that juvenile specimens show that this bone was a fusion of three elements , one in front , the next in rear , and the third at the inner side . 
 The premaxilla , the bone forming the snout tip , was short and no predentary , the bone core of the lower beak on the tip of the stout lower jaws , has been found , so the horny beak that is assumed present with all ornithischians was likely very short . Its teeth were longer and more triangular in side view than in later armoured dinosaurs . There were at least five teeth in each premaxilla , and at least nineteen in the maxilla and sixteen in the dentary of the lower jaw . However , the number of maxillary and dentary teeth were established with the incomplete skull of one of the first specimens found ; the actual numbers might have ranged up to about two dozen . The premaxillary teeth were somewhat longer and recurved . To the rear , they gradually approach the form of the maxillary teeth , beginning to show denticles . The crowns of the maxillary and dentary teeth have denticles on their edges and a swollen basis 
 = = = Postcranial skeleton = = = 
 The vertebral column of Scelidosaurus contained at least six neck vertebrae , seventeen dorsal vertebrae , four sacral vertebrae and at least thirty @-@ five tail vertebrae . 
 Though perhaps the actual total of cervical vertebrae was as high as seven or eight , the neck was only moderately long . The torso was relatively flat in side view , however , despite the belly being broad , it was not extremely vertically compressed as with ankylosaurs but taller than wide . The last three dorsal vertebrae had no ribs . The spines of the sacral vertebrae touched each other but were not fused into a supraneural plate . The quickly tapering tail was relatively short , probably representing about half of body length . The tail chevrons were strongly inclined to the rear . The hip area and tail base were stiffened by large numbers of ossified tendons . 
 The scapula was short with a moderately expanded upper end . The coracoid was circular in side view . The elements of the forelimb were generally moderately long , straight and stout . The hand is only known from recent discoveries and has not yet been described . In the rather wide pelvis , the ilium was straight in side view . Its front blade was rod @-@ shaped and moderately splayed to the outside , creating room for the belly . This was reinforced by the sacral ribs becoming longer towards the front . The sacral ribs were wider at their attachment areas with the ilium , but were not fused into a sacral yoke . The pubis featured a short <unk> . The pubis shaft was straight , running parallel to a straight ischium shaft that was transversely flattened at its lower end . The thighbone was straight in side view , in front view it was somewhat bowed to the outside . Its head was not separated from the shaft by a real neck . While the major trochanter was at about the same level as the head , the lower minor trochanter was separated from both by a deep cleft . At it rear side , the femur mid @-@ shaft featured a well @-@ developed drooping fourth trochanter , a process for the attachment of the retractor tail muscle , the Musculus caudofemoralis longus . The lower leg was somewhat shorter than the thighbone . The tibia had a wide upper end , with a cnemial crest protruding well to the front . The tibia lower end was also robust and rotated about 70 ° compared to the upper part , turning the foot strongly to the outside . The foot was very large and wide . The fifth metatarsal was only rudimentary but the other four were robust . Scelidosaurus had four large toes , with the innermost digit being the smallest . The fourth metatarsal was short but its toe was long and built to be splayed to the outside of the foot , to improve the stability . The claws were flat , hoof @-@ shaped and curved to the inside . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The most obvious feature of Scelidosaurus is its armour , consisting of bony scutes embedded in the skin . These osteoderms were arranged in horizontal parallel rows down the animal 's body . Osteoderms are today found in the skin of crocodiles , armadillos and some lizards . The osteoderms of Scelidosaurus ranged in both size and shape . Most were smaller or larger oval plates with a high keel on the outside , the highest point of the keel positioned more to the rear . Some scutes were small , flat and hollowed @-@ out at the inside . The larger keeled scutes were aligned in regular horizontal rows . There were three rows of these along each side of the torso . The scutes of the lowest , lateral , row were more conical , rather than the blade @-@ like osteoderms of Scutellosaurus . Between these main series , one or two rows of smaller oval keeled scutes were present . There were in total four rows of large scutes on the tail : one at the top midline , one at the midline of the underside , and one at each tail side . Whether the midline tail scutes continued over the torso and neck to the front is unknown and unlikely for the neck , though Scelidosaurus is often pictured this way . 
 The neck had at each side two rows of large scutes . The osteoderms of the lower neck row were very large , flat and plate @-@ like . The first osteoderms of the top neck rows formed a pair of unique three @-@ pointed scutes directly behind the head . These points seem to have been connected by tendons to the rear joint processes , the <unk> , of the axis vertebra . In general the scutes were larger at the front of the torso , the osteoderms diminishing towards the rear , especially on the surface of the thighs . The smallest flat round scutes might have filled the room between the larger osteoderm rows . Perhaps a row of vertical osteoderms was present on the upper arms . Compared to the later Ankylosauria , Scelidosaurus was lightly armoured , without continuous plating , spikes or pelvic shield . Rough areas on the skull and lower jaws indicate the presence of skin <unk> . 
 Some of the latest specimens found show partly different osteoderms including scutes on which the keel is more like a thorn or spike . These specimens also seem to have little horns on the rear corners of the head , placed on the squamosal bones . 
 Fossilized skin impressions have also been found . Between the bony scutes , Scelidosaurus had rounded non @-@ overlapping scales like the present Gila monster . Between the large scutes , very small ( 5 @-@ 10 millimetres [ 0 @.@ 2 @-@ 0 @.@ 4 in ] ) flat " granules " of bone were perhaps distributed within the skin . In the later Ankylosauria , these small scutes may have developed into larger scutes , fusing into the multi @-@ <unk> plate armour seen in genera such as Ankylosaurus . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 During the 1850s , quarry owner James Harrison of Charmouth , West Dorset of England found fossils from the cliffs of Black Ven between Charmouth and Lyme Regis , that were quarried , possibly for raw material for the manufacture of cement . Some of these he gave to the collector and retired general surgeon Henry Norris . In 1858 , Norris and Harrison sent some fragmentary limb bones to Professor Richard Owen of the British Museum ( Natural History ) , London ( today the Natural History Museum ) . Among them was a left thighbone , specimen GSM <unk> . In 1859 , Owen named the genus Scelidosaurus in an entry about palaeontology in the Encyclopaedia Britannica . The lemma text contained a diagnosis , implicating that the genus was validly named and was not a nomen nudum , despite the fact that the definition was vague and no specimens were identified . Owen intended to call the dinosaur " hindlimb saurian " but confused the Greek word <unk> , <unk> , " hindlimb " , with <unk> , <unk> , " rib of beef " . The name was inspired by the strong development of the hind leg . Afterwards Harrison sent a knee joint , a claw ( GSM <unk> ) , a juvenile specimen and a skull to Owen , that were described in 1861 . On that occasion the type species Scelidosaurus harrisonii was named , the specific name honouring Harrison . The skull later was revealed to be part of a nearly complete skeleton , that was described by Owen in 1863 . 
 British palaeontologist David Bruce Norman has stressed how remarkable it is that Owen , who previously had propounded that dinosaurs were active quadrupedal animals , largely neglected Scelidosaurus though it could serve as a prime example of this hypothesis and its fossil was one of the most complete dinosaurs found at that time . Norman explained this by Owen 's excessive workload in this period , including several administrative functions , polemics with fellow @-@ scientists and the study of a large number of even more interesting newly discovered extinct animals , such as Archaeopteryx . Norman also pointed out that Owen in 1861 suggested a lifestyle for Scelidosaurus that is very different from present ideas : it would have been a fish @-@ eater and partially sea @-@ dwelling . 
 Owen had not indicated a holotype . In 1888 , Richard Lydekker while cataloguing the BMNH fossils , designated some of the hindlimb fragments described in 1861 , specimen BMNH <unk> consisting of a lower part of a femur and an upper part of the tibia and fibula , together forming a knee joint , as the type specimen , hereby implicitly choosing them as the lectotype of Scelidosaurus . Lydekker gave no reason for this choice ; perhaps he was motivated by their larger size . Unfortunately , mixed in with the Scelidosaurus fossils had been the partial remains of a theropod dinosaur and the femur and tibia thus belonged to such a carnivore ; this was not discovered until 1968 by Bernard Newman . The same year , B. H. Newman suggested to have Lydekker 's selection of the knee joint as the lectotype officially rescinded by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature , as the joint was in his opinion from a species related to Megalosaurus . Eventually , after Newman had already died , Alan Jack Charig actually filed a request in 1992 . In 1994 the ICZN reacted positively , in Opinion 1788 deciding that the skull and skeleton , specimen BMNH <unk> , would be the neotype of Scelidosaurus . The knee joint was in 1995 by Samuel Welles et al. informally assigned to a " <unk> " , which name has not yet been validly published . It more likely belongs to some member of the Coelophysoidea or <unk> . It has also been established by Newman and confirmed by Roger Benson that the original left <unk> , GSM <unk> , belonged to a theropod . 
 The neotype skeleton had been uncovered in the Black Ven Marl or <unk> <unk> Bed , marine deposits of the Charmouth Mudstone Formation , dating from the late Sinemurian stage , about 191 million years ago . It consists of a rather complete skeleton with skull and lower jaws . Only the snout tip , the neck base , the forelimbs and the tail end are missing . Hundreds of osteoderms were found in connection with the skeleton , many more or less in their original position . From the 1960s onward , this fossil was further prepared by Ronald <unk> using acid baths to free the bones from the surrounding matrix , a method perfected for the Charmouth fossils . In 1992 , Charig reported that only a single block had yet to be treated , but he died before the results could be published . Norman , who intends to complete this task , has revealed some new anatomical details in 2004 . Apart from these , a modern description is largely lacking . 
 Apart from the neotype , other fossils are known of Scelidosaurus . In 1888 Lydekker catalogued a large number of single bones , largely limb elements , and osteoderms , that had been acquired by the BMNH from the Norris collection . Owen in 1861 described a second , partial , skeleton of a juvenile animal , that later was added to the collection of Elizabeth Philpot and today is registered in the Lyme Regis Museum as specimen <unk> 1997 @.@ 37 @.@ 4 @-@ 10 . As it was relatively large , Owen speculated , in the context of its presumed marine lifestyle , that Scelidosaurus might have been ovoviviparous . The short <unk> in this specimen convinced scientists that this process did not represent the main pubic body as some had thought , who had been unable to believe that the thin , backward @-@ pointing , pubis with the Ornithischia was homologous to the forward @-@ pointing much larger pubic bone in most reptilian groups . In more recent times , new discoveries have been made at Charmouth , not through commercial quarrying but by the efforts of amateur palaeontologists . In 1968 a second partial juvenile skeleton was described , specimen BMNH <unk> , that had already been reported in 1959 . It is from a slightly younger layer , the <unk> Marl Member dating to the early Pliensbachian , about 190 million years old . In 1985 Simon Barnsley , David Costain and Peter Langham excavated a partial skeleton including a very complete skull and skin impressions , which was sold to the Bristol Museum where it is registered as specimen <unk> <unk> . Specimen <unk> is part of the collection of the Sedgwick Museum at Cambridge . Several specimens remain undescribed because they are in private collections . These include a two metres ( 7 ft ) long skeleton found by David Sole in 2000 , perhaps the most complete non @-@ avian dinosaur exemplar ever discovered in the British Isles . All elements of the skeleton are now known . The finds by Sole differ from the neotype in details of the armour and might represent a separate taxon or reflect sexual dimorphism . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 Scelidosaurus harrisonii , named and described by Owen , is currently the only recognized species , based on several nearly complete skeletons . A potential second species from the Sinemurian @-@ age Lower Lufeng Formation , Scelidosaurus <unk> , was described by David Jay Simmons in 1965 under its own genus , Tatisaurus . In 1996 Spencer G. Lucas moved it to Scelidosaurus . Although the fossils are fragmentary , this reassessment has not been accepted , and S. <unk> is today once again recognized as Tatisaurus . 
 In 1989 , scutes which were found in the Kayenta Formation ( Glen Canyon Group ) of northern Arizona , were by Kevin Padian referred to a Scelidosaurus sp . , and used to determine that the age of the strata was around 199 @.@ 6 @-@ 196 @.@ 5 million years ago , at a time when it was still thought that Scelidosaurus harrisonii dated to the early Sinemurian . These scutes established a geographic tie @-@ in between Arizona 's Glen Canyon and Europe , where fossils of Scelidosaurus had previously been discovered . Later scientists have rejected the assignment to Scelidosaurus , as the scutes are different in form . In 2014 , Roman <unk> named a new species , S. <unk> , based off these specimens . In 2016 , Peter Malcolm Galton and Kenneth Carpenter identified it as a nomen dubium , instead once again placing the specimens as Thyreophora indet . 
 In 2000 , David <unk> et al. announced the preservation of soft tissue in a specimen referred to a cf . Scelidosaurus sp . , that is , an unnamed species for which a comparison with Scelidosaurus can be illuminating . The fossil , with inventory number <unk> <unk> , was in the early 1990s , in an already prepared state , discovered in the legacy of the late Professor John Challinor , which had used it to illustrate his lectures with . Its provenance is unknown . It consists of a series of eight caudal vertebrae in a cut slab of carbonate mudstone , which was judged to date from the late Hettangian to Sinemurian stages . Parts of the fossil were preserved in such a way that an envelope of preserved soft tissue is visible around the vertebrae , and show the presence of an epidermal layer over the scutes . The authors concluded that the osteoderms of all basal armoured dinosaurs were covered in a tough , probably keratinous layer of skin . 
 = = Classification and phylogeny = = 
 Scelidosaurus was by Owen placed in the Dinosauria in 1861 . In 1868 / 1869 Edward Drinker Cope proposed a family Scelidosauridae in a double lecture but this was only published in December 1871 ; therefore it was Thomas Henry Huxley who validly named the Scelidosauridae in 1869 . In the nineteenth century almost any armoured dinosaur then known has been considered a member of the Scelidosauridae . In the later twentieth century , the term was used for an assembly of " primitive " ornithischians close to the ancestry of ankylosaurs and stegosaurs , such as Scutellosaurus , <unk> , <unk> and Tatisaurus . Today , paleontologists usually consider the Scelidosauridae paraphyletic , thus not forming a separate branch or clade ; however , Benton ( 2004 ) lists the group as monophyletic . The family was resurrected by Chinese paleontologist Dong Zhiming in 2001 after a study of <unk> , which shares close affinities with Scelidosaurus . 
 Scelidosaurus was an ornithischian . It was the oldest ornithischian known until the description of Geranosaurus in 1911 . During the twentieth century , it has been classified at different times as an ankylosaur or stegosaur . Alfred von Zittel ( 1902 ) , William Elgin Swinton ( 1934 ) , and Robert Appleby et al . ( 1967 ) identified the genus as a stegosaurian , though this concept then encompassed all armoured forms . In a 1968 paper , Romer argued it was an ankylosaur . In 1977 , Richard Thulborn of the University of Queensland attempted to reclassify Scelidosaurus as an ornithopod similar to Tenontosaurus or Iguanodon . Thulborn argued Scelidosaurus was a lightly built bipedal dinosaur adapted for running . Thulborn 's 1977 theories on the genus have since been rejected . 
 This debate is still ongoing ; at this time , Scelidosaurus is considered to be either more closely related to ankylosaurids than to stegosaurids and , by extension , a true ankylosaur , or basal to the ankylosaur @-@ stegosaur split . The stegosaur classification has fallen out of favor , but is seen in older dinosaur books . Cladistic analyses have invariably recovered a basal position for Scelidosaurus , outside of the <unk> . 
 The position of Scelidosaurus according to a cladistic study of 2011 is shown by this cladogram : 
 Fossil records of thyreophorans more basal than Scelidosaurus are sparse . The more " primitive " Scutellosaurus , also found in Arizona , was an earlier genus which was facultatively bipedal . A trackway of a possible early armoured dinosaur , from around 195 million years ago , has been found in France . Ancestors of these basal thyreophorans evolved from early ornithischians similar to Lesothosaurus during the Late Triassic . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Like other thyreophorans , Scelidosaurus was herbivorous . However , while some later ornithischian groups possessed teeth capable of grinding plant material , Scelidosaurus had smaller , less complex leaf @-@ shaped teeth suitable for cropping vegetation and jaws capable of only vertical movement , due to a short jaw joint . Paul Barrett concluded that Scelidosaurus fed with a puncture @-@ crush system of tooth @-@ on @-@ tooth action , with a precise but simple up @-@ and @-@ down jaw movement , in which the food was mashed between the inner side of the upper teeth and the outer side of the lower teeth , without the teeth actually touching each other as shown by very long vertical wear facets on the lower teeth alone . In this aspect , it resembled the stegosaurids , which also bore primitive teeth and simple jaws . Its diet would have consisted of ferns or conifers , as grasses did not evolve until late into the Cretaceous Period , after Scelidosaurus was long extinct . 
 Another similarity with the stegosaurs is the narrow head , which might indicate a selective diet consisting of high @-@ quality fodder . However , Barrett pointed out that for an animal the size of Scelidosaurus , with a large gut allowing efficient fermentation , the intake of easily digestible food of high energetic value was less important than with smaller animals , that are often critically dependent on it . Norman concluded that Scelidosaurus fed on low scrubby vegetation , with a height up to one metre . Raising itself on its hindlimbs alone , could have vertically increased the feeding envelope and was perhaps anatomically possible , but Norman doubted it was a relevant part of its behaviour . 
 = Andrew II of Hungary = 
 Andrew II ( Hungarian : II . András , Croatian : Andrija II . , Slovak : Ondrej II . , Ukrainian : <unk> II ; c . 1177 – 21 September 1235 ) , also known as Andrew of Jerusalem , was King of Hungary and Croatia between 1205 and 1235 . He ruled the Principality of Halych from 1188 until 1189 / 1190 , and again between 1208 / 1209 and 1210 . He was the younger son of Béla III of Hungary , who entrusted him with the administration of the newly conquered Principality of Halych in 1188 . Andrew 's rule was unpopular , and the boyars expelled him . Béla III willed property and money to Andrew , obliging him to lead a crusade to the Holy Land . Instead , Andrew forced his elder brother , King Emeric of Hungary , to cede Croatia and Dalmatia as an appanage to him in 1197 . The following year , Andrew occupied Hum . 
 Despite the fact that Andrew did not stop conspiring against Emeric , the dying king made Andrew guardian of his son , Ladislaus III , in 1204 . After the premature death of Ladislaus , Andrew ascended the throne in 1205 . According to historian László Kontler , " [ i ] t was <unk> the socio @-@ political turmoil during [ Andrew 's ] reign that the relations , arrangements , institutional framework and social categories that arose under Stephen I , started to disintegrate in the higher echelons of society " in Hungary . Andrew introduced a new grants policy , the so @-@ called " new institutions " , giving away money and royal estates to his partisans despite the loss of royal revenues . He was the first Hungarian monarch to adopt the title of " King of Halych and Lodomeria " . He waged at least a dozen wars to seize the two Rus ' principalities , but the local boyars and neighboring princes prevented him from conquering the principalities . He participated in the Fifth Crusade to the Holy Land in 1217 – 1218 , but the crusade was a failure . 
 When the servientes regis , or " royal servants " , rose up , Andrew was forced to issue the Golden Bull of 1222 , confirming their privileges . This led to the rise of the nobility in the Kingdom of Hungary . His Diploma Andreanum of 1224 listed the liberties of the Transylvanian Saxon community . The employment of Jews and Muslims to administer the royal revenues led him into conflict with the Holy See and the Hungarian prelates . Andrew pledged to respect the privileges of the clergymen and to dismiss his non @-@ Christian officials in 1233 , but he never fulfilled the latter promise . 
 Andrew 's first wife , Gertrude of Merania , was murdered in 1213 , because her blatant favoritism towards her German kinsmen and courtiers stirred up discontent among the native lords . The veneration of their daughter , Elizabeth of Hungary , was confirmed by the Holy See during Andrew 's lifetime . After Andrew 's death , his sons , Béla and Coloman , accused his third wife , Beatrice d 'Este , of adultery and never considered her son , Stephen , to be a legitimate son of Andrew . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and youth ( c . 1177 – 1197 ) = = = 
 Andrew was the second son of King Béla III and Béla 's first wife , Agnes of Antioch . The year of Andrew 's birth is not known , but modern historians agree that he was born around 1177 . Andrew was first mentioned in connection to his father 's invasion of the Principality of Halych in 1188 . That year , Béla III invaded Halych upon the request of its former prince , Vladimir II Yaroslavich , who had been expelled by his subjects . Béla forced the new prince , Roman Mstislavich , to flee . After conquering Halych , he granted it to Andrew . Béla also captured Vladimir Yaroslavich and imprisoned him in Hungary . 
 After Béla 's withdrawal from Halych , Roman Mstislavich returned with the assistance of Rurik Rostislavich , Prince of Belgorod <unk> . They tried to expel Andrew and his Hungarian retinue , but the Hungarians routed the united forces of Mstislavich and Rostislavich . A group of local boyars offered the throne to Rostislav Ivanovich , a distant cousin of the imprisoned Vladimir Yaroslavich . Béla III sent reinforcements to Halych , enabling Andrew 's troops to repel the attacks . Andrew 's reign remained unpopular in Halych , because the Hungarian soldiers insulted local women and did not respect Orthodox churches . Consequently , the local boyars allied with their former prince , Vladimir Yaroslavich , who had escaped from captivity and returned to Halych . Duke Casimir II of Poland also supported Vladimir Yaroslavich , and they expelled Andrew and his retinue from the principality in August 1189 or 1190 . Andrew returned to Hungary after his defeat . He did not receive a separate duchy from his father , who only gave him estates and money . On his deathbed , Béla III , who had pledged to lead a crusade to the Holy Land , ordered Andrew to fulfill his vow . Andrew 's father died on 23 April 1196 , and Andrew 's older brother , Emeric , succeeded him . 
 = = = Duke of Croatia and Dalmatia ( 1197 – 1204 ) = = = 
 Andrew used the funds that he inherited from his father to recruit supporters among the Hungarian lords . He also formed an alliance with Leopold VI , Duke of Austria , and they plotted against Emeric . Their united troops routed the royal army at <unk> , Slavonia , in December 1197 . Under duress , King Emeric gave Croatia and Dalmatia to Andrew as an appanage . In practice , Andrew administered Croatia and Dalmatia as an independent monarch . He minted coins , granted land and confirmed privileges . He cooperated with the Frankopans , Babonići , and other local lords . The Canons Regular of the Holy Sepulchre settled in the province during his rule . Taking advantage of Miroslav of Hum 's death , Andrew invaded Hum and occupied at least the land between the Cetina and Neretva rivers . He styled himself , " By the grace of God , Duke of Zadar and of all Dalmatia , Croatia and Hum " in his charters . 
 Pope Innocent III urged Andrew to lead a crusade the Holy Land , but Andrew hatched a new conspiracy against Emeric with the help of John , Abbot of Pannonhalma , Boleslaus , Bishop of Vác , and many other prelates and lords . The Pope threatened him with excommunication if he failed to fulfill his father 's vow , but Andrew did not yield . The conspiracy was uncovered on 10 March 1199 , when King Emeric seized letters written by Andrew 's partisans to Bishop Boleslaus . That summer , royal troops routed Andrew 's army near Lake Balaton , and Andrew fled to Austria . A papal legate mediated a reconciliation between Andrew and Emeric , who allowed Andrew to return to Croatia and Dalmatia in 1200 . Andrew married Gertrude of Merania ; her father , Berthold , Duke of Merania , owned extensive domains in the Holy Roman Empire along the borders of Andrew 's duchy . 
 When Emeric 's son , Ladislaus , was born around 1200 , Andrew 's hopes to succeed his brother as king were shattered . Pope Innocent confirmed the child 's position as heir to the crown , declaring that Andrew 's future sons would only inherit Andrew 's duchy . Andrew planned a new rebellion against his brother , but King Emeric captured him without resistance near Varaždin in October 1203 . 
 [ All ] the magnates of the kingdom and almost the whole of the Hungarian army deserted [ King Emeric ] and unlawfully sided with Duke Andrew . Very few men indeed remained with the king , and even they were terrified at the extent of the insurrection , and did not dare to urge the king to hope for success , but rather advised him to flee . Then it happened that one day both sides had drawn close to each other and were beginning to prepare themselves in earnest for battle . ... [ After ] much wise thought , with inspiration from heaven [ King Emeric ] found a successful way by which he might recover his right to the kingdom and still remain guiltless of bloodshed . So he said to his men , " Stay here a while , and do not follow me . " Then he laid down his weapons , and taking only a leafy bough in his hand he walked slowly into the enemy ranks . As he passed through the midst of the armed multitude , he cried out in a loud and strong voice , " Now I shall see who will dare to raise a hand to shed the blood of the royal lineage ! " Seeing him , all fell back , and not daring even to mutter , they left a wide passage for him on either side . And then when [ King Emeric ] reached his brother , he took him , and leading him outside the body of troops , he sent him to a certain castle for custody . 
 Andrew was first imprisoned in the fort of Gornji <unk> , then in Esztergom . Alexander of the Hont @-@ Pázmány clan freed him in early 1204 . Having fallen ill , King Emeric had his son , Ladislaus , crowned king on 26 August . Andrew reconciled with his dying brother , who entrusted him with " the guardianship of his son and the administration of the entire kingdom until the ward should reach the age of majority " , according to the nearly contemporaneous Thomas the Archdeacon . 
 = = = His nephew 's guardian ( 1204 – 1205 ) = = = 
 King Emeric died on 30 November 1204 . Andrew governed the kingdom as Ladislaus 's regent , but he counted his regnal years from the time of his brother 's death , showing that he already regarded himself as the lawful monarch during Ladislaus III 's reign . Pope Innocent told Andrew that he should remain loyal to Ladislaus . Instead , Andrew seized the money that Emeric had deposited for Ladislaus in Pilis Abbey . Ladislaus 's mother , Constance of Aragon , fled from Hungary , taking her son to Austria . Andrew prepared to war against Leopold VI , Duke of Austria , but Ladislaus suddenly died in Vienna on 7 May 1205 . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = " New institutions " and campaigns in Halych ( 1205 – 1217 ) = = = 
 John , Archbishop of Kalocsa , crowned Andrew king in Székesfehérvár on 29 May 1205 . Andrew introduced a new policy for royal grants , which he called " new institutions " in one of his charters . He distributed large portions of the royal domain — royal castles and all estates attached to them — as inheritable grants to his supporters , declaring that " the best measure of a royal grant is its being immeasurable . " His " new institutions " altered the relations between the monarchs and the Hungarian lords . During the previous two centuries , a lord 's status primarily depended on the income he received for his services to the monarch ; after the introduction of the " new institutions " , their inheritable estates yielded sufficient revenues . This policy also diminished the funds upon which the authority of the ispáns , or heads , of the counties — who were appointed by the monarchs — had been based . 
 During his reign , Andrew was intensely interested in the internal affairs of his former principality of Halych . He launched his first campaign to recapture Halych in 1205 or 1206 . Upon the boyars ' request , he intervened against Vsevolod Svyatoslavich , Prince of Chernigov , and his allies on behalf of Daniel Romanovich , the child @-@ prince of Halych , and Lodomeria . Svyatoslavich and his allies were forced to withdraw . Andrew adopted the title of " King of Galicia and Lodomeria " , demonstrating his claim to suzerainty in the two principalities . After Andrew returned to Hungary , Vsevolod Svyatoslavich 's distant cousin , Vladimir Igorevich , seized both Halych and Lodomeria , expelling Daniel Romanovich and his mother . They fled to Leszek I of Poland , who suggested that they visit Andrew . However , Vladimir Igorevich " sent many gifts " to both Andrew and Leszek , dissuading " them from attacking him " on behalf of Romanovich , according to the Galician – Volhynian Chronicle . Vladimir Igorevich 's rebellious brother , Roman Igorevich , soon came to Hungary , seeking Andrew 's assistance . Roman returned to Halych and expelled Vladimir Igorevich with the help of Hungarian auxiliary troops . 
 Andrew confirmed the liberties of two Dalmatian towns — Split and Omiš — and issued a new charter listing the privileges of the archbishops of Split in 1207 . Taking advantage of a conflict between Roman Igorevich and his boyars , Andrew sent troops to Halych under the command of Benedict , son of <unk> . Benedict captured Roman Igorevich and occupied the principality in 1208 or 1209 . Instead of appointing a new prince , Andrew made Benedict governor of Halych . Benedict " tortured boyars and was addicted to lechery " , according to the Galician – Volhynian Chronicle . The boyars offered the throne to Mstislav Mstislavich , Prince of Zvenigorod , if he could overthrow Benedict . Mstislav Mstislavich invaded Halych , but he could not defeat Benedict . 
 Queen Gertrude 's two brothers , <unk> , Bishop of Bamberg , and Henry II , Margrave of Istria , fled to Hungary in 1208 after they were accused of participating in the murder of Philip , King of the Germans . Andrew granted large domains to Bishop <unk> in the Szepesség region ( now Spiš , Slovakia ) . Gertrude 's youngest brother , Berthold , had been Archbishop of Kalocsa since 1206 ; he was made Ban of Croatia and Dalmatia in 1209 . Andrew 's generosity towards his wife 's German relatives and courtiers discontented the local lords . According to historian Gyula Kristó , the anonymous author of The Deeds of the Hungarians referred to the Germans from the Holy Roman Empire when he sarcastically mentioned that " now ... the Romans gaze on the goods of Hungary . " In 1209 , Zadar , which had been lost to the Venetians , was liberated by one of Andrew 's Dalmatian vassals , Domald of <unk> , but the Venetians recaptured the town a year later . 
 Roman Igorevich reconciled with his brother , Vladimir Igorevich , in early 1209 or 1210 . Their united forces vanquished Benedict 's army , expelling the Hungarians from Halych . Vladimir Igorevich sent one of his sons , Vsevolod Vladimirovich , " bearing gifts to the king in Hungary " to appease Andrew , according to the Galician – Volhynian Chronicle . A group of discontented Hungarian lords offered the crown to Andrew 's cousins , the sons of Andrew 's uncle , Géza ; they lived in " Greek land " . However , the cousins ' envoys were captured in Split in 1210 . In the early 1210s , Andrew sent " an army of Saxons , Vlachs , Székelys and Pechenegs " commanded by Joachim , Count of Hermannstadt , ( now Sibiu , Romania ) to assist Boril of Bulgaria 's fight against three rebellious Cuman chieftains . Around the same time , Hungarian troops occupied Belgrade and Barancs ( now Braničevo , Serbia ) , which had been lost to Bulgaria under Emeric . Andrew 's army defeated the Cumans at Vidin . Andrew granted the <unk> ( now Țara <unk> , Romania ) to the Teutonic Knights . The Knights were to defend the easternmost regions of the Kingdom of Hungary against the Cumans and encourage their conversion to Catholicism . 
 A group of boyars , who were alarmed by the despotic acts of Vladimir Igorevich , asked Andrew to restore Daniel Romanovich as ruler of Halych in 1210 or 1211 . Andrew and his allies — Leszek I of Poland and at least five Rus ' princes — sent their armies to Halych and restored Daniel Romanovich . Local boyars expelled Daniel Romanovich 's mother in 1212 . She persuaded Andrew to personally lead his army to Halych . He captured Volodislav <unk> , the most influential boyar , and took him to Hungary . After Andrew withdrew from Halych , the boyars again offered the throne to Mstislav Mstislavich , who expelled Daniel Romanovich and his mother from the principality . Andrew departed for a new campaign against Halych in summer 1213 . During his absence , Hungarian lords who were aggrieved at Queen Gertrude 's favoritism towards her German entourage captured and murdered her and many of her courtiers in the Pilis Hills on 28 September . When he heard of her murder , Andrew returned to Hungary and ordered the execution of the murderer , Peter , son of <unk> . However , Peter 's accomplices , including Palatine Bánk Bár @-@ Kalán , did not receive severe punishments . A group of Hungarian lords , whom Andrew called " perverts " in one of his letters , was plotting to dethrone Andrew and crown his eldest son , the eight @-@ year @-@ old Béla , but they failed to dethrone him and could only force Andrew to consent to Béla 's coronation in 1214 . 
 Andrew and Leszek of Poland signed a treaty of alliance , which obliged Andrew 's second son , Coloman , to marry Leszek of Poland 's daughter , Salomea . Andrew and Leszek jointly invaded Halych in 1214 , and Coloman was made prince . He agreed to cede Przemyśl to Leszek of Poland . The following year , Andrew returned to Halych and captured Przemyśl . Leszek of Poland soon reconciled with Mstislav Mstislavich ; they jointly invaded Halych and forced Coloman to flee to Hungary . A new officer of state , the treasurer , was responsible for the administration of the royal chamber from around 1214 onwards . However , royal revenues had significantly diminished . Upon the advice of the treasurer , Denis , son of <unk> , Andrew imposed new taxes and farmed out royal income from minting , salt trade and custom duties . The yearly exchange of coins also produced more revenue for the royal chamber . However , these measures provoked discontent in Hungary . 
 Andrew signed a new treaty of alliance with Leszek of Poland in the summer of 1216 . Leszek and Andrew 's son , Coloman , invaded Halych and expelled Mstislav Mstislavich and Daniel Romanovich , after which Coloman was restored . That same year , Andrew met Stephen Nemanjić , Grand Prince of Serbia , in Ravno ( now <unk> , Serbia ) . He persuaded Stephen Nemanjić to negotiate with Henry , Latin Emperor of Constantinople , who was the uncle of Andrew 's second wife , Yolanda de Courtenay . Stephen Nemanjić was crowned king of Serbia in 1217 . Andrew planned to invade Serbia , but Stephen Nemanjić 's brother , Sava , dissuaded him , according to both versions of the Life of Sava . 
 = = = Andrew 's crusade ( 1217 – 1218 ) = = = 
 In July 1216 , the newly elected Pope Honorius III once again called upon Andrew to fulfill his father 's vow to lead a crusade . Andrew , who had postponed the crusade at least three times ( in 1201 , 1209 and 1213 ) , finally agreed . Steven Runciman , Tibor <unk> and other modern historians say that Andrew hoped that his decision would increase his likelihood of being elected as Latin Emperor of Constantinople , because his wife 's uncle , Emperor Henry , had died in June . According to a letter written by Pope Honorius in 1217 , envoys from the Latin Empire had actually informed Andrew that they planned to elect either him or his father @-@ in @-@ law , Peter of Courtenay , as emperor . The barons of the Latin Empire elected Peter of Courtenay in the summer of 1216 . 
 Andrew sold and mortgaged royal estates to finance his campaign , which became part of the wider Fifth Crusade . He renounced his claim to Zadar in favor of the Republic of Venice so that he could secure shipping for his army . He entrusted Hungary to Archbishop John of Esztergom , and gave Croatia and Dalmatia to Pontius de Cruce , the Templar Prior of Vrana . In July 1217 , Andrew departed from Zagreb , accompanied by Leopold VI of Austria and Otto I , Duke of Merania . His army was so large — at least 10 @,@ 000 mounted soldiers and uncountable infantrymen — that most of it stayed behind when Andrew and his men embarked in Split two months later . The ships transported them to Acre , where they landed in October . 
 The leaders of the crusade included John of Brienne , King of Jerusalem , Leopold of Austria , the Grand Masters of the Hospitallers , the Templars and the Teutonic Knights . They held a war council in Acre , with Andrew leading the meeting . In early November , the crusaders launched a campaign for the Jordan River , forcing Al @-@ Adil II , Sultan of Egypt , to withdraw without fighting ; the crusaders then pillaged Beisan . After the crusaders returned to Acre , Andrew did not participate in any other military actions . Instead , he was collecting relics , including a water jug allegedly used at the marriage at Cana , the heads of Saint Stephen and Margaret the Virgin , the right hands of the Apostles Thomas and Bartholomew and a part of Aaron 's rod . If Thomas the Archdeacon 's report of certain " evil and audacious men " in Acre who " treacherously passed him a poisoned drink " is reliable , Andrew 's inactivity was because of illness . 
 Andrew decided to return home at the very beginning of 1218 , even though Raoul of <unk> , Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem , threatened him with excommunication . Andrew first visited Tripoli and participated in the marriage of Bohemond IV of Antioch and Melisende of Lusignan on 10 January . From Tripoli , he travelled to Cilicia , where he and Leo I of Armenia betrothed Andrew 's youngest son , Andrew , and Leo 's daughter , Isabella . Andrew proceeded through the <unk> Sultanate of Rum before arriving in Nicaea ( now <unk> , Turkey ) . His cousins ( the sons of his uncle , Géza ) attacked him when he was in Nicaea . He arranged the marriage of his oldest son , Béla , to Maria Laskarina , a daughter of Emperor Theodore I Laskaris . When he arrived in Bulgaria , Andrew was detained until he " gave full surety that his daughter would be united in marriage " to Ivan Asen II of Bulgaria , according to Thomas the Archdeacon . Andrew returned to Hungary in late 1218 . Andrew 's " crusade had achieved nothing and brought him no honor " , according to historian Thomas C. Van Cleve . Oliver of <unk> , James of Vitry and other 13th @-@ century authors blamed Andrew for the failure of crusade . 
 = = = Golden Bull ( 1218 – 1222 ) = = = 
 When he returned to Hungary , Andrew complained to Pope Honorius that his kingdom was " in a miserable and destroyed state , deprived of all of its revenues . " A group of barons had even expelled Archbishop John from Hungary . Andrew was in massive debt because of his crusade , which forced him to impose extraordinarily high taxes and debase coinage . In 1218 or 1219 , Mstislav Mstislavich invaded Halych and captured Andrew 's son , Coloman . Andrew compromised with Mstislavich . Coloman was released , and Andrew 's youngest son and namesake was betrothed to Mstislavich 's daughter . In 1220 , a group of lords persuaded Andrew to make his eldest son , Béla , the Duke of Croatia , Dalmatia and Slavonia . 
 Andrew employed Jews and Muslims to administer royal revenues , which caused a discord between Andrew and the Holy See starting in the early 1220s . Pope Honorius urged Andrew and Queen Yolanda to prohibit Muslims from employing Christians . Andrew confirmed the privileges of clergymen , including their exemption from taxes and their right to be exclusively judged by church courts , but also prohibited the consecration of <unk> , castle folk and other serfs in early 1222 . However , a new conflict emerged between Andrew and the Holy See after he persuaded Béla to separate from his wife , Maria Laskarina . An " immense crowd " approached Andrew around June 1222 , demanding " grave and unjust things " , according to a letter of Pope Honorius . Actually , the royal servants — who were landowners directly subject to the monarch 's power and obliged to fight in the royal army — assembled , forcing Andrew to dismiss Julius Kán and his other officials . Andrew was also forced issue a royal charter , the Golden Bull of 1222 . The charter summarized the liberties of the royal servants , including their exemption from taxes and the jurisdiction of the ispáns . The last clause of the Golden Bull authorized " the bishops as well as the other barons and nobles of the realm , singularly and in common " to resist the monarch if he did not honor the provisions of the charter . The Golden Bull clearly distinguished the royal servants from the king 's other subjects , which led to the rise of the Hungarian nobility . The Golden Bull is commonly compared with England 's Magna Carta — a similar charter which was sealed a few years earlier in 1215 . A significant difference between them is that , in England , the settlement strengthened the position of all the royal subjects but , in Hungary , the aristocracy came to dominate both the crown and the lower orders . 
 = = = Conflicts with his son and the Church ( 1222 – 1234 ) = = = 
 Andrew discharged Palatine Theodore Csanád and restored Julius Kán in the second half of 1222 . The following year , Pope Honorius urged Andrew to launch a new crusade . If the report of the Continuatio <unk> is reliable , Andrew took the cross to show that he intended launch a new crusade , but no other sources mention this event . Andrew planned to arrange a new marriage for his eldest son , Béla , but Pope Honorius mediated a reconciliation between Béla and his wife in the autumn of 1223 . This angered Andrew , and Béla fled to Austria . He returned in 1224 , after the bishops persuaded Andrew to forgive him . 
 In his Diploma Andreanum of 1224 , Andrew confirmed the privileges of the " Saxons " who inhabited the region of Hermannstadt in southern Transylvania ( now Sibiu , Romania ) . The following year , he launched a campaign against the Teutonic Knights , who had attempted to eliminate his suzerainty . The Knights were forced to leave <unk> and the neighboring lands . Andrew 's envoys and Leopold VI of Austria signed a treaty on 6 June , which ended the armed conflicts along the Hungarian @-@ Austrian border . As part of the treaty , Leopold VI paid an indemnification for the damages that his troops had caused in Hungary . Andrew made his oldest son , Béla , Duke of Transylvania . Béla 's former duchy was given to Andrew 's second son , Coloman , in 1226 . Duke Béla started expanding his suzerainty over the Cumans , who inhabited the lands east of the Carpathian Mountains . Andrew launched a campaign against Mstislav Mstislavich in 1226 , because the latter refused to grant Halych to Andrew 's youngest son despite a previous compromise . Andrew besieged and captured Przemyśl , <unk> , and other fortresses in Halych . However , his troops were routed at Kremenets and Zvenigorod , forcing him to withdraw . Despite his victories , Mstislavich ceded Halych to Andrew 's son in early 1227 . 
 In 1228 , Andrew authorized his son , Béla , to revise his previous land grants . Pope Honorius also supported Béla 's efforts . Béla confiscated the domains of two noblemen , Simon Kacsics and Bánk Bár @-@ Kalán , who had taken part in the conspiracy to murder Queen Gertrude . In 1229 , upon Béla 's proposal , Andrew confirmed the privileges of the Cuman chieftains who had subjected themselves to Béla . Robert , Archbishop of Esztergom , made a complaint about Andrew to the Holy See , because Andrew continued to employ Jews and Muslims . Pope Gregory IX authorized the archbishop to perform acts of religious censure to persuade Andrew to dismiss his non @-@ Christian officials . Under duress , Andrew issued a new Golden Bull in 1231 , which confirmed that Muslims were banned from employment , and empowered the Archbishop of Esztergom to excommunicate the king if he failed to honor the provisions of the new Golden Bull . In the second half of the year , Andrew invaded Halych and restored his youngest son , Andrew , to the throne . 
 Archbishop Robert excommunicated Palatine Denis and put Hungary under an interdict on 25 February 1232 , because the employment of Jews and Muslims continued despite the Golden Bull of 1231 . Since the archbishop accused the Muslims of persuading Andrew to seize church property , Andrew restored properties to the archbishop , who soon suspended the interdict . Upon Andrew 's demand , Pope Gregory sent Cardinal Giacomo <unk> as his legate to Hungary and promised that nobody would be excommunicated without the pope 's special authorization . Although Andrew departed for Halych to support his youngest son in a fight against Daniel <unk> , he continued his negotiations with the papal legate . On 20 August 1233 , in the forests of Bereg , he vowed that he would not employ Jews and Muslims to administrate royal revenues , and would pay 10 @,@ 000 marks as compensation for usurped Church revenues . Andrew repeated his oath in Esztergom in September . 
 Andrew and Frederick II , Duke of Austria , signed a peace treaty in late 1233 . Andrew , who had been widowed , married the 23 @-@ year @-@ old Beatrice D 'Este on 14 May 1234 , even though his sons were sharply opposed to his third marriage . John , Bishop of Bosnia , put Hungary under a new interdict in the first half of 1234 , because Andrew had not dismissed his non @-@ Christian officials despite his oath of Bereg . Andrew and Archbishop Robert of Esztergom protested against the bishop 's act at the Holy See . 
 = = = Last years ( 1234 – 1235 ) = = = 
 Danilo Romanovich laid siege to Halych , and Andrew 's youngest son died during the siege in the autumn of 1234 . However , Andrew stormed Austria in the summer of 1235 , forcing Duke Frederick to pay an indemnification for damages that his troops had caused while raiding Hungary . Upon Andrew 's demand , Pope Gregory declared on 31 August that Andrew and his sons could only be excommunicated by the authorization of the Holy See . Andrew died on 21 September , and was buried in <unk> Abbey . 
 = = Family = = 
 Andrew 's first wife , Gertrude of Merania , was born around 1185 , according to historian Gyula Kristó . Their first child , Mary , was born in 1203 or 1204 . She became the wife of Ivan Asen II of Bulgaria . Andrew 's eldest son , Béla , was born in 1206 . He later succeeded his father as king . Béla 's younger sister , Elisabeth , was born in 1207 . She married Louis IV , Landgrave of Thuringia . She died in 1231 and was canonized during Andrew 's life . Andrew 's second son , Coloman , was born in 1208 . His third son , Andrew , was born around 1210 . Coloman and Andrew each ruled the Principality of Halych for a short period . 
 Two years after his first wife was murdered , Andrew married Yolanda de Courtenay , who was born around 1198 . Their only child , Yolanda , was born around 1219 and married James I of Aragon . Andrew 's third wife , Beatrice D 'Este , was about twenty @-@ three when they married in 1234 . She gave birth to a son , Stephen , after Andrew 's death . However , Andrew 's two older sons , Béla and Coloman , accused her of adultery and considered her child to be a bastard . Her grandson , Andrew , became the last monarch of the House of Árpád . 
 = Zaian War = 
 The Zaian ( or <unk> ) War was fought between France and the Zaian confederation of Berber tribes in Morocco between 1914 and 1921 . Morocco had become a French protectorate in 1912 , and Resident @-@ General Louis @-@ Hubert Lyautey sought to extend French influence eastwards through the Middle Atlas mountains towards French Algeria . This was opposed by the Zaians , led by Mouha ou Hammou Zayani . The war began well for the French , who quickly took the key towns of Taza and Khénifra . Despite the loss of their base at Khénifra , the Zaians inflicted heavy losses on the French , who responded by establishing groupes mobiles , combined arms formations that mixed regular and irregular infantry , cavalry and artillery into a single force . 
 The outbreak of the First World War proved significant , with the withdrawal of troops for service in France compounded by the loss of more than 600 French killed at the Battle of El Herri . Lyautey reorganised his available forces into a " living barricade " , consisting of outposts manned by his best troops protecting the perimeter of French territory with lower quality troops manning the rear @-@ guard positions . Over the next four years the French retained most of their territory despite intelligence and financial support provided by the Central Powers to the Zaian Confederation and continual raids and skirmishes reducing scarce French manpower . 
 After the signing of the Armistice with Germany in November 1918 , significant forces of tribesmen remained opposed to French rule . The French resumed their offensive in the Khénifra area in 1920 , establishing a series of blockhouses to limit the Zaians ' freedom of movement . They opened negotiations with Hammou 's sons , persuading three of them , along with many of their followers , to submit to French rule . A split in the Zaian Confederation between those who supported submission and those still opposed led to infighting and the death of Hammou in Spring 1921 . The French responded with a strong , three @-@ pronged attack into the Middle Atlas that pacified the area . Some tribesmen , led by Moha ou Said , fled to the High Atlas and continued a guerrilla war against the French well into the 1930s . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The signing of the Treaty of Fez in 1912 established a French protectorate over Morocco . The treaty had been prompted by the Agadir Crisis of 1911 , during which French and Spanish troops had been sent to Morocco to put down a rebellion against Sultan Abdelhafid . The new French protectorate was led by a resident @-@ general , Louis @-@ Hubert Lyautey , and adopted the traditional Moroccan way of governing through the tribal system . Upon taking up his post Lyautey replaced Abdelhafid with his brother , Yusef . The tribes took offence at this , installing their own Sultan , Ahmed al @-@ Hiba , in Marrakesh and taking eight Europeans captive . Lyautey acted quickly against the revolt , dispatching General Charles Mangin and 5 @,@ 000 troops to retake the town . Mangin 's men were highly successful , rescuing the captives and inflicting heavy casualties on vastly superior numbers of tribesmen for the loss of 2 men killed and 23 wounded . Al @-@ Hiba escaped to the Atlas mountains with a small number of his followers and opposed French rule until his death in 1919 . 
 A popular idea among the public in France was to possess an unbroken stretch of territory from Tunis to the Atlantic Ocean , including expansion into the " Taza corridor " in the Moroccan interior . Lyautey was in favour of this and advocated French occupation of the Middle Atlas mountains near Taza , through peaceful means where possible . This French expansion into the Middle Atlas was strongly opposed by the " powerful Berber trinity " of Mouha ou Hammou Zayani , leader of the Zaian Confederation ; Moha ou Said , leader of the Aït <unk> ; and Ali Amhaouch , a religious leader of the <unk> variant of Islam prevalent in the region . 
 Hammou commanded between 4 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 200 tents of people and had led the Zaians since 1877 , opposing the French since the start of their involvement in Morocco . An enemy of the French following their deposing of Sultan Abdelhafid , who was married to Hammou 's daughter , he had declared a holy war against them and intensified his tribe 's attacks on pro @-@ French ( or " submitted " ) tribes and military convoys . Said was an old man , who was held in good standing by tribesmen across the region and had formerly been a <unk> ( a local governor with almost absolute power ) for the Moroccan government , even serving in the army of Sultan Abdelaziz against a pretender at Taza in 1902 . Despite initially being open to negotiations with the French , pressure from pro @-@ war chiefs and the fear of ridicule from his tribesmen had dissuaded him . Amhaouch was a strong and influential man , described by French officer and explorer René de Segonzac as one of the " great spiritual leaders of Morocco " and the " most powerful religious personality of the south east " . The French had attempted to persuade the Zaians to submit since 1913 with little success ; most tribes in the confederation remained opposed to French rule . 
 Lyautey 's plans for taking Taza also extended to capturing Khénifra , Hammou 's headquarters . He had been advised by his political officer , Maurice Le <unk> that doing so would " finish him off definitively " and cut the Zaians off from support of other tribes . The French outpost at nearby Kasbah Tadla had recently been attacked by Said and subsequent peace negotiations led by Lyautey 's head of intelligence , Colonel Henri Simon , had achieved little . As a result , Mangin was authorised to lead a retaliatory raid to Said 's camp at El <unk> but , despite inflicting heavy casualties , was forced to withdraw with the loss of 60 killed , 150 wounded and much equipment abandoned . Having failed to make any impression on the Zaians through negotiation in May 1914 , Lyautey authorised General Paul Prosper Henrys to take command of all French troops in the area and launch an attack on Taza and Khénifra . Henrys captured Taza within a few days using units drawn from garrisons in Fez , Meknes , Rabat and Marrakesh and then turned his attention to Khénifra . 
 = = Khénifra campaign = = 
 Henrys planned his assault on Khénifra to begin on 10 June 1914 with the dispatch of three columns of troops , totalling 14 @,@ 000 men equipped with wireless radios and supported by reconnaissance aircraft . One column was to set out from Meknes under the command of Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Henri Claudel , another from Rabat under Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Gaston Cros and the third from Kasbah Tadla under Colonel Noël Garnier @-@ Duplessix . Henrys took overall command , directing the forces from an armoured car within the Claudel column . Aware that he knew little of the terrain or the allegiance of local tribes Henrys offered a generous set of terms for tribesmen who submitted to French rule : they would have to surrender only their rapid firing rifles and any captured French supplies , and pay a small tax in return for protection . He also set aside substantial funds to bribe informants and tribal leaders . 
 Despite these measures , Claudel 's column came under attack before it even left Meknes , although it was the largest and intended as a diversion . Hammou 's forces attacked their camp on three separate nights , inflicting losses of at least one officer and four men killed and nineteen injured , but leaving the other two columns unopposed . Claudel launched a counterattack on 10 June while Hammou was preparing a fourth attack , sweeping the Zaians away with artillery and ensuring little resistance for his march to Khénifra on the next day . After enduring some sniping attacks in <unk> , Claudel 's cavalry crossed the Oum er Rbia at el Bordj and advanced to the outskirts of Khénifra . The rest of the column joined them on 12 June , fighting off Zaian attacks on the way and meeting up with the other two columns , finding the town emptied of people and raising the French flag . The column had lost two men killed in the march . 
 The columns experienced repeated , strong attacks by Zaian tribesmen that day , repelled by late afternoon at the cost of five men killed and nineteen wounded . Further attacks on the nights of 14 and 15 June were repulsed by artillery and machine gun fire , directed by searchlights . Henrys then dispatched two columns south to the Zaian stronghold of <unk> to burn houses , proving his military abilities but not provoking a decisive confrontation with the tribes , who returned to guerrilla warfare tactics . In response all French @-@ controlled markets were closed to the Zaians and their trade convoys were intercepted . 
 Henrys became aware of a Zaian presence at el Bordj and sent a column to attack them on 31 June . South of el Bordj the French came under heavy fire from tribesmen with modern rifles and resorted to bayonet charges to clear the way . The encounter was Henrys ' first major engagement with the Zaians and his losses were high , 1 officer and 16 men killed and a further 2 officers and 75 men wounded . Zaian losses were much higher : the French counted at least 140 dead remaining on the battlefield , and considered the battle a victory . Henrys expected a pause in activity while the Zaians recovered , but instead Hammou stepped up attacks on the French . Just four days later an attack on a French convoy by 500 mounted tribesmen was only repulsed after several hours by more bayonet charges . French losses were again significant with one officer and ten men killed and thirty men wounded . 
 = = = Groupes mobiles = = = 
 In light of the increased attacks in the Khénifra area Henrys established three groupes mobiles , made up of troops mostly drawn from the Army of Africa . Each groupe was designed to be highly mobile and typically consisted of several battalions of regular infantry ( Algerian and Senegalese Tirailleurs or French Foreign Legion troops ) , a squadron of cavalry ( Algerian Spahis ) , a few batteries of artillery ( field or mountain ) , a section of Hotchkiss machine guns and a mule train for supplies under the overall leadership of a French senior officer . In addition each groupe mobile would have one or two goums ( informal groups of around 200 men ) of goumiers , irregular tribal auxiliaries , under the leadership of a French intelligence officer . The goums were used for intelligence gathering operations and in areas of difficult terrain . 
 A four @-@ battalion @-@ strong groupe mobile was established at Khénifra , under Lieutenant @-@ Colonel René Laverdure ; one based to the west under Claudel and one to the east under Garnier @-@ Duplessix . In addition fortified posts were established at M 'Rirt and Sidi Lamine with the areas between patrolled by goumiers to protect convoys and submitted tribes from attack . Increasing attacks on Khénifra throughout July , repelled only by concentrated artillery and machine gun fire , left Henrys concerned that a combined force of tribesmen could threaten the town and the submitted tribes . This fear was partially allayed by the separate defeats of Hammou and Amhaouch by the groupes mobiles of Claudel and Garnier @-@ Duplessix and by increasing numbers of auxiliaries becoming available from newly submitted tribes through the levy system . 
 Claudel and Garnier @-@ Duplessix were ordered to patrol the French bank of the Oum er Rbia and attempt to separate the Zaians from the <unk> to the south while Henrys planned for an advance through the Middle Atlas to the <unk> River . These operations were halted by the reduction in forces imposed on him by the outbreak of the First World War in Europe . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Lyautey received orders from Army headquarters in Paris on 28 July 1914 the day the First World War began , requesting the dispatch of all available troops to France in anticipation of a German invasion and the withdrawal of his remaining forces to more defensible coastal enclaves . The French government justified this stance by stating that the " fate of Morocco will be determined in Lorraine " . Lyautey , who had lost most of his own possessions when his house in <unk> had been burnt to the ground by advancing German forces , was keen to support the defence of France and within a month had sent 37 infantry and cavalry battalions and six artillery batteries to the Western Front – more than had been requested of him . A further 35 @,@ 000 Moroccan labourers were recruited by Lyautey over the course of the war for service in France . 
 Nevertheless , Lyautey did not wish to abandon the inland territory his men had fought so hard for , stating that if he withdrew " such a shock would result immediately all over Morocco ... that a general revolt would arise under our feet , on all our points " . Left with just 20 battalions of legionnaires ( mainly German and Austrian ) , military criminals of the Infanterie Légère d 'Afrique , territorial reservists , Senegalese Tirailleurs and goumiers , he switched from the offensive to a long @-@ term strategy of " active defence " . Lyautey withdrew all non @-@ essential personnel from his rear garrisons , brought in elderly reservists from France and issued weapons and elements of military dress to civilians in an attempt to convince the tribes that the French army in Morocco was as strong as before . Lyautey referred to this move as similar to hollowing out a lobster while leaving the shell intact . His plan depended on holding a " living barricade " of French outposts running from Taza in the north through Khenifra , Kasbah Tadla and Marrakesh to Agadir on the Atlantic coast . 
 Lyautey and Henrys intended to hold the Berbers in their current positions until they had sufficient resources to return to the offensive . The recent French advances and troop withdrawals had left Khénifra badly exposed and from 4 August – the day two battalions of infantry left the garrison for France – the Zaian tribes launched a month @-@ long attack on the town , supply convoys and withdrawing French troops " without interruption " . Lyautey was determined to hold Khénifra to use as a bridgehead for further expansion of French territory and referred to it as a bastion against the " hostile Berber masses " upon which the " maintenance of [ his ] occupation " depended . Attacks on Khénifra threatened the vital communication corridor between French forces in Morocco and those in Algeria . To relieve pressure on the town , Claudel and Garnier @-@ Duplessix 's groupes mobiles engaged Hammou and Amhaouch 's forces at <unk> , Bou Moussa and Bou Arar on 19 , 20 and 21 August , inflicting " considerable losses " . This , combined with the reinforcement of Khenifra on 1 September , led to reduced attacks , decreasing to a state of " armed peace " by November . 
 Henrys began to move towards a more offensive posture , ordering mobile columns to circulate through the Middle Atlas and mounted companies to patrol the plains . This was part of his plan to maintain pressure on Hammou , who he considered to be the linchpin of the " artificial " Zaian Confederation and responsible for their continued resistance . Henrys was counting on the onset of winter to force the Zaians from the mountains to their lowland pastures where they could be confronted or persuaded to surrender . In some cases the war assisted Lyautey , allowing him a freer hand in his overall strategy , greater access to finance and the use of at least 8 @,@ 000 German prisoners of war to construct essential infrastructure . In addition the increased national pride led many middle @-@ aged French immigrants in Morocco to enlist in the army and , though they were of poor fighting quality , Lyautey was able to use these men to maintain the appearance of a large force under his command . 
 = = = Battle of El Herri = = = 
 When Henrys had successfully repulsed the attacks on Khénifra , he believed he had the upper hand , having proven that the reduced French forces could resist the tribesmen . The Zaians were now contained within a triangle formed by the Oum er Rbia River , the <unk> River and the Atlas Mountains , and were already in dispute with neighbouring tribes over the best wintering land . Hammou decided to winter at the small village of El Herri , 15 kilometres ( 9 miles ) from Khénifra , and established a camp of around 100 tents there . Hammou had been promised peace talks by the French , and Lyautey twice refused Laverdure permission to attack him and ordered him to remain on the French bank of the Oum er Rbia . On 13 November Laverdure decided to disobey these orders and marched to El Herri with almost his entire force , some 43 officers and 1 @,@ 187 men with supporting artillery and machine guns . This amounted to less than half the force he had in September , when he had last been refused permission to attack . 
 Laverdure 's force surprised the Zaian camp , mostly empty of fighting men , at dawn . A French cavalry charge , followed up with infantry , successfully cleared the camp . After capturing two of Hammou 's wives and looting the tents the French started back for Khénifra . The Zaians and other local tribes , eventually numbering 5 @,@ 000 men , began to converge on the French column and began harassing its flanks and rear . The French artillery proved ineffective against dispersed skirmishers and at the <unk> river the rearguard and gun batteries found themselves cut off and overrun . Laverdure detached a small column of troops to take his wounded to Khénifra , remaining behind with the rest of the force . Laverdure 's remaining troops were surrounded by the Zaians and were wiped out by a mass attack of " several thousand " tribesmen . 
 The wounded and their escort reached Khenifra safely by noon , narrowly outpacing their pursuers , who had stopped to loot the French dead . This force of 431 able @-@ bodied men and 176 wounded were the only French survivors of the battle . The French lost 623 men on the battlefield , while 182 Zaian were killed . The French troops also lost 4 machine guns , 630 small arms , 62 horses , 56 mules , all of their artillery and camping equipment and much of their personal belongings . 
 = = = After El Herri = = = 
 The loss of the column at El Herri , the bloodiest defeat of a French force in Morocco , left Khénifra almost undefended . The senior garrison officer , Captain Pierre Kroll , had just three companies of men to protect the town . He managed to inform Lyautey and Henrys of the situation by telegraph before the town came under siege from the Zaians . Henrys determined to act quickly against the Zaians to prevent Laverdure 's defeat from jeopardising the French presence in Morocco , dispatching Garnier @-@ Duplessix 's groupe mobile to Khénifra and forming another groupe in support at Ito under Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Joseph Dérigoin . Garnier @-@ Duplessix fought his way to the town , relieved it on 16 November , and was joined by Henrys shortly afterwards . The 6th battalion of the 2nd French Foreign Legion Regiment also reached the town , having fought off Zaian attacks during their march from M 'Rirt . Henrys led excursions from Khénifra to El Herri as a show of force and to bury their dead , some of whom had been taken as trophies by Hammou to encourage support from other tribes . 
 The Zaian victory at El Herri , combined with slow French progress on the Western Front and the siding of the Muslim Ottoman Empire with the Central Powers , led to an increase in recruits for the tribes and greater co @-@ operation between Hammou , Amhaouch and Said . To counter this Henrys undertook a reorganisation of his forces , forming three military districts centred on Fez , Meknes and Tadla @-@ Zaian ( the Khénifra region ) , the latter under the command of Garnier @-@ Duplessix . Henrys aimed to maintain pressure on Hammou through an economic blockade and the closure of markets to unsubmitted tribes . He imposed a war penalty , in the form of money , horses and rifles , on submitting tribes , believing that their submission would last only if they paid for it . Few tribes took up Henrys ' offer and the Zaians continued to cross the Rbia and attack French patrols . 
 The French returned to the offensive in March with Dérigoin 's group sweeping along the French bank of the Rbia , north of Khénifra , and Garnier @-@ Duplessix the left . Dérigoin faced and drove off only a small Zaian force , but Garnier @-@ Duplessix faced a more significant force – his troops were almost overrun by a large mounted group but managed to repulse them , inflicting " serious losses " in return for French casualties of one man killed and eight wounded . Garnier @-@ Duplessix crossed the Rbia again in May to confiscate crops , and was attacked there by a force of 4 – 5 @,@ 000 tribesmen at Sidi <unk> , near Kasbah Tadla . He repulsed them with artillery and counterattacked successfully over the course of a two @-@ day engagement , killing 300 of the attackers and wounding 400 at the cost of 3 French dead and 5 wounded . This victory restored the image of French superiority and led to an increase in tribal submissions , the withdrawal of Said 's forces further into the mountains and a six @-@ month period of relative peace . In recognition of this Garnier @-@ Duplessix was promoted to major @-@ general . 
 The peace was broken on 11 November 1915 by an attack on a supply convoy headed for Khénifra by 1 @,@ 200 – 1 @,@ 500 Zaians and allied tribesmen . The Moroccans pressed to within 50 metres ( 55 yards ) of the French , and Garnier @-@ Duplessix , in command of the convoy , was forced to resort to the bayonet to push them back . French casualties amounted to just 3 killed and 22 wounded but Henrys was concerned by the influence that Hammou continued to hold over other Berber tribes . In retaliation Henrys took both groupes mobiles across the Rbia and bombarded the Zaian camp , inflicting casualties but making little impression on their will to fight . The Zaians recrossed the Rbia in January 1916 , camping in French territory and raiding the submitted tribes . Feeling that his communications with Taza were threatened Henrys withdrew his groupes to the Khénifra area , both of them coming under attack en route . At M 'Rirt a sizeable Zaian attack was repulsed with 200 casualties but the French suffered the loss of one officer and 24 men killed and 56 wounded . 
 Lyautey had successfully retained the territory he had captured before the war but was of the opinion that he could not advance any further without risking " an extremely painful " mountain conflict . He faced having his troops withdrawn for service on the Western Front and being left with what he described as " degenerates and outcasts " , a loss only partially mitigated by the expansion of the irregular tribal units to 21 goums in strength . Henrys accepted an offer of a position in France and was replaced by Colonel Joseph @-@ François Poeymirau , a keen follower of Lyautey who had served as Henrys ' second in command at Meknes . Lyautey was offered the post of Minister of War at the invitation of Prime Minister Aristide Briand , which he accepted on 12 December 1916 . Lyautey was replaced , at his request , by General Henri Gouraud , who had experience fighting alongside Lyautey in Morocco and who had recently returned from the Dardanelles , where he had lost his right arm . Lyautey soon became disillusioned with French tactics in Europe , the disunity prevailing between the Allies and his position as a symbolic figurehead of the government . He was unfamiliar with dealing with political opposition and resigned on 14 March 1917 , after being shouted down in the Chamber of Deputies . The government could not survive the resignation of such a senior cabinet member and Briand himself resigned on 17 March , to be replaced by Alexandre Ribot . 
 Lyautey returned to his former position in Morocco at the end of May and immediately decided on a new strategy . He concentrated his forces in the Moulouya Valley , convinced that the submission of the tribes in this area would lead to the collapse of the Zaian resistance . In preparation for this new offensive Poeymirau established a French post at El Bekrit , within Zaian territory , and forced the submission of three local tribes . He then used this post to protect his flanks during an advance south @-@ eastwards into the valley , intending to meet with a column led by Colonel Paul Doury , advancing north @-@ west from Boudenib . The two columns met at <unk> Nidji on 6 June , a moment which represented the establishment of the first French @-@ controlled route across the Atlas mountains , and earned Poeymirau promotion to brigadier @-@ general . A defensive camp was soon established at Kasbah el Makhzen , and Doury began construction on a road that he promised would be traversable by motor transport by 1918 . 
 By late 1917 motorised lorries were able to traverse much of the road , allowing the French to quickly move troops to areas of trouble and supply their garrisons in eastern Morocco from the west rather than over long routes from the Algerian depots . A secondary road was constructed , leading southwards from the first along the <unk> River , that allowed Doury to reach Er @-@ Rich in the High Atlas , and major posts were established at <unk> and <unk> . The Zaians refused to be drawn into attacking the fortified posts that the French built along their new roads , though other tribes launched attacks that summer after rumours of French defeats on the European front . In one instance , in mid @-@ June , it took Poeymirau 's entire groupe three days to restore control of the road after an attack . 
 Doury had expanded the theatre of operations , against Lyautey 's orders , by establishing a French mission at <unk> , in the Tafilalt region , in December 1917 in reaction to a rumoured German presence there . The land here , mainly desert , was almost worthless to the French and Lyautey was keen for his subordinates to focus on the more valuable Moulouya Valley . Local tribes resisted the French presence , killing a translator working at the mission in July 1918 . Doury sought to avenge this act on 9 August by engaging up to 1 @,@ 500 tribesmen , led by Sidi Mhand n 'Ifrutant , at <unk> with a smaller French force that included artillery and aircraft support . Entering a thick , jungle @-@ like date palm oasis , one subgroup of Doury 's force suffered a close , hard @-@ fought action , hampered by exhaustion and poor supply lines . The whole force suffered casualties of 238 men killed and 68 wounded , the worst French losses since the disaster at El Herri , and also lost much of their equipment and transport . Lyautey was doubtful of Doury 's claim to have almost wiped out his foe , and in response chastised him for his rash action in " this most peripheral of zones " and placed him under Poeymirau 's direct command . Thus , as the war in Europe was drawing to a close in the early summer of 1918 , the French remained hard pressed in Morocco . Despite the death of Ali Amhaouch by natural causes , significant numbers of tribesmen under the leadership of Hammou and Said continued to oppose them . 
 = = = The Central Powers in Morocco = = = 
 The Central Powers attempted to incite unrest in the Allied territories in Africa and the Middle East during the war , with the aim of diverting military resources away from the Western Front . German intelligence had identified Northwest Africa as the " Achilles ' heel " of the French colonies , and encouraging resistance there became an important objective . Their involvement began in 1914 , with the Germans attempting to find a suitable Moroccan leader that they could use to unite the tribes against the French . Their initial choice , former Sultan Abdelaziz , refused to co @-@ operate and moved to the south of France to prevent any further approaches . Instead they entered negotiations with his successor Abdelhafid . He initially co @-@ operated with the Germans , renouncing his former pro @-@ Allied stance in autumn 1914 and moving to Barcelona to meet with officials from Germany , the Ottoman Empire and the Moroccan resistance . During this time he was also selling information to the French . These mixed loyalties came to light when he refused to board a German submarine headed for Morocco , and the Central Powers decided he was of no further use . Abdelhafid then attempted to extort money from the French intelligence services , who responded by halting his pension and arranging his internment at El Escorial . He was later awarded a stipend by Germany in return for his silence on the matter . 
 The failure to find a suitable leader caused the Germans to alter their plans from a widespread insurrection in Morocco to smaller @-@ scale support of the existing resistance movement . German support included the supply of military advisers and Foreign Legion deserters to the tribes as well as cash , arms and ammunition . Money ( in both pesetas and francs ) was smuggled into Morocco from the German embassy at Madrid . The money was transferred to Tétouan or Melilla by boat or wired through the telegraph before being smuggled to the tribes , who each received up to 600 @,@ 000 pesetas per month . Weapons arrived through long @-@ established routes from Spanish <unk> or else purchased directly from French gun runners or corrupt Spanish Army troops . The Germans found it hard to get resources to the Zaians in the Middle Atlas due to the distances involved and most of what did get through went to Said 's forces . German attempts to distribute supplies inland were frustrated when many tribes hoarded the best resources . Ammunition remained scarce in the Middle Atlas , and many were forced to rely on locally manufactured gunpowder and cartridges . 
 The Ottoman Empire also supported the Moroccan tribesmen in this period , having provided military training to them since 1909 . They co @-@ operated with German intelligence to write and distribute propaganda in Arabic , French and the Middle Atlas Berber dialect . Much of the Ottoman intelligence effort was coordinated by Arab agents operating from the embassy in Madrid and at least two members of the Ottoman diplomatic staff there are known to have seen active service with the tribes in Morocco during the war . Ottoman efforts in Morocco were hindered by internal divisions among the staff , disagreements with their German allies and the outbreak of the Arab Revolt in 1916 , with which some of the embassy staff sympathised . These problems led many of the Ottoman diplomatic corps in Spain to leave for America in September 1916 , bringing to an end many of the significant Ottoman operations in Morocco . 
 French intelligence forces worked hard to combat the Central Powers and to win the support of the Moroccan people . A series of commercial expositions , such as the Casablanca Fair of 1915 , were held to demonstrate the wealth of France and the benefits of co @-@ operation . In addition to stepping up their propaganda campaign and increasing the use of bribes to convince tribes to submit , the French established markets at their military outposts and paid Moroccans to undertake public works . Islamic scholars were also encouraged to issue <unk> supporting the Moroccan Sultan 's declaration of independence from the Ottoman Empire . 
 French and British intelligence agents co @-@ operated in French and Spanish Morocco and Gibraltar , tracking Ottoman and German agents , infiltrating the advisers sent to the tribes and working to halt the flow of arms . German citizens in Morocco were placed under careful scrutiny and four were executed within days of the war 's start . The French broke the codes used by the German embassy and were able to read almost every communication sent from there to the General Staff in Berlin . <unk> paid to staff at the Ottoman mission to Spain secured intelligence on the Central Powers ' plans for Morocco . 
 Although the efforts of the Central Powers caused a resurgence in resistance against French rule , they were largely ineffective , falling short of the planners ' aims of a widespread jihad . There were few cases of mass civil disorder , France was not required to reinforce the troops stationed in Morocco , and the export of raw materials and labour for the war effort continued . Although they were never able to completely stem the flow of arms , despite considerable effort , the French were able to limit the supply of machine guns and artillery . The tribes were thus unable to face the French in direct confrontation and had to continue to rely on ambushes and raids . This contrasted with the Spanish experience in the Rif War of 1920 – 26 , in which tribes with access to such weapons were able to inflict defeats upon the Spanish Army in the field , such as at the Battle of Annual . 
 = = Post @-@ war conflicts = = 
 The heavy French losses at the Battle of <unk> encouraged an increase in tribal activity across the south @-@ east of Morocco , threatening the French presence at Boudenib . Poeymirau was forced to withdraw garrisons from outlying posts in the Tafilalt , including that at <unk> , to concentrate his force and reduce the risk of further disasters . Lyautey authorised only a series of limited offensives , such as the razing of villages and gardens , the primary aim of which was to emphasise French military superiority . The French struggled to move troops through the mountain passes from the Moulouya Valley due to heavy snows and attacks on their columns , and Lyautey , to his embarrassment , was forced to request reinforcements from Algeria . By October the situation had stabilised to the extent that Poeymirau was able to withdraw his troops to Meknes , but a large @-@ scale uprising in January 1919 forced his return . Poeymirau defeated n 'Ifrutant in battle at <unk> on 15 January , but was seriously wounded in the chest by the accidental explosion of an artillery shell and was forced to hand command to Colonel Antoine Huré . Lyautey then received assistance from <unk> El Glaoui , a tribal leader who Lyautey had made Pasha of Marrakesh after the uprising of 1912 . El Glaoui owed his increasing wealth ( when he died in 1956 he was one of the richest men in the world ) to corruption and fraud , which the French tolerated in return for his support . Thus committed to Lyautey 's cause , El Glaoui led an army of 10 @,@ 000 men , the largest Moroccan tribal force ever seen , across the Atlas to defeat anti @-@ French tribesmen in the <unk> Gorges and to reinforce the garrison at Boudenib on 29 January . The uprising was over by 31 January 1919 . 
 The conflict in the Tafilalt distracted the French from their main war aims , draining French reinforcements in return for little economic gain and drawing comparisons to the recent Battle of Verdun . Indeed , the Zaians were encouraged by French losses in the area to renew their attacks on <unk> along the trans @-@ Atlas road . The French continued to hope for a negotiated end to the conflict and had been in discussions with Hammou 's close relatives since 1917 . Indeed , his nephew , Ou El <unk> , had offered his submission in exchange for weapons and money but had been refused by the French who suspected he wanted to fight with his cousin , Hammou 's son , Hassan . With no progress in these negotiations Poeymirau moved against the tribes to the north and south of Khénifra in 1920 , the front in this area having remained static for six years . Troops were brought in from Tadla and Meknes to establish blockhouses and mobile reserves along the Rbia to prevent the Zaians crossing to use the pastures . The French were opposed vigorously but eventually established three blockhouses and forced some of the local tribes to submit . French successes in the Khénifra region persuaded Hassan and his two brothers to submit to the French on 2 June 1920 , having returned some of the equipment captured at El Herri . Hassan was soon appointed Pasha of Khénifra and his 3 @,@ 000 tents were brought under French protection in an expanded zone of occupation around the Rbia . 
 Following the submission of his sons , Hammou retained command of only 2 @,@ 500 tents and in Spring 1921 was killed in a skirmish with other Zaian tribes that opposed continued resistance . The French seized the opportunity to launch an assault on the last bastion of Zaian resistance , located near El Bekrit . In September a three @-@ pronged attack was made : General Jean <unk> moved west from the El Bekrit settlement , Colonel Henry Freydenberg moved east from Taka <unk> and a third group of submitted tribesmen under Hassan and his brothers also took part . <unk> encountered resistance from the Zaians in his area but Freydenberg was almost unopposed and within days all resistance was put down . After seven years of fighting the Zaian War was ended , though Lyautey continued his expansion in the area , promising to have all of " useful Morocco " under French control by 1923 . Lyautey had been granted the dignity of a Marshal of France in 1921 in recognition of his work in Morocco . 
 In Spring 1922 , Poeymirau and Freydenberg launched attacks into the headwaters of the Moulouya in the western Middle Atlas and managed to defeat Said , the last surviving member of the Berber triumvirate , at El <unk> in April 1922 . Said was forced to flee , with much of the Aït Ichkern tribe , to the highest mountains of the Middle Atlas and then into the High Atlas . Lyautey then secured the submission of several more tribes , constructed new military posts and improved his supply roads ; by June 1922 , he had brought the entire Moulouya Valley under control and pacified much of the Middle Atlas . Limited in numbers by rapid post @-@ war demobilisation and commitments to garrisons in Germany , he determined not to march through the difficult terrain of the High Atlas but to wait for the tribes to tire of the guerrilla war and submit . Said never did so , dying in action against a groupe mobile in March 1924 , though his followers continued to cause problems for the French into the next decade . Pacification of the remaining tribal areas in French Morocco was completed in 1934 , though small armed gangs of bandits continued to attack French troops in the mountains until 1936 . Moroccan opposition to French rule continued , a plan for reform and return to indirect rule was published by the nationalist Comité d 'Action <unk> ( CAM ) in 1934 , with significant riots and demonstrations occurring in 1934 , 1937 , 1944 and 1951 . France , having failed to quell the nationalists by deposing the popular Sultan Mohammed V and already fighting a bloody war of independence in Algeria , recognised Moroccan independence in 1956 . 
 = Golden Ticket ( The Office ) = 
 " Golden Ticket " is the 19th episode of the fifth season of the television series The Office , and the 91st overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 12 , 2009 . 
 In the episode , Michael excitedly starts a Willy Wonka @-@ inspired promotional gimmick providing discounts to customers who receive golden tickets , then tries to blame the idea on Dwight when the promotion appears to cost the company a large amount of money . In a B story , Kevin receives conflicting romantic advice from Andy , Jim and Pam . 
 The episode was written by Mindy Kaling and directed by Randall Einhorn . It received mixed reviews from critics , and many commented on the selfishness and mean behavior of Michael Scott in the episode . According to Nielsen ratings , " Golden Ticket " was watched by 7 @.@ 7 million overall viewers the week it aired . In addition to multiple references to Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , " Golden Ticket " includes two knock knock jokes involving the KGB . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Michael ( Steve Carell ) , inspired by the film Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , decides to put five " golden tickets " randomly into five different boxes of paper that will provide Dunder Mifflin clients with a ten percent discount for one year . Michael is excited about the promotional gimmick , which prompts him to dress and act like Wonka throughout the day . However , because Michael distributed all the tickets on the same day in the same small area of the warehouse , all five golden tickets go to their biggest client , the Blue Cross of Pennsylvania ; because Michael did not specify " limit one per customer " , the company is owed a fifty percent discount . As a result , the Scranton branch is expected to lose a significant amount of revenue which could shut down the branch , making everyone in the office upset with Michael . When angry Chief Financial Officer David Wallace ( Andy Buckley ) demands to know who is responsible , Michael claims Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) thought of the idea . Michael tries to convince Dwight to take the fall , insisting that Michael needs the job more than Dwight and that it would allow Dwight to focus more energy on his beet farm . 
 David Wallace comes to the Scranton branch and says that the client was so pleased with the discount that they decided to make the company their exclusive provider of office supplies . Grateful , David congratulates Dwight for the idea and after a moment 's hesitation , Dwight accepts the credit . Michael is shocked and upset . The rest of the office , still angry at Michael for his near @-@ disastrous idea , play along with Wallace 's misunderstanding and congratulate Dwight . When David sets up a conference call with the marketing department so Dwight can explain his Golden Ticket promotion , Michael interrupts and goads Dwight into revealing the idea actually came from Michael . After much bickering between Michael and Dwight , a frustrated David leaves the office , appearing indifferent about the outcome . 
 Meanwhile , Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) seeks advice from others in the office on how to start a relationship with Lynne ( Lisa K. Wyatt ) , the woman he socialized with at the Valentine 's Day singles mixer at the office ( from the previous episode , " Blood Drive " ) . Andy ( Ed Helms ) , still upset from his recent broken engagement with Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) , suggests that Kevin should be mean to Lynne , providing only backhanded compliments and ignoring her calls . Jim ( John Krasinski ) suggests he ask her out , but not immediately and take things slow . Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) , on the other hand , suggests he ask her out immediately and not be afraid to express himself to her . When Lynne visits the office , Kevin said he has decided to simply tell her what exactly he is thinking . He tells her that she has a nice smile and he would like to take her out to dinner and a movie , which she accepts . Kevin then accidentally says " Nice ... boobs " , but Lynne seems flattered by the statement . 
 = = Production = = 
 The official The Office website included three cut scenes from " Golden Ticket " . One 72 @-@ second clip includes Michael eavesdropping from the men 's bathroom on Angela , Oscar , Kelly and Meredith , who discuss how unfair Michael is treating Dwight in making him take the fall over the failed golden ticket promotion . Kelly also makes the remark , " I hope Dwight gets fired and they get a hot new guy to replace him , " to which Oscar replies , " Seriously . " In another 52 @-@ second scene , Michael asks Dwight to go on a stroll , but Dwight suggests turning it into a " power stroll " , which he prepares Michael for by applying sunscreen to his face . And in a follow @-@ up to the scene where workers discuss that Michael should be fired , a visibly angry and upset Michael confronts the office . When he says " Can any of you imagine this office without me ? " everyone gleefully raises their hands , but Michael then asks them if they 've thought about what kind of terrible person they could get to replace him ; he then pointedly says that they could get someone who knows they don 't actually need three accountants ( Oscar , Kevin , and Angela look visibly ashamed that Michael knew this going back to Season 2 's Halloween episode but has never taken any action about it ) or someone who doesn 't approve of romantic relationships and would transfer one or both people having one to separate branches ( Jim and Pam in turn get this message and look thoughtful ) , and tells the office that they should mind what they 're saying about him " when I 'm hiding in the bathroom pretending to be pooping . " 
 The NBC site also featured more than two minutes @-@ worth of clips involving the subplot between Kevin and Lynne , including Andy discussing his new method of being mean to women while courting dates , in response to his recent failed engagement with Angela . Among the deleted scenes are Kevin telling Lynn he will be too busy for three weeks to talk to her and giving a backhanded compliment to her shirt , both at Andy 's suggestion . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The golden ticket promotional gimmick , from which the episode receives its title , is a reference to the golden tickets from the 1964 Roald Dahl novel , Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , as well as the 1971 and 2005 film adaptations of the book . Throughout the first half of the episode , Michael wears a purple suit and top hat similar to Willy Wonka , the character responsible for the promotion from which this episode takes its name . Blue Cross of Pennsylvania , the Dunder Mifflin client who receives the Golden Tickets , is a real @-@ life division of Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association , an American health insurance company . After throwing away the Willy Wonka outfit , Michael wears a gray T @-@ shirt advertising the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Pioneers , a minor league arena football team . One of the excuses Michael uses to avoid David 's phone calls is that he is attending an " Obama fashion show " , a reference to U.S. President Barack Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama . 
 Dwight Schrute makes knock knock jokes involving the KGB , the secret police and intelligence agency for the Soviet Union . Michael also makes a knock knock joke involving Buddha , with the punch @-@ line that Pam " <unk> " ( butter , pronounced like Buddha ) a slice of bread . Gautama Buddha was a spiritual teacher in the South Asian country Nepal who founded the religion Buddhism . During an office meeting in which Michael asks his employees to come up with other Golden Ticket @-@ like ideas , Andy suggests the breakfast cereal brand Golden Grahams and American sitcom The Golden Girls before confessing he does not understand the assignment . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 12 , 2009 , " Golden Ticket " was watched by 7 @.@ 7 million overall viewers and received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 1 among adults aged between 18 and 49 , despite directly competing with ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy and CBS 's CSI : Crime Scene Investigation . For the week of March 9 – 15 , the episode ranked number 10 among adults 18 – 49 , within two shares of the time @-@ period lead in that age group . " Golden Ticket " was number four among all programs in adults 18 – 34 , behind Grey 's Anatomy and the Tuesday and Wednesday editions of American Idol . In the 9 to 9 : 30 p.m. time @-@ slot , the episode also ranked number one among men 18 – 34 and men 18 – 49 , tied with Grey 's Anatomy for number one among the broadcast networks in adults 18 – 34 , and tied with CSI for number two among adults 18 – 49 . 
 " Golden Ticket " received mixed reviews , with several reviewers commenting on the selfishness and mean behavior of Michael in the episode . In a New York magazine article entitled " Michael Finally Goes Too Far " , Will Leitch describes it as " one of the funnier recent episodes " , but found Michael 's willingness to sell out Dwight unsettling : " Usually , when he ’ s about to do something over @-@ the @-@ top ( like plant drugs on Toby ) , he backs off at the last second . This time , he 's willing to go all the way and sell out Dwight , his most loyal friend . It 's a little jarring . " Leitch , however , said the sweetness of the subplot involving Kevin and Lynne offset some of the darker aspects of the episode , and praised several of the jokes including Michael 's " Shoe @-@ La @-@ La " shoe store idea , Dwight 's idea for a " Horse Boat " invention and the KGB knock knock jokes . 
 Kona Gallagher , of TV Squad , praised " Golden Ticket " , especially the final act : " Between Michael 's face and Dwight 's conference call , the last ten minutes of this episode were absolutely golden . " Gallagher said the episode returned to " season one levels of Michael Scott stupidity " , and particularly liked the way Dwight so readily accepted credit once the golden ticket promotion proved to be a success . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club gave " Golden Ticket " an A- grade and particularly praised Steve Carell 's Willy Wonka impression and the way Michael tried to distance himself after the promotional idea went bad . Rabin said , " Tonight ’ s episode lacked a certain gravity but it delivered the goods , comedy @-@ wise . " He also pointed out that the script was technically illogical in that Michael pretended he did not come up with the golden ticket idea despite the documentary camera crew filming his earlier discussions about it . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Whitney Pastorek described the episode as " kind of cute tonight , and kind of flat in places , and kind of sad . " Pastorek said one of the most interesting aspects of " Golden Ticket " was the relationship between Michael and Dwight : " After their respective failed romances with Holly and Angela , Michael and Dwight may be coming to the awkward realization that the most successful relationship in either of their lives is with one another , and that may be causing a little tension . " Travis Fickett of IGN said " Golden Ticket " was a " solid offering " , but felt it lacked any big moments and fit too much of a status quo mold he feels other recent episodes had fallen into . Fickett said it was " fun to watch Michael squirm " both when he thought he was in trouble , and when he was robbed credit for his good idea ; he also liked when Jim encouraged Dwight not to take the fall for Michael , and when the others in the office rallied around Dwight when David Wallace gave Dwight credit for the success . 
 Alan Sepinwall , television writer for The Star @-@ Ledger , said Michael acted so " nakedly selfish and unfeeling " that it made the episode unpleasant to watch : " If last week 's ' Blood Drive ' gave us Michael at his most human and sympathetic , then ' Golden Ticket ' showed how a human Michael could also be a monster . " However , Sepinwall said he did think the subplot involving Kevin receiving romantic advice was funny and sweet : " Brian Baumgartner 's just been aces the last two weeks , and if it hadn 't been for this story , I might have found ' Golden Ticket ' unbearable . " Dan Hopper of VH1 's Best Week Ever strongly criticized the episode and the behavior of the characters : " Why was every single character on last night ’ s Willy Wonka episode acting like a complete idiot ? Not ' idiot ' in the sense that the characters are always dumb and goofy in an amusing way , but ' idiot ' as in ' none of these human beings would ever act this way and this is really frustrating to watch ? ' " 
 " Golden Ticket " was voted the eleventh highest @-@ rated episode out of 26 from the fifth season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 8 @.@ 33 out of 10 . 
 = Halden Prison = 
 Halden Prison ( Norwegian : Halden <unk> ) is a maximum @-@ security prison in Halden , Norway . It has three main units and receives prisoners from all over the world , but has no conventional security devices . The second @-@ largest prison in Norway , it was established in 2010 with a focus on rehabilitation ; its design simulates life outside the prison . Among other activities , sports and music are available to the prisoners , who interact with the unarmed staff to create a sense of community . Praised for its humane conditions , Halden Prison has received the Arnstein Arneberg Award for its interior design in 2010 and been the subject of a documentary , but has also received criticism for being too liberal . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Located in Halden , Østfold , Norway , Halden Prison was built over 10 years at a cost of 1 @.@ 5 billion Norwegian kroner ( $ 252 million / £ 15 million ) . The prison received its first inmates on March 1 , 2010 and was officially opened on April 8 by the Norwegian King Harald V. It is Norway 's second @-@ largest prison with a capacity of 248 – 252 prisoners and a site of 75 acres ( 30 ha ) . 
 A maximum @-@ security prison , it hosts dangerous as well as highly dangerous criminals , such as rapists , murderers , and child molesters . They compose half of the population , while a third of the residents are drug offenders . Sex offenders , who may face violence from other inmates , and prisoners who require close psychiatric or medical supervision , are located in Unit A , a restrictive and separated area . There is also a special unit ( C8 ) focused on addiction recovery . Most inmates live in Units B and C , which are freer and have mixed cell blocks . Halden Prison receives both domestic and international criminals ; as only around three @-@ fifths of the prisoners are Norwegians ( as of 2015 ) , both Norwegian and English are used , and the prison has English teachers . However , fluency in Norwegian is a requirement to live in C8 , because group and individual counseling is conducted in Norwegian . 
 There are no conventional security devices , such as barbed tape , electric fences , towers , or snipers . However , there is safety glass , a 6 meter × 1 @.@ 5 kilometer ( 6 @.@ 5 ft × 1 mi ) concrete and steel wall , and a system of underground tunnels which guards use to walk through the prison . Although there are surveillance cameras on the prison grounds , they are not present in the cells , the cell hallways , the common rooms , the classrooms , and most of the workshops . While there is little violence reported , almost exclusively in Unit A , officers try to prevent it . If two inmates have a dispute , they engage in a mediation session under staff supervision . If mediation fails , repeated misbehavior or rule violations are punished with cell confinement or prison transference . 
 = = Design = = 
 The prison was designed by the Danish group Erik Møller Architects and the British <unk> Architects selected in a competition held by the Department of Justice and the Norwegian Directorate of Public Construction and Property to determine the designers of the building . 
 With a focus on rehabilitation , it was designed to simulate a village so that the prisoners can consider themselves part of society . The government believes that " the smaller the difference between life inside and outside the prison , the easier the transition from prison to freedom . " Interiors are painted and designed to demarcate the differences between home , school , and the workplace . In designing the prison 's interiors , the architects tried to separate the internal buildings to have prisoners walking , to strengthen their bond with the outside world . The hallways are tiled with Moroccan tiles or have large @-@ scale photographs , such as daffodils or Parisian streets . 
 Exteriors are composed of bricks , galvanized steel , and larch wood , instead of concrete . The black and red kiln @-@ fired bricks were inspired by the trees , mosses , and bedrock of the surroundings . Natural life , including birch , blueberry , and pine trees , also contribute to rehabilitation . The steel , a " hard " material , symbolizes detention , while the larch , a " soft " material , stands for rehabilitation and growth . The yard walls and toilet doors are decorated by a graffiti painting by the Norwegian artist <unk> , which was ordered by the prison from its 6 million kroner ( $ 1 million / £ 640 @,@ 000 ) art budget . 
 All aspects of the prison 's design aim to avoid psychological pressures , conflicts , and interpersonal friction . Despite this , the prison wall was designed for security . As the wall is visible everywhere , it was seen as a " symbol and an instrument " of " [ the prisoners ' ] punishment , taking away their freedom " , according to Gudrun <unk> , one of its architects . 
 = = Prison life = = 
 Each prison cell is 10 square metres ( 110 sq ft ) and has a flat @-@ screen television , desk , mini @-@ fridge , toilet with shower , and unbarred vertical window that lets in more light . Every 10 – 12 cells share a common area with a kitchen and a living room ; the kitchen has stainless steel silverware , porcelain plates , and a dining table , and the living room has a modular couch and a video game system . While the prison provides food , the prisoners can also buy ingredients at its grocery shop and cook their own meals . Inmates are locked in their cells twelve hours a day , but they are encouraged to maximize their time outside . Prisoners have an incentive of 53 kroner ( $ 9 / £ 5 @.@ 60 ) a day to leave their cells . Are <unk> , the prison 's governor , stated that the fewer activities the prisoners have , the more aggressive they become . There is an " Activities House " , and from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m , there are practices on jogging trails and a soccer field , while wood working , cooking , and music classes are also offered . At the mixing studio , the inmates may record music and a monthly program broadcast by the local radio station . A library with books , magazines , CDs and DVDs ; a gym with a rock @-@ climbing wall ; and a chapel are also available . Prisoners even receive questionnaires asking how their prison experience can be improved . 
 Inmates are allowed to receive their families , partners , or friends privately twice a week for two hours . Individual rooms containing a sofa , sink , and cupboard with sheets , towels , and condoms are available for single @-@ person visits . For those with families , a larger room with toys and baby @-@ changing facilities is available . Inmates are checked after visits , and if illegal items are found , prisoners can lose their rights to private visits . This right is denied to high risk criminals and visitors with histories of drug offenses . There is also a separated , chalet @-@ style house where prisoners can receive visits from family members and stay with them for 24 hours . The house has a small kitchen , two bedrooms , a bathroom , a living room with a dining table , a sofa , and a television , as well as an outdoor play area with toys . Foreigners are not allowed and inmates have to complete a child @-@ development education program to have 24 @-@ hour @-@ long visits . During visits , staff make regular checks on the prisoners and their families . 
 = = Staff = = 
 As of 2012 , Halden had 340 staff members , including teachers , healthcare workers , personal trainers , and guards . The philosophy of " dynamic security " , which encourages the staff and the inmates to develop interpersonal relationships , helps prevent potential aggression and guarantees safety . Guards eat meals and play sports with the inmates , and are typically unarmed because guns can produce intimidation and social distance . The interaction between prisoners and the staff is designed " to create a sense of family , " according to architect Per <unk> Nielsen , and because the staff can be role models to help the inmates to recreate their sense of daily routine outside of prison walls . Half the guards are women , as <unk> thinks it minimizes aggression . The guard stations were also designed to be tiny and cramped , to encourage officers to interact more with the inmates . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Halden city 's inhabitants view the prison as a chance to find employment rather than a bad thing . Nina Margareta <unk> of the web magazine The Nordic Page stated that the prison is " known for having the most humanly conditions in Europe , " while William Lee James of Time and Amelia Gentleman from The Guardian called it the world 's " most humane prison . " The BBC reported that the design of Scottish prison HMP Grampian was inspired by Halden . 
 In 2010 , Halden Prison 's interior design earned the Arnstein Arneberg Award . In 2014 , as part of Wim Wenders ' 3D documentary series Cathedrals of Culture , Michael Madsen directed a short film exploring how the prison 's design and architecture influence the re @-@ socialization process . That same year , another film on Halden Prison was produced : The Norden , a television film produced by Finnish Broadcasting Company , explored the reactions of James Conway , a former superintendent at New York 's Attica Correctional Facility , during a prison tour . Conway affirmed , " This is prison utopia . I don 't think you can go any more liberal — other than giving the inmates the keys . " 
 However , the conservative , right @-@ wing populist Progress Party has criticized Halden Prison . Foreigners in Norwegian prisons increased from 8 @.@ 6 percent in 2000 to 34 @.@ 2 percent in 2014 ; Per Sandberg , deputy leader of the party , attributes this to " Halden 's high standard " , arguing that Halden 's facilities should be reserved for Norwegian citizens . The party also contended that Halden 's quality of life is " better than in many nursing and retirement homes . " 
 = Henrik Sedin = 
 Henrik Lars Sedin ( born 26 September 1980 ) is a Swedish professional ice hockey centre who currently serves as captain of the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . His identical twin brother Daniel also plays for the Canucks . Having played together throughout their careers , the pair are known for their effectiveness playing off one another . Henrik , a skilled passer , is known as the playmaker , while Daniel is known as the goalscorer . On 15 February 2013 , Henrik Sedin became the all @-@ time leading scorer for the Vancouver Canucks . 
 Henrik began his career in the Swedish Elite League with Modo Hockey in 1997 and was co @-@ recipient , with Daniel , of the 1999 Golden Puck as Swedish player of the year . Selected third overall — one pick after his brother Daniel — by the Canucks in the 1999 NHL Entry Draft , Henrik has spent his entire NHL career in Vancouver . After four seasons with the club , he became the Canucks ' top @-@ scoring centre in 2005 – 06 . He has since won three Cyrus H. McLean Trophies as the team 's leading point @-@ scorer ( from 2007 – 08 to 2009 – 10 ) and one Cyclone Taylor Award as the team 's most valuable player ( 2010 ) . In 2009 – 10 , he won the Hart Memorial Trophy as well as the Art Ross Trophy as the NHL 's most valuable player and leading point @-@ scorer , respectively . He was also named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team that year and again in 2010 – 11 , a season that included an appearance in the Stanley Cup Finals , where Vancouver lost to the Boston Bruins in seven games . That summer , Henrik and Daniel were named co @-@ recipients of the Victoria Scholarship as Swedish athletes of the year . 
 Internationally , Henrik has competed for Sweden . He is a two @-@ time Olympian and helped Sweden to a gold medal at the 2006 Winter Games in Turin . In five appearances at the IIHF World Championships , he has won bronze medals in 1999 and 2001 and clinched the world title in 2013 . At the junior level , he appeared in one World U17 Hockey Challenge ( where he won silver ) , two European Junior and three World Junior Championships . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henrik was born on 26 September 1980 in Örnsköldsvik , Sweden , six minutes before his identical twin brother , Daniel . The pair have two older brothers , Stefan and Peter . Their father , Tommy , is a school vice principal who played for Modo Hockey in the 1960s ; their mother , Tora , is a nurse . Henrik began playing organized hockey with Daniel when they were eight . They did not regularly play on the same line until Daniel switched from the center to the wing at the age of 14 . Henrik and Daniel attended high school at <unk> Gymnasium in their hometown in Sweden while playing professionally for Modo Hockey . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Modo Hockey ( 1997 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Aged 16 , Henrik and Daniel Sedin began their professional careers in 1997 – 98 with Modo Hockey of the Swedish Elite League . Henrik recorded a goal and five points over 39 games during his rookie season . In his second year with Modo , he improved to 12 goals and 34 points , joint second in team scoring with Samuel <unk> , behind Daniel . At the end of the season , Henrik and Daniel were named co @-@ recipients of the Golden Puck , the Swedish player of the year award . 
 The Sedins were considered top prospects for the 1999 NHL Entry Draft . Rated as the top European prospects , they were expected to be top five selections and expressed a desire to play for the same team . Their agent , Mike Barnett , president of international talent agency IMG , presented them with two options to circumvent the usual NHL draft process , allowing them to play together . The first option was for the pair to enter the 1999 draft and not sign with their respective NHL clubs for two years , allowing them to become unrestricted free agents . This option required that they play junior ice hockey in North America , which was not their intention . Barnett also suggested that either Henrik or Daniel opt out of the 1999 draft , in the hope that the same team that selected the first twin would select the other the following year . On the possibility of the Sedins ' playing for separate teams , Vancouver Canucks scout Thomas Gradin commented , " They 're good enough to play with anyone , but separately their capacity might decrease by 10 or 15 percent . " Nevertheless , Henrik and Daniel both entered the 1999 draft expecting to be selected by separate teams . However , then @-@ Canucks General Manager Brian Burke already possessed the third overall pick and through a series of transactions he obtained the second overall pick . He used these second and third overall picks to select Daniel and Henrik , respectively . Gradin notified them of the Canucks ' intentions five minutes before the draft . Although then @-@ Tampa Bay Lightning General Manager Rick Dudley was ready to make Daniel his first overall choice before opening negotiations , he was convinced by Burke and Barnett that Daniel would not sign unless his brother was on the same team . 
 On 27 July 1999 , a month following the draft , Henrik and Daniel signed three @-@ year contracts with the Canucks . As the contract did not require them to begin playing in Vancouver immediately , they announced on 12 August they would return to Sweden to play one more season with Modo . During the 1999 – 2000 season , Henrik led Modo in scoring with 47 points in 50 games , two points ahead of Daniel . The two brothers played on a line with New York Islanders prospect Mattias Weinhandl . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks ( 2000 – present ) = = = 
 = = = = 2000 – 2005 = = = = 
 The 2000 – 01 NHL season was Henrik 's first for the Canucks . His debut was the team 's first game of the campaign on 5 October 2000 , a 6 – 3 loss to the Philadelphia Flyers . With the game , Henrik and Daniel became the fourth pair of twins to have played in the NHL . Three days later , Henrik assisted on Daniel 's first career NHL goal in a 5 – 4 win against the Tampa Bay Lightning . The goal tied the game at 4 with 1 : 26 left in regulation . In a 5 – 2 win against the Toronto Maple Leafs on 16 October 2000 , Henrik scored his first NHL goal and added an assist on Daniel 's second career goal . Henrik tallied 29 points over the course of the campaign — second among team rookies to Daniel 's 34 points . He and Daniel played primarily on the Canucks ' third line . 
 Henrik improved to 36 points in his second NHL season ; he finished with five goals in his last six games , taking his season total to 16 . In the opening game of the 2002 Stanley Cup playoffs , Henrik scored the overtime winner against the first @-@ seeded Detroit Red Wings to put the Canucks 1 – 0 ahead in the series ; it was his first NHL playoff goal . Detroit went on to eliminate the Canucks in six games en route to winning the Stanley Cup . During the 2002 – 03 season , Henrik suffered a sprained left shoulder that forced him out of three games . He had sustained the injury during a game against the Edmonton Oilers on 14 December 2002 . Henrik also missed a game on 23 February 2003 because of a hand injury . He played 78 games during 2002 – 03 and finished the campaign with 39 points . 
 After their third NHL season , Henrik and Daniel were re @-@ signed to one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 125 million contracts on 29 July 2003 . The Sedins began the 2003 – 04 season on a line with first @-@ year player Jason King . The trio were named the " Mattress Line " ( two twins and a King ) and formed the Canucks ' second scoring unit until King was reassigned to the team 's minor league affiliate midway through the season . On 7 November 2003 , St. Louis Blues forward Doug Weight was suspended four games without pay for a cross @-@ check he delivered to Henrik during a game the previous day ; Henrik was not injured . On 17 December 2003 , Henrik was a healthy scratch for the first and only time in his NHL career . He was also sidelined for five games in March 2004 due to sore ribs . Over 76 games , Henrik increased his points total over the previous season to 42 . During the off @-@ season , Henrik and Daniel were re @-@ signed to one @-@ year , US $ 1 @.@ 25 million contracts on 10 September 2004 . 
 During the 2004 – 05 lockout , Henrik returned to Sweden to play for Modo with Daniel and their Canucks teammate Markus Näslund . During a game against Mora IK on 20 November 2004 , Henrik received a slash that required a minor amputation to his left little finger . He finished the season with 36 points in 44 games , third in team scoring behind Peter Forsberg and Mattias Weinhandl . 
 = = = = 2005 – 2010 = = = = 
 As NHL play resumed in 2005 – 06 , Henrik returned to the Canucks and scored 75 points , finishing second in team scoring behind Markus Näslund , who had 79 points . His breakout season was sparked , in part , by the signing of winger Anson Carter , who played on the Sedins ' line and led the team in goal @-@ scoring . The trio matched the scoring pace of the Canucks ' top line of Näslund , Todd Bertuzzi and Brendan Morrison . Vancouver 's head coach at the time , Marc Crawford , recalled that season as marking the Sedins ' ascent as leaders on the team , stating , " By the end of that year , they definitely were our top guys . They had surpassed Näslund and Bertuzzi . " During the off @-@ season , Henrik and Daniel re @-@ signed with the Canucks to identical three @-@ year , $ 10 @.@ 75 million contracts on 30 June 2006 . Despite the team 's success with Carter , the Canucks did not re @-@ sign him ; he joined the Columbus Blue Jackets the following season . 
 In the 2006 – 07 season , Henrik established himself as the Canucks ' top @-@ line centre . Winger Taylor Pyatt , who had been acquired in a trade from the Buffalo Sabres during the off @-@ season , replaced Carter as the Sedins ' linemate and went on to score a career @-@ high 23 goals . For the fifth @-@ straight season , Henrik recorded a personal best , with 81 points ; he set a new Canucks record for assists in one season with 71 , beating the 62 by André <unk> in 1974 – 75 . Henrik passed <unk> on 25 March 2007 , with a three @-@ assist effort during a 5 – 4 loss to the Colorado Avalanche . In the opening game of the 2007 playoffs against the Dallas Stars , Henrik scored a game @-@ winning , quadruple @-@ overtime goal to end the sixth longest game in NHL history ( and longest in Canucks history ) at 138 minutes and six seconds of play . He struggled to produce offensively in his 12 games in the playoffs , however , managing four points as the Canucks were eliminated by the Anaheim Ducks in the second round . 
 Henrik was awarded his first NHL career penalty shot on 27 November 2007 , during a game against the Anaheim Ducks . His attempt was stopped by goaltender Jonas Hiller . In 2007 – 08 , Henrik was selected to play for the Western Conference in the 2008 All @-@ Star Game against the East , the first appearance of his career . He recorded two assists . He won his first Cyrus H. McLean Trophy as Vancouver 's leading scorer with 76 points . His 61 assists ranked fourth in the League for the second consecutive season . 
 The following season , Henrik scored 22 goals and 82 points , tying for the team lead in points with Daniel . Steve Bernier had been acquired in the 2008 off @-@ season in another trade with Buffalo and began the season on the top line with the Sedins . Bernier was later removed ; on 12 February 2009 , Head Coach Alain Vigneault moved Alexandre Burrows from the third line during a game against the Phoenix Coyotes . After recording 19 points and three game @-@ winning goals in March , Henrik was named the NHL 's Second Star of the Month . He added ten points over ten games in the 2009 playoffs , helping the Canucks advance to the second round , where they were defeated in six games by the Chicago Blackhawks . 
 Set to become unrestricted free agents on 1 July 2009 , Henrik and Daniel began negotiating with the Canucks in the off @-@ season and were reported to have asked for 12 @-@ year , $ 63 million contracts in mid @-@ June . With free agency looming , Canucks General Manager Mike Gillis travelled to Sweden to visit the Sedins , where they agreed on identical five @-@ year , $ 30 @.@ 5 million contracts on 1 July . On 30 September , Henrik was announced as one of the Canucks ' three alternate captains , replacing defenceman Mattias Öhlund , who had signed with Tampa Bay during the off @-@ season . 
 Four games into the 2009 – 10 season , Daniel suffered the first major injury of his career , breaking his foot in a game against the Montreal Canadiens . He was sidelined for 18 games , marking the first time in Henrik 's career that he played without his brother for an extended period . In Daniel 's absence , however , Henrik enjoyed a high @-@ scoring start to the season . On 14 November 2009 , he scored his first NHL career hat @-@ trick in an 8 – 2 win against the Colorado Avalanche . Leading up to Daniel 's 22 November return , Henrik scored seven goals in seven games . He continued his pace into December , recording a League @-@ leading 25 points ( five goals , 20 assists ) in 15 games to be named the NHL 's First Star of the Month . The following month , he was named Second Star , having recorded 25 points in 13 games . On 7 January 2010 , Henrik moved into top spot in the NHL scoring race , ahead of San Jose Sharks centre Joe Thornton with a three @-@ assist night against the Phoenix Coyotes . It marked the first time in nearly five years , since Näslund was tied with Robert Lang on 18 February 2004 , that a Canucks player held the League lead in scoring . During a 3 – 1 win against the Calgary Flames on 14 March , Henrik recorded his <unk> career assist to pass Trevor Linden as Vancouver 's all @-@ time leader . On 27 March , he scored two assists against the San Jose Sharks to become the fourth Canuck in team history to record a 100 @-@ point season ( after Pavel Bure , Alexander Mogilny and Markus Näslund ) . He was named Third Star of the Month for March after scoring 24 points in 15 games . 
 Henrik entered the final game of the regular season , on 10 April against the Calgary Flames , one point behind Alexander Ovechkin for the NHL scoring lead . In a pre @-@ game ceremony , he was awarded the Canucks ' Cyclone Taylor Trophy , Cyrus H. McLean Trophy and Molson Cup as the team 's most valuable player , leading scorer and three @-@ star selection leader , respectively . He then went on to record four assists in a 7 – 3 win to finish the season with 112 points , passing Ovechkin for the season lead , while also breaking Pavel Bure 's franchise record of 110 points , set in 1992 – 93 . Ovechkin failed to register a point in his last game the next day , earning Henrik the League scoring title and making him the first Art Ross Trophy winner in Canucks history . With a League @-@ leading 83 assists , he also surpassed his own team record of 71 assists in one season . In the subsequent 2010 playoffs , Henrik added 14 points in 12 games . He scored the winning goal in game four against the Los Angeles Kings with under three minutes to go in regulation to tie the series at two games each . The Canucks went on to eliminate the Kings in six games before being ousted by the Blackhawks the following round for the second consecutive year . 
 On 19 May 2010 , The Sporting News named Henrik their 2009 – 10 Player of the Year . He received 108 first @-@ place votes out of the 353 NHL players , coaches and executives polled . Ovechkin received 86 first @-@ place votes while Sidney Crosby received 72 first @-@ place votes . Henrik was also voted by his countrymen in the league to receive the Viking Award as the NHL 's best Swedish player . At the NHL Awards Show the following month on 23 June , Henrik , Ovechkin and Crosby were up for both the Hart Memorial Trophy , awarded to the player deemed by the media to be the most valuable to his team , and the Ted Lindsay Award , given to the best player as voted by the NHL Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) . After losing the Ted Lindsay Award to Ovechkin , Henrik was awarded the Hart , becoming the first Canuck and second Swedish player ( after Peter Forsberg in 2003 ) to win the trophy . Henrik garnered 894 voting points , compared to Ovechkin 's 834 and Crosby 's 729 . He admitted afterwards to feeling like the underdog going into the awards ceremony , noting " [ Ovechkin and Crosby ] are the faces of the sport ... to be standing next to them as the old guy , it 's a strange feeling . " He was additionally named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team ; at the same time , twin Daniel was named to the NHL Second All @-@ Star Team . It marked the first time since Phil and Tony Esposito in 1973 – 74 that two brothers were named post @-@ season NHL All @-@ Stars . They were also chosen to appear together on the cover of EA Sports ' European version of the NHL 11 video game . 
 = = = = 2010 – present : Captaincy = = = = 
 On 9 October 2010 , Henrik was named the Canucks ' 13th captain in team history during a pre @-@ game ceremony celebrating the start of the team 's 40th season . He succeeded Roberto Luongo , who had stepped down as team captain the previous month . Early in the 2010 – 11 season , he scored his first penalty shot goal on his second NHL career attempt on 1 November . Playing the New Jersey Devils , he scored on a backhand deke against goaltender Martin Brodeur . Midway through the campaign , he was chosen to his second career NHL All @-@ Star Game . Playing on Team Lidstrom opposite Daniel and teammate Ryan Kesler on Team Staal , Henrik helped his squad to an 11 – 10 win , recording two assists in the process . Finishing the season with 19 goals and a League @-@ leading 75 assists over 82 games , he ranked fourth in the NHL point @-@ scoring with 94 ; only brother Daniel , Martin St. Louis of the Tampa Bay Lightning and Corey Perry of the Anaheim Ducks finished ahead of him . With Daniel winning the League scoring title , the two became the first brothers to win the Art Ross Trophy in consecutive years . ( Chicago Blackhawks forwards Doug and Max Bentley also won separate scoring titles , but had achieved the feat three years apart in 1943 and 1946 , respectively . ) 
 As the Canucks established a team @-@ record 54 wins and 117 points , they won their first Presidents ' Trophy as the team with the best regular season record . Entering the 2011 playoffs as the first seed in the West , the Canucks eliminated the Blackhawks and the Nashville Predators in seven and six games , respectively . In the third round against the San Jose Sharks , Henrik established a single @-@ game Canucks playoff record with four assists in Game 4 , leading the Canucks to a 4 – 2 win . His first three assists helped the Canucks set another team record for the fastest three goals scored in a playoff game ; all three were registered on 5 @-@ on @-@ 3 powerplays in a span of one minute and fifty @-@ five seconds . With his third assist of the game , Henrik set another team record with his 16th assist of the 2011 playoffs , surpassing Pavel Bure 's mark set in 1994 . With San Jose facing <unk> the following game , Henrik recorded two more assists for his 11th and 12th points in the series , tying Bure for most in a single round by a Canucks player . Vancouver won the game 3 – 2 in double @-@ overtime to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals . Playing the Boston Bruins , the Canucks won the first two games of the series , but went on to lose four @-@ games @-@ to @-@ three . Henrik finished the post @-@ season with three goals and 22 points over 25 games , ranking second in playoff scoring behind Bruins centre David Krejčí . It was revealed following their defeat that Henrik had been playing a large portion of the playoffs with a back injury . 
 A week after Vancouver 's Game 7 loss , Henrik was on hand at the NHL Awards Ceremony in Las Vegas , having been nominated along with Daniel for the NHL Foundation Player Award for their charitable work . They lost the award to Los Angeles Kings captain Dustin Brown . For his regular season efforts , Henrik was named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team for a second consecutive year , alongside Daniel , who earned the distinction for the first time . Returning to Sweden in the off @-@ season , Henrik and Daniel were co @-@ recipients of the Victoria Scholarship as the country 's athletes of the year . They became the third and fourth ice hockey players to receive the award , after Stefan Persson in 1980 and Peter Forsberg in 1994 . Henrik and Daniel were presented the award , commemorated with glass plates , on 14 July 2011 , in the city of <unk> . 
 Playing in the 2011 – 12 season opener , Henrik dressed for his 500th consecutive NHL regular season game , having not missed a contest since returning from a rib injury on 21 March 2004 . Almost three months later , he surpassed Brendan Morrison 's Canucks record of 534 consecutive games played in a 5 – 2 win against the Edmonton Oilers on 26 December 2011 . The previous game , in which he tied the record , was played against Morrison 's Calgary Flames . At the end of the month , Henrik was named the NHL 's Third Star for December , having recorded 22 points ( two goals and 20 assists ) over 15 games ( a League @-@ high total for the month ) . At the mid @-@ season mark , Henrik was named to his third NHL All @-@ Star Game in January 2012 . He was one of four players representing the Canucks , including Daniel , Alexander Edler and Cody Hodgson , who was named as a rookie . With the exception of Hodgson , all the Canucks All @-@ Stars were selected to Team Alfredsson . Henrik went on to record a goal and two assists in a 12 – 9 loss to Team Chara . Shortly after the All @-@ Star break , Henrik injured his foot while blocking a shot from Predators defenceman Kevin Klein on 7 February . He briefly left the game and while a subsequent CT scan revealed no fracture , he remained questionable for the following contest before eventually playing through the ailment . Later that month , Henrik began a streak that saw him go eight games without a point for the first time since the 2003 – 04 season . Near the end of the regular season , Daniel sustained a concussion during a game against Chicago , forcing Henrik to play without his brother for the final nine contests of the campaign . During that span , he recorded 11 points , leading the Canucks to eight wins and one loss . The season @-@ ending streak helped the Canucks to their second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy , clinching the championship on the last game of the campaign , a 3 – 0 win against the Edmonton Oilers . During the contest , Henrik broke a 22 @-@ game goalless streak with the game @-@ winner . With 67 assists , he led the League for a third consecutive season , becoming the fifth player in NHL history to do so , after Joe Thornton ( 2005 – 08 ) , Wayne Gretzky ( 1979 – 92 ) , Bobby Orr ( 1969 – 72 ) and Stan Mikita ( 1964 – 67 ) . Though his points total dropped to 81 , which ranked ninth in the NHL , he led the Canucks in scoring and was voted the team MVP . 
 The Canucks entered the 2012 playoffs against the eighth @-@ seeded Los Angeles Kings . With Daniel out with a concussion Vancouver lost the first two games . In Game 3 , Henrik received a hard hit from Kings ' forward Dustin Brown — he had to be helped onto the bench following the hit and went to the locker room for six minutes . Despite later returning to the game , the Canucks lost 1 – 0 . With Daniel back in the lineup for Game 4 , Henrik registered a goal and an assist in a 3 – 1 Canucks ' victory . Facing elimination in Game 5 , Henrik scored a power play goal late in the first period to give Vancouver the early lead , though Canucks were unable to add another goal and eventually lost 2 – 1 in overtime . Henrik finished the playoffs with two goals and five points to lead the team in scoring . 
 Despite another lockout beginning on 15 September 2012 , the Sedins decided that they would only return to Modo , now managed by former teammate Markus Näslund , if the entire 2012 – 13 season wound up cancelled . Instead , the shortened season begun on January 2013 , and during it Henrik passed Näslund as the franchise 's all @-@ time leading scorer with 757 points . After scoring the record @-@ setting point , Sedin was given a standing ovation that carried on as play continued . After three minutes , the play stopped and Sedin saluted the crowd . During a commercial break , the Canucks ran a tribute video for the accomplishment , featuring congratulations from Näslund and Trevor Linden , the third @-@ leading scorer in team history . In the final game of the season , Head Coach Alain Vigneault wanted to rest his regulars ahead of the playoffs . However , he played Henrik in the game though only for 22 seconds ; he left the bench after just one shift . For his part , Henrik told Vigneault that " he would be okay with sitting out the game " and to him the streak is just " a number in the paper . " Vigneault responded by telling Sedin that " he 's not going to be the one that breaks the streak " , and he gave him the choice to remain on the bench or return to the locker room . Sedin felt remaining on the bench would have been a further distraction and chose to leave . Henrik finished the season with 11 goals and 45 points in 48 games . 
 As of the end of the 2012 – 13 season , six 2003 – 04 season regular @-@ season games plus four regular @-@ season games in the previous season are the only NHL games he had missed in the regular season or play @-@ offs throughout his NHL career of 1 @,@ 039 games , to that point . Through the end of the 2012 – 13 season Henrik trailed only St. Louis Blues defenceman Jay Bouwmeester among active NHL ironman streaks ; Bouwmeester had played in six more consecutive regular season games than Henrik 's 629 . On 21 January 2014 , Sedin 's consecutive regular season games streak ended at 679 games due to a rib injury sustained 16 January when he was cross @-@ checked in Phoenix by Coyotes forward Martin <unk> . 
 At the beginning of the 2013 – 14 season , the Sedins signed matching $ 28 million contract extensions to play four more years with the Canucks . Sedin played his 1,000th NHL game against the Winnipeg Jets on 12 March 2014 , becoming only the second player in franchise history to reach that milestone . His brother Daniel reached the same milestone early in the 2014 – 15 season . On 3 March 2015 , against the San Jose Sharks , Sedin scored his 900th point , a goal in the second period of the game . He is the 101st player to reach this milestone . Sedin became the first player in Canucks history to record 900 points with the team . On 6 April 2015 , Sedin scored his 700th career assist against the Los Angeles Kings . Henrik surpassed Trevor Linden for most regular season games played in a Canucks uniform on February 13 , 2016 during a game against the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 = = International play = = 
 Henrik played for the first time in North America with Sweden 's national under @-@ 17 team at the 1997 World U17 Hockey Challenge , held in Alberta . Recording 20 points ( 12 goals and eight assists ) over six games , he helped Sweden to a silver medal . After going undefeated in five contests , they were defeated in the gold medal game by Team Ontario , 6 – 2 . 
 Henrik competed for Sweden at the 1997 European Junior Championships , recording three goals and seven points over six games . He joined Sweden for the 1998 European Junior Championships , the final game of which required Sweden to beat Russia by four goals to surpass Finland in goal differential and win the gold medal . Henrik recorded a goal and an assist against Russia as Sweden won 5 – 1 . 
 In his NHL draft year , Henrik competed for Sweden at the 1999 World Junior Championships in Winnipeg , Manitoba . He recorded nine points in six games , fifth in tournament scoring and second in team scoring to brother Daniel , as Sweden failed to win a medal . Later that year , Henrik made his international debut for the Swedish men 's team at the 1999 World Championships in Norway . He scored no points in eight games as Sweden won the bronze medal . 
 In 2000 , Henrik once again competed in both the World Junior and Senior Championships . At the junior tournament in Sweden , Henrik led the tournament with 13 points in seven games , but Sweden did not earn a medal . At the World Championships , Henrik recorded five points as Sweden again failed to medal . 
 Following his rookie season with the Vancouver Canucks , Henrik made his third World Championships appearance , in 2001 in Germany . He earned his second bronze medal in three years as Sweden defeated the United States 3 – 2 in the bronze medal game . He made a fourth tournament appearance at the 2005 World Championships in Austria . Sweden missed out on the bronze medal , losing to Russia 6 – 3 . Henrik had a goal and an assist in a losing effort during the bronze medal game . He finished the tournament with two goals and six points in nine games . 
 On 22 December 2005 , Henrik was named to the Swedish Olympic team for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin . He joined Daniel , Markus Näslund and Mattias Öhlund as one of four Canucks on the squad . Competing in his first Olympics , he contributed four points as Sweden won a gold medal , defeating Finland 3 – 2 in the final . Four years later , Henrik was once again named to the Swedish Olympic team for the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver . Unlike the previous Olympics , Henrik went into the 2010 tournament as one of Sweden 's key players : at the time of the roster announcement on 27 December 2009 , he led all Swedish players in NHL scoring . Sweden failed to defend their gold medal from Turin , however , losing to Slovakia in the tournament quarterfinal . Henrik had two assists in four games . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Throughout his career , Henrik has scored markedly more assists than goals . Known as a playmaker , he starts play sequences that lead to goals with passes to his teammates . Many of the plays he generates are created off the cycle . Henrik 's familiarity with Daniel 's play enhances his effectiveness ; the pair are known for their ability to find each other intuitively with passes , often without looking . 
 Beginning around the 2008 – 09 season , Henrik began to expand his skill @-@ set by scoring more goals . His increased tendency to shoot was given an extra push when Daniel suffered the first major injury of his career early in the 2009 – 10 season , forcing Henrik to play without his brother and consequently pass less often . He recorded the first two 20 @-@ goal seasons of his career in 2008 – 09 and 2009 – 10 , and increased his shot totals . 
 With his offensive skill the prime component of his game , Henrik is known to avoid initiating contact with opposing players . Early in their career , he and Daniel were knocked off the puck easily , As a result , players have often taken advantage of the brothers ' lack of physicality by playing aggressively against them . This once led Canucks General Manager Brian Burke to publicly complain , commenting during a 2002 playoff series against the Detroit Red Wings , " ' Sedin ' is not Swedish for ' punch me or headlock me in a scrum ' . " As their careers progressed , the Sedins have worked on their strength , improving their puck possession and allowing them to play more effectively . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Henrik is married to Johanna Sedin ; they have two sons : Valter , who was born in 2006 in Vancouver and Harry , who was born on 12 May 2010 . They live together in the city 's Yaletown neighbourhood , and return to Sweden during the off @-@ season . In March 2010 , Henrik and Johanna made a joint $ 1 @.@ 5 million donation , with Daniel and his wife Marinette , to the BC Children 's Hospital 's $ 200 million project for a new building ; the two families requested that it be put towards a pediatric intensive @-@ care unit and a diagnostic imaging area . Henrik commented that it was something he and his wife had wanted to do since Valter was born . 
 Henrik and Daniel Sedin are devoted harness racing fans and race horse owners . Their most successful trotter so far is the 2013 <unk> winner Nahar . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Bolded numbers indicate season leader . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = NHL All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
