 In the winter of 1850 , a severe storm hit Scotland , causing widespread damage and over 200 deaths . In the Bay of Skaill , the storm stripped the earth from a large irregular knoll , known as " <unk> " . When the storm cleared , local villagers found the outline of a village , consisting of a number of small houses without roofs . William Watt of Skaill , the local laird , began an amateur excavation of the site , but after uncovering four houses , the work was abandoned in 1868 . The site remained undisturbed until 1913 , when during a single weekend the site was plundered by a party with shovels who took away an unknown quantity of artefacts . In 1924 , another storm swept away part of one of the houses and it was determined the site should be made secure and more seriously investigated . The job was given to University of Edinburgh 's Professor Vere Gordon Childe who travelled to Skara Brae for the first time in mid @-@ 1927 . 
 = = = Roman influence = = = 
 The written <unk> of Scotland began with the arrival of the Roman Empire in southern and central Great Britain , when the Romans occupied what is now England and Wales , administering it as a province called Britannia . Roman invasions and occupations of southern Scotland were a series of brief interludes . 
 According to the Roman historian Tacitus , the Caledonians " turned to armed resistance on a large scale " , attacking Roman forts and skirmishing with their legions . In a surprise night @-@ attack , the Caledonians very nearly wiped out the whole 9th Legion until it was saved by Agricola 's cavalry . 
 In AD 83 – 84 , the General Gnaeus Julius Agricola defeated the Caledonians at the Battle of Mons Graupius . Tacitus wrote that , before the battle , the Caledonian leader , Calgacus , gave a rousing speech in which he called his people the " last of the free " and accused the Romans of " making the world a desert and calling it peace " ( freely translated ) . After the Roman victory , Roman forts were briefly set along the Gask Ridge close to the Highland line ( only Cawdor near Inverness is known to have been constructed beyond that line ) . Three years after the battle , the Roman armies had withdrawn to the Southern Uplands . 
 The Romans erected Hadrian 's Wall to control tribes on both sides of the wall so the Limes Britannicus became the northern border of the Roman Empire ; although the army held the Antonine Wall in the Central Lowlands for two short periods – the last of these during the time of Emperor Septimius Severus from 208 until 210 . 
 The Roman military occupation of a significant part of what is now northern Scotland lasted only about 40 years ; although their influence on the southern section of the country , occupied by Brythonic tribes such as the Votadini and Damnonii , would still have been considerable between the first and fifth centuries . The Welsh term Hen Ogledd ( " Old North " ) is used by scholars to describe what is now the North of England and the South of Scotland during its habitation by Brittonic @-@ speaking people around AD 500 to 800 . According to writings from the 9th and 10th centuries , the Gaelic kingdom of Dál Riata was founded in the 6th century in western Scotland . The ' traditional ' view is that settlers from Ireland founded the kingdom , bringing Gaelic language and culture with them . However , recently some archaeologists have argued against this view , saying there is no archaeological or placename evidence for a migration or a takeover by a small group of elites . 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 The Kingdom of the Picts ( based in Fortriu by the 6th century ) was the state that eventually became known as " Alba " or " Scotland " . The development of " Pictland " , according to the historical model developed by Peter Heather , was a natural response to Roman imperialism . Another view places emphasis on the Battle of Dun Nechtain , and the reign of Bridei m . Beli ( 671 – 693 ) , with another period of consolidation in the reign of Óengus mac Fergusa ( 732 – 761 ) . 
 The Kingdom of the Picts as it was in the early 8th century , when Bede was writing , was largely the same as the kingdom of the Scots in the reign of Alexander I ( 1107 – 1124 ) . However , by the tenth century , the Pictish kingdom was dominated by what we can recognise as Gaelic culture , and had developed a traditional story of an Irish conquest around the ancestor of the contemporary royal dynasty , Cináed mac Ailpín ( Kenneth MacAlpin ) . 
 From a base of territory in eastern Scotland north of the River Forth and south of the River <unk> , the kingdom acquired control of the lands lying to the north and south . By the 12th century , the kings of Alba had added to their territories the English @-@ speaking land in the south @-@ east and attained overlordship of Gaelic @-@ speaking Galloway and Norse @-@ speaking Caithness ; by the end of the 13th century , the kingdom had assumed approximately its modern borders . However , processes of cultural and economic change beginning in the 12th century ensured Scotland looked very different in the later Middle Ages . 
 The push for this change was the reign of David I and the Davidian Revolution . Feudalism , government reorganisation and the first legally recognised towns ( called burghs ) began in this period . These institutions and the immigration of French and Anglo @-@ French knights and churchmen facilitated cultural osmosis , whereby the culture and language of the low @-@ lying and coastal parts of the kingdom 's original territory in the east became , like the newly acquired south @-@ east , English @-@ speaking , while the rest of the country retained the Gaelic language , apart from the Northern Isles of Orkney and Shetland , which remained under Norse rule until 1468 . The Scottish state entered a largely successful and stable period between the 12th and 14th centuries , there was relative peace with England , trade and educational links were well developed with the Continent and at the height of this cultural flowering John Duns Scotus was one of Europe 's most important and influential philosophers . 
 The death of Alexander III in March 1286 , followed by that of his granddaughter Margaret , Maid of Norway , broke the centuries @-@ old succession line of Scotland 's kings and shattered the 200 @-@ year golden age that began with David I. Edward I of England was asked to arbitrate between claimants for the Scottish crown , and he organised a process known as the Great Cause to identify the most legitimate claimant . John Balliol was pronounced king in the Great Hall of Berwick Castle on 17 November 1292 and inaugurated at Scone on 30 November , St. Andrew 's Day . Edward I , who had coerced recognition as Lord Paramount of Scotland , the feudal superior of the realm , steadily undermined John 's authority . In 1294 , Balliol and other Scottish lords refused Edward 's demands to serve in his army against the French . Instead the Scottish parliament sent envoys to France to negotiate an alliance . Scotland and France sealed a treaty on 23 October 1295 , known as the Auld Alliance ( 1295 – 1560 ) . War ensued and King John was deposed by Edward who took personal control of Scotland . Andrew Moray and William Wallace initially emerged as the principal leaders of the resistance to English rule in what became known as the Wars of Scottish Independence ( 1296 – 1328 ) . 
 The nature of the struggle changed significantly when Robert the Bruce , Earl of Carrick , killed his rival John Comyn on 10 February 1306 at Greyfriars Kirk in Dumfries . He was crowned king ( as Robert I ) less than seven weeks later . Robert I battled to restore Scottish Independence as King for over 20 years , beginning by winning Scotland back from the Norman English invaders piece by piece . Victory at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 proved the Scots had regained control of their kingdom . In 1315 , Edward Bruce , brother of the King , was briefly appointed High King of Ireland during an ultimately unsuccessful Scottish invasion of Ireland aimed at strengthening Scotland 's position in its wars against England . In 1320 the world 's first documented declaration of independence , the Declaration of Arbroath , won the support of Pope John XXII , leading to the legal recognition of Scottish sovereignty by the English Crown . 
 However , war with England continued for several decades after the death of Bruce . A civil war between the Bruce dynasty and their long @-@ term Comyn @-@ Balliol rivals lasted until the middle of the 14th century . Although the Bruce dynasty was successful , David II 's lack of an heir allowed his half @-@ nephew Robert II to come to the throne and establish the Stewart Dynasty . The Stewarts ruled Scotland for the remainder of the Middle Ages . The country they ruled experienced greater prosperity from the end of the 14th century through the Scottish Renaissance to the Reformation . This was despite continual warfare with England , the increasing division between Highlands and Lowlands , and a large number of royal minorities . 
 This period was the height of the Franco @-@ Scottish alliance . The Scots Guard – la Garde Écossaise – was founded in 1418 by Charles VII of France . The Scots soldiers of the Garde Écossaise fought alongside Joan of Arc against England during the Hundred Years War . In March 1421 , a Franco @-@ Scots force under John Stewart , 2nd Earl of Buchan , and Gilbert de Lafayette , defeated a larger English army at the Battle of Baugé . Three years later , at the Battle of Verneuil , the French and Scots lost around 7000 men . The Scottish intervention contributed to France 's victory in the war . 
 = = = Early modern era = = = 
 In 1502 , James IV of Scotland signed the Treaty of Perpetual Peace with Henry VII of England . He also married Henry 's daughter , Margaret Tudor , setting the stage for the Union of the Crowns . For Henry , the marriage into one of Europe 's most established monarchies gave legitimacy to the new Tudor royal line . A decade later , James made the fateful decision to invade England in support of France under the terms of the Auld Alliance . He was the last British monarch to die in battle , at the Battle of Flodden . Within a generation the Auld Alliance was ended by the Treaty of Edinburgh . France agreed to withdraw all land and naval forces . In the same year , 1560 , John Knox realised his goal of seeing Scotland become a Protestant nation and the Scottish parliament revoke papal authority in Scotland . Mary , Queen of Scots , a Catholic and former queen of France , was forced to abdicate in 1567 . 
 In 1603 , James VI , King of Scots inherited the thrones of the Kingdom of England and the Kingdom of Ireland , and became King James I of England and Ireland , and left Edinburgh for London . With the exception of a short period under the Protectorate , Scotland remained a separate state , but there was considerable conflict between the crown and the Covenanters over the form of church government . The Glorious Revolution of 1688 – 89 saw the overthrow of the King James VII of Scotland and II of England by the English Parliament in favour of William and Mary . As late as the 1690s , Scotland experienced famine , which reduced the population of parts of the country by at least 20 per cent . 
 In 1698 , the Scots attempted an ambitious project to secure a trading colony on the Isthmus of Panama . Almost every Scottish landowner who had money to spare is said to have invested in the Darien scheme . Its failure bankrupted these landowners , but not the burghs . Nevertheless , the nobles ' bankruptcy , along with the threat of an English invasion , played a leading role in convincing the Scots elite to back a union with England . 
 On 22 July 1706 , the Treaty of Union was agreed between representatives of the Scots Parliament and the Parliament of England and the following year twin Acts of Union were passed by both parliaments to create the united Kingdom of Great Britain with effect from 1 May 1707 . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 With trade tariffs with England now abolished , trade blossomed , especially with Colonial America . The clippers belonging to the Glasgow Tobacco Lords were the fastest ships on the route to Virginia . Until the American War of Independence in 1776 , Glasgow was the world 's premier tobacco port , dominating world trade . The disparity between the wealth of the merchant classes of the Scottish Lowlands and the ancient clans of the Scottish Highlands grew , amplifying centuries of division . 
 The deposed Jacobite Stuart claimants had remained popular in the Highlands and north @-@ east , particularly amongst non @-@ Presbyterians , including Roman Catholics and Episcopalian Protestants . However , two major Jacobite Risings launched in 1715 and 1745 failed to remove the House of Hanover from the British throne . The threat of the Jacobite movement to the United Kingdom and its monarchs effectively ended at the Battle of Culloden , Great Britain 's last pitched battle . This defeat paved the way for large @-@ scale removals of the indigenous populations of the Highlands and Islands , known as the Highland Clearances . 
 The Scottish Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution made Scotland into an intellectual , commercial and industrial powerhouse – so much so Voltaire said " We look to Scotland for all our ideas of civilisation . " With the demise of Jacobitism and the advent of the Union , thousands of Scots , mainly Lowlanders , took up numerous positions of power in politics , civil service , the army and navy , trade , economics , colonial enterprises and other areas across the nascent British Empire . Historian Neil Davidson notes " after 1746 there was an entirely new level of participation by Scots in political life , particularly outside Scotland . " Davidson also states " far from being ' peripheral ' to the British economy , Scotland – or more precisely , the Lowlands – lay at its core . " 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The Scottish Reform Act 1832 increased the number of Scottish MPs and widened the franchise to include more of the middle classes . From the mid @-@ century there were increasing calls for Home Rule for Scotland and the post of Secretary of State for Scotland was revived . Towards the end of the century Prime Ministers of Scottish descent included William E. Gladstone , and the Earl of Rosebery . In the later 19th century the growing importance of the working classes was marked by Keir Hardie 's success in the Mid Lanarkshire by @-@ election , 1888 , leading to the foundation of the Scottish Labour Party , which was absorbed into the Independent Labour Party in 1895 , with Hardie as its first leader . 
 Glasgow became one of the largest cities in the world , and known as " the Second City of the Empire " after London . After 1860 the Clydeside shipyards specialised in steamships made of iron ( after 1870 , made of steel ) , which rapidly replaced the wooden sailing vessels of both the merchant fleets and the battle fleets of the world . It became the world 's pre @-@ eminent shipbuilding centre . The industrial developments , while they brought work and wealth , were so rapid that housing , town @-@ planning , and provision for public health did not keep pace with them , and for a time living conditions in some of the towns and cities were notoriously bad , with overcrowding , high infant mortality , and growing rates of tuberculosis . 
 While the Scottish Enlightenment is traditionally considered to have concluded toward the end of the 18th century , disproportionately large Scottish contributions to British science and letters continued for another 50 years or more , thanks to such figures as the physicists James Clerk Maxwell and Lord Kelvin , and the engineers and inventors James Watt and William Murdoch , whose work was critical to the technological developments of the Industrial Revolution throughout Britain . In literature the most successful figure of the mid @-@ 19th century was Walter Scott . His first prose work , Waverley in 1814 , is often called the first historical novel . It launched a highly successful career that probably more than any other helped define and popularise Scottish cultural identity . In the late 19th century , a number of Scottish @-@ born authors achieved international reputations , such as Robert Louis Stevenson , Arthur Conan Doyle , J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald . Scotland also played a major part in the development of art and architecture . The Glasgow School , which developed in the late 19th century , and flourished in the early 20th century , produced a distinctive blend of influences including the Celtic Revival the Arts and Crafts Movement , and Japonisme , which found favour throughout the modern art world of continental Europe and helped define the Art Nouveau style . Proponents included architect and artist Charles Rennie Mackintosh . 
 This period saw a process of rehabilitation for Highland culture . In the 1820s , as part of the Romantic revival , tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of the social elite , not just in Scotland , but across Europe , prompted by the popularity of Macpherson 's Ossian cycle and then Walter Scott 's Waverley novels . However , the Highlands remained very poor and traditional . The desire to improve agriculture and profits led to the Highland Clearances , in which much of the population of the Highlands suffered forced displacement as lands were enclosed , principally so that they could be used for sheep farming . The clearances followed patterns of agricultural change throughout Britain , but were particularly notorious as a result of the late timing , the lack of legal protection for year @-@ by @-@ year tenants under Scots law , the abruptness of the change from the traditional clan system , and the brutality of many evictions . One result was a continuous exodus from the land — to the cities , or further afield to England , Canada , America or Australia . The population of Scotland grew steadily in the 19th century , from 1 @,@ 608 @,@ 000 in the census of 1801 to 2 @,@ 889 @,@ 000 in 1851 and 4 @,@ 472 @,@ 000 in 1901 . Even with the development of industry there were not enough good jobs . As a result , during the period 1841 – 1931 , about 2 million Scots migrated to North America and Australia , and another 750 @,@ 000 Scots relocated to England . 
 After prolonged years of struggle in the Kirk , in 1834 the Evangelicals gained control of the General Assembly and passed the Veto Act , which allowed congregations to reject unwanted " intrusive " presentations to livings by patrons . The following " Ten Years ' Conflict " of legal and political wrangling ended in defeat for the non @-@ intrusionists in the civil courts . The result was a schism from the church by some of the non @-@ intrusionists led by Dr Thomas Chalmers , known as the Great Disruption of 1843 . Roughly a third of the clergy , mainly from the North and Highlands , formed the separate Free Church of Scotland . In the late 19th century growing divisions between fundamentalist Calvinists and theological liberals resulted in a further split in the Free Church as the rigid Calvinists broke away to form the Free Presbyterian Church in 1893 . Catholic Emancipation in 1829 and the influx of large numbers of Irish immigrants , particularly after the famine years of the late 1840s , mainly to the growing lowland centres like Glasgow , led to a transformation in the fortunes of Catholicism . In 1878 , despite opposition , a Roman Catholic ecclesiastical hierarchy was restored to the country , and Catholicism became a significant denomination within Scotland . 
 Industrialisation , urbanisation and the Disruption of 1843 all undermined the tradition of parish schools . From 1830 the state began to fund buildings with grants ; then from 1846 it was funding schools by direct sponsorship ; and in 1872 Scotland moved to a system like that in England of state @-@ sponsored largely free schools , run by local school boards . The historic University of Glasgow became a leader in British higher education by providing the educational needs of youth from the urban and commercial classes , as opposed to the upper class . The University of St Andrews pioneered the admission of women to Scottish universities . From 1892 Scottish universities could admit and graduate women and the numbers of women at Scottish universities steadily increased until the early 20th century . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Scotland played a major role in the British effort in the First World War . It especially provided manpower , ships , machinery , fish and money . With a population of 4 @.@ 8 million in 1911 , Scotland sent over half a million men to the war , of whom over a quarter died in combat or from disease , and 150 @,@ 000 were seriously wounded . Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig was Britain 's commander on the Western Front . 
 The war saw the emergence of a radical movement called " Red Clydeside " led by militant trades unionists . Formerly a Liberal stronghold , the industrial districts switched to Labour by 1922 , with a base among the Irish Catholic working class districts . Women were especially active in building neighbourhood solidarity on housing issues . However , the " Reds " operated within the Labour Party and had little influence in Parliament and the mood changed to passive despair by the late 1920s . 
 The shipbuilding industry expanded by a third and expected renewed prosperity , but instead a serious depression hit the economy by 1922 and it did not fully recover until 1939 . The interwar years were marked by economic stagnation in rural and urban areas , and high unemployment . Indeed , the war brought with it deep social , cultural , economic , and political dislocations . Thoughtful Scots pondered their declension , as the main social indicators such as poor health , bad housing , and long @-@ term mass unemployment , pointed to terminal social and economic stagnation at best , or even a downward spiral . Service abroad on behalf of the Empire lost its allure to ambitious young people , who left Scotland permanently . The heavy dependence on obsolescent heavy industry and mining was a central problem , and no one offered workable solutions . The despair reflected what Finlay ( 1994 ) describes as a widespread sense of hopelessness that prepared local business and political leaders to accept a new orthodoxy of centralised government economic planning when it arrived during the Second World War . 
 The Second World War brought renewed prosperity , despite extensive bombing of cities by the Luftwaffe . It saw the invention of radar by Robert Watson @-@ Watt , which was invaluable in the Battle of Britain as was the leadership at RAF Fighter Command of Air Chief Marshal Sir Hugh Dowding . 
 = = = Since 1945 = = = 
 After 1945 , Scotland 's economic situation became progressively worse due to overseas competition , inefficient industry , and industrial disputes . Only in recent decades has the country enjoyed something of a cultural and economic renaissance . Economic factors contributing to this recovery include a resurgent financial services industry , electronics manufacturing , ( see Silicon Glen ) , and the North Sea oil and gas industry . The introduction in 1989 by Margaret Thatcher 's government of the Community Charge ( widely known as the Poll Tax ) one year before the rest of the United Kingdom , contributed to a growing movement for a return to direct Scottish control over domestic affairs . Following a referendum on devolution proposals in 1997 , the Scotland Act 1998 was passed by the United Kingdom Parliament to establish a devolved Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government with responsibility for most laws specific to Scotland . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The Scottish education system has always remained distinct from the rest of the United Kingdom , with a characteristic emphasis on a broad education . In the 15th century , the Humanist emphasis on education cumulated with the passing of the Education Act 1496 , which decreed that all sons of barons and freeholders of substance should attend grammar schools to learn " perfyct Latyne " , resulting in an increase in literacy among a male and wealthy elite . In the Reformation the 1560 First Book of Discipline set out a plan for a school in every parish , but this proved financially impossible . In 1616 an act in Privy council commanded every parish to establish a school . By the late seventeenth century there was a largely complete network of parish schools in the lowlands , but in the Highlands basic education was still lacking in many areas . Education remained a matter for the church rather than the state until the Education Act ( 1872 ) . 
 = = Geography and natural history = = 
 The mainland of Scotland comprises the northern third of the land mass of the island of Great Britain , which lies off the north @-@ west coast of Continental Europe . The total area is 78 @,@ 772 km2 ( 30 @,@ 414 sq mi ) , comparable to the size of the Czech Republic . Scotland 's only land border is with England , and runs for 96 kilometres ( 60 mi ) between the basin of the River Tweed on the east coast and the Solway Firth in the west . The Atlantic Ocean borders the west coast and the North Sea is to the east . The island of Ireland lies only 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) from the south @-@ western peninsula of Kintyre ; Norway is 305 kilometres ( 190 mi ) to the east and the Faroes , 270 kilometres ( 168 mi ) to the north . 
 The territorial extent of Scotland is generally that established by the 1237 Treaty of York between Scotland and the Kingdom of England and the 1266 Treaty of Perth between Scotland and Norway . Important exceptions include the Isle of Man , which having been lost to England in the 14th century is now a crown dependency outside of the United Kingdom ; the island groups Orkney and Shetland , which were acquired from Norway in 1472 ; and Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , lost to England in 1482 . 
 The geographical centre of Scotland lies a few miles from the village of <unk> in Badenoch . Rising to 1 @,@ 344 metres ( 4 @,@ 409 ft ) above sea level , Scotland 's highest point is the summit of Ben Nevis , in Lochaber , while Scotland 's longest river , the River Tay , flows for a distance of 190 kilometres ( 118 mi ) . 
 = = = Geology and geomorphology = = = 
 The whole of Scotland was covered by ice sheets during the Pleistocene ice ages and the landscape is much affected by glaciation . From a geological perspective , the country has three main sub @-@ divisions . 
 The Highlands and Islands lie to the north and west of the Highland Boundary Fault , which runs from Arran to Stonehaven . This part of Scotland largely comprises ancient rocks from the Cambrian and Precambrian , which were uplifted during the later Caledonian Orogeny . It is interspersed with igneous intrusions of a more recent age , remnants of which formed mountain massifs such as the Cairngorms and Skye Cuillins . 
 A significant exception to the above are the fossil @-@ bearing beds of Old Red <unk> found principally along the Moray Firth coast . The Highlands are generally mountainous and the highest elevations in the British Isles are found here . Scotland has over 790 islands divided into four main groups : Shetland , Orkney , and the Inner Hebrides and Outer Hebrides . There are numerous bodies of freshwater including Loch Lomond and Loch Ness . Some parts of the coastline consist of machair , a low lying dune pasture land . 
 The Central Lowlands is a rift valley mainly comprising Paleozoic formations . Many of these sediments have economic significance for it is here that the coal and iron bearing rocks that fuelled Scotland 's industrial revolution are found . This area has also experienced intense volcanism , Arthur 's Seat in Edinburgh being the remnant of a once much larger volcano . This area is relatively low @-@ lying , although even here hills such as the <unk> and Campsie Fells are rarely far from view . 
 The Southern Uplands are a range of hills almost 200 kilometres ( 124 mi ) long , interspersed with broad valleys . They lie south of a second fault line ( the Southern Uplands fault ) that runs from Girvan to Dunbar . The geological foundations largely comprise Silurian deposits laid down some 4 – 500 million years ago . The high point of the Southern Uplands is Merrick with an elevation of 843 m ( 2 @,@ 766 ft ) . The Southern Uplands is home to the UK 's highest village , <unk> ( 430 m or 1 @,@ 411 ft above sea level ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Scotland is temperate and oceanic , and tends to be very changeable . As it is warmed by the Gulf Stream from the Atlantic , it has much milder winters ( but cooler , wetter summers ) than areas on similar latitudes , such as Labrador , southern Scandinavia , the Moscow region in Russia , and the Kamchatka Peninsula on the opposite side of Eurasia . However , temperatures are generally lower than in the rest of the UK , with the coldest ever UK temperature of − 27 @.@ 2 ° C ( − 17 @.@ 0 ° F ) recorded at Braemar in the Grampian Mountains , on 11 February 1895 . Winter maxima average 6 ° C ( 42 @.@ 8 ° F ) in the Lowlands , with summer maxima averaging 18 ° C ( 64 @.@ 4 ° F ) . The highest temperature recorded was 32 @.@ 9 ° C ( 91 @.@ 2 ° F ) at <unk> , Scottish Borders on 9 August 2003 . 
 The west of Scotland is usually warmer than the east , owing to the influence of Atlantic ocean currents and the colder surface temperatures of the North Sea . Tiree , in the Inner Hebrides , is one of the sunniest places in the country : it had more than 300 hours of sunshine in May 1975 . Rainfall varies widely across Scotland . The western highlands of Scotland are the wettest , with annual rainfall in a few places exceeding 3 @,@ 000 mm ( 118 @.@ 1 in ) . In comparison , much of lowland Scotland receives less than 800 mm ( 31 @.@ 5 in ) annually . Heavy snowfall is not common in the lowlands , but becomes more common with altitude . Braemar has an average of 59 snow days per year , while many coastal areas average fewer than 10 days of lying snow per year . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Scotland 's wildlife is typical of the north west of Europe , although several of the larger mammals such as the lynx , brown bear , wolf , elk and walrus were hunted to extinction in historic times . There are important populations of seals and internationally significant nesting grounds for a variety of seabirds such as gannets . The golden eagle is something of a national icon . 
 On the high mountain tops species including ptarmigan , mountain hare and stoat can be seen in their white colour phase during winter months . Remnants of the native Scots pine forest exist and within these areas the Scottish crossbill , the UK 's only endemic bird species and vertebrate , can be found alongside capercaillie , wildcat , red squirrel and pine marten . In recent years various animals have been re @-@ introduced , including the white @-@ tailed sea eagle in 1975 , the red kite in the 1980s , and more recently there have been experimental projects involving the beaver and wild boar . Today , much of the remaining native Caledonian Forest lies within the Cairngorms National Park and remnants of the forest remain at 84 locations across Scotland . On the west coast , remnants of ancient Celtic Rainforest still remain , particularly on the Taynish peninsula in Argyll , these forests are particularly rare due to high rates of deforestation throughout Scottish history . 
 The flora of the country is varied incorporating both deciduous and coniferous woodland and moorland and tundra species . However , large scale commercial tree planting and the management of upland moorland habitat for the grazing of sheep and commercial field sport activities impacts upon the distribution of indigenous plants and animals . The UK 's tallest tree is a grand fir planted beside Loch Fyne , Argyll in the 1870s , and the Fortingall Yew may be 5 @,@ 000 years old and is probably the oldest living thing in Europe . Although the number of native vascular plants is low by world standards , Scotland 's substantial bryophyte flora is of global importance . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The population of Scotland at the 2001 Census was 5 @,@ 062 @,@ 011 . This rose to 5 @,@ 295 @,@ 400 , the highest ever , at the 2011 Census . 
 In the 2011 Census , 62 % of Scotland 's population stated their national identity as ' Scottish only ' , 18 % as ' Scottish and British ' , 8 % as ' British only ' , and 4 % chose other national identities . 
 Although Edinburgh is the capital of Scotland , the largest city is Glasgow , which has just over 584 @,@ 000 inhabitants . The Greater Glasgow conurbation , with a population of almost 1 @.@ 2 million , is home to nearly a quarter of Scotland 's population . The Central Belt is where most of the main towns and cities are located , including Glasgow , Edinburgh , Dundee and Perth . Scotland 's only major city outside the Central Belt is Aberdeen . 
 In general , only the more accessible and larger islands retain inhabited . Currently , fewer than 90 remain inhabited . The Southern Uplands are essentially rural in nature and dominated by agriculture and forestry . Because of housing problems in Glasgow and Edinburgh , five new towns were created between 1947 and 1966 . They are East Kilbride , Glenrothes , Livingston , Cumbernauld , and Irvine . 
 Immigration since World War II has given Glasgow , Edinburgh and Dundee small South Asian communities . In 2011 , there were an estimated 49 @,@ 000 ethnically Pakistani people living in Scotland , making them the largest non @-@ White ethnic group . Since the Enlargement of the European Union more people from Central and Eastern Europe have moved to Scotland , and the 2011 census indicated that 61 @,@ 000 Poles live there . 
 Scotland has three officially recognised languages : English , Scots , and Scottish Gaelic . Scottish Standard English , a variety of English as spoken in Scotland , is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum , with broad Scots at the other . Scottish Standard English may have been influenced to varying degrees by Scots . The 2011 census indicated that 63 % of the population had " no skills in Scots " . Others speak Highland English . Gaelic is mostly spoken in the Western Isles , where a large proportion of people still speak it ; however , nationally its use is confined to just 1 % of the population . The number of Gaelic speakers in Scotland dropped from 250 @,@ 000 in 1881 to 60 @,@ 000 in 2008 . 
 There are many more people with Scottish ancestry living abroad than the total population of Scotland . In the 2000 Census , 9 @.@ 2 million Americans self @-@ reported some degree of Scottish descent . Ulster 's Protestant population is mainly of lowland Scottish descent , and it is estimated that there are more than 27 million descendants of the Scots @-@ Irish migration now living in the US . In Canada , the Scottish @-@ Canadian community accounts for 4 @.@ 7 million people . About 20 % of the original European settler population of New Zealand came from Scotland . 
 In August 2012 , the Scottish population reached an all @-@ time high of 5 @.@ 25 million people . The reasons given were that , in Scotland , births were outnumbering the number of deaths , and immigrants were moving to Scotland from overseas . In 2011 , 43 @,@ 700 people moved from Wales , Northern Ireland or England to live in Scotland . 
 The total fertility rate ( TFR ) in Scotland is below the replacement rate of 2 @.@ 1 ( the TFR was 1 @.@ 73 in 2011 ) . The majority of births today are to unmarried women ( 51 @.@ 3 % of births were outside of marriage in 2012 ) . 
 Life expectancy for those born in Scotland between 2010 and 2012 is 76 @.@ 5 years for males and 80 @.@ 7 years for females . This is the lowest of any of the four countries of the UK . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Just over half ( 54 % ) of the Scottish population reported being a Christian while nearly 37 % reported not having a religion in a 2011 census . Since the Scottish Reformation of 1560 , the national church ( the Church of Scotland , also known as The Kirk ) has been Protestant in classification and Reformed in theology . Since 1689 it has had a Presbyterian system of church government , and enjoys independence from the state . Its membership is 398 @,@ 389 , about 7 @.@ 5 % of the total population , though according to the 2011 census , 32 @.@ 4 % identified Church of Scotland as their religion . The Church operates a territorial parish structure , with every community in Scotland having a local congregation . 
 Scotland also has a significant Roman Catholic population , 19 % claiming that faith , particularly in the west . After the Reformation , Roman Catholicism in Scotland continued in the Highlands and some western islands like Uist and Barra , and it was strengthened during the 19th century by immigration from Ireland . Other Christian denominations in Scotland include the Free Church of Scotland , various other Presbyterian offshoots , and the Scottish Episcopal Church . 
 Islam is the largest non @-@ Christian religion ( estimated at around 75 @,@ 000 , which is about 1 @.@ 4 % of the population ) , and there are also significant Jewish , Hindu and Sikh communities , especially in Glasgow . The <unk> Ling monastery near <unk> , which celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2007 , is the first Buddhist monastery in western Europe . 
 = = Politics and government = = 
 Scotland 's head of state is the monarch of the United Kingdom , currently Queen Elizabeth II ( since 1952 ) . The regnal numbering " Elizabeth II " caused controversy around the time of the Queen 's coronation because there had never been an Elizabeth I in Scotland . A legal action , MacCormick v. Lord Advocate ( 1953 SC 396 ) , was brought to contest the right of the Queen to entitle herself Elizabeth II within Scotland , arguing that this was a breach of Article 1 of the Treaty of Union . The Crown won the case . It was decided that future British monarchs would be numbered according to either their English or their Scottish predecessors , whichever number is higher . For instance any future King James would be styled James VIII — since the last Scottish King James was James VII ( also James II of England , etc . ) — while the next King Henry would be King Henry IX throughout the UK even though there have been no Scottish kings of that name . 
 Scotland has limited self @-@ government within the United Kingdom , as well as representation in the UK Parliament . Executive and legislative powers respectively have been devolved to the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood in Edinburgh since 1999 . The UK Parliament retains control over reserved matters specified in the Scotland Act 1998 , including UK taxes , social security , defence , international relations and broadcasting . The Scottish Parliament has legislative authority for all other areas relating to Scotland , as well as a limited power to vary income tax . 
 The Scottish Parliament can give legislative consent over devolved matters back to the UK Parliament by passing a Legislative Consent Motion if United Kingdom @-@ wide legislation is considered more appropriate for a certain issue . The programmes of legislation enacted by the Scottish Parliament have seen a divergence in the provision of public services compared to the rest of the UK . For instance , university education and care services for the elderly are free at point of use in Scotland , while fees are paid in the rest of the UK . Scotland was the first country in the UK to ban smoking in enclosed public places . 
 The Scottish Parliament is a unicameral legislature with 129 members ( MSPs ) : 73 of them represent individual constituencies and are elected on a first past the post system ; the other 56 are elected in eight different electoral regions by the additional member system . MSPs serve for a four @-@ year period ( exceptionally five years from 2011 – 16 ) . The Parliament nominates one of its Members , who is then appointed by the Monarch to serve as First Minister . Other ministers are appointed by the First Minister and serve at his / her discretion . Together they make up the Scottish Government , the executive arm of the devolved government . The Scottish Government is headed by the First Minister , who is accountable to the Scottish Parliament and is the minister of charge of the Scottish Government . The First Minister is also the political leader of Scotland . The Scottish Government also comprises of the Deputy First Minister , currently John Swinney MSP , who <unk> for the First Minister during a period of absence of overseas visits . Alongside the Deputy First Minister 's requirements as Deputy , the minister also has a cabinet ministerial responsibility . Swinney is also currently Cabinet Secretary for Education and Skills . The Scottish Government 's cabinet comprises of nine cabinet secretaries , who form the Cabinet of Scotland . There are also twelve other ministers , who work alongside the cabinet secretaries in their appointed areas . As a result , junior ministers do not attend cabinet meetings . 
 In the 2016 election , the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) won 63 of the 129 seats available . Nicola Sturgeon , the leader of the SNP , has been the First Minister since November 2014 . The Conservative Party became the largest opposition party in the 2016 elections , with the Labour Party , Liberal Democrats and the Green Party also represented in the Parliament . The next Scottish Parliament election is due to be held on 6 May 2021 . 
 Scotland is represented in the British House of Commons by 59 MPs elected from territory @-@ based Scottish constituencies . In the most recent general election , held on 7 May 2015 , the Scottish National Party won 56 of the 59 seats and saw elected the youngest current member of the House of Commons , <unk> Black . The next United Kingdom general election is due to be held in May 2020 . The Scotland Office represents the UK government in Scotland on reserved matters and represents Scottish interests within the UK government . The Scotland Office is led by the Secretary of State for Scotland , who sits in the Cabinet of the United Kingdom ; the current incumbent is David Mundell . 
 = = = Constitutional changes = = = 
 A policy of devolution had been advocated by the three main UK parties with varying enthusiasm during recent history . The late Labour leader John Smith described the revival of a Scottish parliament as the " settled will of the Scottish people " . The devolved Scottish Parliament was created after a referendum in 1997 found majority support for both creating the Parliament and granting it limited powers to vary income tax . The constitutional status of Scotland is nonetheless subject to ongoing debate . 
 The Scottish National Party ( SNP ) , which supports Scottish independence , was first elected to form the Scottish Government in 2007 . The new government established a " National Conversation " on constitutional issues , proposing a number of options such as increasing the powers of the Scottish Parliament , federalism , or a referendum on Scottish independence from the United Kingdom . In rejecting the last option , the three main opposition parties in the Scottish Parliament created a commission to investigate the distribution of powers between devolved Scottish and UK @-@ wide bodies . The Scotland Act 2012 , based on proposals by the commission , is currently in the process of devolving additional powers to the Scottish Parliament . 
 In August 2009 the SNP proposed a bill to hold a referendum on independence in November 2010 . Opposition from all other major parties led to an expected defeat . After the 2011 elections gave the SNP an overall majority in the Scottish Parliament , a referendum on independence for Scotland was held on 18 September 2014 . The referendum rejected independence by a majority of 55 % to 45 % . During the campaign , the three main parties in the UK Parliament pledged to extend the powers of the Scottish Parliament . An all @-@ party commission chaired by Lord Smith of Kelvin was formed , which led to a further devolution of powers through the Scotland Act 2016 . 
 Following the referendum on the UK 's membership of the European Union on 23 June 2016 , where a UK @-@ wide majority voted to withdraw from the EU whilst a majority within Scotland voted to remain , Scotland 's First Minister , Nicola Sturgeon , announced that as a result a new independence referendum was " highly likely " . 
 = = = Administrative subdivisions = = = 
 Historical subdivisions of Scotland included the <unk> , <unk> , earldom , burgh , parish , county and regions and districts . Some of these names are still sometimes used as geographical descriptors . 
 Modern Scotland is subdivided in various ways depending on the purpose . In local government , there have been 32 single @-@ tier council areas since 1996 , whose councils are responsible for the provision of all local government services . Community councils are informal organisations that represent specific sub @-@ divisions of a council area . 
 In the Scottish Parliament , there are 73 constituencies and eight regions . For the Parliament of the United Kingdom , there are 59 constituencies . Until 2013 , the Scottish fire brigades and police forces were based on a system of regions introduced in 1975 . For healthcare and postal districts , and a number of other governmental and non @-@ governmental organisations such as the churches , there are other long @-@ standing methods of subdividing Scotland for the purposes of administration . 
 City status in the United Kingdom is conferred by letters patent . There are seven cities in Scotland : Aberdeen , Dundee , Edinburgh , Glasgow , Inverness , Stirling and Perth . 
 = = Law and criminal justice = = 
 Scots law has a basis derived from Roman law , combining features of both uncodified civil law , dating back to the Corpus Juris Civilis , and common law with medieval sources . The terms of the Treaty of Union with England in 1707 guaranteed the continued existence of a separate legal system in Scotland from that of England and Wales . Prior to 1611 , there were several regional law systems in Scotland , most notably Udal law in Orkney and Shetland , based on old Norse law . Various other systems derived from common Celtic or Brehon laws survived in the Highlands until the 1800s . 
 Scots law provides for three types of courts responsible for the administration of justice : civil , criminal and heraldic . The supreme civil court is the Court of Session , although civil appeals can be taken to the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom ( or before 1 October 2009 , the House of Lords ) . The High Court of Justiciary is the supreme criminal court in Scotland . The Court of Session is housed at Parliament House , in Edinburgh , which was the home of the pre @-@ Union Parliament of Scotland with the High Court of Justiciary and the Supreme Court of Appeal currently located at the <unk> . The sheriff court is the main criminal and civil court , hearing most cases . There are 49 sheriff courts throughout the country . District courts were introduced in 1975 for minor offences and small claims . These were gradually replaced by Justice of the Peace Courts from 2008 to 2010 . The Court of the Lord Lyon regulates heraldry . 
 For many decades the Scots legal system was unique for being the only legal system without a parliament . This ended with the advent of the Scottish Parliament , which <unk> for Scotland . Many features within the system have been preserved . Within criminal law , the Scots legal system is unique in having three possible verdicts : " guilty " , " not guilty " and " not proven " . Both " not guilty " and " not proven " result in an acquittal , typically with no possibility of retrial in accordance with the rule of double jeopardy . There is however the possibility of a retrial where new evidence emerges at a later date that might have proven conclusive in the earlier trial at first instance , where the person acquitted subsequently admits the offence or where it can be proved that the acquittal was tainted by an attempt to pervert the course of justice – see the provisions of the Double Jeopardy ( Scotland ) Act 2011 . Many laws differ between Scotland and the other parts of the United Kingdom , and many terms differ for certain legal concepts . Manslaughter , in England and Wales , is broadly similar to culpable homicide in Scotland , and arson is called wilful fire raising . Indeed , some acts considered crimes in England and Wales , such as forgery , are not so in Scotland . Procedure also differs . Scots juries , sitting in criminal cases , consist of fifteen , rather than twelve jurors , as is more common in English @-@ speaking countries . 
 The Scottish Prison Service ( SPS ) manages the prisons in Scotland , which collectively house over 8 @,@ 500 prisoners . The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is responsible for the Scottish Prison Service within the Scottish Government . 
 = = Health care = = 
 Healthcare in Scotland is mainly provided by NHS Scotland , Scotland 's public health care system . This was founded by the National Health Service ( Scotland ) Act 1947 ( later repealed by the National Health Service ( Scotland ) Act 1978 ) that took effect on 5 July 1948 to coincide with the launch of the NHS in England and Wales . However , even prior to 1948 , half of Scotland 's landmass was already covered by state funded health care , provided by the Highlands and Islands Medical Service . Healthcare policy and funding is the responsibility of the Scottish Government 's Health Directorates . The current Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing is Alex Neil and the Director @-@ General ( DG ) Health and chief executive , NHS Scotland is Paul Gray . 
 In 2008 , the NHS in Scotland had around 158 @,@ 000 staff including more than 47 @,@ 500 nurses , midwives and health visitors and over 3 @,@ 800 consultants . In addition , there are also more than 12 @,@ 000 doctors , family practitioners and allied health professionals , including dentists , opticians and community pharmacists , who operate as independent contractors providing a range of services within the NHS in return for fees and allowances . These fees and allowances were removed in May 2010 , and prescriptions are entirely free , although dentists and opticians may charge if the patient 's household earns over a certain amount , about £ 30 @,@ 000 per annum . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Scotland has a western style open mixed economy closely linked with the rest of Europe and the wider world . Traditionally , the Scottish economy has been dominated by heavy industry underpinned by shipbuilding in Glasgow , coal mining and steel industries . Petroleum related industries associated with the extraction of North Sea oil have also been important employers from the 1970s , especially in the north east of Scotland . 
 In February 2012 , the Centre for Economics and Business Research concluded that " Scotland receives no net subsidy " from the UK , as greater per capita tax generation in Scotland balanced out greater per capita public spending . More recent data , from 2012 – 13 , show that Scotland generated 9 @.@ 1 % ( £ <unk> ; this included a geographical share of North Sea oil revenue – without it , the figures were 8 @.@ 2 % and £ <unk> ) of the UK 's tax revenues and received 9 @.@ 3 % ( £ <unk> ) of spending . Scotland 's public spending deficit in 2012 – 13 was £ <unk> , a £ <unk> increase on the previous year ; over the same period , the UK 's deficit decreased by £ <unk> Over the past thirty years , Scotland contributed a relative budget surplus of almost £ <unk> to the UK economy . 
 In the third quarter of 2015 , the Scottish economy grew by 0 @.@ 1 % , below the 0 @.@ 4 % recorded for the UK . As of September 2015 , the Scottish unemployment rate of 5 @.@ 9 % was above the UK rate of 5 @.@ 5 % , while the Scottish employment rate of 74 @.@ 0 % was higher than the UK figure of 73 @.@ 5 % . De @-@ industrialisation during the 1970s and 1980s saw a shift from a manufacturing focus towards a more service @-@ oriented economy . 
 Edinburgh is the financial services centre of Scotland , with many large finance firms based there , including : Lloyds Banking Group ( owners of HBOS ) ; the Government owned Royal Bank of Scotland and Standard Life . Edinburgh was ranked 15th in the list of world financial centres in 2007 , but fell to 37th in 2012 , following damage to its reputation , and in 2016 was ranked 56th out of 86 . 
 In 2012 , total Scottish exports ( excluding intra @-@ UK trade ) were estimated to be £ 26 billion , of which 59 % ( £ 15 @.@ 4 billion ) were attributable to manufacturing . Scotland 's primary exports include whisky , electronics and financial services . The United States , Netherlands , Germany , France and Norway constitute the country 's major export markets . Scotland 's Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) , including oil and gas produced in Scottish waters , was estimated at £ 150 billion for the calendar year 2012 . If Scotland became independent , it would hold 95 % of the UK 's current oil and gas reserves if they were split geographically using a median line from the English @-@ Scottish border . If the reserves were split by population , that figure would be reduced to 9 % . 
 Whisky is one of Scotland 's more known goods of economic activity . Exports increased by 87 % in the decade to 2012 and were valued at £ 4 @.@ 3 billion in 2013 , which was 85 % of Scotland 's food and drink exports . It supports around 10 @,@ 000 jobs directly and 25 @,@ 000 indirectly . It may contribute £ 400 – 682 million to Scotland , rather than several billion pounds , as more than 80 % of whisky produced is owned by non @-@ Scottish companies . 
 A briefing published in 2002 by the Scottish Parliament Information Centre ( <unk> ) for the Scottish Parliament 's Enterprise and Life Long Learning Committee stated that tourism accounted for up to 5 % of GDP and 7 @.@ 5 % of employment . 
 = = = Currency = = = 
 Although the Bank of England is the central bank for the UK , three Scottish clearing banks still issue their own Sterling banknotes : the Bank of Scotland ; the Royal Bank of Scotland ; and the Clydesdale Bank . The value of the Scottish banknotes in circulation in 2013 was £ 3 @.@ 8 billion , underwritten by the Bank of England . 
 = = Military = = 
 Of the money spent on UK defence , about £ 3 @.@ 3 billion can be attributed to Scotland as of 2013 . Although Scotland has a long military tradition predating the Treaty of Union with England , its armed forces now form part of the British Armed Forces , with the notable exception of the Atholl Highlanders , Europe 's only legal private army . In 2006 , the infantry regiments of the Scottish Division were amalgamated to form the Royal Regiment of Scotland . Other distinctively Scottish regiments in the British Army include the Scots Guards , the Royal Scots Dragoon Guards and the Scottish Transport Regiment , a Territorial Army Regiment of the Royal Logistic Corps . 
 Because of their topography and perceived remoteness , parts of Scotland have housed many sensitive defence establishments . Between 1960 and 1991 , the Holy Loch was a base for the US fleet of Polaris ballistic missile submarines . Today , Her Majesty 's Naval Base Clyde , 25 miles ( 40 kilometres ) north west of Glasgow , is the base for the four Trident @-@ armed Vanguard class ballistic missile submarines that comprise the UK 's nuclear deterrent . Scapa Flow was the major Fleet base for the Royal Navy until 1956 . 
 A single front @-@ line Royal Air Force base is located in Scotland . RAF Lossiemouth , located in Moray , is the most northerly air defence fighter base in the United Kingdom and is home to Typhoon and Tornado fast @-@ jet squadrons 
 The only open @-@ air live depleted uranium weapons test range in the British Isles is located near Dundrennan . As a result , over 7000 potentially toxic munitions lie on the seabed of the Solway Firth . 
 = = Education = = 
 The Scottish education system is distinct from the rest of the United Kingdom . The " Curriculum for Excellence " provides the curricular framework for children and young people from age 3 to 18 . All 3- and 4 @-@ year @-@ old children in Scotland are entitled to a free nursery place . Formal primary education begins at approximately 5 years old and lasts for 7 years ( P1 – P7 ) ; today , children in Scotland study Standard Grades , or Intermediate qualifications between the ages of 14 and 16 . These are being phased out and replaced by the National Qualifications of the Curriculum for Excellence . The school leaving age is 16 , after which students may choose to remain at school and study for Access , Intermediate or Higher Grade and Advanced Higher qualifications . A small number of students at certain private , independent schools may follow the English system and study towards GCSEs and A and AS @-@ Levels instead . 
 There are fifteen Scottish universities , some of which are amongst the oldest in the world . These include the University of St Andrews , the University of Glasgow , the University of Aberdeen , the University of Edinburgh and the University of Dundee — many of which are ranked amongst the best in the UK . Proportionally , Scotland has more universities in QS ' World University Rankings ' top 100 than any other nation in the world . The country produces 1 % of the world 's published research with less than 0 @.@ 1 % of the world 's population , and higher education institutions account for 9 % of Scotland 's service sector exports . Scotland 's University Courts are the only bodies in Scotland authorised to award degrees . Scotland 's Universities are complemented in the provision of Further and Higher Education by 43 Colleges . Colleges offer National Certificates , Higher National Certificates and Higher National Diplomas . These Group Awards , alongside Scottish Vocational Qualifications , aim to ensure Scotland 's population has the appropriate skills and knowledge to meet workplace needs . 
 In 2014 , research reported by the Office for National Statistics found that Scotland was the most highly educated country in Europe and among the most well @-@ educated in the world in terms of tertiary education attainment , with roughly 40 % of people in Scotland aged 16 – 64 educated to NVQ level 4 and above . Based on the original data for EU statistical regions , all four Scottish regions ranked significantly above the European average for completion of tertiary @-@ level education by 25- to 64 @-@ year @-@ olds . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Scottish music is a significant aspect of the nation 's culture , with both traditional and modern influences . A famous traditional Scottish instrument is the Great Highland Bagpipe , a wind instrument consisting of three drones and a melody pipe ( called the chanter ) , which are fed continuously by a reservoir of air in a bag . Bagpipe bands , featuring bagpipes and various types of drums , and showcasing Scottish music styles while creating new ones , have spread throughout the world . The <unk> ( harp ) , fiddle and accordion are also traditional Scottish instruments , the latter two heavily featured in Scottish country dance bands . Today , there are many successful Scottish bands and individual artists in varying styles including Annie Lennox , Amy Macdonald , Runrig , Boards of Canada , Cocteau Twins , Deacon Blue , Franz Ferdinand , Susan Boyle , Emeli Sandé , Texas , The View , The Fratellis , Twin Atlantic and Biffy Clyro . Other Scottish musicians include Shirley Manson , Paolo Nutini and Calvin Harris . 
 Scotland has a literary heritage dating back to the early Middle Ages . The earliest extant literature composed in what is now Scotland was in Brythonic speech in the 6th century , but is preserved as part of Welsh literature . Later medieval literature included works in Latin , Gaelic , Old English and French . The first surviving major text in Early Scots is the 14th @-@ century poet John Barbour 's epic Brus , focusing on the life of Robert I , and was soon followed by a series of vernacular romances and prose works . In the 16th century the crown 's patronage helped the development of Scots drama and poetry , but the accession of James VI to the English throne removed a major centre of literary patronage and Scots was sidelined as a literary language . Interest in Scots literature was revived in the 18th century by figures including James Macpherson , whose Ossian Cycle made him the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation and was a major influence on the European Enlightenment . It was also a major influence on Robert Burns , whom many consider the national poet , and Walter Scott , whose Waverley Novels did much to define Scottish identity in the 19th century . Towards the end of the Victorian era a number of Scottish @-@ born authors achieved international reputations as writers in English , including Robert Louis Stevenson , Arthur Conan Doyle , J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald . In the 20th century the Scottish Renaissance saw a surge of literary activity and attempts to reclaim the Scots language as a medium for serious literature . Members of the movement were followed by a new generation of post @-@ war poets including Edwin Morgan , who would be appointed the first Scots Makar by the inaugural Scottish government in 2004 . From the 1980s Scottish literature enjoyed another major revival , particularly associated with a group of writers including Irvine Welsh . Scottish poets who emerged in the same period included Carol Ann Duffy , who , in May 2009 , was the first Scot named UK Poet Laureate . 
 As one of the Celtic nations , Scotland and Scottish culture is represented at <unk> events at home and over the world . Scotland hosts several music festivals including Celtic Connections ( Glasgow ) , and the Hebridean Celtic Festival ( Stornoway ) . Festivals celebrating Celtic culture , such as Festival <unk> de Lorient ( Brittany ) , the Pan Celtic Festival ( Ireland ) , and the National Celtic Festival ( <unk> , Australia ) , feature elements of Scottish culture such as language , music and dance . 
 The image of St. Andrew , martyred while bound to an X @-@ shaped cross , first appeared in the Kingdom of Scotland during the reign of William I. Following the death of King Alexander III in 1286 an image of Andrew was used on the seal of the Guardians of Scotland who assumed control of the kingdom during the subsequent interregnum . Use of a simplified symbol associated with Saint Andrew , the saltire , has its origins in the late 14th century ; the Parliament of Scotland decreeing in 1385 that Scottish soldiers should wear a white Saint Andrew 's Cross on the front and back of their tunics . Use of a blue background for the Saint Andrew 's Cross is said to date from at least the 15th century . Since 1606 the saltire has also formed part of the design of the Union Flag . There are numerous other symbols and symbolic artefacts , both official and unofficial , including the thistle , the nation 's floral emblem ( celebrated in the song , The Thistle o ' Scotland ) , the Declaration of Arbroath , incorporating a statement of political independence made on 6 April 1320 , the textile pattern tartan that often signifies a particular Scottish clan and the royal Lion Rampant flag . Highlanders can thank James Graham , 3rd Duke of Montrose , for the repeal in 1782 of the Act of 1747 prohibiting the wearing of tartans . 
 Although there is no official national anthem of Scotland , Flower of Scotland is played on special occasions and sporting events such as football and rugby matches involving the Scotland national teams and since 2010 is also played at the Commonwealth Games after it was voted the overwhelming favourite by participating Scottish athletes . Other currently less popular candidates for the National Anthem of Scotland include Scotland the Brave , Highland Cathedral , Scots Wha Hae and A Man 's A Man for A ' That . 
 St Andrew 's Day , 30 November , is the national day , although Burns ' Night tends to be more widely observed , particularly outside Scotland . In 2006 , the Scottish Parliament passed the St. Andrew 's Day Bank Holiday ( Scotland ) Act 2007 , designating the day an official bank <unk> Day is a recent innovation from Canada . 
 The national animal of Scotland is the unicorn , which has been a Scottish heraldic symbol since the 12th century . 
 = = Media = = 
 National newspapers such as the Daily Record , The Herald , and The Scotsman are all produced in Scotland . Important regional dailies include the Evening News in Edinburgh The Courier in Dundee in the east , and The Press and Journal serving Aberdeen and the north . Scotland is represented at the Celtic Media Festival , which showcases film and television from the Celtic countries . Scottish entrants have won many awards since the festival began in 1980 . 
 Television in Scotland is largely the same as UK @-@ wide broadcasts , however the national broadcaster is BBC Scotland , a constituent part of the British Broadcasting Corporation , the publicly funded broadcaster of the United Kingdom . It runs three national television stations , and the national radio stations , BBC Radio Scotland and BBC Radio nan <unk> , amongst others . Scotland also has some programming in the Gaelic language . BBC Alba is the national Gaelic @-@ language channel . The main Scottish commercial television station is STV . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Scotland hosts its own national sporting competitions and has independent representation at several international sporting events , including the FIFA World Cup , the Rugby Union World Cup , the Rugby League World Cup , the Cricket World Cup and the Commonwealth Games . Scotland has its own national governing bodies , such as the Scottish Football Association ( the second oldest national football association in the world ) and the Scottish Rugby Union . Variations of football have been played in Scotland for centuries , with the earliest reference dating back to 1424 . Association football is the most popular sport and the Scottish Cup is the world 's oldest national trophy . 
 Scotland contested the first ever international football game in 1872 against England . The match took place at Hamilton Crescent , Glasgow , home of the West of Scotland Cricket Club . Scottish clubs have been successful in European competitions with Celtic winning the European Cup in 1967 , Rangers and Aberdeen winning the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup in 1972 and 1983 respectively , and Aberdeen also winning the UEFA Super Cup in 1983 . Dundee United have also made it to a European final , reaching the UEFA Cup Final in 1987 , but losing 2 – 1 on aggregate to IFK Göteborg . 
 With the modern game of golf originating in 15th century Scotland , the country is promoted as the home of golf . To many golfers the Old Course in the Fife town of St. Andrews , an ancient links course dating to before 1574 , is considered a site of pilgrimage . In 1764 , the standard 18 @-@ hole golf course was created at St Andrews when members modified the course from 22 to 18 holes . The world 's oldest golf tournament , and golf 's first major , is The Open Championship , which was first played on 17 October 1860 at Prestwick Golf Club , in Ayrshire , Scotland , with Scottish golfers winning the earliest majors . There are many other famous golf courses in Scotland , including Carnoustie , Gleneagles , Muirfield , and Royal Troon . Other distinctive features of the national sporting culture include the Highland games , curling and shinty . In boxing , Scotland has had 13 world champions , including Ken Buchanan , Benny Lynch and Jim Watt . 
 Scotland has competed at every Commonwealth Games since 1930 and has won 356 medals in total — 91 Gold , 104 Silver and 161 Bronze . Edinburgh played host to the Commonwealth Games in 1970 and 1986 , and most recently Glasgow in 2014 . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 Scotland has five main international airports ( Glasgow , Edinburgh , Aberdeen , Prestwick and Inverness ) , which together serve 150 international destinations with a wide variety of scheduled and chartered flights . <unk> operates Edinburgh airport and BAA operates ( Aberdeen and Glasgow International ) , while Highland and Islands Airports operates 11 regional airports , including Inverness , which serve the more remote locations . <unk> operates Prestwick . 
 The Scottish motorways and major trunk roads are managed by Transport Scotland . The remainder of the road network is managed by the Scottish local authorities in each of their areas . 
 = = = Water transport = = = 
 Regular ferry services operate between the Scottish mainland and many islands . These ferries are mostly run by Caledonian MacBrayne , but some are operated by local councils . Other ferry routes , served by multiple companies , connect to Northern Ireland , Belgium , Norway , the Faroe Islands and also Iceland . 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Network Rail Infrastructure Limited owns and operates the fixed infrastructure assets of the railway system in Scotland , while the Scottish Government retains overall responsibility for rail strategy and funding in Scotland . Scotland 's rail network has around 340 railway stations and 3 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) of track . Over 62 million passenger journeys are made each year . 
 The East Coast and West Coast main railway lines connect the major cities and towns of Scotland with each other and with the rail network in England . Domestic rail services within Scotland are operated by ScotRail . During the time of British Rail the West Coast Main Line from London Euston to Glasgow Central was electrified in the early 1970s , followed by the East Coast Main Line in the late 1980s . British Rail created the ScotRail brand . When British Rail existed , many railway lines in Strathclyde were electrified . Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive was at the forefront with the acclaimed " largest electrified rail network outside London " . Some parts of the network are electrified , but there are no electrified lines in the Highlands , Angus , Aberdeenshire , the cities of Dundee or Aberdeen , or Perth & Kinross , and none of the islands has a rail link ( although the railheads at Kyle of Lochalsh and Mallaig principally serve the islands ) . 
 The East Coast Main Line crosses the Firth of Forth by the Forth Bridge . Completed in 1890 , this cantilever bridge has been described as " the one internationally recognised Scottish landmark " . Scotland 's rail network is managed by Transport Scotland . 
 = = = Specialized monographs = = = 
 = Brian Griffin 's House of Payne = 
 " Brian Griffin 's House of Payne " is the 15th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on March 28 , 2010 . The episode features Brian after he discovers an old script he had written that Stewie found in the basement , and subsequently pitches the show to television executives . The show is quickly and dramatically altered by the executives and James Woods , however , much to the frustration of Brian , who nevertheless attempts to adapt to the new format . Meanwhile Chris and Meg attempt to hide the fact that Stewie is unconscious , after they accidentally bump him down a flight of stairs . 
 The episode was written by Spencer Porter and directed by Jerry Langford . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 27 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Jennifer Birmingham , Rob <unk> , Danielle Panabaker , Charlie Sheen , Elijah Wood and James Woods , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Brian Griffin 's House of Payne " was released on DVD along with ten other episodes from the season on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Stewie rams a toy spaceship into Peter 's ear , annoying him , so Peter throws Rupert into the basement . Stewie follows the bear , discovering an old television script that Brian wrote entitled What I Learned on Jefferson Street . Stewie tosses the script onto the kitchen table , prompting Lois to question what it is about . Brian suggests she read it and tell him what she thinks . Lois falls in love with it , and suggests he meet with network executives about producing the show . When Brian pitches it to CBS , the executives respond positively . While the initial casting session goes well , with Elijah Wood auditioning for the lead , the producers assigned by the executives also bring in James Woods , who performs the role in a more comedic fashion , winning over the executives . Brian 's serious drama is turned into a sitcom , bringing in a live studio audience as well as a chimpanzee , and renaming it Class Holes . When Brian objects to the changes , the producers remind him of what he had tried to achieve for many years — his own television show — and threaten him with unemployment if he objects to those changes . Disappointed that Brian allowed the executives to change his show so dramatically , Lois demands that he stand up for himself and object to everything James Woods changed about the show . The producers , however , do not take kindly to Brian 's desire to start over , so Brian quits in frustration . Brian reveals his disappointment that he no longer has his own television show , but Lois convinces him that it is his integrity that matters . Peter interrupts , with his own show appearing on the screen , entitled Bigger Jaws . 
 Meanwhile , Chris sneaks into Meg 's bedroom and reads her diary . Discovering him , Meg chases after Chris while Stewie walks by the staircase . Accidentally bumped by them , Stewie tumbles down the stairs and becomes unconscious , suffering a severe head wound . Chris and Meg hide the wound with a hat . Continuing the charade , they are approached by Peter , who asks how long Stewie has been unconscious . Peter reveals that he has knocked both of them out plenty of times , and wants to continue hiding Stewie 's injury from Lois until he can frame her for it . The next day , noticing Lois pulling out of the driveway , Peter throws Stewie behind her car , making it appear Lois has run him over . Lois suggests they frame someone else , but Peter professes his love for her and suggests they take Stewie to the hospital . At the end of the show , Stewie walks in on the family with his head wrapped in bandages , revealing that many months have passed since his accident , he asks what happened to him . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 In his first official episode for the series , the show was written by Spencer Porter , who had previously worked as a writing assistant for series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane on both Family Guy , as well as The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! . In addition , the episode was directed by series regular Jerry Langford , his second episode for the season , the first being " Quagmire 's Baby " . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg and Alex Carter serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Ron Jones , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Brian Griffin 's House of Payne " . The opening scene of the episode , involving Stewie in the Star Wars @-@ like universe , was originally attempted to be animated by the traditional Korean animators , which regularly provide the animation for Family Guy . According to Shannon Smith , producer for Family Guy , half @-@ way through production of the sequence , they decided to approach a Vancouver @-@ based animation company instead , who had previously worked for Battlestar Galactica and Stargate . The sequence was created during the 2010 Winter Olympics , which took place in Vancouver , during which the company was on hiatus from their regularly scheduled work . 
 " Brian Griffin 's House of Payne " , along with the eleven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 Returning for his fourth official appearance in the series , the first being " Peter 's Got Woods " , the second being " Back to the Woods " and the third being a brief cameo appearance in the The Empire Strikes Back parody entitled " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " , actor James Woods reassumed his role as the overly exaggerated version of himself . Actress Danielle Panabaker , who played Woods ' character 's daughter in the TV series Shark , voiced Woods ' fictional daughter . In addition , voice actress Jennifer Birmingham , writer Rob <unk> , and actors Charlie Sheen and Elijah Wood guest star as themselves . Recurring guest voice actor Ralph Garman and writers Mark Hentemann , Chris Sheridan , Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin and John Viener also made minor appearances . Actress Jennifer Tilly and Actor Patrick Warburton guest appeared as well . " Brian Griffin 's House of Payne " was Elijah Wood 's first episode of Family Guy , however he previously provided a voice for Seth MacFarlane 's second show American Dad ! , in the Season 3 episode " Iced , Iced , Babies " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , a Battlestar Galactica and Star Wars @-@ inspired space fight is shown between Stewie , Rupert , and a giant spaceship in the shape of Peter 's head , along with a series of lookalike TIE fighters . In addition , Stewie paraphrases a series of lyrics from the 1972 single " Rocket Man " by singer @-@ songwriter and composer Elton John . When Brian 's script is brought up during breakfast , Peter mentions his own idea for a script entitled Big Jaws , in which the shark from the 1975 film Jaws has to team up with the guys , including Martin Brody , Quint and Matt Hooper , to go after him to get " bigger Jaws . " After it 's produced , Peter already has a sequel in mind called Way Bigger Jaws . Most of the storyline following Stewie , Chris and Meg is an homage to the 1989 film Weekend at Bernie 's . The episode 's title is also a reference to the TBS series Tyler Perry 's House of Payne . As the family gathers around the television to watch Brian 's show , actors Charlie Sheen , Jon Cryer and Angus T. Jones of the CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men appear in the Griffin family living room , with Sheen attacking Brian for always criticizing their show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In an improvement over the previous four episodes , the episode was viewed in 7 @.@ 27 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with The Amazing Race on CBS , Celebrity Apprentice on NBC and WWE WrestleMania XXVI on pay @-@ per @-@ view . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , The Cleveland Show , and Sons of Tucson , in addition to significantly edging out all three shows in total viewership . 
 Reviews of the episode were mixed . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club called Brian 's plotline a " pretty funny , if uninspired , take on the pilot process . " VanDerWerff also criticized the Stewie storyline , calling it an unnecessary " grossout gag . " In a more positive review , Jason Hughes of TV Squad noted that " both storylines were funny to their respective ends , " in addition to praising James Woods ' performance in the episode . Ramsey Isler of IGN criticized Brian 's plotline , writing that it " really didn 't work as comedy " and " if the episode had been entirely about Stewie 's predicament , it might have been much better " . 
 = Shimer College = 
 Shimer College ( pronounced / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ) is an American Great Books college in Chicago , Illinois . Founded in 1853 as the Mt . Carroll Seminary in Mount Carroll , Illinois , the school became affiliated with the University of Chicago and was renamed the Frances Shimer Academy in 1896 . It was renamed Shimer College in 1950 , when it began offering a four @-@ year curriculum based on the Hutchins Plan of the University of Chicago . Although the University of Chicago parted with Shimer ( and the Hutchins Plan ) in 1958 , Shimer has continued to use a version of that curriculum . The college left Mount Carroll for Waukegan in 1978 , moving to Chicago in 2006 . 
 Its academic program is based on a core curriculum of sixteen required courses in the humanities , social sciences and natural sciences . All courses are small seminars with no more than twelve students , and are based on original sources from a list of about 200 core texts broadly based on the Great Books canon . Classroom instruction is Socratic discussion . Considerable writing is required , including two comprehensive examinations and a senior thesis . Students are admitted primarily on the basis of essays and interviews ; no minimum grades or test scores are required . Shimer has one of the highest alumni doctorate rates in the country . 
 The college occupies a complex designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe on the main campus of the Illinois Institute of Technology ( IIT ) in the Bronzeville neighborhood of Chicago 's Near South Side . The American Institute of Architects has called the IIT campus one of the 200 most significant works of architecture in the United States , and it was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2005 . 
 Shimer is governed internally by an assembly in which all community members have a vote . 
 According to The New York Times , students " share a love of books [ and ] a disdain for the conventional style of education . Many say they did not have a good high school experience " . Students , who tend to be individualistic and creative thinkers , are encouraged to ask questions . Shimer has historically averaged 125 students , and enrolled 97 in 2014 . Most Shimer alumni go on to graduate studies . 
 Shimer has announced an agreement to be acquired by North Central College " with the intention of a completed acquisition on or around March 1 , 2017 . " 
 = = History = = 
 In 1852 , the pioneer town of Mount Carroll , Illinois , lacking a public school , incorporated the Mount Carroll Seminary with no land , no teachers and no money . The town persuaded Frances Wood and <unk> Gregory , two schoolteachers from Ballston Spa , New York , to come and teach . On May 11 , 1853 , the new seminary opened in a local church with eleven students . 
 Unable to raise sufficient funds locally , the seminary 's founders borrowed money to construct a building in 1854 . They were discouraged by the school 's finances and sold it to Wood and Gregory , who borrowed money for the purchase . In 1857 Wood married Henry Shimer , a mason who was a creditor of the seminary . In 1864 , the overcrowded school began accepting female students only . 
 To ensure the seminary 's long @-@ term survival , in 1896 Frances Shimer reached an agreement with the University of Chicago in which the school became the Frances Shimer Academy of the University of Chicago and was loosely affiliated with the Baptist Church . She retired to Florida , never returning to the school , and died in 1901 . University of Chicago president William Rainey Harper was the first to champion junior colleges in the United States , and in 1907 Shimer became one of the first schools to offer a junior @-@ college program . The two @-@ year junior @-@ college program , operating with the original preparatory program , was accredited in 1920 . 
 The college had a precipitous decline in enrollment and financial stability during and after the Great Depression , weathering the storm under five successive presidents . Its survival was due in part to the reorganization of the six @-@ year preparatory program into a four @-@ year junior college program and in part to steep salary reductions . In 1943 , Shimer president Albin C. Bro invited the Department of Education at the University of Chicago to evaluate the college community ; its 77 recommendations became the basis for Shimer 's transformation from a conservative finishing school to a nontraditional , co @-@ educational four @-@ year college . 
 The school was renamed Shimer College in 1950 , adopting the great @-@ books curriculum then in place at the University of Chicago . The university connection dissolved in 1958 after the latter 's decision to abandon the great @-@ books plan , and Shimer narrowly avoided bankruptcy in 1957 . The great @-@ books program at Shimer continued , and the school enjoyed national recognition and a rapid growth in enrollment during the 1960s . In 1963 , a Harvard Educational Review article listed Shimer as one of 11 colleges with an " ideal intellectual climate " . According to a 1966 article in the education journal Phi Delta Kappan , Shimer " present [ ed ] impressive statistical evidence that their students are better prepared for graduate work in the arts and sciences and in the professions than those who have specialized in particular areas " . 
 During the late 1960s Shimer experienced a period of internal unrest known as the Grotesque Internecine Struggle , with disputes over curriculum changes , the extent to which student behavior should be regulated and inadequate fundraising by president Francis Joseph Mullin . Half the faculty and a large portion of the student body left as a result . Its financial problems worsened , and the school 's survival was uncertain . Although Shimer 's trustees voted to close the college at the end of 1973 , the school was saved by intense student and faculty fundraising . In the school 's 1977 bankruptcy filing the trustees , in the words of board chair Barry Carroll , " put responsibility for the school 's continuing on the shoulders of a very dedicated faculty of 12 and students who volunteered " . 
 During the 1978 Christmas break , the faculty and 62 students borrowed trucks and moved the college into two " run @-@ down " homes in Waukegan , Illinois , a suburb north of Chicago . Shimer emerged from bankruptcy in 1980 . During the next 25 years , the college purchased 12 surrounding homes to form a makeshift campus and slowly progressed towards financial stability . By 1988 its enrollment had grown from a low of 40 to 114 , and income exceeded expenses . In 1991 , Shimer received a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities with the help of NEH chair and core @-@ curriculum advocate Lynne Cheney ; the grant revitalized the school 's fundraising , helping it raise $ 2 million . 
 In 2006 , Shimer again moved to the campus of the Illinois Institute of Technology ( IIT ) in Chicago . Although the institutions operate independently , they cooperate closely under a long @-@ term agreement . 
 Shimer received national attention in 2009 , when it was embroiled in " a battle over what some saw as a right @-@ wing attempt to take over its board and administration " . In February 2012 the college announced the appointment of Susan <unk> , former professor of religious studies at Hobart and William Smith Colleges , as Shimer 's 14th president . 
 In September 2014 Shimer again received media attention when Ben Miller of Washington Monthly ranked it as one of the worst colleges in America , according to a formula adjusting graduation rates to the percentage of minority and low @-@ income students and factoring net expense to low @-@ income students . In December 2014 Jon Ronson of The Guardian disputed Miller 's claim , citing Miller 's assertion that the ranking was " at least partly due to small sample sizes " . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Curriculum history = = = 
 Shimer is one of four colleges in the U.S. which follow the great @-@ books tradition begun by John Erskine . Erskine 's Socratic seminar at Columbia University ( begun in 1919 ) impacted his colleague , Mortimer J. Adler , who came to believe that the purpose of education was to engage student minds " in the study of individual works of merit ... accompanied by a discussion of the ideas , the values , and the forms embodied in such products of human art " . Robert Maynard Hutchins , head of the University of Chicago from 1929 to 1951 , brought Adler to the university and implemented a program ( known as the Chicago Program and , later , the Hutchins Plan ) based on Adler 's ideas . 
 The Chicago program comprised sequences in the natural sciences , the humanities , and the social sciences which were supposed to integrate past and present work within these divisions of knowledge . In addition , these sequences were capped by work in philosophy and history . The emphasis in teaching was on small classes with bright students , where discussion could supplant monologue as the dominant pedagogic technique .... At the same time , in order to retain high academic standards and contact with the " frontiers of knowledge " , the College 's pedagogy emphasized reading originals ( sometimes although not invariably , defined as Great Books ) . 
 Shimer , affiliated with the University of Chicago since 1896 , adopted the Hutchins plan ( including University of Chicago syllabi , comprehensive examinations and several university instructors ) in 1950 . When Hutchins left the university in 1951 and it abandoned the Hutchins Plan , Shimer continued to use it and it is still reflected in the college 's curriculum . 
 = = = Degree program = = = 
 Shimer is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools . Its core curriculum is a sequence of sixteen required courses in the humanities , social sciences , natural sciences and interdisciplinary studies . Basic @-@ studies courses are generally taken during the first two years , advanced @-@ studies during the final two years and integrative @-@ studies courses in the final year . In addition to core courses students take electives , which offer basic instruction or in @-@ depth work in particular subjects . Students may also take tutorials , with one or two students per course , tailored to their interests and similar in structure to the Oxford tutorial system . 
 Shimer College students do not pursue traditional majors , instead having broad concentrations in the humanities , natural sciences or social sciences . Within these areas , students may specialize in literature , mathematics , philosophy , political science or psychology . 
 The school 's 200 @-@ book reading list remains largely faithful to the original Hutchins plan , with new works judiciously added to the core curriculum . These include voices originally overlooked in the formation of the canon : Martin Luther King , Jr . , Carol Gilligan , Frantz <unk> , Michel Foucault and other contemporary authors . Readings are organized by broad historical and philosophical themes . 
 Small seminars remain the sole form of instruction in all subjects , from mathematics to poetry . Classes are composed of no more than twelve students ( the average class size is seven ) , who read and discuss only source material . In a process Shimer calls " shared inquiry " , " the text is the teacher , and thus the faculty member 's role is to facilitate interaction between the text and the students " . According to a former Shimer professor : 
 At Shimer , the professor is a facilitator , a guide on the side , not a sage on the stage – encouraging each student to contribute to the intellectual light being kindled in every class . Each student is expected to question and comment upon the text , to respond to one other ’ s insights , actively taking part in every discussion .... Students know their insights matter ; they have something to offer to their peers , and to the life of the text being discussed . Some students are more exuberant than others , some would rather talk than listen ; others may be a bit shy . The professor / facilitator must make sure that each student has a chance to shine , that each can feel confident , each can have the courage to ask what they think might be a stupid question . What are feared to be stupid questions are often the most provocative ones . 
 The curriculum emphasizes writing ; students are required to complete a semester project each term on a topic chosen in conjunction with an advisor , and are required to complete a research paper during their third year . All students must pass a basic @-@ studies comprehensive examination to register for upper @-@ level courses , and at least one area @-@ studies comprehensive examination ( usually in their area of concentration ) to graduate . A senior thesis is required of all students . Usually an analytic or expository essay , it may also be a piece of original fiction , poetry , a performance or work of visual art . Students are encouraged to present their theses orally , and the public is invited to the presentations . 
 = = = Special programs = = = 
 = = = = Early Entrance program = = = = 
 The Early Entrance program , which admits students who have not yet graduated from high school , was pioneered by Hutchins at the University of Chicago in 1937 and adopted by Shimer in 1950 . It has continued with the support of the Ford Foundation , the Carnegie Foundation and the <unk> Foundation . In the past , up to 80 percent of Shimer 's student body was composed of Early Entrance students . 
 Early entrants are admitted after the 10th or 11th grade , and follow the regular curriculum . The college considers applications from any interested students , with motivation , willingness to learn and intellectual curiosity the most important qualifications . Shimer encourages applications from home @-@ schooled students , accommodating their lack of credentials such as transcripts . In 2008 , 16 percent of new students were early entrants or home @-@ schooled . 
 = = = = Joint programs = = = = 
 The Great Books + Law program , introduced in 2007 , is offered in conjunction with the Chicago @-@ Kent College of Law ( the law school of the Illinois Institute of Technology ) and the Vermont Law School and allows students to complete undergraduate and law degrees in six ( instead of seven ) years . Shimer has a dual @-@ enrollment program with Harold Washington College , one of the few community colleges in the U.S. with a great @-@ books program . The program allows <unk> students to take a Shimer course , and is intended to encourage students to transfer to Shimer to complete their bachelor 's degree . 
 = = = = Study abroad = = = = 
 Shimer first offered a year of study abroad ( in Paris ) in 1961 , and the college has had a biennial program in Oxford since 1963 . The Shimer @-@ in @-@ Oxford program allows third- or fourth @-@ year students to study for one or two semesters in Oxford , supervised by a Shimer professor . Students take a core class each term with the supervising faculty ; the rest of their work is completed in tutorials of self @-@ selected subjects under the guidance of academics associated with the University of Oxford . 
 = = = = Teaching Fellows Program = = = = 
 The Teaching Fellows Program , now discontinued , was a graduate @-@ level great @-@ books course designed for kindergarten through 12th @-@ grade teachers . Although Shimer does not award graduate degrees , teachers could then earn professional development credit with the program ; it complements traditional education courses by providing background knowledge for teachers to impart more content @-@ rich instruction . The program was developed in conjunction with the Core Knowledge Foundation , founded in 1986 by E. D. Hirsch ( author of Cultural Literacy : What Every American Needs to Know ) to promote a common core in U.S. elementary education . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 As of 2014 Shimer had eleven full @-@ time faculty and one part @-@ time faculty member , and the student @-@ faculty ratio is eight to one . All full @-@ time faculty have doctoral degrees . Shimer instructors teach across disciplines ; the " ideal is that any faculty member can teach any one of the core courses " . 
 = = = Admission = = = 
 Shimer applicants are evaluated according to their academic potential , and no minimum grade @-@ point average or test score is required . Applicants are required to write essays analyzing their academic experience and demonstrating their creative talent . These essays and interviews are the primary criteria for admission . The college accepts students it believes will benefit from , and contribute to , its intellectual community . Barron ’ s Profiles of American Colleges rates Shimer " very competitive plus " . Candidates are counseled before applying , and nearly 90 percent of those who apply are admitted . 
 In 2010 , the average GPA of incoming students was 3 @.@ 29 out of 4 @.@ 0 . Average composite scores on standardized college @-@ admissions tests were 28 on the ACT ( the 92nd percentile ) and 1917 on the SAT ( the 90th percentile ) . 
 = = = Tuition and fees = = = 
 In 2014 full @-@ time tuition was $ 27 @,@ 491 , and the total cost of attendance ( including room , board and fees ) was $ 41 @,@ 615 . All students received financial aid , with the average aid package $ 13 @,@ 956 . 
 = = = Recognition and rankings = = = 
 Shimer has one of the highest rates of doctoral candidates in the U.S. In a 1998 University of Wisconsin – Madison study , the college had the highest rate of graduates receiving doctoral degrees of any liberal @-@ arts college and the third @-@ highest rate of any undergraduate program in the nation . A 2009 report by Washington Monthly ranked Shimer third in graduate Ph.D. rate among U.S. liberal @-@ arts colleges . Studies based on Higher Education Data Sharing Consortium data found that Shimer had the seventh @-@ highest alumni Ph.D. rate of U.S. colleges and universities , and the highest rate for Ph.D.s in linguistics . 
 Shimer students who take the Graduate Record Exam outscore three out of four potential graduate students , " consistently rank [ ing ] among the best in the nation in scores on the verbal and analytical portions of the test " with average analytic scores in the 91st percentile . 
 Insight Magazine named Shimer one of its 15 Most Politically @-@ Incorrect Colleges : " colleges that had strong and effective traditional curricula that were not ' obsessed with the recent educational fads and fetishes such as multiculturalism and diversity ' " . Barron 's called Shimer one of the 300 best buys in college education , noting that " the success of the Shimer curriculum depends a great deal on the knowledge and skill of the faculty facilitators , who receive accolades ranging from ' fantastic ' to ' brilliant ' " . Shimer was one of the top 50 colleges in All @-@ American Colleges : Top Schools for Conservatives , Old @-@ Fashioned Liberals , and People of Faith , which highlights " programs that connect in a special way with the core values of the American founding and the vibrant intellectual traditions of the West " . 
 In 2007 , Shimer joined a national effort by the Education Conservancy to boycott participation in college @-@ ranking surveys . President William Craig Rice said , " What Shimer does well — educating ourselves in on @-@ going dialogue with the greatest minds of the past — can ’ t be captured in the U.S. News measurements " . Washington Monthly ranks Shimer 200th among liberal @-@ arts colleges , based on social mobility , research and service . The college is unranked by U.S. News & World Report . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Shimer is located on the main campus of the Illinois Institute of Technology . IIT 's 120 @-@ acre ( 48 @.@ 6 ha ) campus is at the intersection of 33rd and State Streets , about three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of the Chicago Loop , and borders the Bridgeport and Bronzeville neighborhoods of Chicago 's Near South Side . In 1976 the American Institute of Architects named the IIT campus one of the 200 most significant works of architecture in the United States , and it was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2005 . 
 Shimer occupies 17 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 580 m2 ) on two floors of the former Institute of Gas Technology complex . The complex , designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe , consists of four buildings ( the southernmost formerly hosting the first industrial nuclear reactor in the U.S. ) The college has access to the Paul V. Galvin Library , IIT 's main research library , and Shimer 's collection of 15 @,@ 000 books has also been housed in the Galvin Library since the school relocated from Waukegan . 
 = = Organization and administration = = 
 According to the college , " As a function of its mission to promote active citizenship " it is " devoted to internal self @-@ governance to an extent that is rare among institutions of higher education " . Since 1977 , Shimer has been governed internally by a body known as the Assembly . Begun informally in the years before the move to Waukegan , the Assembly was formalized with a constitution in 1980 . Voting members include students , faculty , administrators , staff and trustees ; alumni are members , but do not vote . 
 The Assembly has no independent legal authority , but governs " by virtue of the moral suasion established by communal deliberation " . Its goal is to foster an environment in which " all the top @-@ down bureaucracy of traditional colleges and universities has been replaced by participatory democracy committed to dialogue . " Shimer students participate in the IIT Student Government Association , a liaison between students and university administration and a forum for student opinion . 
 = = Student life = = 
 The New York Times , calling Shimer " one of the smallest liberal arts colleges in the United States " , described its students as " both valedictorians and high school dropouts . What the students share , besides a love of books , is a disdain for the conventional style of education . Many say they did not have a good high school experience . " Shimer students tend to be individualistic , creative thinkers and are encouraged to be inquisitive . The college enrolled 97 students in 2014 , about half from Illinois . Of these students 41 were women , 25 percent were students of color and 76 percent were age 24 or over . Forty percent were first @-@ time , full @-@ time college students . Of the full @-@ time students attending for the first time in 2012 , 86 percent returned for their second year . Sixty percent of students who entered in 2007 completed a bachelor 's degree in six years . 
 The college has a tradition of community meals dating back to the Waukegan campus , when the community would meet for <unk> meals and discuss matters of general interest . The Orange Horse , Shimer 's biennial talent show since the 1960s , invites students , faculty and alumni to read poetry , sing , play music or tell jokes , individually or in groups . The Shimer theater program produces plays complementing its curriculum , offering anyone who wants to participate the chance to do so . Recent productions have included Anton Chekhov 's Uncle Vanya and Eve Ensler 's The Vagina Monologues . 
 In addition to student services at the McCormick Tribune Campus Center and its health and athletic facilities , Shimer students may participate in the more than 150 student organizations sponsored by IIT ( including <unk> Magazine , IIT 's student @-@ run literary magazine and IIT 's on @-@ campus radio station , <unk> , where students can host a show ) . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 Most Shimer alumni continue to graduate school ; 50 percent earn master 's degrees , and 21 percent earn doctorates . Another ten percent attend law school and five percent go to business school . As of 2008 , Shimer had 5 @,@ 615 living alumni . Nearly 25 percent of graduates are employed in education ( elementary school through college ) , seven percent are attorneys and seven percent work in the computer @-@ software industry . The remainder occupy all walks of life , from consulting to social services to non @-@ profit organizations . 
 Notable alumni include : 
 Peter Cooley : Prize @-@ winning poet , author , and professor of English at Tulane University 
 Alan Dowty : Arab Israeli conflict scholar and professor emeritus at the University of Notre Dame 
 Robert Keohane : Political scientist , international relations scholar and professor at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs best known for After Hegemony : Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy 
 John Norman Maclean : Pulitzer Prize @-@ nominated author of the 1999 bestseller Fire on the Mountain 
 Daniel J. Sandin : Pioneer in computer graphics , electronic art and visualization , professor emeritus and director of the Electronic Visualization Laboratory at the University of Illinois Chicago 
 Jayne Barron Sherman : Producer of the Tony Award @-@ winning Broadway shows A Raisin in the Sun , The Normal Heart , Kinky Boots and Hedwig and the Angry Inch 
 Phoebe Snow : Grammy @-@ nominated singer @-@ songwriter best known for her 1974 hit , " Poetry Man " 
 Laurie Spiegel : Composer , software engineer and electronic and computer music pioneer 
 Sydney <unk> : Medical inventor , Slate columnist and professor at the Yale University School of Medicine 
 Daniel Perlman : Former president of Suffolk University in Boston , Massachusetts and Webster University in Webster Groves , Missouri 
 Nick <unk> : Computing researcher and theorist , IBM Fellow and professor at Harvey Mudd College . Known for his work on the foundations of computer science , including complexity , computability and communications theory 
 Tucker <unk> : Award @-@ winning industrial designer and holder of 32 US patents , called " industrial design 's elder <unk> " by I.D. 
 Phyllis Westberg : Literary agent and president of Harold Ober Associates , whose clients have included J. D. Salinger and Langston Hughes 
 Mary Wings : Writer , artist , and musician known for publishing the first lesbian underground comic book and a series of novels with lesbian detective Emma Victor 
 Roland Winston : Leading figure in <unk> optics and its applications to solar energy who has been called the " father of non @-@ imaging optics " . Director of the California Advanced Solar Technologies Institute 
 Catherine " Cat " <unk> : Award @-@ winning writer and comic @-@ book editor 
 = Titania ( moon ) = 
 Titania is the largest of the moons of Uranus and the eighth largest moon in the Solar System at a diameter of 1 @,@ 578 kilometres ( 981 mi ) . Discovered by William Herschel in 1787 , Titania is named after the queen of the fairies in Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream . Its orbit lies inside Uranus 's magnetosphere . 
 Titania consists of approximately equal amounts of ice and rock , and is probably differentiated into a rocky core and an icy mantle . A layer of liquid water may be present at the core – mantle boundary . The surface of Titania , which is relatively dark and slightly red in color , appears to have been shaped by both impacts and endogenic processes . It is covered with numerous impact craters reaching up to 326 kilometres ( 203 mi ) in diameter , but is less heavily cratered than the surface of Uranus 's outermost moon , Oberon . Titania probably underwent an early endogenic resurfacing event which obliterated its older , heavily cratered surface . Titania 's surface is cut by a system of enormous canyons and scarps , the result of the expansion of its interior during the later stages of its evolution . Like all major moons of Uranus , Titania probably formed from an accretion disk which surrounded the planet just after its formation . 
 Infrared spectroscopy conducted from 2001 to 2005 revealed the presence of water ice as well as frozen carbon dioxide on the surface of Titania , which in turn suggested that the moon may have a tenuous carbon dioxide atmosphere with a surface pressure of about 10 <unk> ( 10 − 13 bar ) . Measurements during Titania 's occultation of a star put an upper limit on the surface pressure of any possible atmosphere at 1 – 2 <unk> ( 10 – 20 nbar ) . 
 The Uranian system has been studied up close only once , by the spacecraft Voyager 2 in January 1986 . It took several images of Titania , which allowed mapping of about 40 % of its surface . 
 = = History = = 
 Titania was discovered by William Herschel on January 11 , 1787 , the same day he discovered Uranus 's second largest moon , Oberon . He later reported the discoveries of four more satellites , although they were subsequently revealed as spurious . For nearly fifty years following their discovery , Titania and Oberon would not be observed by any instrument other than William Herschel 's , although the moon can be seen from Earth with a present @-@ day high @-@ end amateur telescope . 
 All of Uranus 's moons are named after characters created by William Shakespeare or Alexander Pope . The name Titania was taken from the Queen of the Fairies in A Midsummer Night 's Dream . The names of all four satellites of Uranus then known were suggested by Herschel 's son John in 1852 , at the request of William Lassell , who had discovered the other two moons , Ariel and Umbriel , the year before . 
 Titania was initially referred to as " the first satellite of Uranus " , and in 1848 was given the designation Uranus I by William Lassell , although he sometimes used William Herschel 's numbering ( where Titania and Oberon are II and IV ) . In 1851 Lassell eventually numbered all four known satellites in order of their distance from the planet by Roman numerals , and since then Titania has been designated Uranus III . 
 Shakespeare 's character 's name is pronounced / <unk> / , but the moon is often pronounced / <unk> / , by analogy with the familiar chemical element titanium . The adjectival form , <unk> , is homonymous with that of Saturn 's moon Titan . The name Titania is ancient Greek in origin , meaning " Daughter of the Titans . " 
 = = Orbit = = 
 Titania orbits Uranus at the distance of about 436 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 271 @,@ 000 mi ) , being the second farthest from the planet among its five major moons . Titania 's orbit has a small eccentricity and is inclined very little relative to the equator of Uranus . Its orbital period is around 8 @.@ 7 days , coincident with its rotational period . In other words , Titania is a synchronous or tidally locked satellite , with one face always pointing toward the planet . 
 Titania 's orbit lies completely inside the Uranian magnetosphere . This is important , because the trailing hemispheres of satellites orbiting inside a magnetosphere are struck by magnetospheric plasma , which co @-@ rotates with the planet . This bombardment may lead to the darkening of the trailing hemispheres , which is actually observed for all Uranian moons except Oberon ( see below ) . 
 Because Uranus orbits the Sun almost on its side , and its moons orbit in the planet 's equatorial plane , they ( including Titania ) are subject to an extreme seasonal cycle . Both northern and southern poles spend 42 years in a complete darkness , and another 42 years in continuous sunlight , with the sun rising close to the zenith over one of the poles at each solstice . The Voyager 2 flyby coincided with the southern hemisphere 's 1986 summer solstice , when nearly the entire northern hemisphere was unilluminated . Once every 42 years , when Uranus has an equinox and its equatorial plane intersects the Earth , mutual occultations of Uranus 's moons become possible . In 2007 – 2008 a number of such events were observed including two occultations of Titania by Umbriel on August 15 and December 8 , 2007 . 
 = = Composition and internal structure = = 
 Titania is the largest and most massive Uranian moon , and the eighth most massive moon in the Solar System . Its density of 1 @.@ 71 g / cm ³ , which is much higher than the typical density of Saturn 's satellites , indicates that it consists of roughly equal proportions of water ice and dense non @-@ ice components ; the latter could be made of rock and carbonaceous material including heavy organic compounds . The presence of water ice is supported by infrared spectroscopic observations made in 2001 – 2005 , which have revealed crystalline water ice on the surface of the moon . Water ice absorption bands are slightly stronger on Titania 's leading hemisphere than on the trailing hemisphere . This is the opposite of what is observed on Oberon , where the trailing hemisphere exhibits stronger water ice signatures . The cause of this asymmetry is not known , but it may be related to the bombardment by charged particles from the magnetosphere of Uranus , which is stronger on the trailing hemisphere ( due to the plasma 's co @-@ rotation ) . The energetic particles tend to sputter water ice , decompose methane trapped in ice as clathrate hydrate and darken other organics , leaving a dark , carbon @-@ rich residue behind . 
 Except for water , the only other compound identified on the surface of Titania by infrared spectroscopy is carbon dioxide , which is concentrated mainly on the trailing hemisphere . The origin of the carbon dioxide is not completely clear . It might be produced locally from carbonates or organic materials under the influence of the solar ultraviolet radiation or energetic charged particles coming from the magnetosphere of Uranus . The latter process would explain the asymmetry in its distribution , because the trailing hemisphere is subject to a more intense magnetospheric influence than the leading hemisphere . Another possible source is the outgassing of the primordial CO2 trapped by water ice in Titania 's interior . The escape of CO2 from the interior may be related to the past geological activity on this moon . 
 Titania may be differentiated into a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle . If this is the case , the radius of the core 520 kilometres ( 320 mi ) is about 66 % of the radius of the moon , and its mass is around 58 % of the moon ’ s mass — the proportions are dictated by moon 's composition . The pressure in the center of Titania is about 0 @.@ 58 GPa ( 5 @.@ 8 kbar ) . The current state of the icy mantle is unclear . If the ice contains enough ammonia or other antifreeze , Titania may have a subsurface ocean at the core – mantle boundary . The thickness of this ocean , if it exists , is up to 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) and its temperature is around 190 K. However the present internal structure of Titania depends heavily on its thermal history , which is poorly known . 
 = = Surface features = = 
 Among Uranus 's moons , Titania is intermediate in brightness between the dark Oberon and Umbriel and the bright Ariel and Miranda . Its surface shows a strong opposition surge : its reflectivity decreases from 35 % at a phase angle of 0 ° ( geometrical albedo ) to 25 % at an angle of about 1 ° . Titania has a relatively low Bond albedo of about 17 % . Its surface is generally slightly red in color , but less red than that of Oberon . However , fresh impact deposits are bluer , while the smooth plains situated on the leading hemisphere near Ursula crater and along some grabens are somewhat redder . There may be an asymmetry between the leading and trailing hemispheres ; the former appears to be redder than the latter by 8 % . However , this difference is related to the smooth plains and may be accidental . The reddening of the surfaces probably results from space weathering caused by bombardment by charged particles and micrometeorites over the age of the Solar System . However , the color asymmetry of Titania is more likely related to accretion of a reddish material coming from outer parts of the Uranian system , possibly , from irregular satellites , which would be deposited predominately on the leading hemisphere . 
 Scientists have recognized three classes of geological feature on Titania : craters , chasmata ( canyons ) and rupes ( scarps ) . The surface of Titania is less heavily cratered than the surfaces of either Oberon or Umbriel , which means that it is much younger . The crater diameters range from a few kilometers at the low end to 326 kilometers for the largest known crater , Gertrude . Some craters ( for instance , Ursula and Jessica ) are surrounded by bright impact ejecta ( rays ) consisting of relatively fresh ice . All large craters on Titania have flat floors and central peaks . The only exception is Ursula , which has a pit in the center . To the west of Gertrude there is an area with irregular topography , the so @-@ called " unnamed basin " , which may be another highly degraded impact basin with the diameter of about 330 kilometres ( 210 mi ) . 
 Titania 's surface is intersected by a system of enormous faults , or scarps . In some places , two parallel scarps mark depressions in the satellite 's crust , forming grabens , which are sometimes called canyons . The most prominent among Titania 's canyons is Messina Chasma , which runs for about 1 @,@ 500 kilometres ( 930 mi ) from the equator almost to the south pole . The grabens on Titania are 20 – 50 kilometres ( 12 – 31 mi ) wide and have a relief of about 2 – 5 km . The scarps that are not related to canyons are called rupes , such as <unk> <unk> near Ursula crater . The regions along some scarps and near Ursula appear smooth at Voyager 's image resolution . These smooth plains were probably resurfaced later in Titania 's geological history , after the majority of craters formed . The resurfacing may have been either endogenic in nature , involving the eruption of fluid material from the interior ( cryovolcanism ) , or , alternatively it may be due to blanking by the impact ejecta from nearby large craters . The grabens are probably the youngest geological features on Titania — they cut all craters and even smooth plains . 
 The geology of Titania was influenced by two competing forces : impact crater formation and endogenic resurfacing . The former acted over the moon 's entire history and influenced all surfaces . The latter processes were also global in nature , but active mainly for a period following the moon 's formation . They obliterated the original heavily cratered terrain , explaining the relatively low number of impact craters on the moon 's present @-@ day surface . Additional episodes of resurfacing may have occurred later and led to the formation of smooth plains . Alternatively smooth plains may be ejecta blankets of the nearby impact craters . The most recent endogenous processes were mainly tectonic in nature and caused the formation of the canyons , which are actually giant cracks in the ice crust . The cracking of the crust was caused by the global expansion of Titania by about 0 @.@ 7 % . 
 = = Atmosphere = = 
 The presence of carbon dioxide on the surface suggests that Titania may have a tenuous seasonal atmosphere of CO2 , much like that of the Jovian moon Callisto . Other gases , like nitrogen or methane , are unlikely to be present , because Titania 's weak gravity could not prevent them from escaping into space . At the maximum temperature attainable during Titania 's summer solstice ( 89 K ) , the vapor pressure of carbon dioxide is about 300 μPa ( 3 nbar ) . 
 On September 8 , 2001 , Titania occulted a bright star ( <unk> ) with a visible magnitude of 7 @.@ 2 ; this was an opportunity to both refine Titania 's diameter and ephemeris , and to detect any extant atmosphere . The data revealed no atmosphere to a surface pressure of 1 – 2 <unk> ( 10 – 20 nbar ) ; if it exists , it would have to be far thinner than that of Triton or Pluto . This upper limit is still several times higher than the maximum possible surface pressure of the carbon dioxide , meaning that the measurements place essentially no constraints on parameters of the atmosphere . 
 The peculiar geometry of the Uranian system causes the moons ' poles to receive more solar energy than their equatorial regions . Because the vapor pressure of CO2 is a steep function of temperature , this may lead to the accumulation of carbon dioxide in the low @-@ latitude regions of Titania , where it can stably exist on high albedo patches and shaded regions of the surface in the form of ice . During the summer , when the polar temperatures reach as high as 85 – 90 K , carbon dioxide sublimates and migrates to the opposite pole and to the equatorial regions , giving rise to a type of carbon cycle . The accumulated carbon dioxide ice can be removed from cold traps by magnetospheric particles , which sputter it from the surface . Titania is thought to have lost a significant amount of carbon dioxide since its formation 4 @.@ 6 billion years ago . 
 = = Origin and evolution = = 
 Titania is thought to have formed from an accretion disc or subnebula ; a disc of gas and dust that either existed around Uranus for some time after its formation or was created by the giant impact that most likely gave Uranus its large obliquity . The precise composition of the subnebula is not known ; however , the relatively high density of Titania and other Uranian moons compared to the moons of Saturn indicates that it may have been relatively water @-@ poor . Significant amounts of nitrogen and carbon may have been present in the form of carbon monoxide and N2 instead of ammonia and methane . The moons that formed in such a subnebula would contain less water ice ( with CO and N2 trapped as a clathrate ) and more rock , explaining the higher density . 
 Titania 's accretion probably lasted for several thousand years . The impacts that accompanied accretion caused heating of the moon 's outer layer . The maximum temperature of around 250 K ( − 23 ° C ) was reached at a depth of about 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) . After the end of formation , the subsurface layer cooled , while the interior of Titania heated due to decay of radioactive elements present in its rocks . The cooling near @-@ surface layer contracted , while the interior expanded . This caused strong extensional stresses in the moon 's crust leading to cracking . Some of the present @-@ day canyons may be a result of this . The process lasted for about 200 million years , implying that any endogenous activity ceased billions of years ago . 
 The initial accretional heating together with continued decay of radioactive elements were probably strong enough to melt the ice if some antifreeze like ammonia ( in the form of ammonia hydrate ) or salt was present . Further melting may have led to the separation of ice from rocks and formation of a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle . A layer of liquid water ( ocean ) rich in dissolved ammonia may have formed at the core – mantle boundary . The eutectic temperature of this mixture is 176 K ( − 97 ° C ) . If the temperature dropped below this value , the ocean would have subsequently frozen . The freezing of the water would have caused the interior to expand , which may have been responsible for the formation of the majority of the canyons . However , the present knowledge of Titania 's geological evolution is quite limited . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 So far the only close @-@ up images of Titania have been from the Voyager 2 probe , which photographed the moon during its flyby of Uranus in January 1986 . Since the closest distance between Voyager 2 and Titania was only 365 @,@ 200 km ( 226 @,@ 900 mi ) , the best images of this moon have a spatial resolution of about 3 @.@ 4 km ( only Miranda and Ariel were imaged with a better resolution ) . The images cover about 40 % of the surface , but only 24 % was photographed with the precision required for geological mapping . At the time of the flyby , the southern hemisphere of Titania ( like those of the other moons ) was pointed towards the Sun , so the northern ( dark ) hemisphere could not be studied . 
 No other spacecraft has ever visited the Uranian system or Titania , and no mission is currently planned . One possibility , now discarded , was to send Cassini on from Saturn to Uranus in an extended mission . Another mission concept proposed was the Uranus orbiter and probe concept , evaluated around 2010 . Uranus was also examined as part of one trajectory for a precursor interstellar probe concept , Innovative Interstellar Explorer . 
 A Uranus orbiter was listed as the third priority for a NASA Flagship mission by the NASA Planetary Science Decadal Survey , and conceptual designs for such a mission are currently being analyzed . 
 = Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea = 
 Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea is a village in north @-@ east Kent , England , with a population of around 10 @,@ 000 . 
 It is part of the Thanet district and forms part of the civil parish of Birchington . It lies on the coast facing the North Sea , east of the Thames Estuary , between the seaside resorts of Herne Bay and Margate . As a seaside resort , the village is a tourist and retirement destination . The village 's Minnis Bay is a family beach with attractions such as sailing , windsurfing , a paddling pool and coastal walking routes . Its three smaller beaches are surrounded by chalk cliffs , cliff stacks and caves . 
 The village was first recorded in 1240 . Its parish church , All Saints ' , dates to the 13th century and its churchyard is the burial place of the 19th @-@ century Pre @-@ Raphaelite artist Dante Gabriel Rossetti . Quex Park , a local 19th @-@ century manor house , is home to the Powell @-@ Cotton Museum and a twelve @-@ bell tower built for change ringing . The museum contains a large collection of stuffed exotic animals collected by Major Percy Powell @-@ Cotton on his travels in Africa , and also houses artefacts unearthed in and around Birchington by his daughter , Antoinette Powell @-@ Cotton , a keen archeologist . 
 = = History = = 
 Birchington was first recorded in 1240 as <unk> , a name derived from the Old English words ' <unk> tun ' , meaning a farm where birch trees grow . Archaeological evidence has shown the area was inhabited before the existence of the village : Roman and prehistoric artefacts have been discovered in the area , and Minnis Bay was once the site of an Iron Age settlement . 
 Archives show the village 's All Saints ' Church dates to around 1350 . In the early 15th century , Quex Park manor house — named after the park 's second owner , John <unk> — was built just south of the village . The ownership of the manor passed to various families until 1770 when it was acquired by the present owners , the Powell family . In the late 17th century , the house was visited by King William III . In 1565 , a report on the coast of Thanet by the commissioners of Queen Elizabeth I stated that Birchington had 42 houses and did not have an active port . Before the 19th century , the village coastline was frequented by smugglers , leading to skirmishes between them and excise officers . Several of the older houses in the village contain cellars and bricked up tunnels , once used for storing contraband . 
 The 1801 census recorded the village 's population as 537 . In the early 19th century , the Tudor Quex House had to be demolished and a replacement manor house was built in its place . In 1818 , the Waterloo Tower was built on the grounds of Quex Park . It is a bell tower built by the owner of Quex Park , John Powell Powell , who had an interest in change ringing . Waterloo Tower was the first twelve @-@ bell tower in Kent . The village was a farming community until the late 19th century , when it began to develop into a coastal resort . Birchington railway station was opened in 1863 and the Railway Hotel , now the Sea View Hotel pub , was opened in 1865 . Station Road was subsequently built to serve as Birchington 's main shopping street . Coast Guard cottages were built at Minnis Bay in the 1870s and the first shops appeared by the bay in 1903 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea is located at 51 ° 22 ′ 37 ″ N 1 ° 18 ′ 18 ″ E ( 51 @.@ 377 , 1 @.@ 305 ) in northeast Kent , on the coast of the Thames Estuary . The village is 14 kilometres ( 9 mi ) to the east of Herne Bay and 6 kilometres ( 4 mi ) to the west of Margate . The small town of Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea lies between Birchington and Margate . 
 The village is built beside four sandy bays ; Minnis Bay to the west , Grenham Bay and Beresford Gap towards the centre and <unk> Bay to the east . The village is situated on the Isle of Thanet , which was a separate island from mainland Kent until around two hundred years ago , when the channel in between became silted up . The area to the west of the village , between Birchington and Herne Bay , was once part of the channel and is now low @-@ lying marshland . In the east of the village the land rises , forming chalk cliffs and cliff stacks around the beaches at Grenham Bay , Beresford Gap and <unk> Bay . A sea wall stretches along the foot of the cliffs to prevent further erosion . The geology of Thanet consists mainly of chalk , deposited when the area was below the sea . Isle of Thanet became exposed above sea @-@ level once the English Channel broke through between Kent and France , causing the sea @-@ level to fall . The whole of the northeast Kent coast has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest . 
 The drinking water in the village is classed as being ' very hard ' , having just over 120 mg of calcium per litre . The hardness is due to water being obtained from underground chalk sources by the water company Southern Water . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 In East Kent , the warmest time of the year is July and August , when maximum temperatures average around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . The coolest time of the year is January and February , when minimum temperatures average around 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) . East Kent 's average maximum and minimum temperatures are around 1 / 2 ° C higher than the national average . East Kent 's average annual rainfall is about 728 millimetres ( 29 in ) , with October to January being the wettest months . The national average annual rainfall is about 838 millimetres ( 33 in ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2011 census , the village had 9 @,@ 961 residents . There were 4 @,@ 944 households , of which 43 @.@ 6 % were married couples living together , 13 @.@ 0 % were cohabiting couples ; 43 @.@ 4 % of all households were made up of lone individuals . For every 100 females , there were 86 @.@ 2 males . The age distribution was 6 % aged 0 – 4 years , 13 @.@ 1 % aged 5 – 15 years , 5 @.@ 1 % aged 16 – 19 years , 28 @.@ 2 % aged 20 – 44 years , 26 @.@ 4 % aged 45 – 64 years and 21 @.@ 2 % aged 65 years and over . The village had a high percentage of residents over 65 , compared with the national average of 16 @.@ 4 % . The ethnicity of the village was predominately white , with over 95 % of its residents being born in the United Kingdom and other Western European countries . About 61 % of residents claimed to be Christian , with less than 1 % claiming to be Buddhist , Jewish , Hindu or an alternative religion , while 7 @.@ 4 % did not state their religion , and 28 @.@ 6 % claimed no religious affiliation . 
 = = Economy = = 
 At the 2011 UK census , the economic activity of residents in the village aged 16 – 74 was 31 @.@ 7 % in full @-@ time employment , 14 @.@ 4 % in part @-@ time employment , 10 @.@ 1 % self @-@ employed , 5 @.@ 7 % unemployed , 3 @.@ 0 % students with jobs , 4 @.@ 3 % students without jobs , 18 @.@ 2 % retired , 4 @.@ 9 % looking after home or family , 5 @.@ 5 % permanently sick or disabled and 2 @.@ 1 % economically inactive for other reasons . The percentage of retired people was significantly higher than the national figure of 13 @.@ 7 % . 20 @.@ 6 % of the village 's residents aged 16 – 74 had Level 4 qualification or higher , compared to 27 @.@ 3 % nationwide . According to Office for National Statistics estimates , during the period of April 2001 to March 2002 the average gross weekly income of households in the Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea electoral wards was £ 460 ( £ 23 @,@ 986 per year ) . 
 The industry of employment of residents in 2011 was 16 @.@ 1 % retail , 17 @.@ 2 % health and social work , 5 @.@ 8 % manufacturing , 12 @.@ 3 % education , 1 @.@ 3 % real estate , 9 @.@ 6 % construction , 4 @.@ 9 % transport and storage , 2 @.@ 2 % communications , 6 @.@ 7 % public administration , 4 @.@ 3 % hotels and restaurants , 3 @.@ 1 % finance , 0 @.@ 8 % agriculture , 1 @.@ 1 % energy and water supply , and 5 @.@ 2 % other community , social or personal services . Compared to national figures , the village had a relatively high number of workers in the construction and health / social care industries and a relatively low number in manufacturing . Many residents commute to work outside the town ; at the 2001 census , the town had 3 @,@ 370 employed residents , but only 1 @,@ 711 jobs . 
 As a seaside resort , the village has an economy based around tourism , with several hotels , caravan parks and leisure attractions . The village shopping centre attracts walk @-@ in trade from tourists . One of the largest retailers is the Co @-@ Op ( formerly Somerfield ) supermarket . The elderly population of the village has generated health and social care jobs at local care homes and at the Birchington Medical Centre . At the 2001 census , 1 @.@ 4 % of the village 's population resided in a medical or care establishment , compared to the national average of only 0 @.@ 8 % . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Minnis Bay is a popular family beach with attractions such as sailing , windsurfing , cafes , beach huts , public houses , restaurants , a paddling pool and coastal walking / cycling routes . The beach has gained a European Blue Flag Award for its cleanliness and safety . The village has three other smaller beaches , which are surrounded by chalk cliffs and cliff stacks . Wildlife that can be observed in the Thames Estuary includes seals , velvet swimming crabs and the migrant turnstone . 
 Paintings by local artists are displayed at the David Burley Gallery in Birchington Library . Community activities take place at the Birchington Village Centre , including adult education classes , drama productions by the Birchington Guild of Players and concerts by the Birchington Silver Band . In 1989 , Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea was twinned with the town of La Chapelle d <unk> , near Lille in northern France ; Birchington Twinning Association arranges events between the two communities , such as school trips , concerts and war remembrance services . Since 1932 , Birchington has held a street carnival each summer . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Several teams compete in local leagues : the Birchington United Services Club runs a football team in the Thanet Sunday Football League Premier Division and a netball team in the Thanet and District Netball League , while Birchington Chess Club competes in the Thanet League . Westgate and Birchington Golf Club has an 18 @-@ hole 4 @,@ 889 @-@ yard ( 4 @,@ 471 m ) course on the cliff tops between Westgate and Birchington . Birchington Bridge Club meets twice a week at the Our Lady and St Benedict 's Church Hall . A football pitch is provided at the council owned Birchington Recreation Ground . 
 As a seaside resort , the village has several clubs for watersports . Minnis Bay Sailing Club , founded in 1950 , is a dinghy and catamaran club where members can sail for fun , but competitions are also held most weekends . Speed boats , jet skis and water skis can be hired for use near the beach at Beresford Gap by members of Beresford <unk> and Water Ski Club , which was established in 2004 to help alleviate anti @-@ social behaviour in the area . Anglers are catered for by Birchington Sea Angling Society . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 There are two local weekly newspapers providing news on the Thanet district area . Isle Of Thanet KM Extra is a free newspaper , while Isle of Thanet Gazette is paid @-@ for . Isle Of Thanet KM Extra is owned by the KM Group , Isle of Thanet Gazette is owned by Trinity Mirror . There are two local <unk> produced for the people of Birchington : The Birchington Roundabout , which began publishing in April 2003 , and The Birchington Forum . KMFM Thanet is a radio station on frequency <unk> , owned by the KM Group . Community radio station Academy FM ( Thanet ) launched in 2010 on <unk> 
 = = Quex House and Park = = 
 To the south of the village is Quex House , a 200 ‑ year ‑ old manor house situated in 250 acres ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) of parkland and gardens . Several rooms , decorated with oriental and English period furniture , are open to visitors , and guided tours are provided . The Powell @-@ Cotton Museum houses three galleries of stuffed animal displays , depicting more than 500 African and Asian animals against their natural habitats . Further galleries display a vast collection of African artefacts , European firearms , European and Asian cutting weapons , European and Chinese porcelain , and important archaeological finds from Thanet and East Kent . The total amount of artefacts have not been counted , though the ethnography items alone total approximately 18 @,@ 000 . 
 Percy Powell @-@ Cotton was born in 1866 , and was a Major in the Northumberland Fusiliers . His expeditions were conducted for scientific research , and would sometimes take 18 months . In 1896 , Major Powell @-@ Cotton founded the Powell @-@ Cotton Museum at Quex Park to display his collection of mammals and artefacts acquired on his expeditions to Africa and Asia . The animals were mounted by the noted taxidermist Rowland Ward . 
 During World War I , Quex House became an Auxiliary Military Hospital run by the Birchington Voluntary Aid Detachment . In 1923 , the Memorial Ground was donated to the village by Mr H. A. <unk> for sport and recreational use . Mr <unk> owned the village 's now defunct <unk> House School and purchased land from the Quex House estate for the school . He gave the southern part of the land to the people of Birchington and dedicated it in memory of his three sons who had been killed in World War I. The land is now owned by Thanet District Council . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Since 1983 , the Member of Parliament for North Thanet , covering northern Thanet and Herne Bay , has been the Conservative Roger Gale . At the 2015 general election , in North Thanet the Conservatives won a majority of 10 @,@ 948 and 49 @.@ 0 % of the vote . The UK Independence Party won 25 @.@ 7 % of the vote , Labour 17 @.@ 9 % , the Green Party 3 @.@ 7 % , the Liberal Democrats 3 @.@ 5 % and the Party for a United Thanet 0 @.@ 3 % . 
 Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea is in the Thanet local government district . The village 's electoral wards of Birchington North and Birchington South have five of the fifty six seats on the Thanet District Council . At the 2007 local elections , all five of those seats were held by the Conservative Party . The village has its own civil parish , the lowest unit of local government . Birchington Parish Council has ten members and deals with issues specifically affecting Birchington . 
 = = Education = = 
 Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea 's secondary school is the secondary modern King Ethelbert School . In 2006 , it had around 750 pupils and was seeking government support to become a specialist visual arts school . In 2005 , 15 percent of its pupils gained at least five GCSEs at grades A * – C including English and maths , ranking it 103rd out of 120 Kent secondary schools . The school failed the 30 % GCSE target . Many secondary students living in Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea commute to schools in nearby towns , especially to the grammar schools in Ramsgate and Broadstairs . The village 's primary school is Birchington Church of England Primary School , which is a state school owned by the Church of England but run by Kent County Council . In 2006 , the school 's Key Stage 2 performances ranked 340th out of 386 Kent state primary schools . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea railway station is on the Chatham Main Line which runs between Ramsgate in East Kent and London Victoria . Other stations on this line include Broadstairs , Margate , Herne Bay , Faversham , Gillingham , Chatham , Rochester and Bromley South . Birchington is around 1 hour and 40 minutes from London by Mainline train . A National Express coach service also runs between London Victoria and Ramsgate via Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea . A selection of early morning and evening trains run on weekdays to London 's Cannon Street station and high speed services to St. Pancras International , primarily for business commuting . 
 There are Stagecoach bus services running to Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea , Margate , Broadstairs , Canterbury and Herne Bay . The A28 road runs between Hastings and Margate via Ashford , Canterbury , Birchington and Westgate @-@ on @-@ Sea . 3 miles ( 5 km ) southwest of Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea , the A28 crosses the A299 road which leads along North Kent towards London , becoming the M2 motorway at Faversham . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Residents of Birchington @-@ on @-@ Sea have included the British screenwriter Tudor Gates , who wrote a number of stories about female vampires for Hammer Studios in the early 1970s . Gates died in the village in January 2007 . In early 1882 , Pre @-@ Raphaelite artist and poet Dante Gabriel Rossetti rented a bungalow in the village , in an attempt to recuperate from ill @-@ health . He died in April the same year and was buried in the churchyard of All Saints , under a tombstone designed by fellow artist , Ford Madox Brown . 
 = Treehouse of Horror VIII = 
 " Treehouse of Horror VIII " is the fourth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 26 , 1997 . In the eighth annual Treehouse of Horror episode , Homer Simpson is the last man left alive when a neutron bomb destroys Springfield until a gang of mutants come after him , Homer buys a transporter that Bart uses to switch bodies with a housefly , and Marge is accused of witchcraft in a Puritan rendition of Springfield in 1649 . It was written by Mike Scully , David X. Cohen and Ned Goldreyer , and was directed by Mark Kirkland . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = The HΩmega Man = = = 
 Mayor Quimby generates controversy after making an offensive joke about France . After refusing to apologize , the French president launches a neutron bomb directly into Springfield . Homer had been inspecting a bomb shelter he was considering buying from Herman 's military surplus store . After the blast , Homer emerges from the shelter and seems to be the only person in town to have survived . Homer is soon confronted by a band of hostile Springfield citizens who have become mutants . Homer flees back home where he finds that his family survived the blast because their house was protected by its layers of lead paint . Marge and the children kill the mutants with shotguns that they were hiding behind their backs and the family head off to steal some Ferraris . 
 = = = Fly vs. Fly = = = 
 Homer buys a matter transporter from Professor Frink . That night , Bart , after experimentations involving the family pets , steps into the teleporter with a fly on his arm , thinking that he will become a mutant superhero . He comes out with his normal head , but with the fly 's body whilst the fly has his body . Bart enlists the help of Lisa . However , she is chased by the fly and cornered in the kitchen . Bart tries to stop the fighting , but is quickly eaten by the fly . Lisa then sees this as an opportunity to undo the process and pushes the fly into the teleporter . Bart comes out the other end , now with his head back on his real body . Homer then pulls out an axe and angrily chases Bart for using the device . 
 = = = Easy @-@ Bake Coven = = = 
 In 1649 , the town is witness to many witch burnings . In the church , the townspeople try to figure out whom to condemn next . People begin accusing others and soon they erupt into chaos , until Marge intervenes . She tries to talk sense into the townspeople , but Moe accuses her of being a witch . Quimby assures her that she is entitled to due process which means she will be thrown off a cliff with a broomstick ; if she is a witch she will be able to fly to safety , in which case the authorities expect her to report back for punishment . If she is not a witch , then she will fall to an honorable Christian death . After being shoved off the cliff , Marge flies up on the broomstick revealing that she really is a witch and vows to conquer the whole entire town . She returns to her sisters Patty and Selma . The sisters watch Ned and Maude Flanders talking about how the witches eat children , which gives them the notion to do just that . They knock on the Flanders ' door and demand their sons , but before they leave , Maude offers the witches gingerbread men instead . The witches like these better than the children so they go to each house , getting goodies in exchange for not eating the children . As they fly off , the Sea Captain says that is how the tradition of Halloween and trick @-@ or @-@ treating started . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The HΩmega Man " was written by Mike Scully , " Fly Vs . Fly " was written by David X. Cohen , and " Easy @-@ Bake Coven " was written by Ned Goldreyer . Large portions of the " Fly vs. Fly " segment were cut , including the original ending where the fly also emerges from the teleporter , but is considerably larger and the Simpson family ride it to the mall . 
 The producers had trouble with the censors over several segments in this episode . The opening segment of the episode , which features a Fox censor being stabbed to death , was pitched by David Mirkin and had a difficult time getting through the real @-@ life censors . They had issues with the size of the knife and the sound effects used . Originally , the TV @-@ rating was supposed to stab the censor with a dagger , but Fox objected because it was too gruesome and was changed to a cutlass . The censors also objected to an unaired scene where Homer does his naked church dance on an altar . The scene was reanimated so that Homer was dancing naked in the front row . 
 This episode was the only Treehouse of Horror episode that was directed by Mark Kirkland . It was also the last episode Brad Bird worked on ; he left the show to direct The Iron Giant . " Easy @-@ Bake Coven " was storyboarded by Kirkland and the backgrounds were designed by Lance Wilder . Although Kang and Kodos make brief appearances in every Treehouse of Horror episode , their brief appearance in this one was nearly cut . David X. Cohen managed to persuade the producers to leave the scene in . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 As with the majority of the Treehouse of Horror episodes , numerous cultural references are made throughout the episode . " The HΩmega Man " is an extended homage to film The Omega Man , which was one of Mike Scully 's favorite movies as a child . In the same segment , Homer runs over Johnny and Edgar Winter while fleeing the mutants pursuing him , mistaking them as mutants as the Winter brothers are both albino . 
 The title " Fly vs. Fly " is a reference to the Mad magazine comic strip " Spy vs. Spy " , while the segment itself is based on the film The Fly . In " Easy @-@ Bake Coven " , the animators referenced the film The Crucible for many of their designs , and Edna Krabappel is wearing a Scarlet A , which is a reference to the novel The Scarlet Letter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Treehouse of Horror VIII " finished 18th in ratings for the week of October 20 – 26 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 9 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating King of the Hill . 
 " Treehouse of Horror VIII " won a Golden Reel Award in 1998 for " Best Sound Editing - Television Animated Specials " for Robert <unk> , Travis Powers , Norm MacLeod and Terry Greene . Alf Clausen received an Emmy Award nomination for " Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) " for this episode , which he ultimately lost . The A.V. Club named Comic Book Guy 's line " Oh , I 've wasted my life " as one of the quotes from The Simpsons that can be used in everyday situations . 
 = Just Dance ( video game ) = 
 Just Dance is a dance video game developed by Ubisoft Milan and Ubisoft Paris and published by Ubisoft . The game was released exclusively for Wii on 17 November 2009 in North America , 26 November 2009 in Australia , and 27 November 2009 in Europe . Expanding upon a concept introduced in a minigame for Rayman Raving Rabbids : TV Party , players mimic the motions of an on @-@ screen dancer 's choreography for a selected song , using the Wii Remote to judge the player 's motions and accuracy . 
 Just Dance was released to mixed reviews , with criticism directed towards its simplistic gameplay , poor motion detection , and a lack of progression or additional content beyond what was included on @-@ disc . At the same time , the simplistic gameplay of Just Dance was praised for making the game more accessible to a casual audience , and was also praised for featuring a " fun " soundtrack and dance routines , and for becoming more enjoyable when played as a multiplayer party game rather than alone . Just Dance was a major commercial success , selling over 4 @.@ 3 million copies <unk> and establishing a franchise that , as of October 2013 , had collectively sold over 40 million units , making it Ubisoft 's second @-@ largest franchise . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 After selecting a song , players are presented with an on @-@ screen dancer , as well as an occasional display of scrolling pictograms representing specific poses . While holding a Wii Remote in their hand , players follow the motions of the on @-@ screen dancer and their choreographed routine . Players are judged on a ranking scale for the accuracy of each of their moves in comparison to that of the on @-@ screen dancer , and receive points . Just Dance can be played by up to four players at once . 
 Along with standard play , three other modes are included ; the " Warm Up " mode serves as a practice mode . In " Strike a Pose " mode , players are instructed at random to freeze ( similarly to Red light green light ) . In " Last One Standing " mode , players are given seven lives ; players lose lives on mistakes , and gain them back after hitting five correct moves in a row . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept of Just Dance originated from a minigame developed for inclusion in the Rayman Raving Rabbids series . Ubisoft France 's managing director Xavier Poix and his team felt the Wii Remote and Nunchuck would work well for music games ; Rayman Raving Rabbids 2 featured a music minigame that IGN compared to Guitar Hero — where players shook the Wii Remote or Nunchuck when prompted to play an instrument . For Rayman Raving Rabbids : TV Party , the concept was iterated into a pose @-@ based dance game . Proving popular in demonstrations , the concept was refined and re @-@ developed into a stand @-@ alone game . 
 Just Dance was developed by a small team of around 20 at Ubisoft Paris , and was only officially pitched six months prior to its eventual release . Poix explained that unlike the Raving Rabbids games , which he described as being a " gamer 's game " , Just Dance was designed to contrast skill @-@ based rhythm games with a concept and control scheme that would be accessible to a mainstream audience , encouraging them to " [ get ] off the couch and [ have ] fun together " . Ubisoft producer Florian Granger noted that Just Dance was designed to help players overcome their inhibitions and anxiety towards dance , helping them build a " vocabulary " of moves they can practice in a " safe context " , and with the game itself being the focal point of attention rather than themselves . He reminisced that " everyone remembers going to a nightclub or school disco where it takes a couple of hours before anyone has the bottle to get up and dance . Most guys do the fix @-@ placed @-@ beer @-@ bottle dance or neck @-@ shake to the beat . " 
 Creative director Gregoire <unk> argued that existing dance games were merely instructing players to press buttons with their feet , rather than actually dance . Acknowledging Dance Dance Revolution players who use its gameplay as a base for their own dance routines , Spiller likened Just Dance to be a reversal of the concept , in which the dance moves themselves were " fit " into the gameplay , and could be applied outside the game as well . The team deliberately focused on building the mechanics of Just Dance solely around the Wii Remote , eschewing dedicated accessories such as dance pads , arm or leg bands , as well as the Nunchuck attachment . <unk> explained that such accessories were " distractions " that restricted the motion of players ; for instance , the team felt that the Nunchuck 's short cord limited how it could be used in routines , and that removing it helped the game focus less on precision and more on letting players feel like they are dancing . The lack of dedicated peripheral also contrasted with other music games that utilized increasingly intricate and expensive controllers . 
 While Poix felt that his team had developed a game that could potentially become successful , his colleagues at Ubisoft Paris doubted Just Dance . Poix explained that " people thought it would never work , because people don 't dance , or that it wasn 't precise enough for people to actually learn to dance . " Granger felt that the development team would be " cynical " of Just Dance due to the oversaturated market of casual games on the Wii , but noted that there was a " sense of excitement " among them , as it would be based upon a proven codebase , and used " respected " games such as Dance Dance Revolution as an example to build upon . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Just Dance features a soundtrack consisting of 32 songs . There is no unlock system , nor any downloadable content . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Just Dance received mixed to negative reviews from critics ; Metacritic lists the game with an aggregate score of 49 out of 100 based on 21 critic reviews , indicating a " generally unfavorable " reception . 
 GameSpot was relatively positive , praising Just Dance for having simplistic gameplay , and remarking that its dance routines were " both fun and at times downright hilarious " . However , GameSpot felt that the game 's motion detection system was " frustrating and unrewarding " , and also panned the game 's graphical quality and lack of career modes or downloadable content . In conclusion , giving the game a 5 @.@ 5 out of 10 , GameSpot felt that Just Dance would appeal best as a multiplayer party game , where players " [ can ] attempt the silly dances , laugh at each other 's mistakes , and sing along to the cheesy pop tunes " , but was " water @-@ thin " as a single @-@ player game . 
 Nintendo World Report noted that the soundtrack of Just Dance consisted primarily of " fun " pop music , but contained a few songs considered " cheesy " . The game 's user interface was described as being " colorful " but minimalistic , while the appearance of the on @-@ screen dancers drew comparisons to iPod commercials . It was also noted that the pictograms additionally used to represent moves sometimes contradicted with the instructions implied to the player via the on @-@ screen dancer , " making it look like timing relies on the pose you make rather than the movements you do " , but that " once you ' get it ' , Just Dance becomes very enjoyable , very enduring , and extremely silly and fun . " In conclusion , it was felt that Just Dance was " very rough but shows promise , especially when played with friends . " 
 IGN felt that Just Dance was " an experience so devoid of depth or even basic game concepts that it would be considered a rip @-@ off even if it was one of those Chinese knock @-@ off systems masquerading as an existing console " , further criticizing the game for its basic gameplay mechanics , " sloppy " motion detection , lack of variation or unlockable content , and ironically excluding the Lady Gaga song the game 's title references . IGN concluded by urging readers not to buy , rent , look at , or think about Just Dance , " lest someone at Ubisoft find out and they prep a Just Dance 2 . Such would be the end of all things , mark my words . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 In contrast to its critical reception , Just Dance was a major commercial success for Ubisoft ; for a period , it was the top @-@ selling video game in the United Kingdom , and in March 2010 , Ubisoft announced that Just Dance had sold 2 million copies worldwide . In October 2010 , the company announced that over 4 @.@ 3 million copies of the game had been sold worldwide . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of Just Dance led to the development of a sequel , Just Dance 2 , which focused on adding new features and refinements to the game — such as improvements to its motion tracking system , new game modes , and support for downloadable content . Sales of Just Dance 2 surpassed that of the original ; with over 5 million copies as of January 2011 , it was the best @-@ selling third @-@ party title for the Wii . Laurent Detoc , CEO of Ubisoft 's North American operations , stated that this achievement " [ solidified ] the Just Dance brand as a pop culture phenomenon . " Poix felt that " there 's a pressure within Ubisoft to keep Just Dance enormous , and we think we can make it enormous . But it wasn 't like that initially , because at the end of the first one , people — even us — had our doubts that it would last . After the first one we thought maybe there would be a second one , and then it would be over . " 
 The release of motion control accessories for the Wii 's competitors in the seventh generation of video game consoles — PlayStation Move for PlayStation 3 , and Kinect for Xbox 360 , spawned competing motion @-@ controlled dance games such as Dance Central , Dance Masters , Dance Paradise , and SingStar Dance . The 2010 Wii release of Dance Dance Revolution also added a mode combining its traditional dance pad gameplay with choreography gestures performed using the Wii Remote and Nunchuck ; in its review , IGN declared that the dance pad had become " antiquated " by motion @-@ controlled dance games . 
 Just Dance 3 would introduce versions of the game for PS3 and Xbox 360 , as well as Wii , and was ultimately the second best @-@ selling video game of 2011 overall , finishing only behind Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 3 . Tony Key , Ubisoft 's senior vice president of sales and marketing , complimented the success of Dance Central for proving the viability of dance games for Kinect , but iterated that as a brand , Just Dance had become " a juggernaut way beyond anything that any dance franchise has ever done . " As of October 2013 , the overall Just Dance franchise had collectively sold over 40 million units , making it Ubisoft 's second @-@ largest franchise behind Assassin 's Creed . 
 = Brereton Jones = 
 Brereton Chandler Jones ( born June 27 , 1939 ) is an American politician and horse breeder from Kentucky . From 1987 to 1991 , he served as the 50th Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky and from 1991 to 1995 , he was the state 's 58th governor . He now chairs the Kentucky Equine Education Project ( KEEP ) , a lobbying organization for the Kentucky horse industry . 
 Born in Ohio and raised in West Virginia , Jones became the youngest @-@ ever member of the West Virginia House of Delegates in 1964 . Two years later , he was chosen as the Republican floor leader in the House . In 1968 , he decided to leave politics and focus on his real estate business . He married Elizabeth " Libby " Lloyd in 1970 and in 1972 , the family moved to historic Airdrie Farm , Libby 's family estate in Woodford County , Kentucky . There , Jones founded Airdrie Stud , now an internationally recognized Thoroughbred farm . Although he remained mostly out of politics , Jones changed his party affiliation to Democratic in 1975 , and was appointed to various boards and commissions by governors John Y. Brown , Jr. and Martha Layne Collins . 
 In 1987 , Jones announced his candidacy for lieutenant governor , admitting that he considered the office a stepping stone to some day becoming governor . He was elected , but experienced a poor relationship with Governor Wallace Wilkinson throughout their four @-@ year terms . Jones was elected governor in 1991 , turning back a challenge from Governor Wilkinson 's wife Martha in the Democratic primary . ( Wilkinson was ineligible to succeed himself in office . ) Although Jones maintained a strained relationship with the Kentucky General Assembly following comments he made in the wake of the federal Operation Boptrot investigation , he was still able to pass much of his agenda , including an amendment that would allow state officials to succeed themselves in office once . ( Jones was able to secure passage of the amendment by exempting the state 's sitting officials , including himself . ) However , he achieved only a partial victory on his top priority – health care reform . While the legislature acceded to many of Jones ' proposals , such as eliminating the practice of denying insurance coverage to those with pre @-@ existing conditions , they did not approve his mandate for universal health care for all Kentuckians . Following his term in office , Jones founded the Kentucky Equine Education Project . He considered running for governor again in 2003 , but never formally became a candidate . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Although his family lived in Point Pleasant , West Virginia , Brereton Jones was born on June 27 , 1939 in <unk> , Ohio , the site of the nearest hospital to the family 's home . One of six children born to E. Bartow Jones II , who served two terms in the West Virginia Senate , and <unk> Wilhelm Jones , he was raised on a dairy farm in Point Pleasant . 
 Jones was a star football player in the public schools of Point Pleasant ( Point Pleasant High School , Class of 1957 ) . After graduating from high school as valedictorian , he attended the University of Virginia on a football scholarship , playing both offensive and defensive end . He earned a bachelor 's degree in commerce in 1961 . For one semester , he studied at the University of Virginia School of Law , but he returned home to West Virginia and established a real estate and construction business . 
 In 1964 , Jones ' political career began with his election as a Republican to the West Virginia House of Delegates . He was the youngest person ever elected to that body . In 1966 , he was chosen as the Republican floor leader in the House . In 1968 , Jones announced that he would not seek re @-@ election to his seat , despite facing no opposition . Among the factors influencing his decision was his perception of corruption in state politics . 
 After his service in the West Virginia House , Jones began to concentrate on his real estate business and established a small horse farm just outside Huntington . His interest in the horse business led him to make several trips to Keeneland race track in central Kentucky ; it was on one of these trips that he met his future wife , Elizabeth " Libby " Lloyd , daughter of Arthur Lloyd , the former Adjutant General of Kentucky . Jones and Lloyd married in 1970 ; they had two children – Lucy and Bret . In 1972 , the Joneses moved to Airdrie Farm , Libby 's childhood home in Woodford County , Kentucky . Jones leased a portion of the farm from his father @-@ in @-@ law and founded Airdrie Stud , a thoroughbred horse farm that has since been internationally recognized for its horses . Airdrie contains the original site of Woodburn Stud , a top thoroughbred farm in the 1800s . The property had not been used for breeding for 70 years prior to Jones ' creation of Airdrie Stud . Jones went on to chair the Kentucky Thoroughbred Commission and serve as treasurer of the Breeders ' Cup . 
 = = Political career in Kentucky = = 
 In 1975 , Jones registered as a Democrat , citing his disenchantment with the Nixon administration and his desire to participate in Kentucky primary elections . At the time , Democrats outnumbered Republicans in Kentucky by a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 margin . Governor John Y. Brown , Jr. named him to the board of directors for the University of Kentucky and the Chandler Medical Center . In the mid @-@ 1980s , Jones created the Kentucky Health Care Access Foundation to provide free health care to individuals who fell below the poverty line but did not qualify for Medicaid . Governor Martha Layne Collins chose Jones to chair her Medicaid Program Review Team and serve on her Council on Education Reform . 
 = = = Lieutenant governor = = = 
 In late 1985 , Jones announced his candidacy for lieutenant governor in the 1987 election , conceding that he sought the office because he would like to serve as governor in the future . He convincingly won in the Democratic primary against Paul E. Patton , who later became governor , and David L. Armstrong , the sitting Attorney General and later Mayor of Louisville . Wallace G. Wilkinson , winner of the Democratic gubernatorial primary , praised Jones and said that , if elected , he would make Jones the head of a blue @-@ ribbon economic development council . Wilkinson and Jones went on to win the general election ; Jones defeated Republican nominee Lawrence R. Webster by a convincing vote of 517 @,@ 811 to 186 @,@ 321 . 
 Soon after the election results were announced , Jones was quoted in a newspaper as saying that he had talked with Wilkinson about opening channels with the media , whom Wilkinson often refused to speak with . Jones also said that he did not agree with all of Wilkinson 's political positions and would not be his " yes man " . These comments angered Wilkinson , who backtracked on his promise to give Jones an active role in the administration . Relations between Jones and Wilkinson further deteriorated as both men tried to recoup the money spent during their campaigns . 
 During the 1988 legislative session , Governor Wilkinson proposed an amendment to the Kentucky Constitution that would allow state officials , including the sitting incumbents , to succeed themselves in office once . As presiding officer in the Senate , Jones insisted that any such measure also include a runoff provision if a candidate did not receive a majority of votes in the party primary . Wilkinson opposed this provision , and the measure died in the state senate . Wilkinson 's proposed education program also failed in the session , and Jones suggested that the governor should build a consensus among legislators before including the program on the agenda of a special legislative session , which Wilkinson had proposed for January 1989 . After the 1988 session , Wilkinson called Jones a <unk> and accused him of sabotaging the succession amendment . The two did not meet for six months following the session . 
 As lieutenant governor , Jones advocated for the preservation of family farms and for school reform . He won praise for his efforts to include a " Made in Kentucky " label on produce grown in the state . Further , he claimed the state could save $ 500 @,@ 000 a year by merging the offices of lieutenant governor , secretary of state , and state treasurer . Jones maintained that the arrangement would give the lieutenant governor something specific to do between legislative sessions and would provide a broader record upon which voters could judge the officeholder should they seek higher office . Jones ' proposal , which would have required a constitutional amendment , was never adopted . Jones also claimed to have saved his office $ 200 @,@ 000 by choosing not to live in the lieutenant governor 's mansion , by reducing the number of Kentucky State Police troopers used for security at the mansion , and by giving up seven cars assigned to the office – two for him and wife Libby , and five used by the state troopers . 
 = = = Governor = = = 
 In 1991 , Jones was the front @-@ runner for the governorship for the entire gubernatorial campaign . The rivalry between Jones and Wilkinson had become so strong that Wilkinson 's wife Martha was among Jones ' challengers in the Democratic primary ; she ended her candidacy 18 days before the primary . Advocating campaign finance reform , Jones garnered 184 @,@ 703 votes in the primary , enough to best a field including Scotty Baesler ( 149 @,@ 352 votes ) , Dr. Floyd Poore ( 132 @,@ 060 votes ) , and Gatewood Galbraith ( 25 @,@ 834 ) . 
 In the general election , Jones faced Republican Larry Hopkins , a seven @-@ term congressman representing Kentucky 's 6th congressional district . Hopkins was considered the Republicans ' best hope of capturing the governorship since Louie B. Nunn in 1967 . Instead , Hopkins ' negative campaign ads , mistakes about his record , and involvement in a House scandal involving bounced checks all hurt his chances . Jones won the election by a vote of 540 @,@ 468 to 294 @,@ 542 , the largest margin of victory in a Kentucky gubernatorial race . 
 A supporter of " good government " , Jones ' first policy action as governor was to issue an executive order restricting the post @-@ government employment of his appointees . He also secured passage of one of the nation 's toughest ethics laws , limiting the activities of lobbyists and instituting campaign finance reform to diminish the advantage of wealthy candidates for office . The so @-@ called " trustees bill " , passed in 1992 , provided for an independent review of all appointees to university boards of trustees . Jones later removed former governor Wilkinson from the board of the University of Kentucky using the bill 's provisions . Despite these reforms , Jones drew criticism from ethics watchdogs because no law required him to disclose the identities of his business partners and associates with Airdrie Stud and because the farm benefited from a 1992 law that set up off @-@ track betting parlors and allowed some of their proceeds to go to successful breeders . 
 The state faced a $ 400 million revenue shortfall when Jones took office . Shortly after his election , Jones created the Quality and Efficiency Commission to study ways to streamline state government . Among the enacted recommendations were refinancing state bonds at lower interest rates , cutting the state workforce by 2 @,@ 000 employees ( mostly through attrition ) , and spurring local economic growth through tax incentives . By the end of Jones ' term , the state enjoyed a $ 300 million budget surplus . 
 During the first year of his administration , Jones and five others were traveling in a state helicopter from Frankfort to Fort Knox when a tail rotor blade snapped , causing the helicopter to crash in Shelby County . The pilot was able to guide the helicopter into a treetop to soften the impact . No one was killed , but Jones suffered a severe back strain and a bruised kidney . The National Transportation Safety Board later determined that the pilot and co @-@ pilot had not properly attached an engine cowling that knocked off the tail rotor blade . Both pilots maintained that they did nothing wrong , and Jones credited them for the survival of the passengers aboard the helicopter . 
 Although fellow Democrats controlled two @-@ thirds of the Kentucky General Assembly , Jones never developed a good working relationship with the legislature . This was due in part to remarks Jones made in the wake of the Operation Boptrot investigation that led to the conviction of 15 sitting or former state legislators . Jones called the investigation " a cleansing process " ; legislators reacted negatively , claiming Jones was trying to take " the high ground " above them . Following Jones ' remarks , state senate president John " Eck " Rose became Jones ' bitter political foe . Nevertheless , Jones was able to enact many of his legislative priorities during his term . 
 Jones ' top priority as governor was the passage of health care reform . He appointed two health care reform study commissions , and in May 1993 , he called the legislature into a special session to consider a universal health care bill . The only measure to come out of this session was a temporary tax on health care providers . Legislators also agreed to work toward a bill that could be passed in the next regular legislative session . On March 2 , 1994 , the Kentucky House of Representatives passed a health care reform bill that did not include universal coverage . Angered , Jones began campaigning against the bill , but the Kentucky Senate passed its version on March 22 . 
 Both chambers worked to reconcile differences between their respective versions of the bill , and on April 1 , 1994 , the last regular day of the legislative session , the Senate passed a compromise bill , but the House killed it on a procedural motion . On April 15 , the last day of the session , which legislators had set aside to override any gubernatorial vetos , the health care bill was reintroduced and passed both houses of the General Assembly . Jones then reversed course and signed it . Among the reforms included in the bill were a mechanism making the policies of all companies uniform and the creation of a Health Policy Board to regulate rate increases . It ensured that insurance companies could not deny coverage because of a pre @-@ existing condition and allowed workers to retain their insurance after changing jobs . 
 Jones also advocated for an amendment to the state constitution that had major implications for the governor 's office . Under the terms of the amendment , the lieutenant governor no longer became acting governor when the sitting governor left the state . It also allowed candidates for governor and lieutenant governor to run as a ticket instead of being elected on separate ballots . The centerpiece of the amendment , however , was the removal of the restriction on governors from succeeding themselves in office . The state constitution had previously barred the incumbent from seeking a second consecutive term ; under the new amendment , the sitting governor would be allowed to succeed himself once . Succession amendments had been proposed and defeated during the administrations of John Y. Brown , Jr. and Wallace Wilkinson , but Jones was able to see it passed because , unlike Brown and Wilkinson , he was willing to exempt the present incumbents , including himself , from the succession provision . Separate legislation passed during Jones ' term required a runoff election if no gubernatorial candidate won a majority in his or her party primary . ( Each of Jones ' three immediate predecessors would have faced a runoff had this law been in effect during their primaries . ) 
 Among Jones ' other accomplishments were the passage of a mandatory seat belt law , an increase in funding for the state park system , and the phasing out of the state inheritance tax . He also established the state 's largest @-@ ever reserve trust fund using income from the state 's sales , income , corporate , coal , severance , and property taxes . He exceeded his goal of having a 7 @.@ 4 percent minority representation in the state workforce , and appointed three times more African @-@ Americans than the previous administration had recruited . He also appointed more women to government positions than his predecessor , including Sara Combs , the first woman to serve on the Kentucky Supreme Court . 
 = = Later life = = 
 At the end of his term as governor , Jones retired to Airdrie Stud . He started Commonwealth Broadcasting and joined with partners to purchase several radio and television stations in Kentucky and Tennessee . He remained a public advocate of campaign finance reform and health care reform and was a supporter of posting the Ten Commandments in public schools . 
 Jones talked openly of running for governor in 2003 but did not enter the race . In 2004 , he founded the Kentucky Equine Education Project ( KEEP ) , an organization dedicated to educating the public about Kentucky 's horse industry and lobbying the General Assembly for more horse @-@ friendly legislation . He presently serves as chair of KEEP . 
 = Infrastructure of the Brill Tramway = 
 The Brill Tramway , also known as the Quainton Tramway , Wotton Tramway , Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad and Metropolitan Railway Brill Branch , was a six @-@ mile ( 10 km ) rail line in the Aylesbury Vale , Buckinghamshire , England . It was privately built in 1871 by the 3rd Duke of Buckingham as a horse tram line to transport goods between his lands around Wotton House and the national railway network . Lobbying from residents of the nearby town of Brill led to the line 's extension to Brill and conversion to passenger use in early 1872 . Two locomotives were bought for the line , but as it had been designed and built with horses in mind , services were very slow ; trains travelled at an average speed of only 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . 
 In 1883 , the Duke of Buckingham announced plans to upgrade the route to main line railway standards and extend the line to Oxford , creating a through route from Aylesbury to Oxford . If built , the line would have been the shortest route between Aylesbury and Oxford at the time . Despite the backing of the wealthy Ferdinand de Rothschild , investors were deterred by the costly tunnelling proposed , and the Duke was unable to raise sufficient funds . In 1888 a cheaper scheme was proposed , in which the line would be built to a lower standard and wind around hills to avoid tunnelling . In anticipation of this , the line was named the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad . Although the existing line was upgraded in 1894 , the extension to Oxford was never built . Instead , the operation of the Brill Tramway was taken over by London 's Metropolitan Railway , and Brill became one of their two north @-@ western termini . The line was rebuilt a second time in 1910 , and more advanced locomotives were introduced , allowing trains to run faster . 
 In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway was taken into public ownership and became the Metropolitan line of London Transport . As a result , the Brill Tramway became a part of the London Underground . The management of London Transport aimed to concentrate on electrification and the improvement of passenger services in London , and saw little possibility that the former Metropolitan Railway routes in Buckinghamshire could ever become viable passenger routes . In 1935 all services on the Brill Tramway were withdrawn , and the line was closed . The infrastructure of the route was dismantled and sold shortly afterwards . Very little trace of the Brill Tramway remains , other than the former junction station at Quainton Road , now the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . 
 = = Stations = = 
 When the line was opened in 1871 – 72 the stations were crude earth banks 6 inches ( 150 mm ) high , held in place by wooden planks . In 1894 , in preparation for the Oxford extension , Waddesdon , Westcott , Wotton and Brill stations were provided with buildings containing a booking office , waiting rooms and toilets , while Wood Siding station was equipped with a small waiting room " with shelf and drawer " . Church Siding station was not included in the rebuilding , and ceased to be listed in the timetable at this time . 
 = = = Quainton Road = = = 
 Quainton Road originally consisted of two separate stations , one on the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and one on the Wotton Tramway . The only physical link between the two lines was a turntable . Before 1895 , the station was referred to as both " Quainton Road " and " Quainton " indiscriminately . Between 1895 – 97 the Metropolitan Railway repositioned the station building from the west to the east side of the former A & BR line , freeing space for a junction between the two lines to be built . The section of the station serving the Aylesbury line remained open to passengers until 4 March 1963 , and to goods traffic until 4 July 1966 . In 1969 the Quainton Road Society was formed to preserve the station . The station , along with former wartime emergency food depots and sections of siding preserved as a demonstration line , is now the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . Between 1999 and 2000 , the original Buckinghamshire Railway 's Oxford terminus of Oxford Rewley Road railway station was dismantled and reassembled alongside the existing station buildings at Quainton Road . 
 Quainton Road is still connected to the railway network and used by occasional special passenger services , and freight trains continue to pass through , but the station no longer has a scheduled passenger service . 
 = = = Waddesdon = = = 
 Waddesdon was known as " Waddesdon Road Siding " at the time of the line 's opening , but was renamed " Waddesdon " when the line was converted for passenger use . It was heavily used during the construction of Baron Ferdinand de Rothschild 's estate at Waddesdon Manor in the 1870s and 1880s . Other than that , the station was little used other than for shipping milk from nearby farms to Aylesbury and London . <unk> sited away from any nearby towns and villages , and with the far more frequently served Quainton Road and Waddesdon Manor stations within easy walking distance , the station saw very little passenger use . In 1932 , the last year of private operation , Waddesdon Road station saw only 281 passengers and made only £ 4 ( about £ 300 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts over the entire year . It was renamed " Waddesdon Road " in 1922 , when Waddesdon Manor station on the former Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway between Aylesbury and Quainton Road was renamed " Waddesdon " . 
 = = = Westcott = = = 
 Westcott was sometimes known in early years as " <unk> " . Two cottages for tramway staff were built next to the station in 1871 . It was removed from the timetable by 1931 , although trains continued to stop on request . Westcott was a small village with a population of about 150 , and passenger usage was low ; in 1932 Westcott station saw only 1 @,@ 560 passengers and made only £ 27 ( about £ 1 @,@ 700 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts . The station building remains in place in the back garden of the former station house , now a private residence , and carries an exact replica of its original " Westcott " station sign . Aside from Quainton Road station , the two buildings at Westcott are the only significant structures associated with the Tramway to have survived . 
 = = = Wotton = = = 
 Wotton was a focal point of the line , and the site of the Tramway 's forge and the stables for its horses . With a population at the time of the line 's opening of 220 , Wotton served a smaller populated area than Brill , but as the loading place for goods from Church Siding and the Kingswood branch it handled the majority of goods traffic . As much as 90 per cent of milk traffic carried by the Tramway was loaded at Wotton . The station was situated on a sharp curve and , had the extension to Oxford been built , it would have needed <unk> to accommodate longer and faster trains . Wotton had the highest passenger numbers on the line other than Brill itself and the junction station at Quainton Road ; in 1932 the station saw 2 @,@ 648 passenger journeys earning a total of £ 144 ( about £ 9 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts . Wotton station on the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway , which in 1923 had been taken over by the London and North Eastern Railway , remained open ( albeit little used and served by only two trains per day in each direction ) until 7 December 1953 , when the line was abandoned . All buildings of the Tramway station at Wotton were subsequently demolished , other than a small building which had once housed the Tramway 's forge , which was left derelict . 
 = = = Church Siding = = = 
 Church Siding was immediately west of Wotton . It was treated as a station during the Tramway 's early years and listed as such in timetables , but was never redeveloped following the conversion to locomotive haulage and its " platform " remained an earth bank with no buildings . Trains heading down the Quainton Road – Brill line would pause at the entrance to the siding , and any wagons intended for the siding would be detached and hauled down the siding by rope . It ceased to be listed in timetables in September 1894 , although there is some evidence that passenger trains ceased to make scheduled stops at Church Siding before this date . Freight trains are recorded as stopping at Church Siding to load goods as late as 1899 . Church Siding was the scene of the Tramway 's only fatal accident , on 8 March 1883 . 
 = = = Wood Siding = = = 
 Wood Siding initially had no facilities for passengers , not even a platform . In 1894 a low platform and small corrugated iron waiting room were built for passengers . As well as the passenger platform , a short siding led to a raised wooden platform , alongside the through line to Brill , which served both as a buffer stop for the siding , and as a loading platform for milk . The station was staffed by a single porter , responsible for opening the gates of a nearby level crossing and for loading and unloading freight ( mainly milk ) ; a small , unheated hut was provided for his use . While the original Aveling & Porter locomotive was slow and noisy and could be heard by the porter long before its arrival , later locomotives were quieter and quicker ; a ladder was installed against a large oak for the porter to watch for oncoming trains . Wood Siding station and its siding were rebuilt at the GWR 's expense between 1908 – 1910 to stand on a wide bridge above the new Chiltern Main Line . Wood Siding was removed from the timetable by 1931 , although trains continued to stop on request . While Wood Siding station was demolished shortly after closure , the abutments of the bridge which carried the station and sidings remain intact . The porter 's hut survives as a nearby garden shed . 
 = = = Brill = = = 
 Brill was valuable as a shipment point between the dairy farms of Buckinghamshire and the markets of Aylesbury and London . Around 30 carts per day would deliver milk to Brill station for the first train each morning . There was also a small amount of coal traffic to the station ; Brill coal dealer George Green received three coal wagons per month . In addition , a storehouse at the station held beer supplied by the breweries of Brackley and Aylesbury . Two cottages for station staff were built near the station in 1871 . A third cottage was built in 1885 , possibly to serve as an office . Brill station was relatively little used by passengers ; in 1932 Brill and Wood Siding saw only 3 @,@ 272 passenger journeys and raised only £ 191 ( about £ 12 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in passenger receipts . Since the closure , all buildings in Brill associated with the railway station have been demolished , with the exception of the station cottages , and the station site is now mostly open fields . 
 = = Locomotives = = 
 The first two locomotives operated on the line were 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 single @-@ cylinder geared steam locomotives of the traction engine type built by Aveling and Porter , works numbers 807 and 846 . A crankshaft drove a 3 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 07 m ) flywheel which in turn drove chains attached to the wheels . They were delivered in 1872 , and numbered 1 & 2 . Following the 1894 authorisation of the rebuilt line to operate as a railway , both locomotives failed to meet minimum speed requirements for railway operations . Both were sold on 23 September 1895 to the Heyford Iron Company in Northamptonshire . No. 2 was found to have a faulty boiler , and was used as a source of spares for No. 1 . By 1922 the Heyford Iron Company had developed a brickworks , and No 1 was used for haulage there until the closure of the brickworks in 1940 . In the 1950s No. 1 was restored by London Transport at Neasden Depot , and was transferred to the Clapham Museum of British Transport on 19 January 1957 . It was displayed there until March 1973 , when it was transferred to the London Transport Museum . Since then it has been displayed at the London Transport Museum and at the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre at Quainton Road . 
 The next two locomotives were manufactured by W. G. Bagnall : Buckingham , 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0ST , works number 16 , built 1876 , and Wotton , 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 0T , works number 120 , built 1877 . They were unusual in having " reversed " inside cylinders , which drove the front axle . Bagnall used a single numbering scheme for all their products ; although the locomotives had the works numbers 16 and 120 , they were in fact the first and third locomotives made by the company . Buckingham was hired , not owned ; it was returned to Bagnall 's in February 1878 . Wotton was sold in around 1894 . 
 By 1894 two Manning Wardle locomotives were in use : Huddersfield , works number 616 , built 1876 , and Earl Temple , works number 1249 , built 1894 . Huddersfield was bought second @-@ hand and had originally been named Prestwich . Earl Temple , later renamed Brill No.1 , was identical to Huddersfield other than having a covered cab , and was bought new . The Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad could not afford the price , and thus Earl Temple was owned directly by the Earl and rented to the O & AT . Wotton No. 2 , works number 1415 , built 1899 , was bought on 7 February 1899 to replace Huddersfield . All three were 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0ST with inside cylinders . The decrepit Huddersfield was sold in 1901 , and the other two Manning Wardle locomotives were sold in 1909 . 
 From 1903 the Manning Wardle locomotives were replaced by Metropolitan Railway D Class 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank engines , numbered 71 and 72 . The D Class locomotives were unsatisfactory to the MR , and between 1916 and 1922 the MR sold their entire stock of D Class engines . Their place on the O & AT was taken by two Metropolitan Railway A Class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0T locomotives numbered 23 and 41 , built by Beyer , Peacock and Company in 1866 and 1869 respectively . The A Class locomotives would alternate in service , each operating the route for a week . No. 41 was scrapped in 1936 , but No. 23 continued to be used by London Transport until 1948 , and is now preserved in the London Transport Museum . 
 = = Carriages and wagons = = 
 Details of the carriages and wagons used in the very early years of the Tramway are uncertain . By 1879 the company operated a fleet of nine four @-@ wheeled goods wagons , some with 9 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) and some with 11 @-@ inch ( 280 mm ) high sides . All nine wagons were fitted with dumb buffers , and as a consequence did not comply with Railway Clearing House standards and could not be used on other lines . When it was necessary to run through traffic from the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway onto the Tramway via the Quainton Road turntable , appropriate wagons and trucks were hired from the GWR or London and North Western Railway . It is also known that a passenger tram carriage was owned by the Tramway by March 1873 . This passenger carriage seated 16 – 20 passengers and although it had been designed as a horse tram , was fitted with buffers allowing it to be used in trains . By 1878 ( when it is recorded as being repaired ) the company also owned a passenger carriage divided into a third @-@ class compartment , a second @-@ class compartment and a luggage compartment . 
 In 1895 two new passenger carriages , each accommodating 40 passengers , were bought by the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company from the Bristol Wagon & Carriage Works as part of the programme of improvements in anticipation of the extension to Oxford . On 4 October 1899 the MR loaned the O & AT an eight @-@ wheeled 70 seat passenger carriage . Following the takeover of the O & AT by the MR , goods services were operated by a fleet of five eight @-@ wheeled carriages built in 1865 – 66 . Two cattle wagons were added to the line 's stock in the 1920s . 
 = American Life ( song ) = 
 " American Life " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It is the title track from her ninth studio album American Life ( 2003 ) , and was released digitally as the lead single from the album on April 8 , 2003 by Maverick Records . It was written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï ; the lyrics to " American Life " feature violent transitions and a political and religious view from Madonna . She questions the shallowness of modern life and the American dream under President George W. Bush 's conservative watch . Towards the end of the song , Madonna raps naming the people who were working for her . 
 " American Life " was panned by music critics , with Billboard criticizing Madonna 's rapping , and Blender naming it as the ninth worst song of all time . Despite receiving mostly negative reviews from music commentators , " American Life " reached number one in Canada , Denmark , Italy , Japan and Switzerland , and the top ten in Australia , where the song was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . However , the song peaked at number 37 in the US Billboard Hot 100 , staying in the chart for eight weeks , while it debuted and peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart . 
 Two music videos were shot for the song , both directed by Swedish director Jonas Åkerlund . The first one featured Madonna at a military @-@ themed fashion show , cavorting with a brigade of female soldiers and in the end , she throws a hand grenade at George W. Bush . Prior its release , it caused controversy regarding its political , racial , violence and religious views , leading Madonna to release a statement explaining its concept . After the invasion of Iraq started , Madonna cancelled the release of the original music video , because of the political climate of the country at the time , and released an alternative version , featuring her in front of a backdrop of flags from around the world . The song was performed during promotion for American Life in 2003 and on the Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " American Life " was written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï . " I could be having a guitar lesson and something will just come to me , " the former observed . " Or Mirwais will send me over music – rough stuff that doesn 't have an arrangement : basic chord progressions . ' American Life ' itself came about like that . " In April 2003 , Madonna discussed her motivations behind " American Life " with VH1 while talking about her experience in the music industry . She stated " I look back at the 20 years behind me and I realized that a lot of things that I 'd valued weren 't important " , in response to the non @-@ materialistic themes of the record . Discussing the album , Madonna said about " American Life " : 
 " [ The song ] was like a trip down memory lane , looking back at everything I 've accomplished and all the things I once valued and all the things that were important to me . What is my perspective now ? I 've fought for so many things , I 've tried so hard to be number one and to stay on top , to look good , to be the best . And I realized that a lot of things that last and the things that matter are none of those things . " 
 To counter illegal Internet downloads of the song both before and after the single 's release , Madonna 's associates created a number of false song files of similar length and size . Some of these files delivered a brief message from Madonna saying " What the fuck do you think you 're doing ? " followed by minutes of silence . However , the song leaked online one day before its official premiere . " American Life " premiered on March 25 , 2003 , through AOL . The song was released in the United States on April 8 , 2003 . " American Life " went on sale two days later , through digital services Liquid Audio , <unk> , and also through Madonna 's website in MP3 format . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 Starting with Madonna 's voice multi @-@ tracked questioning – " Am I gonna be a star ? " , " Should I change my name ? " – the lyrics develop into what Rikky Rooksby of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna states is a complaint about modern @-@ day life . She also questions the shallowness of modern life and the " American dream . " " I know it sounds clichéd , " she admitted . " But I 've had 20 years of fame and fortune , and I feel that I have the right to an opinion on what it is and isn 't . All everyone is obsessed about now is being a celebrity . I 'm saying that 's bullshit , and who knows better than me ? Before it happens , you have all kinds of notions about how wonderful celebrity is and how much joy it 's going to bring you . Then you arrive ... In America , more than any other place in the world , you have the freedom to be anything you want to be . Which is all well and good , but it only works if you have a value system – and we seem not to have one anymore . It 's , ' Whatever it takes to get to the top , that 's what you gotta do . ' It 's the allure of the beautiful life : ' Look like this , you 're gonna be happy . Drive this car , you 're gonna be popular . Wear these clothes and people are gonna want to fuck you . ' It 's a very powerful illusion and people are caught up in it , including myself . Or I was . " 
 After three minutes , Madonna performs a rap naming the people who are working for her . Basically , we [ she and Ahmadzaï ] had recorded the whole song and we had this instrumental thing at the end , " said Madonna , " and Mirwais was like , ' You know what , you have to go and do a rap . ' And I was like , ' Get out of here , I don 't rap . ' And he was like , ' Yeah you do . Just go in there , just do it . ' He totally encouraged me . I had nothing planned , nothing written , and he just told me to do stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness , whatever I was thinking . Because I was always drinking soy lattes in the studio , and I drive my Mini Cooper to the studio , I was just like , ' OK , let me just talk about the things that I like . ' So I went and it was just total improv and obviously it was sloppy at first , but I got out all my thoughts and then I wrote everything down that I said and then I perfected the timing of it . So it was totally spontaneous . " 
 The repeated acoustic guitar riff " adds a touch of pathos " to the song , according to biographer Carol <unk> . The lyrics accompany a " punchy octave synth figure " synchronized with a drum and bass beat . " American Life " is written in the time signature of common time with a moderate tempo of 102 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of F @-@ sharp minor with Madonna 's voice spanning from C3 to B4 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " American Life " was met with generally negative reception from music critics . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine labeled it a " trite , self @-@ aggrandizing and often awkward song about privilege " and a " dour and robotic " track . Stylus Magazine gave a negative review and said that when one of the world 's richest women complains about commercialism and the emptiness of entertainment culture , it seems hypocritical rather than insightful . He also noted that in the song , she 's raging against the life she herself is leading . 
 Chuck Taylor of Billboard gave a negative review for the song , criticizing Madonna 's rapping and calling the song " a blurry snarl of style and composition that 's sounds more like a disjointed medley than a song . " Alexis Petridis from The Guardian was disappointed by the lyrics saying that " what on earth might her extreme point of view involve ? That the world is ruled by a shadowy cabal of super @-@ intelligent lizards ? ... Sadly not . Her extreme point of view turns out to be that money can 't buy you happiness and that fame isn 't all it 's cracked up to be . " He also panned the lyric " I like to express my extreme point of view " , saying that it 's difficult to hear that line without feeling a prickle of excitement . 
 Entertainment Weekly called the song a list of celeb perks : trainer , butler , assistant , three nannies , a bodyguard or five . It seems , at first , not like the clever self @-@ <unk> she clearly intended , but rather a facile confirmation of her haters ' conviction : that the middle @-@ aged Madonna does not have a worldview beyond her next Pilates appointment . In 2004 , Blender magazine listed the song at number nine on the list of the 50 Worst Songs Ever , stating that Madonna " updates the ' Material Girl ' -era satire of commercialism and spiritual emptiness ... with what is hands @-@ down the most embarrassing rap ever recorded . Nervous and choppy , she makes Debbie Harry sound as smooth as Jay @-@ Z. " The magazine also said that the worst moment of the song is when after rapping , Madonna sings ' Nothing is what it seems ' with no profundity . Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club considered the song to be " jittery , tuneless , and shallow to the point of self @-@ parody " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " American Life " debuted at number 90 on the US Billboard Hot 100 on the week of April 5 , 2003 . A few weeks later on April 26 , 2003 , the song peaked at number 37 , being the greatest gainer song of that week . In Canada , the song peaked at number one on the singles chart . In Australia , " American Life " debuted at its peak of number seven , during the week of April 24 , 2003 . In the following week , the song began its decline , and experienced a total chart trajectory of eight weeks . The song was certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . In the New Zealand , the song peaked at number 33 , and remained on the chart for one week . On the UK Singles Chart , " American Life " debuted at its peak of number two on the week of April 26 , 2003 . 
 On April 27 , 2003 , " American Life " debuted at number seven on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 chart , spending a total of 11 weeks in the chart . The song achieved moderate chart positions in both the Flemish and Wallonian territories in Belgium , peaking at numbers 12 and 10 , respectively . Making its debut at number 61 , " American Life " charted for a total of 11 weeks in France and peaked at number 10 , before falling out on July 6 , 2003 . The song was certified Silver by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) . On the Dutch Top 40 chart , the song made its debut at number 34 . The following week it rose to number 21 and peaked at number 4 , before the ending of its eleven @-@ week run . On April 24 , 2003 , " American Life " debuted at number three on the Swedish Singles Chart . Similarly in Switzerland , the song debuted at number one on the Swiss Singles Chart , spending 13 weeks on the chart . In Germany , the song peaked at number 10 . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 There are two different music videos for " American Life " , the first of which was not released by Madonna . It was shot in the first week of February 2003 at Los Angeles Center Studios in Los Angeles , California by Swedish director Jonas Åkerlund , who worked with Madonna in the videos for " Ray of Light " ( 1998 ) and " Music " ( 2000 ) . Madonna had the idea for the music video in November 2002 , then she and Åkerlund developed the idea to make an anti @-@ war and anti @-@ fashion mini @-@ movie . With " American Life " , she took her music videos to a different level by focusing on war , politics and , according to media interpretation , the then @-@ upcoming invasion of Iraq . " It is an antiwar statement ... " she subsequently clarified , " but it 's not necessarily against this war . At any given moment there 's at least 30 wars going on in this world and I 'm against all of them . " Shortly after it was filmed , Warner Bros. Records released a statement regarding the music video : " [ The video ] expresses a panoramic view of our culture and looming war through the view of a female superhero portrayed by Madonna . Starting as a runway show of couture army fatigues , the fashion show escalates into a mad frenzy depicting the catastrophic repercussions and horrors of war . " An exclusive sneak peek of the video was available on VH1 's program Backstage at the Grammys . 
 The video begins with several male and female models dressed up as soldiers on a fashion runway , wearing military garb and gas masks with one male model sports a shirt that reads " Fashion Victim " while it is inter @-@ cut with scenes of Madonna singing in front of a black background . In the second chorus , middle @-@ eastern children are seen walking on the runway , and being bullied by the soldier models . During the bridge , Madonna and her group prepare to enter the runway in a restroom , while she carves " Protect Me " on the partition of a stall and dances angrily with them to the song . The women also are seen dancing in front of surveillance cameras . When the rap section starts , Madonna is seen crashing into the show driving a Mini Cooper and pummel the photographers with an industrial @-@ strength water hose , while rapping and dancing on top of the car with her gang . In the end of the video , Madonna frantically drives out of the runway into the amused audience , and pull a hand grenade with her teeth and then throws it to George W. Bush , and the video ends with him using it to light up his cigar . 
 Due to the political climate of the country at the time , on April 1 , 2003 , Madonna pulled the video and released a statement explaining why : " I have decided not to release my new video . It was filmed before the war started and I do not believe it is appropriate to air it at this time . Due to the volatile state of the world and out of sensitivity and respect to the armed forces , who I support and pray for , I do not want to risk offending anyone who might misinterpret the meaning of this video . " After pulling the original video , it was then released an edited version that premiered on April 16 , 2003 on VH1 , immediately after a special program called Madonna Speaks . This version features Madonna singing in front of a backdrop of ever @-@ changing flags of different countries . 
 In 2005 , a director cut of the video leaked onto the Internet . It shows heavier scenes , like wounded and maimed soldiers , war scenes , images of poverty and death . In 2010 , Slant Magazine placed this alternate video on the nineteenth place of decade 's fifty best music videos list , stating : " It isn 't like either the video 's message about viewing war as a form of popular entertainment or its striking , loaded images leave much room for misinterpretation . <unk> ? Yes . Relevant ? Surely . Subtle ? Not so much . " This version of the video ends with the tossed grenade landing on the catwalk and Madonna putting her hands on her ears . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 To promote American Life , Madonna embarked on the American Life Promo Tour . A performance on Tower 's Fourth Street in Manhattan was presented to around 400 people ; the set started with Madonna , wearing black beret , polka @-@ dot blouse , black trousers and heels , performing an acoustic performance of " American Life " followed by the track " X @-@ Static Process " . The promotional show also saw Madonna perform two other tracks from the album being " Mother and Father " and " Hollywood " , before performing an " impromptu " performance of " Like a Virgin " , and lastly performing the album version of " American Life " . A stage was built in preparation for the performances with long dark drapes and large speakers , and according to Billboard was so that over one thousand fans nearby could hear the performance . Madonna also performed the song at HMV store in Oxford to around 500 people . While in the United Kingdom , she performed " American Life " and " Hollywood " at BBC One 's Top of the Pops . 
 The following year , " American Life " was included on her Re @-@ Invention World Tour . It opened the Military @-@ Army segment and started with the sound of a helicopter in the background as Madonna 's backup dancers , dressed as soldiers , crawled on their bellies as though in the middle of battle , then hugged each other as if saying goodbye . Madonna appeared onstage , on top of a structure made up of TV sets , wearing camouflage pants , an olive army jacket and black beret . She started performing the song as war footage of death and destruction flashed on screens behind her . At the end of the song , it showed a George W. Bush look @-@ alike lovingly resting his head on the shoulder of a Saddam Hussein look @-@ alike , as though the pair were waiting for a marriage license . During the performance , Madonna ran down a lengthy V @-@ shaped catwalk that descended from the ceiling and allowed her to reach the middle of the stadium . Toronto Sun 's Jane Stevenson praised the performance , but called the background images " sober " . The performance was included in the I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret live album and documentary . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – producer , programming , guitar 
 Mike " Spike " Stent – mixing 
 Tim Young – mastering 
 Tom Hannen – assistant engineer 
 Simon Changer – assistant engineer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from American Life album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = At Long Last Leave = 
 " At Long Last Leave " is the fourteenth episode of The Simpsons ' twenty @-@ third season , and the 500th episode overall of the series . In the episode , the Simpsons discover that the inhabitants of Springfield have grown tired of them and have secretly decided to throw them out of the city . After being evicted from Springfield , the family members end up in a rugged place without rules and regulations called The Outlands . There , they briefly come across their neighbor Julian Assange , who created WikiLeaks . Assange , who is in fear of extradition to Sweden and then the United States , guest @-@ starred in the episode as himself and recorded his lines over the phone having been granted asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy in Britain , while waiting for the results of Assange v Swedish Prosecution Authority . 
 Michael Price wrote " At Long Last Leave " without the intention of it becoming the 500th episode and felt honored when it was selected for the milestone . Television critics have given the episode generally positive reviews , particularly praising it for a montage of the series ' couch gags that was included in the opening sequence . The storyline of " At Long Last Leave " has , however , received criticism for being similar to stories previously done on The Simpsons and in The Simpsons Movie . 
 During its original airing on the Fox network in the United States on February 19 , 2012 , the episode was watched by about 5 @.@ 77 million people and received a 2 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 . Before this broadcast , Fox promoted the 500th episode milestone by arranging an attempt to break the Guinness World Record for longest continuous television viewing . A hundred fans of The Simpsons were invited to watch a marathon of the series ' episodes , starting on February 8 , 2012 . The record was broken 86 hours and 37 minutes later on February 12 , 2012 , with only two fans left watching the marathon . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family is advised of a citywide nuclear safety drill and all the inhabitants of Springfield are told to stay in their basements for three hours . The family members quickly become bored in the basement and decide to leave the house and go see the empty city . As they walk through Springfield , they see an unusual number of cars parked by the City Hall . The Simpsons go in and discover that everyone in town has gathered for a secret town meeting and have voted unanimously to kick them out of Springfield forever . Mayor Quimby reveals that the city has gone bankrupt due to the constant cleaning up of the family 's shenanigans over the years , ranging from Homer 's drunken antics , Bart 's various pranks , and Lisa 's environmental concerns . Marge delivers a heart @-@ felt plea to the residents to let the Simpsons live in the one place they call home , but they refuse , with Quimby declaring her the " worst Simpson " for always trying to see the family in a positive light . 
 A big celebration is held by the city 's population as the Simpsons are officially evicted from Springfield . When the family drives out into the middle of nowhere at night with no place to stay , they come across a man who takes them to a county called The Outlands , which is a dirty , run @-@ down place where there are no rules and regulations . The Simpsons settle in The Outlands and meet Julian Assange — their unfriendly next @-@ door neighbor who operates the WikiLeaks Headquarters there . 
 While the rest of the family gets used to their new home , Marge becomes homesick . Homer sneaks her back into Springfield one night under the disguise of Mr. Burns and Smithers , and they spend the night getting drunk and having sex in their old abandoned home . However , Chief Wiggum sees through their disguises , and rallies the people of Springfield to the Simpson home to capture Homer and Marge . Marge is initially angry at the members of the mob , but she stuns them by saying that she does not want to live in Springfield or deal with them anymore , having found a place to live where she and her family can be accepted for who they are and love each other without worry of hate and judgment from others . Marge and Homer march through the visibly disillusioned crowd and return to The Outlands . Back in the Simpsons ' new home , Bart discovers Lenny and Carl sneaking in . They tell the family they long to start a new life in The Outlands . Soon , Moe , Mayor Quimby , and many other Springfield residents show up , wishing to abandon their lives in Springfield and start over in The Outlands . Soon , all of Springfield moves there to start new lives with the Simpsons , and they begin rebuilding a new city which they name Springfield . 
 = = Production = = 
 " At Long Last Leave " , which is the 500th episode of The Simpsons , was written by Michael Price . The Simpsons ' showrunner Al Jean has described it as " a tribute to people who love the show . " Being a fan of musical theater , Price titled the episode in reference to the Cole Porter song " At Long Last Love " . Price did not write " At Long Last Leave " with the intention of it becoming the 500th episode ; that decision was made afterwards when the staff members realized the story offered an opportunity for a look @-@ back at the history of the Simpson family . He said in an interview with the magazine Channel Guide that he was " deeply honored " when his episode was selected for the milestone . As acknowledged by Price in that interview , the plot of the episode features similarities to the 2007 film The Simpsons Movie , in which the Simpsons are forced to flee to Alaska after Homer angers the townspeople in Springfield by polluting a lake . However , Price commented that " I think it 's different from the movie in that it sort of does reference back the entire history of the show , the collective experience of Springfield vis @-@ a @-@ vis the Simpsons , whereas the movie they were forced to run away due to that very specific thing " . He further noted that despite the similarities " we [ the staff ] liked it enough to go with it anyway . " The plot was first announced to the press at the Comic @-@ Con convention in San Diego , California on July 23 , 2011 , during a panel with the cast and crew of The Simpsons . 
 The episode features several guest appearances , with Kelsey Grammer and Jackie Mason returning for short cameos as Sideshow Bob and Rabbi Krustofski , respectively . American musician Alison Krauss and her band Union Station recorded a bluegrass version of the Simpsons theme song that is played in the episode and over the closing credits . 
 Australian activist Julian Assange — the founder of WikiLeaks — appeared as himself . Many of his lines were written by Australian author Kathy Lette , who is one of Assange 's friends . According to Lette , " Julian and The Simpsons producers asked me to rewrite his scene and dialogue . I guess they just wanted me to add a little Aussie irony to the script . Julian does not suffer from an irony deficiency ! I used to write a sitcom for Columbia Pictures , the long @-@ running series The Facts of Life , so the producers knew I could fire off a quip or two . " In 2010 , Swedish authorities issued a European Arrest Warrant to extradite Assange from Britain to Sweden for questioning in relation to sexual assault allegations made against him there . Assange was arrested in England , before being freed on conditional bail until a decision would be made as to whether or not he should be extradited to Sweden . Assange recorded his lines over the phone while under house arrest in England . Jean , who directed Assange 's performance from Los Angeles , only acquired a phone number to call and received no information about the whereabouts of the activist . According to Jean in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , The Simpsons creator Matt Groening had found out through a rumor that Assange wanted to appear on the show . Casting director Bonnie Pietila was therefore given the task to contact Assange and make sure the guest appearance could happen . The episode features no reference to Assange 's legal situation at the time of his recording . Jean commented that he is " a controversial figure , and there 's a good reason he 's controversial . There was discussion internally whether or not to have him on the show , but ultimately we went ahead and did it . " Groening has said in an interview that " We [ the staff ] dare ourselves to do things and Julian Assange was a dare . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the 500th episode milestone , the Fox network , which airs The Simpsons , attempted to break the Guinness World Record for longest continuous television viewing by arranging a marathon screening of the show 's episodes at Hollywood & Highland . The record of 86 hours , six minutes , and 41 seconds was set in 2010 when three people watched all episodes of the Fox show 24 . A hundred fans were selected to participate in the Simpsons marathon , which was also a contest to determine which fan could last the longest into the marathon . The screening started on February 8 , 2012 with " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , the first episode of the series , and ended on February 12 of that same year with " Faith Off , " the eleventh episode of the eleventh season . At that point , 86 hours and 37 minutes had passed , which meant the record was broken . The two remaining viewers — Jeremiah Franco and Carin Shreve — were crowned joint winners of the contest and each won US $ 10 @,@ 500 . They also got to attend the 500th Episode Celebration party held on February 13 , 2012 for the cast and crew of The Simpsons . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on February 19 , 2012 . It was watched by approximately 5 @.@ 77 million people during this broadcast , and in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , it received a 2 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating and a seven percent share . The rating was a thirty percent increase from the previous episode , " The Daughter Also Rises " . " At Long Last Leave " became the most @-@ watched broadcast in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup for the night in terms of total viewers , finishing higher than new episodes of the four series Family Guy ( 5 @.@ 47 million ) , American Dad ! ( 4 @.@ 43 million ) , Napoleon Dynamite ( 4 @.@ 41 million ) , and The Cleveland Show ( 2 @.@ 61 million ) . It also became the second highest @-@ rated broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 , being exceeded only by the Family Guy episode which received a 2 @.@ 8 rating . 
 " At Long Last Leave " has received generally positive reviews from television critics , particularly for its couch gag in the Simpsons opening sequence . This couch gag features a frame @-@ by @-@ frame montage of previous couch gags that pulls back into a photomosaic of the number " 500 " . The A.V. Club critic Hayden Childs wrote that the " best thing about the 500th Simpsons episode is the opening couch montage , which hits the nostalgia bullseye almost perfectly . " HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall praised the couch gag as being " marvelous " , noting that it " actually made me choke up a bit . " Sepinwall commended " At Long Last Leave " , commenting that " like many latter @-@ day Simpsons outings , [ it ] features a story we 've seen variations on several times before ( including in The Simpsons Movie ) , but also features many funny jokes that affirm my belief that I 'm happier to live in a world that keeps giving us new Simpsons episodes [ ... ] than I will be in the one where that inevitably stops . " Similarly to Sepinwall , Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter wrote : " I got a few laughs and that 's all I ever look for in The Simpsons these days . I just like knowing it 's still there . [ ... ] It doesn 't have the spring in the legs quite like it used to . It 's not going to dazzle at the same spectacular rate . But even after 500 episodes , it still has a little something left . " Goodman described the couch gag as " lovely " . 
 Matt Roush of TV Guide wrote favorably about " At Long Last Leave " , describing it as a " keeper " and highlighting the " dazzling opening sequence " . He concluded that The Simpsons " once again delivers the goods , proving itself to be a classic for our age and for the ages . " Childs was less positive , writing that the episode is " nothing special " as " all of the elements seem drawn from earlier stories " and " only a few of the jokes rise to the lowered bar of latter @-@ day Simpsons humor . " He added , however , that " nothing in the episode goes outrageously wrong , either . There is little Family Guy @-@ style stupidity and randomness , the satire is gently pointed inward , and the guest star , while splashy for his <unk> , does not hijack the plot — instead appearing for a single joke before vanishing . " TIME critic James Poniewozik commented that " At Long Last Leave " was an " all right " episode , noting that certain gags felt " forced by the writers ’ room " . Poniewozik , who thinks the quality of The Simpsons declined at the end of the 1990s , added however that " a few moments made me bark out loud and realize why I loved the show in the first place . " 
 = Pilot ( Veronica Mars ) = 
 The pilot episode of the television series Veronica Mars premiered on UPN on September 22 , 2004 . It was written by series creator Rob Thomas , and directed by Mark Piznarski . Set in the fictional town of Neptune , the pilot introduces Kristen Bell as the title character , a high @-@ school student moonlighting as a private investigator under the wing of her detective father . Two separate mysteries are presented in the episode , which are explored throughout the season and resolved in the final and penultimate episodes . 
 Thomas originally wrote Veronica Mars as a young adult novel , featuring a male as the protagonist . He changed the gender of the protagonist because he thought a noir piece told from a female point of view would be more interesting and unique . The original pilot script was darker in tone than the one filmed , and several details were changed . Although it ranked low in the ratings , the pilot was critically acclaimed and Bell 's performance as the protagonist was praised . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Flashbacks reveal Veronica 's backstory : in small @-@ town Neptune , California , Veronica - daughter of well @-@ respected County Sheriff Keith Mars ( Enrico Colantoni ) is a typical teen who was dating Duncan Kane ( Teddy Dunn ) , and was popular with loving parents . But when her best friend and Duncan 's sister , Lilly Kane ( Amanda Seyfried ) , is murdered , Veronica 's life falls apart . Keith accuses software billionaire Jake Kane ( Kyle Secor ) , Lilly 's father , of being involved in the murder . This provokes Neptune 's wrath , and Keith is ousted from office and replaced by Don Lamb ( Michael Muhney ) in a recall election . Veronica 's mother , Lianne Mars ( Corinne Bohrer ) , unable to face the loss of status and economic security , develops a drinking problem and suddenly leaves town . Veronica 's boyfriend also ends their relationship , and her friends turn their backs on her . To prove that she is unaffected by the rejection , Veronica attends wealthy classmate Shelly Pomroy 's " 09er " party . Her drink is spiked with GHB and she is raped , but Sheriff Lamb refuses to take her report seriously . These events shock Veronica and she changes her attitude towards her former friends , becoming tough and cynical . 
 Estranged from all her " 09er " friends — wealthy students from the fictional 90909 ZIP code — including Duncan and Lilly 's ex @-@ boyfriend , Logan Echolls ( Jason Dohring ) , and feeling the drop in income and status that her father 's dismissal from office brings , Veronica takes a part @-@ time job in her father 's newly opened private investigation agency , Mars Investigations . Although the case of Lilly 's murder is officially closed following the confession of a former Kane Software employee , Abel Koontz ( Christian Clemenson ) , Veronica continues her own investigation into what happened . Her investigation discovers new evidence which suggests that Koontz is innocent . 
 In the present , Veronica starts her Junior year at Neptune High by freeing new student Wallace Fennel ( Percy Daggs III ) , who had been stripped and duct @-@ taped to the school flag pole . Wallace explains that while working at the local Sac @-@ n @-@ Pac , he alerted the sheriff 's department to two PCH ( Pacific Coast Highway ) bikers who took alcohol without paying . Sheriff Lamb exposes Wallace as the witness , and despite Wallace 's attempts to retract his accusation , Lamb walks away with proof from the in @-@ store video camera . Wallace 's duct @-@ taping is PCH retribution for his honesty . In a convoluted scheme to help Wallace , Veronica sets up Logan by placing a bong in his locker . Once the bong is taken to the evidence room at the sheriff 's department , Veronica triggers it to smoke and spark by remote control , leading to the arrival of the fire department . The fire chief , a friend of Veronica , switches the video from the Sac @-@ n @-@ Pac with one Veronica filmed of a deputy receiving sexual favors . When the bikers are in court , that video is shown instead , embarrassing Lamb and undermining the case against the bikers . Wallace is forgiven and Eli " Weevil " Navarro ( Francis Capra ) , the bikers ' leader , becomes Veronica 's occasional ally . 
 At Mars Investigations , Duncan and Lilly 's mother , Celeste Kane ( Lisa Thornhill ) hires Keith to ascertain if her husband Jake is having an affair , despite her open contempt for both Keith and Veronica . Keith is busy with other projects , and Veronica takes it upon herself to follow Jake . Veronica takes photos of him at the Camelot hotel as he meets with an unseen woman after midnight . Once Keith sees the license plate number of the woman 's car , he stops the investigation and files the photograph . Puzzled by his actions , Veronica finds the file and learns that Keith has continued his own personal investigation of Lilly 's murder . Veronica discovers that the car belongs to her missing mother , Lianne , and begins to investigate the murder herself . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Rob Thomas originally wrote Veronica Mars as a young adult novel for publishing company Simon & Schuster . Prior to his first television job on Dawson 's Creek , Thomas sold two novel ideas . One of these was provisionally titled Untitled Rob Thomas Teen Detective Novel , which formed the basis for the series . The novel had many elements similar to Veronica Mars , however the protagonist was male . Thomas 's father was a vice @-@ principal at Westlake High School in Austin , Texas , and the main character attended a " thinly disguised version " of the school . As Thomas had begun writing for film and television , he did not resume his teen detective idea for several years . Writing a novel could take months for Thomas , whereas a television script only took several weeks . Knowing that television scripts paid more , Thomas wrote the television version of the teen detective project as a spec script before it became a novel . Since no studio or network had asked him to write it , and he would not get paid unless it sold , Thomas said that " it was never a very pressing project for me " . Tinkering with it from time to time , Thomas wrote project notes a year before he actually started writing the television script . Most of his original ideas made it into the script , but some changed drastically . Thomas wanted to use flashbacks , and he had to shorten the timeline so that the murder could happen in a recent time . Thomas changed the gender of the protagonist because he thought a noir piece told from a female point of view would be more interesting and unique . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kristen Bell was chosen to portray Veronica Mars from more than 500 women who auditioned for the role . On casting the lead role , Thomas later commented , " When you 're casting 20 @-@ year @-@ old hot girl , you see a lot of bad actors . " Bell felt that it was " just luck " that Rob Thomas saw that " I have some sass to me , and that 's exactly what he wanted " . Bell thought that it was her cheerleader looks and an outsider 's attitude that set her apart from the other women who auditioned . Bell 's life shared many similarities with that of her character — her father had " an investigative bent " , and her best friend died in high school in a car crash . 
 Jason Dohring , who played Logan Echolls , originally auditioned for the role of Duncan Kane . Teddy Dunn originally auditioned for Logan , but ended up portraying Duncan Kane . Dohring felt that his audition for Duncan " was a little dark " , and he was told by the producers that it was " not really right " . The producers asked Dohring to read for the role of Logan , which involved reading Duncan 's lines . Dohring acted one scene from the pilot , in which he shattered the headlights of a car with a crowbar . During the final auditions , Dohring read two times with Bell and met with the studio and the network . When reading with Bell , Dohring acted the whole scene as if he had raped her , and tried to give the character an evil and fun feel . At the time of Dohring 's audition for Logan , the character was only going to be a guest star in the pilot . 
 Percy Daggs III auditioned for the role of Wallace Fennel twice before being cast , and he had to go through three tests with the studio and network executives . During his first audition , Daggs read four scenes from the pilot . Before his studio test , Daggs read with Bell and had " a great conversation " . He said that she " made me feel comfortable about auditioning " and was a big reason why he became more comfortable playing Wallace as the season went on . Thomas described Amanda Seyfried , who portrayed the murdered Lilly Kane , as " the biggest surprise of the year " . When casting a series regular , he was able to see all the best actors in town , mainly because they all wanted to be a series regular . When casting Lilly , who would only appear from time @-@ to @-@ time as " the dead girl " , Thomas did not receive the same level of actors . Thomas said that he had " never had a more cut and dry audition " than he did with Seyfried ; she was " about 100 times better than anyone else that we saw , she was just spectacular " . He said that she ended up being so good in the series that he used her three or four times more than he initially planned . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The original pilot script was darker in tone than the one filmed . Thomas intended to take the script to FX , HBO or Showtime , but gave UPN " credit " as they only wanted it a bit lighter to match their standards and practices . There was also a lengthy debate as to whether Veronica could be a rape victim ; UPN eventually consented . In the aired version of the episode , Lilly Kane was found by the pool in the same spot where she was murdered . However , Thomas stated that Lilly 's body was originally going to be found in the ocean , and he had a plan for events which led to Lilly 's body being dumped . When Thomas pitched the idea to UPN , the network felt that it was " too dark and creepy " for Jake Kane to dispose of his daughter 's body to protect his son , and the idea was changed . Much of the series ' scenes were filmed at Stu Segall Productions in San Diego . During the filming of the pilot , producer Paul Kurta said that much of the filming would take place in Oceanside , California . Kurta liked that it was " a seaside town that still feels like middle @-@ class people live there ... Most of the seaside towns feel resort driven . " The setting of Neptune High , which was featured in the first two seasons , was also located in Oceanside . The school , Oceanside High School , was paid $ 7 @,@ 750 by Stu Segall Productions for the use of the campus and extras . When Thomas watched the final cut of the scene in which Veronica realizes that she has been raped , Thomas thought that he had casted the role correctly . " I ’ m watching her from the monitor , and tears start streaming down her face , and I ’ m just like , ' Holy shit ! We have a star ! ' " 
 = = Music = = 
 " We Used to Be Friends " by The Dandy Warhols was used as the series ' theme song . Composer Josh Kramon was originally going to produce a noir version of an ' 80s song for the theme . However , Rob Thomas was " pretty much set on finding a song " , and " We Used to Be Friends " was chosen right from the beginning . Kramon wrote the original background music to convey the film noir themes . For the pilot , Thomas wanted " a really atmospheric , kind of modern noir type of vibe " , and Kramon used sounds similar to that of Air and Zero 7 . Kramon used " traditional sounds " for the series , but also processed and filtered them . Among the instruments used were piano , vibraphone and guitar . When using an acoustic piano , Kramon would use compression so that it did not sound like a traditional piano . Live bass and percussion was also used , as Kramon did not like to program them . The main instrument used was guitar , but Kramon felt that piano was " by far the most important instrument for working on TV shows , especially when you 're doing everything yourself . " A week before choosing the sounds for the pilot , the crew had a " spotting session " , where they would discuss with Thomas and the producers which type of music was going to be featured . Kramon did not decide the songs to be featured , but composed and created the whole score . Since there was little orchestral music , and Kramon could play guitar , piano , bass and drums , he played the whole score without hiring a musician . 
 = = = Other songs heard in this episode = = = 
 " La Femme d 'Argent " by Air 
 " What You Want " by The <unk> 
 " <unk> Because I " by The Dandy Warhols 
 " Sittin ' On Top Of The World " by Botany Boyz 
 " Just Another " by Pete Yorn 
 " White Lines ( Don 't Do It ) " by Grandmaster Flash 
 " Give You More " by Taxi Doll 
 " Girls " by Death In Vegas 
 " Bathroom Stall " by <unk> Lee 
 " Weak Become Heroes " by The Streets 
 " ( Don 't Fear ) The Reaper " by Blue Öyster Cult 
 " Pata Pata " by Miriam Makeba 
 " <unk> Party " by Air 
 " Atomic Girl " by The Wannabes 
 " Butterflies " by <unk> Garza 
 = = Reception = = 
 The pilot was viewed by an average of 2 @.@ 49 million American viewers on its original broadcast , ranking 108 out of 112 in the weekly charts . Debra <unk> and Amy Amatangelo of The Washington Post praised the pilot for relying " on strong storytelling and casting " , but hoped that viewers would be able to follow the multiple storylines . Barry Garron of The Hollywood Reporter said that the pilot was " so cleverly constructed , the hero so engaging and complicated and the story so filled with great dialogue that I wonder how anyone can sustain this level of accomplishment . " He said that the protagonist " has all the sass , strength , resolve and ingenuity of any of literature 's classic detectives [ ... ] and Bell is so convincing in the role that it all somehow makes perfect sense . " He praised the pilot and Thomas ' writing , saying it had " comedy , deathly serious drama , parody and danger , ingredients not typically mixed together " , and said that " if future episodes are half as good , this still will be one of TV 's bright spots " . Kay McFadden of The Seattle Times felt that Veronica Mars was the best new series on UPN , and that the title character was potentially " this season 's most interesting character creation " . McFadden described the series as " Alias in its attitude , Raymond Chandler in its writing and The O.C. in its class @-@ consciousness " . 
 Phil Gallo of Variety called Veronica Mars " the smartest teen @-@ oriented drama since Freaks and Geeks " . He enjoyed Bell 's acting , describing her " as charismatic as she is tough and intelligent , giving a multilayered <unk> that touches on simple 17 @-@ year @-@ old insecurity and convincingly incorporates deeper issues concerning family , love and disappointment . " Gallo discussed the pilot 's reliance on flashbacks and voiceover , and felt that neither got in the way of the storytelling or felt too obvious . He praised Thomas ' writing of the " fine script " and Piznarski 's directing . Robert Bianco of USA Today felt that Veronica Mars was more akin to Buffy Summers than Nancy Drew , with " sharp wits , steely nerves and a wicked sense of humor " . Bianco praised Bell 's portrayal of the character , saying " whether you buy the idea of teen crime @-@ solvers or not , there 's no questioning Bell 's credentials as a TV star . " Melanie McFarland of the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer said that the pilot was " showing signs of being network television 's next Buffy " , emanating from a tough , emotionally battered heroine . McFarland found the acting to be fantastic , and said that Bell and Colantoni " create a wonderful father @-@ daughter dynamic " . Samantha Bonar of the Los Angeles Times thought that the writing was clever , and praised Bell ability to channel charisma , smarts and frustration . 
 IGN rated the pilot episode 10th on its list of the top ten Veronica Mars episodes , writing that " The smooth introduction to all things Veronica makes you care for her instantly . Anyone wrestling with creating a female character who is multifaceted and real needs only to study Veronica . We see many different sides , and there isn 't any stereotyping . They sell her tough exterior so well that even though Veronica has been through a pile of crap , you don 't pity her – which is good , because she doesn 't want it anyway . " 
 = Battle of Torrence 's Tavern = 
 The Battle of Torrence 's Tavern ( also referred to as the Skirmish at Torrence 's Tavern or the Battle at Tarrant 's Tavern ) was a minor engagement of the American Revolutionary War that took place in what was the western portion of Rowan County , North Carolina , approximately 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of the Catawba River near modern @-@ day Mooresville in Iredell County . Torrence 's Tavern was a part of the larger Southern campaign of the American Revolution , which , by 1780 – 1781 involved a series of clashes between the British Army and Loyalist milita and the Continental Army and Patriot militia in the Piedmont region of North and South Carolina . 
 The engagement took place on either February 1 or February 2 , 1781 immediately following the Battle of Cowan 's Ford , and resulted in a victory for British cavalry units under the command of Colonel Banastre Tarleton . The British victory served to demoralize Patriot supporters in western North Carolina , and forced General Nathanael Greene , commander of the Continental Army in the southern theater , to withdraw his forces further east . This withdrawal allowed Greene to unite his army with several detached Patriot forces in the Piedmont prior to the Battle of Guilford Courthouse . After the conclusion of the war , the site of Torrence 's Tavern was commemorated by two state and local historical markers . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Throughout the winter of 1780 @-@ 1781 , the British Army in the Carolinas , under the command of General Charles Cornwallis , pursued the southern Continental Army , commanded by Nathanael Greene , from central South Carolina to North Carolina . At the Battle of Cowpens on January 17 , 1781 , the Continental Army scored a victory against a force , detached from the main British Army , commanded by Tarleton . After the defeat , Cornwallis set out to pursue Greene into nearby North Carolina . The victor of Cowpens , Daniel Morgan , had requested that Greene relieve him of his command of the Patriot militia due to a flare @-@ up of sciatica , but Greene refused . Morgan then set about establishing defenses on the Catawba River , which Cornwallis ' army would be forced to cross in order to drive into central and eastern North Carolina . Defensive positions were established at every ford on the river in that state in expectation of the British assault . By January 30 , Morgan had received word that the British were indeed preparing to cross the river . 
 On January 31 , 1781 , Greene and Morgan left the Catawba River defenses in the hands of militia General William Lee Davidson , and rode towards Salisbury to establish a rallying point . The Continental force crossed the Catawba River ahead of Cornwallis ' army , and followed Davidson and Morgan to the rallying point . At Cowan 's Ford on February 1 , 1781 , a force of Patriot militia commanded directly by Davidson held back the British Army for a period of time , and slowed their crossing of the Catawba River . Davidson 's militia inflicted numerous casualties before withdrawing towards the rally point . Davidson was killed in the battle at the ford , leaving the surviving militia temporarily without effective strategic command . 
 = = Battle and aftermath = = 
 = = = Date of the engagement = = = 
 Confusion exists over the exact date of the Battle of Torrence 's Tavern ; official North Carolina historical sources often cite February 2 as the date , but Tarleton 's memoirs indicate that the engagement occurred at two o 'clock in the afternoon of February 1 , after the early @-@ morning confrontation at Cowan 's Ford . 
 = = = Tarleton 's pursuit of the militia = = = 
 Cornwallis , whose army took a longer amount of time to cross the Catawba , wanted to prevent Greene 's forces from withdrawing quickly and being able to regroup , and so he ordered Colonel Tarleton , the commander of the British Legion , to pursue the militia formerly commanded by Davidson . After the engagement at Cowan 's Ford , citizens between the Catawba and Yadkin rivers who were sympathetic to the Patriots became panicked , and many fled their homes with whatever valuables they could pack in a short period of time . 
 Tarleton 's British Legion was a force that contained infantry , cavalry , and artillery units , but Tarleton was forced to take only his mounted soldiers with him due to heavy rains in the area . Upon nearing the site of what Tarleton labelled " Tarrant 's Tavern " , the British commander gained information that led him to believe the militia ahead were unprepared for any engagement , and were waiting on reinforcements from Mecklenburg and Rowan county militias . At the time of the battle , Torrence 's Tavern sat on a roadway that ran from Beatty 's and Cowan 's fords on the Catawba directly to Salisbury . Additionally , the same rain that forced Tarleton to shed his foot @-@ soldiers had rendered much of the militia 's gunpowder supply useless . Refugees with Patriot sympathies who had fled in advance of Cornwallis ' army had also used Torrence 's Tavern as a rendezvous point , and a large number of both militiamen and refugees consumed alcohol from the tavern 's stores . 
 = = = Assault of the British Legion = = = 
 Despite lacking support from Cornwallis ' main army , Tarleton 's cavalry struck immediately upon arriving at the scene , charging into the militia 's makeshift camp . At the first sign of the British approach , the Patriots attempted to organize a defense under the ad @-@ hoc command of Captain Nathaniel M. Martin , who tried to rally the militia to a line behind a nearby rail fence . There is also evidence that Col. Thomas Farmer and some 300 militia were stationed at the tavern as a secondary defensive line . Tarleton claimed to have led the charge by reminding his cavalrymen to " remember the Cowpens " . The British won in a quick and convincing fashion , dispersing the outnumbered militia units before they managed to complete their rally . Martin was captured in the first few moments of the battle , thereafter leaving the Patriots without any effective tactical command . With Patriot forces under the effects of such confusion , Tarleton divided his dragoons into smaller parties , ordering them to chase and further disburse the militia from the area . 
 While the battle was a minor engagement , the defense provided some additional time for Greene 's main army of regulars to cross the Yadkin River without harassment near Salisbury , which allowed that force to regroup and resupply . At the time of the skirmish , Greene was at a farm owned by David Carr ( sometimes attributed as " Cain " ) , approximately 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from the tavern . Carr 's farm had been set as a secondary rendezvous point for the Patriot militia , but none of the expected units rallied to that location following the Torrence 's Tavern engagement . Upon reaching Salisbury after the loss , and finding nearly 1 @,@ 700 stands of muskets rusted and in useless condition , Greene reportedly exclaimed " These are the happy effects of defending the Country with Militia from which the good Lord deliver us ! " The tavern that stood at the location of the battle was burned to the ground the day after the engagement by the main British army , as it had been operated by the widow of a Patriot militiaman killed at the Battle of Ramsour 's Mill . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The battle 's impact on the American Revolutionary War in the southern theater was minor , but the failure of Patriot militia to significantly stall Cornwallis at Cowan 's Ford and Torrence 's Tavern caused Greene to hasten his retreat towards his ultimate goal , Guilford Courthouse , where he determined to rendezvous with a detached force under the command of Isaac Huger . The total impact of Torrence 's Tavern alone , however , has been rated as especially minor , since the Continental Army force commanded by Greene managed to escape Cornwallis ' advance regardless of the short engagement 's outcome , and given the more substantial delay to the British caused by the defense at Cowan 's Ford the previous day . 
 John Buchanan , an American historian and archivist , postulated that at most , Torrence 's Tavern discouraged further militia turnout among North Carolinians of fighting age , noting , however , that turnout had previously been very low in that state . Buchanan went so far as to state that " had Tarleton not lived to write his history of the campaign Torrence 's Tavern probably would have merited at most a footnote . " Cornwallis , however , wrote to George Germain , 1st Viscount Sackville about the engagements of February 1 – 2 , 1781 , and stated that " this stroke , with our passage of the ford , so effectively dispirited the militia , that we met with no further opposition on our march to the Yadkin . " 
 A Daughters of the American Revolution stone marker was placed near the battle site in 1914 , marking the site of the tavern and commemorating the members of nearby Centre Presbyterian Church who had fought in the war . In 1939 , the State of North Carolina placed a Historical marker on the south @-@ bound shoulder of N.C. Highway 115 in Mount <unk> marking the approximate location of the battle . 
 = Boadicea @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Boadicea @-@ class cruiser was a pair of scout cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . They were the first class of this type to be fitted with steam turbine machinery . Upon completion in 1909 – 10 , the sister ships served as flotilla leaders for destroyer flotillas of the First Fleet until 1913 when they were assigned to battleship squadrons . When the First World War began in August 1914 , they remained with their squadrons as the First Fleet was incorporated into the Grand Fleet , although they changed squadrons over the course of the war . Both ships were present during the Battle of Jutland in mid @-@ 1916 , but neither fired a shot . They were converted into minelayers the following year and both ships laid minefields in early 1918 in addition to other missions . The sisters were reduced to reserve in 1919 and sold for scrap in 1921 and 1926 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Like the earlier scout cruisers , the Boadicea class was designed to provide destroyer flotillas with a command ship , theoretically offering the ability to scout ahead of the group and locate targets for the smaller ships to attack . They were enlarged and more powerfully armed versions of the earlier ships , fitted with steam turbines . Curiously , they were no faster than the older ships and equally unsuccessful in their intended role as they lacked the speed of the destroyers they were supposed to escort . 
 Displacing 3 @,@ 350 long tons ( 3 @,@ 400 t ) , the ships had an overall length of 405 feet ( 123 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 41 feet 6 inches ( 12 @.@ 6 m ) and a deep draught of 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . They were powered by two sets of Parsons steam turbines , each driving two shafts . The turbines produced a total of 18 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) , using steam produced by 12 Yarrow boilers that burned both fuel oil and coal , and gave a maximum speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . They carried a maximum of 780 long tons ( 790 t ) of coal and 189 long tons ( 192 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 4 @,@ 260 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 890 km ; 4 @,@ 900 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Her crew consisted of 317 officers and enlisted men . 
 The main armament of the Boadicea class consisted of six breech @-@ loading ( BL ) four @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk VII guns . The forward pair of guns were mounted side by side on a platform on the forecastle , the middle pair were amidships , one on each broadside , and the two remaining guns were on the centreline of the quarterdeck , one ahead of the other . The guns fired their 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shells to a range of about 11 @,@ 400 yards ( 10 @,@ 400 m ) . Her secondary armament was four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) three @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) ) Vickers Mk I guns and two submerged 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . During the war , four additional four @-@ inch guns were added amidships to increase her firepower . A QF three @-@ inch 20 cwt anti @-@ aircraft gun was also added . In 1918 it was replaced by a four @-@ inch gun . 
 As scout cruisers , the ships were only lightly protected to maximise their speed . They had a curved protective deck that was 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick on the slope and 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) on the flat . Their conning tower was protected by 4 inches of armour . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Both Boadicea and Bellona began their careers with destroyer flotillas of the First Fleet , Boadicea as senior officers ' ship for the 1st Destroyer Flotilla and Bellona with the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla . The former was transferred to the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla in mid @-@ 1912 and the sisters were transferred to the 2nd and the 1st Battle Squadrons , respectively , of the First Fleet in 1913 . Both ships were assigned to positions at the rear of their squadrons and did not fire their guns during the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . 
 The sisters remained with their squadrons until 1917 when they were converted into minelayers , Bellona in May and Boadicea in October , Bellona replacing her sister in the 2nd Battle Squadron that month . After her conversion , Boadicea was assigned to the 4th Battle Squadron in January 1918 and neither ship was reassigned before the end of the war . They laid mines at the entrance to the Kattegat on the nights of 18 / 19 and 24 / 25 February 1918 and both made several other sorties to lay their mines before the end of the war . They were placed in reserve after the war and taken out of service in 1920 . Bellona was quickly sold for scrap in 1921 , but Boadicea was not sold until 1926 . 
 = Erik Gjems @-@ Onstad = 
 Erik @-@ Ørn Gjems @-@ Onstad , MBE ( 22 February 1922 – 18 November 2011 ) was a Norwegian resistance member , officer , lawyer , sports official , politician , author and anti @-@ immigration activist . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad joined the Norwegian resistance movement after Nazi Germany invaded Norway in 1940 . He was arrested in Sweden for his involvement with Norwegian resistance activity in the country in 1941 , and was sent to the United Kingdom where he joined the Norwegian Independent Company 1 ( Kompani Linge ) and received British military training . He was deployed to Norway in 1943 as part of Lark , assigned with establishing radio connection with London . He led Lark in Trøndelag between 1943 and 1945 , which constituted the leadership of Milorg in the region . His other activities included to assist with weapons smuggling , prepare the sinking of the German battleship Tirpitz and plotting to assassinate Nazi collaborator Ivar Grande . He also founded the Durham organisation for conducting psychological warfare towards the end of the war , and he took part in blowing up railway tracks . Gjems @-@ Onstad 's efforts during the Second World War led him to become one of Norway 's highest decorated war heroes . 
 He joined the Norwegian Home Guard after the war , where he served as a captain . He completed education in law , and also worked as a judge and lawyer . He ultimately reached the rank of colonel in the military , as military lawyer of a branch of the Royal Norwegian Air Force . For some years he was CEO of a project that planned to develop the Vaterland neighbourhood in Oslo . Gjems @-@ Onstad also had a career in sports , representing the sports club SK Rye in cycling and racewalking . He later worked as a sports official as board member and chairman of various national sports bodies . 
 A former member of the Conservative Party and the libertarian organisation Libertas , Gjems @-@ Onstad joined Anders Lange 's Party when it was founded in 1973 and became the party 's deputy leader . He was elected a Member of Parliament in the 1973 parliamentary election , and became the party 's parliamentary leader following Anders Lange 's death in 1974 . Many of his views and proposals caused controversy , and he got in conflict with the new leadership of the party , which was eventually headed by Carl I. Hagen . Gjems @-@ Onstad was expelled from the party in 1976 , and finished his term as an independent . He also became known for criticising the Norwegian government 's policy in Africa , and for defending the governments of countries such as Rhodesia and South Africa . In the 1980s he worked as a defender for several anti @-@ immigration activists , and from the late 1980s he became involved in anti @-@ immigration politics himself . He stood in election for the Stop Immigration party in 1989 and for the Fatherland Party in 1991 , and he was later involved in the organisations Folkebevegelsen mot innvandring and Stop Islamisation of Norway . He was briefly active locally in the Conservative Party and the Pensioners ' Party in the late 2000s . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Erik @-@ Ørn Gjems @-@ Onstad was born in Kristiania ( modern @-@ day Oslo ) to jurist and civil servant Olaf Gjems @-@ Onstad ( 1882 – 1945 ) and architect <unk> <unk> ( 1886 – 1959 ) . He worked at sea as a cabin boy in 1937 , and went to port in both Africa and Asia . He finished his secondary education in 1940 . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad was active in the boy scouts before the invasion , and he was because of his experience there asked to instruct in map and compass for a volunteer military training program in late 1939 . He thereafter became scout leader as the former leader went to fight in the Winter War . Due to the war in Europe , the scout exercises became increasingly serious , and the scout movement arguably had a big part in the early organisation of the Norwegian resistance . In the winter of 1939 / 40 , Gjems @-@ Onstad commenced training in orienteering and signaling during the night . The weekend before the invasion , he and a friend prepared " for war " by training and sleeping in a tent in the snow in the forest <unk> , which was seen as unusual to do at the time . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Early activities = = = 
 On 9 April 1940 , Nazi Germany invaded and occupied Norway as a part of the Second World War . Gjems @-@ Onstad became aware of the German presence when he and his family saw German planes flying right over their home . They did not get any notification of what was happening , and only music was played on the radio . Gjems @-@ Onstad took his bike and cycled to his school , the Oslo Cathedral School , only to find it closed and in a chaotic state . He thereafter went to the city centre and Karl Johans gate , where he witnessed the Germans marching through . The next ( or possibly the same ) day , a German Junkers plane crashed near him and his friend when they were on their way from Lysaker to get a closer view of the captured Fornebu Airport . He briefly found himself in the situation of attempting to rescue the Germans trapped inside the plane , but the heat was unbearable and the two were told by the Germans to run away and get in safety just moments before the plane exploded . The proclamation by Norwegian Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold on 10 April ( that rejected the German claim to appoint Vidkun Quisling as Norwegian Prime Minister ) , was according to Gjems @-@ Onstad received with great disappointment by him and his friends . He thought it contained nothing but verbiage , with no remarks about mobilisation , defence , fighting or war . He thereafter wanted to join the resistance , but on his way met a man who told him that he would be rejected if he had not been through recruit training , and he thus returned home . After a few days , he and a friend nevertheless set out for Northern Norway . They came as far north as Nord @-@ Trøndelag , where they however gave up and returned home . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad started studying at the University of Oslo in late 1940 , and he got in touch with students who wanted to organise a resistance movement . One time , he and other youth who sympathised with the resistance disrupted a public meeting held by the fascist party Nasjonal Samling ( NS ) . They deliberately clapped their hands so relentlessly ( they considered that they could not get punished for " cheering " ) that the speakers could not speak , and thereafter started leaving the room . Many were however blocked from leaving , and Gjems @-@ Onstad and a few others were arrested and fined due to their role in the event . In September he participated in a clash between students and a group of Hird members ( the NS 's paramilitary organisation ) outside the university . A young boy came by during the initial stand @-@ off , asking Gjems @-@ Onstad what was happening . Gjems @-@ Onstad responded that the others were traitors , and Hird members thus captured him and beat him up . Later , due to an outbreak of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease in December , Gjems @-@ Onstad took part in digging mass graves for slaughtered cows in <unk> and in <unk> . 
 In late 1940 , an engineer had created some military inventions which Gjems @-@ Onstad 's group wanted to bring to the Allied forces . It was decided that one of them was to travel to the UK , while Gjems @-@ Onstad was to travel to Stockholm . Gjems @-@ Onstad was joined by three others , and they decided to let themselves be arrested in <unk> in Sweden . They were transported to Stockholm , but the Norwegian legation was not interested in the inventions . Gjems @-@ Onstad was later tipped to contact the British military attaché . He got in contact with Major Malcolm Munthe , who in turn was interested in the inventions . Gjems @-@ Onstad was arrested by Swedish police in Stockholm on 25 March 1941 , as parts of Munthe 's organisation had been exposed . Gjems @-@ Onstad was imprisoned at the Stockholm police station for 13 days , and then for 59 days in the Stockholm Remand Prison . On 23 May 1941 the government decided that he was to be expelled and banned from entering Sweden ( the ban was repealed after the war ) . He was originally scheduled to be deported to Canada via Moscow and China , but the plans were halted due to the German invasion of the Soviet Union . He was instead sent to the Norwegian refugee camp in <unk> . He was ordered by the British to escape from <unk> in October 1941 and travel to Norway . He was captured by the Swedish Home Guard close to the Norwegian border , but was sent by plane to the UK by Swedish authorities in December . 
 = = = In the resistance = = = 
 After arriving in the UK , Gjems @-@ Onstad joined the Norwegian Independent Company 1 ( Kompani Linge ) and took British military education . The British decided in 1943 to deploy him to Trøndelag in Norway together with Odd Sørli , Johnny Pevik and Nils <unk> Hansen . The deployment was necessary as Evald Hansen and Herluf Nygaard had been captured and tortured in December 1942 ( Nygaard later escaped , Hansen died at <unk> ) . Sørli and Gjems @-@ Onstad were set to maintain Lark , establish radio connection with London and get intelligence about the German battleship Tirpitz , at the time located in the Trondheimsfjord . When he was training at Glen More Lodge near Aviemore , Gjems @-@ Onstad was ordered to go to London , where he was supplied with a 20 kg radio transmitter and other equipment . Together with Sørli he travelled to Inverness by train , and to Shetland by plane , under stormy weather conditions . They initially set out with the fishing boat Harald II from Scalloway in late February , but due to unusually stormy weather they were driven back to Shetland three times after three unsuccessful attempts to reach Ålesund ; the last attempt destroyed their equipment as the boat was <unk> open . They had their equipment replaced , and set out for Kristiansund in March instead on a bigger boat . With easier , yet still poor weather , the voyage took two days . When they reached land they noticed that they had reached Kya Lighthouse , much farther to the north of their original destination , but they decided to make landfall anyway . From there they travelled with fake identification via Namsos to Trondheim , where they reunited with fellow Lark members Johnny Pevik and Nils <unk> Hansen , the other group sent from London . Gjems @-@ Onstad thereafter assisted Pevik and Hansen with transporting five tons of weapons from an uninhabited island near <unk> to Trondheim . 
 Lark received missions from London ( sometimes via Stockholm ) , and constituted the leadership of Milorg in Trøndelag where they in practice were the same entity . Gjems @-@ Onstad started his operations in Trondheim by establishing radio connection with London and operating the radio transmitter , and he soon became one of the most important persons in the leadership of Milorg . His saboteur activity included to prepare the sinking of Tirpitz , but the plans were never realised as the ship had left the Trondheimsfjord in early 1943 . Sørli commanded Gjems @-@ <unk> to a spontaneous assassination of Nazi collaborator Ivar Grande after spotting him incidentally , but Gjems @-@ Onstad aborted after noticing a division of Russian POWs , fearing for what in turn might happen to them if he went through with the assassination . Some days later he again plotted to assassinate Grande together with Sørli and <unk> <unk> . They delivered a box booby trapped with an egg hand grenade to his home , but Grande foiled the attempt with advice Norwegian Gestapo agent Henry Rinnan ( who was present at the time ) had received on not to open such boxes . Following the attempted assassination , he was ordered to not get himself involved in any further such attempts , as it was considered too risky for him . Gjems @-@ Onstad took over as leader of the group from Sørli in October 1943 , and it was decided to pull him out of Norway and close the radio station following news that Pevik had been arrested . He left Trondheim for Stockholm later that month , and received training in psychological warfare . 
 When Sørli came to Stockholm in January 1944 he took over for Gjems @-@ Onstad , while Gjems @-@ Onstad was to take over the leadership of Lark as well as to reorganise Milorg . Gjems @-@ Onstad also founded the propaganda organisation Durham when he came back to Trondheim in March 1944 . Lark and Durham were to be kept completely separate , with Gjems @-@ Onstad as their only mutual connection . Durham 's mission was to influence the moral of the enemy , mainly through distributing brochures ( an estimated 115 @,@ 000 copies in total ) and posters ( an estimated 257 @,@ 000 ) , while also to cause irritation by minor sabotage . The brochures were chiefly distributed in the enemy 's quarters , and the posters were put up throughout Trondheim . Members of the group also tore down Nazi posters , sabotaged German vehicles , threw stink bombs into restaurants and cinemas , and applied itching powder — notably in condoms for sale to German soldiers . Sabotage on a bigger scale had to be authorised from London , and was largely discouraged as it would risk unnecessary German reprisals . Gjems @-@ Onstad reported back in Stockholm at the end of June . Eager to bring supplies to Trondheim , he and Sørli soon decided to transport propaganda material , handguns and explosives to the Norwegian border . After finding a lost resistance member in the mountains , Gjems @-@ Onstad joined a course in Alby near Stockholm where he worked as instructor in " silent killing " for a month . He went for a short mission to Trondheim in July in order to insert Egil <unk> as Lark 's new radio operator there . 
 By his next time in Trondheim , the Gestapo had gained knowledge of Gjems @-@ Onstad 's activities , and did their outermost to capture him . Gjems @-@ Onstad went back to Trondheim at the end of October . He was to establish a new radio station , and investigate if Milorg and Lark could be rebuilt , as the organisation had been severely damaged by multiple arrests and murders . Durham was however largely intact . The mission went into a new phase , as the Norwegian resistance started organising defence against potential destructions during the now largely inevitable German withdrawal . A continuation of the scorched earth policy practiced in Northern Norway was particularly feared . Gjems @-@ Onstad and Lark were not to lead the defence , but rather to organise it and train new recruits . In November he authorised the creation of the illegal newspaper For <unk> by his own initiative , the first in Trondheim in years . He also operated the paper DFP , or Deutsche <unk> , a form of black propaganda distributed to German soldiers and officers . He became increasingly frustrated with the damages caused by Rinnan and his gang of Nazi collaborators , and he vocally advocated their assassination . He reported back to Stockholm in November , and as he saw it , little remained of Milorg in Trøndelag after this . He however noted the importance of Durham , which he considered to have grown very powerful . 
 In early 1945 Gjems @-@ Onstad took part in blowing up railway tracks on the stretches around Støren Station , but the group had a limited supply of explosives , and the practical effects of the bombings could thus not cause as much effect as wanted . They could for instance not go through with blowing up the railway bridge near Hovin , which they sought as their main target . He was transferred back to Stockholm in March 1945 , and Durham was dissolved . He reacted with shock that London had decided that it was too dangerous for him to return to Trondheim . He was uneasy about being set on the sideline , and headed a mission of four men from Stockholm to <unk> at the end of the month to receive British sabotage supplies . They established a base of operations , as well as radio connection to the UK by the station Quail . The mission returned to Stockholm in early April , and Gjems @-@ Onstad was transferred to a mission in Northern Norway . He was in Troms at the time of the German capitulation . 
 = = = Decorations , comments = = = 
 In 1944 Gjems @-@ Onstad was promoted to second lieutenant ( <unk> ) . He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire in 1941 , and decorated with the Haakon VII 70th Anniversary Medal in 1942 , the St. Olav 's Medal With Oak Branch in 1944 , the Defence Medal , War Medal 1939 – 1945 , 1939 – 45 Star and the Norwegian Defence Medal in 1945 and the Norwegian War Cross with Sword in 1947 . As such he was one of Norway 's highest decorated war heroes . In 1947 he played himself in the documentary film Det <unk> fram about the Norwegian resistance movement in Trondheim . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad became critical of the " retracted regional leadership " of the Home Front ( <unk> ) which he became aware of in late 1944 . According to him , he and his fellow resistance members had not even heard of their existence . He sent a wire to London requesting that they should take over what remained of Milorg , rather than remaining passive during the occupation only to step forward as leaders of Milorg when the war was over . He became more critical when he became aware that they had started entering the administration in London and Stockholm , according to him without the necessary experience from practical fieldwork . He was shocked at the recklessness of one of them who arrived at one of their bases in Trondheim , concluding that they " obviously had no idea about how strong the infiltration really was in Trondheim , nor how we worked . " The regional leadership that stepped forward after the war was according to Gjems @-@ Onstad not identical with the actual leadership of Lark and Milorg during the war . 
 Historians have noted that it was " very surprising " that Erling <unk> stepped forward as the leader of the Home Front in Trøndelag after the German capitulation . He had entered the administration in Stockholm in February 1945 , but he had not been contacted whatsoever by Lark . The decision of putting Gjems @-@ Onstad on the sideline in March 1945 led him to become increasingly critical of the leadership in London , which had gradually become more Norwegian than British , and subsequently decayed into what Gjems @-@ Onstad considered to be a lack of <unk> . He also questioned Norway 's military abilities in a possible future war in Norway , based on post @-@ war developments . According to Gjems @-@ Onstad , what influenced him and his contemporaries to join the resistance was a national feeling that — speaking some 60 years after war — he then considered that was " almost gone . " 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad deliberated his post @-@ war views on the war in a 2008 ten @-@ minute television special . As he saw it , the Norwegian Labour Party government before the war stood " entirely on the side of the Soviet Union . " He pointed to the Soviet Union as the greatest murderer of the war , and considered that nobody had " opened their eyes " to the fact that the Soviet Union was the only country that won territorial gains following the war . While he maintained that the coup headed by Vidkun Quisling was both bad and illegal , he considered that Quisling should be judged softer in light of the situation at the time . He pointed to the government fleeing the country , and what he considered the " pitiful " reaction of Prime Minister Johan Nygaardsvold . He also noted that while some of the figures in the Quisling regime had acted out far too harshly , some others had tried to maintain Norway 's interests against the occupiers ; the alternative of letting the Germans run the country completely unopposed under Josef Terboven could in his mind have ended up far worse . Gjems @-@ Onstad said he believed that the treason by Quisling should be compared with the lack of preparations for war by Nygaardsvold and the Labour Party government . Gjems @-@ Onstad also complained that he for unexplained reasons had been kept away from public arrangements related to the Second World War . He said he had not been invited to a single such event . He was also in possession of a large archive of wartime material from the resistance movement in Trøndelag , but said he had not been approached with interest by any public institution . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad joined the Norwegian Home Guard after the war . From 1947 to 1959 he held the rank of captain there . He was mobilisation manager as military lawyer colonel at Strike Command Southern Norway ( <unk> Sør @-@ Norge ) , one of the Air Commands of the Royal Norwegian Air Force , from 1970 to 1980 . He also completed his education in law , graduating with a cand.jur. degree in 1948 . He worked as a judge in southern Buskerud from 1948 to 1949 , and in 1949 he opened a law firm in Oslo . From 1957 he had access to work with Supreme Court cases . He was also a consultant or secretary for Norsk <unk> , <unk> / <unk> <unk> <unk> and for the local branch of the Norwegian Bar Association . He was a board member of the local Bar Association chapter from 1960 to 1964 and of Max Manus AS , the eponymous company belonging to former resistance member Max Manus , from 1965 to 1969 . Gjems @-@ Onstad had served with Manus in the Norwegian Home Guard after the war , and had met his later wife <unk> Manus for the first time in 1943 when she worked as a military attaché in Stockholm . The three remained lifetime close friends ever since they met during the war . 
 In 1961 Gjems @-@ Onstad left his lawyer 's firm to work as a consultant in Den norske <unk> . He became a central figure in the <unk> 's plans to develop the Vaterland neighbourhood in Oslo . AS Vaterland was created soon after the <unk> had been granted construction rights in 1965 , and was a project designated for planning to develop the Vaterland neighbourhood into a business and office centre . Gjems @-@ Onstad was a board member of AS Vaterland from 1966 to 1972 , and was its CEO from 1970 . He soon got the nickname the " Vaterland King " ( <unk> ) , after a local 1930s house owner . After a while , the plans for the development was dropped , as neither the bank nor the municipality saw it to be in their interests to realise the plans . Gjems @-@ Onstad was removed from his position with a golden parachute of NOK 500 @,@ 000 in 1972 and lost his faith in the project . 
 From 1972 to 1977 he operated a lawyer 's firm in Oslo again , and from 1977 he moved his office to Hvalstad and worked as a defender in Asker and Bærum District Court . He retired as a defender in 1990 , but remained a lawyer until 2001 . During the 1980s he defended several anti @-@ immigration activists , including Vivi Krogh , Jan <unk> and Arne Myrdal . He also stated that he by 1994 had helped draft the wills of several anonymous persons who wanted to designate their fortunes , ranging from NOK 100 @,@ 000 to NOK 10 million , to persons and organisations working against immigration . 
 = = Sports official = = 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad had an active career in sports . He represented the club SK Rye which he joined on 1 August 1936 , and was made an honorary member of the club in 1986 . He became the Norwegian junior champion in cycling in 1939 . He was also an active race walker , with two sixth places in the Norwegian championships achieved between 1967 and 1969 . He chaired the Norwegian Cycling Federation from 1959 to 1965 and the Norwegian Walking Association from 1967 to 1973 . He was a member of the Norwegian Olympic Committee from 1959 to 1973 and a deputy board member of the Norwegian Confederation of Sports from 1965 to 1967 . He was an official for Norway at the Summer Olympics in 1960 and 1972 , and in 1993 he sat on the committee that organized the 1993 UCI Road World Championships . In 1967 he initiated <unk> , a yearly <unk> from Trondheim to Oslo . He completed the race himself more than fifteen times ; the last times with the starting number " 1 " . 
 = = Politics = = 
 = = = Member of Parliament = = = 
 From 1960 to 1964 Gjems @-@ Onstad was a member of the school board in Oslo , representing the Conservative Party . He was also a member of the libertarian organisation Libertas , but had left it by 1971 as he considered that it had become " too tame . " When Anders Lange 's Party ( ALP ) was founded in 1973 he joined the party and became deputy leader under Anders Lange . He had been present at the founding meeting at Saga kino , and was offered a place in the party 's central leadership by Anders Lange after they one day incidentally met outside Gjems @-@ Onstad 's lawyer 's office . From then on he was the most central person in the party after Lange himself . Besides his leading positions in business and sports , Gjems @-@ Onstad had for years expressed his political views in newspapers and journals , which broadly coincided with Lange 's views . By offering him positions in the party , Lange particularly thought that Gjems @-@ Onstad could help develop the party politically and organisationally . In the 1973 parliamentary election he won a seat in the Norwegian Parliament from Akershus , and became a member of the Standing Committee on Finance and the Election Committee . During his term he set a new record for number of times speaking to the assembly — 325 times in one year . 
 At the start of his parliamentary term he made some proposals that were opposed by the entire parliament , including his own party . He proposed in November 1973 to introduce gun and shooting training as an optional course for students in high school , and to separate church and state ( with its financial implications ) . The proposals were criticised in a press statement by Anders Lange and the party 's two other MPs . Turmoil later also erupted in the Akershus and Bærum chapters of the party , and calls were made for expelling Gjems @-@ Onstad due to his proposals in parliament ; this wing however left the party in 1975 after being in clear minority . Gjems @-@ Onstad and Lange nonetheless stood together in their conflict with Carl I. Hagen and Kristofer Almås , who sought to strengthen the party 's deliberately loose organisation . After Lange 's death in 1974 , Gjems @-@ Onstad became leader of the party 's parliamentary group . While Hagen and Almås had broken out and formed the Reform Party earlier the same year , Gjems @-@ Onstad welcomed Hagen back to the party in 1975 for " constructive cooperation " . He thereafter changed to support the work led by Hagen and Arve <unk> of strengthening the party organisation . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad 's cooperation with Hagen was however not to last . In early 1976 Gjems @-@ Onstad voiced his discontent with the ever @-@ ongoing conflicts within the party , and he had by mid @-@ year not decided whether or not he wanted to run for re @-@ election . He eventually felt squeezed out of the party , and wanted no part in the intriguing he considered Hagen to represent . He was replaced as parliamentary leader of the party at the start of October . After he in turn recommended voters to rather vote for the Conservative Party in an interview with Aftenposten , he was finally expelled from the party by a unanimously approved motion put forward by Carl I. Hagen later the same month . Gjems @-@ Onstad finished his term as an independent . 
 = = = Positions in parliament = = = 
 Before the 1973 election Gjems @-@ Onstad advocated a restrictive immigration policy in an interview with Morgenbladet . After being elected to parliament , he was the sole member of the Finance Committee to oppose agreements of raising fuel taxes in 1973 . He proposed steep budget cuts in 1974 , notably in press support and in the Office of the Prime Minister . He proposed to abolish the Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of Consumer Affairs and Administration , as well as 22 laws the same year . Gjems @-@ Onstad also wanted to abolish conscription . In 1975 he criticised parliament for violating the Norwegian Constitution by regularly holding session with less than half of the representatives present . Prime Minister Trygve Bratteli in turn claimed that Gjems @-@ Onstad " undermined democracy " because he was present and spoke in parliament too much . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad was among the signatories of a petition in 1974 that called on the Norwegian government to secure Israel 's existence . He wanted to terminate the Norwegian government 's support of liberation movements in Portuguese Guinea the same year . He proposed to end all public foreign aid , and instead grant tax deduction to private donations . He also proposed to prioritise Norwegian interests in Antarctica higher , and to align Norway 's ambassador to Thailand with South Vietnam . He advocated expelling the five Soviet KGB spies who had been exposed in Norway in 1975 , but gained no support from the government . He was criticised by the Norwegian Foreign Minister the same year for claiming that Tanzanian President Julius Nyerere used Norwegian taxes for " national socialist " experiments of forcibly moving populations . 
 = = = Gjems @-@ Onstad and Africa = = = 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad travelled extensively in Africa . He toured Angola for a week in 1973 , and was in Guinea @-@ Bissau in 1974 . He later claimed that blacks and whites had lived peacefully together in these countries when he had visited them before their decolonisation — after which he considered the conditions to be grim — and that the standard of living among blacks had been higher there than in many other places in Africa . He came to regard it as a life 's mission to work for Africa , and believed that the Norwegian government 's policy in Africa contributed to destroy the continent through supporting " wars of liberation " and failed foreign aid . He maintained that his prime concern was to warn against the entrenchment of socialism and communism in Africa . 
 He also travelled extensively throughout South Africa , and said that conditions for blacks were better there than in other African countries . He was introduced to a South African official visiting Norway in 1974 by Anders Lange , and visited the country himself in 1975 after being invited by the South African Department of Information . He met with figures including Connie Mulder , and following Lange 's death he considered himself as the continuation of Lange 's legacy with regards to the country . He supported the South African policy since the 1970s of gradually dismantling the apartheid system , which included the granting of independence to tribal homelands . He was in the country in April 1976 for a conference that was to prepare the establishment of Transkei . He later considered the homelands to be true democratic states governed by the rule of law , which he considered that many other African states were not . Gjems @-@ Onstad strongly opposed the African National Congress and the Norwegian government 's support of the group , as he believed their agenda would lead to civil war and a government led by revolutionary socialists — as had happened in other African countries . He later pointed to the development in former Rhodesia , Robert Mugabe 's Zimbabwe . He arranged several study trips to South Africa , and was part of a group of eight Norwegians who toured the country in 1987 and issued an " apology " to the South African government for the Norwegian government 's policy towards the country . 
 He went to Rhodesia in April 1979 as the sole Norwegian observer of the general election , after he had been invited by the Rhodesian Department of Information . He admitted at the same time that he for years had corresponded with the Rhodesian government about how he considered various institutions and individuals in Norway , particularly in the news media . The relationship was initiated after Gjems @-@ Onstad had written a letter of sympathy to Rhodesian Prime Minister Ian Smith some years ahead . When in Salisbury , he met with Smith , Foreign Minister P. K. van der Byl and Head of the Military Peter Walls . Eager to participate with the government army during the Rhodesian Bush War , he was authorised by Walls to patrol with Rhodesian Security Forces around a garrison near Lake Kariba for two days . While he earlier had written he did not think democracy and human rights was optimal in the country — he considered Botswana to be one of the better countries — he considered rule of law to be better than in countries the Norwegian government had supported financially , such as Idi Amin 's Uganda . 
 = = = Later political activity = = = 
 Carl I. Hagen wrote in his book <unk> <unk> <unk> in 1984 that he would put his office on the line in order to prevent Gjems @-@ Onstad from making a " comeback " to the Progress Party ( ALP 's successor ) , despite his alleged requests . Gjems @-@ Onstad criticised Hagen strongly for his complicity in the establishment of a Labour Party government in 1986 , and was a member of the Conservative Party by 1988 . He supported prospects of a Conservative Party government led by Jan P. Syse , but criticised the Norwegian political system for being a " caricature " of democracy , instead considering it a <unk> . Gjems @-@ Onstad had according to his own statement in 1987 not seen any reason for getting himself involved in the public debate about immigration until then . The reaction followed a comment by Conservative Party student politician Knut Albert Solem , in which he " presupposed " that anti @-@ immigration sentiment was based on feelings of " foreign @-@ hate " , something which Gjems @-@ Onstad disputed . Gjems @-@ Onstad contested the 1989 parliamentary election for the Stop Immigration party in Akershus , and chaired its regional chapter from 1988 to 1990 . He was expelled from the party together with <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> due to their vocal criticism of the leadership of the party 's leader Jack Erik <unk> . In 1991 Gjems @-@ Onstad ran unsuccessfully in the local election for the Fatherland Party , and he was later active in Folkebevegelsen mot innvandring . He was also present at the meeting at <unk> kino in 1995 . Gjems @-@ Onstad expressed his outrage at the Lund Report in 1996 after it was revealed that he had been under surveillance by the Norwegian Police Security Service ( <unk> ) , considering it defamatory and demanding an apology . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad came to believe that the recent mass immigration to Norway was a greater threat than the Nazi invasion of Norway , although he made clear he had nothing against " normal immigration " and individuals , nor about Norwegians finding spouses in other countries . What he stated he was concerned about was increasing ethnic tensions and Norwegians being outnumbered in Norway in the course of the 21st century , and he stated that what worried him the very most was the growth of Islam . Gjems @-@ Onstad praised Progress Party MPs Vidar Kleppe and Øystein Hedstrøm at their election campaign rally in 1999 , and participated in the non @-@ partisan demonstration against Muslim prayer calling in 2000 . He was involved in the Conservative Party in Asker from 2005 to 2007 , but joined the Pensioners ' Party in 2007 as their top ballot candidate for the municipal election . As Gjems @-@ Onstad called for a halt of immigration to Asker , he was instantly denounced by his own party . He also maintained that " Norway is the fatherland of the Norwegians , and Norwegians are a nation within the white race , " and during a television debate with fellow lawyer and politician Abid Raja said that he could not call himself a Norwegian , only a Pakistani @-@ Norwegian — they both nevertheless affirmed that they had great respect for each other . Gjems @-@ Onstad was expelled from the Pensioners ' Party before the election , but removal from the ballot is legally impossible . As the election was held the Pensioners ' Party did not win any seats , and the local party leadership expressed their delight . Gjems @-@ Onstad was also a member of Stop Islamisation of Norway , and participated in a demonstration alongside the organisation 's leader Arne <unk> in 2009 . 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad made news in 2008 when he had talks with the disturbed man who fired a gun towards a refugee centre . He was also involved in an heritage distribution controversy . In her will , millionaire Clara Westin declared that NOK 2 @.@ 5 million be given to anti @-@ immigration activists , and that the distribution be decided by a board consisting of four people . Egil Karlsen backed out and gave up his vote to Gjems @-@ Onstad , and the other three were Gjems @-@ Onstad , <unk> Aasen of Folkebevegelsen mot innvandring and Bjarne Pettersen . It surfaced that suggestions by board members included the mother of child murder convict Ole Nicolai Kvisler . While the background for involving Kvisler was his anti @-@ immigration views , the pressing issue was the matter of his court ruling . Having followed the case closely as a former lawyer , Gjems @-@ Onstad had disputed the court ruling as he believed there was not evidence to conclude that Kvisler had any more than possibly a subsidiary role in the murder ; he thus explained the suggestion with providing funds for reopening his case . Gjems @-@ Onstad maintained that it was only the other convict , Joe Erling Jahr , who had committed the murder . Pettersen had in addition wanted to distribute money to people from his circle around <unk> ( a group Gjems @-@ Onstad loathed ) , such as Tore <unk> and Øyvind Heian , but was squeezed out of the board after this was opposed by Gjems @-@ Onstad and Aasen . The left @-@ wing anti @-@ racist organization SOS <unk> petitioned the Norwegian state to confiscate Gjems @-@ Onstad 's war decorations , but to no avail . After all disputes were resolved , it was not made public who actually received any money . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad was married in 1949 to <unk> Pedersen ( 9 November 1921 – 2 July 2003 ) . They divorced in 1973 . He was married for the second time to Inger Opseth ( born 2 October 1937 ) in 1974 . Gjems @-@ Onstad met Inger when he worked for the Vaterland @-@ project , where she worked as an interior architect . Gjems @-@ Onstad had three children , including his son , jurist Ole Gjems @-@ Onstad . 
 He lived in Hvalstad , Asker , where he owned a nine <unk> small farm . The property included three equal parts of garden , forest and arable land . He often cut lumber from the forest to build his own furniture . At various times , he had rabbits , sheep , cows , calves , piglets and a fish pond of brown trout at his property . According to himself , he kept the livestock largely in protest against tax authorities , while also as a hobby . 
 Erik Gjems @-@ Onstad died in November 2011 after short illness at the Bærum Hospital . He left behind his wife , children , grandchildren and great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Gjems @-@ Onstad has authored several books . He wrote about the psychological warfare of the Norwegian resistance movement in <unk> : <unk> <unk> i Trøndelag mot <unk> <unk> 1943 @-@ 45 , released in 1981 . Durham was the codeword for the operations which to a large extent consisted of distributing flyers , brochures and posters with the purpose of demoralising the Germans . This was also the topic in <unk> <unk> i Norge under <unk> <unk> 1940 @-@ 45 , published in 1994 . In 1990 he wrote about the resistance group Lark in <unk> : Milorg i Trøndelag 1940 @-@ 1945 . He released the book <unk> og St. <unk> med <unk> in 1995 , which gives an overview of all the holders of Norway 's highest wartime decorations . The reasons given for awarding the War Cross ( Norway 's highest decoration ) was in the book also made public for the first time . 
 In 1984 he published the books Dagbok fra Tanzania : U @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> , a travel diary from Tanzania discussing what he considered to be failed foreign aid , and a travel diary from Israel , Dagbok fra Israel : Reiser og tanker . He wrote about alternative Norwegian policies towards South Africa in the 1985 book Syd @-@ Afrika i dag : <unk> eller <unk> . These books were published by <unk> , of which he was board chairman from 1983 to 1990 . In 1994 , he chronicled the trials against Arne Myrdal in Myrdal @-@ <unk> . Gjems @-@ Onstad has in addition released his own periodical , <unk> og <unk> . 
 = List of battleships of Spain = 
 In the latter half of the 19th century , the Spanish Navy had built a series of ironclad warships that culminated in the barbette ship Pelayo in the 1880s . Following the destruction of much of the Spanish fleet in the Spanish – American War in 1898 , Spain slowly began to rebuild its navy . In the early 20th century , the Spanish Navy built three battleships and planned several more ; the three ships that were completed were the vessels of the España class . These ships were the smallest dreadnought @-@ type battleships ever built . A further three ships of the Reina Victoria Eugenia class were authorized by the Navy Law of 1913 , but the outbreak of World War I prevented these ships from being built , as Spain was heavily dependent on Great Britain for material and technical expertise . The three completed battleships all served in the Rif War in North Africa , where the lead ship , España , ran aground and was wrecked . 
 Following the end of the First World War , occasional plans for the construction of new battleships were proposed , including a small design deriving from Britain 's powerful Nelson @-@ class battleships . However , nothing had come of these efforts by the time of the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War . Following the victory of Francisco Franco 's Nationalists in that conflict , in which both of the surviving Spanish battleships — one serving on the side of the Nationalists , the other on that of the Republicans — had been destroyed , proposals for the construction of four fast battleships to an Italian design , as well as the construction of " large cruisers " - the only battlecruiser designs proposed for or by Spain - were made . However , the outbreak of the Second World War resulted in these plans being disrupted . 
 = = España class = = 
 Authorized under the Navy Law of 1908 and assigned to the Primera Escuadra ( First Squadron ) , the España class were the first and only Spanish dreadnoughts , and also the smallest of that type of ship ever to be built . Considered by some to be more " Dreadnought @-@ type coast @-@ defense ships " than pure battleships , the three ships of the class were built in Ferrol by Sociedad Española de Construcción Naval ( SECN ) , the lead ship being completed in under four years , but the onset of World War I resulted in delays to the remaining two ships , and especially the third , as equipment and armament deliveries from England were disrupted due to the war . 
 Obsolete before completion due to the rapid progress of naval technology , the <unk> saw combat service in the Rif Wars and the Spanish Civil War , España being wrecked on the Moroccan coast in 1923 , Alfonso XIII being renamed España following the establishment of the Second Spanish Republic in 1931 . In the mid @-@ 1930s , it was proposed that the two surviving ships of the class be rebuilt as " pocket battleships " , including a lengthening of the hull and rearranging of the turrets to a centreline alignment . By 1936 , a more modest rebuild was proposed , including conversion to oil firing , but the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War put this plan to rest . 
 The remaining two ships of the class , one operating on each side , were both lost in the Spanish Civil War . España ( ex @-@ Alfonso XIII ) , serving the Nationalist side , struck a mine in April 1937 and sunk , while Jaime I fighting as part of the Republican navy , suffered an internal explosion at Cartagena in June 1937 , being scuttled as a precautionary measure afterwards . The wreck was raised the following year before being scrapped in 1939 . 
 = = Reina Victoria Eugenia class = = 
 Authorized as the Plan de la Segunda Escuadra under the Navy Law of 1913 , the three ships of the Reina Victoria Eugenia @-@ class , named for King Alfonso 's queen consort and designated ships " A " , " B " and " C " ( only " A " having a formally proposed name ) , were designed by Vickers @-@ Armstrongs and were planned to displace 21 @,@ 000 long tons ( 21 @,@ 000 t ) with a speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Early plans for the type called for an armament of 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) guns , however financial difficulties resulted in the selection of an armament of eight 13 @.@ 5 in ( 343 mm ) weapons instead . As significant technical assistance from Britain would have been required for construction of the class , the outbreak of the First World War led to the cancellation of the project . 
 = = Postwar projects = = 
 Following the end of the First World War , Spain did not participate in the Washington Naval Conference which limited battleship construction for its signatories . Nevertheless , battleships of the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) displacement class — the limit under the Washington Naval Treaty — were considered by the Spanish Navy in the early 1920s . By the early 1930s , the navy made proposals for a " reduced Nelson type " ship , although nothing came of either project . 
 After his victory in the Spanish Civil War , Francisco Franco 's plans for the Spanish Navy included the acquisition of four modern battleships , and a variation on the Italian Littorio @-@ class battleships was the favored candidate to fill the requirement . In late 1939 , a Spanish mission to Italy received assurances of technical support for the construction of ships of the class in Spanish yards , and a slipway of sufficient size to construct two ships at a time was built at Ferrol . However , Italy 's entry into the Second World War in 1940 , combined with the limited resources of Spain , led to the cancellation of the project . 
 A " super @-@ Treaty cruiser " type was also projected as part of Franco 's naval expansion plans , with some designs proposed for the type calling for an armament of six 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) guns ; alternatively , some have speculated that the Spanish desired to purchase the two triple 283 @-@ millimetre ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) turrets that were available following the decision by the German Kriegsmarine to rebuild the damaged battleship Gneisenau with twin 381 @-@ millimetre ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) turrets . The war situation meant that nothing was to come of this project either . 
 = Stan Musial = 
 Stanley Frank " Stan " Musial ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ; born Stanisław Franciszek <unk> ; November 21 , 1920 – January 19 , 2013 ) , nicknamed " Stan the Man " , was an American Major League Baseball ( MLB ) outfielder and first baseman . He spent 22 seasons playing for the St. Louis Cardinals , from 1941 to 1944 and 1946 to 1963 . Widely considered to be one of the greatest and most consistent hitters in baseball history , Musial was a first @-@ ballot inductee into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1969 , and was also selected to the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame in the inaugural class of 2014 . 
 Musial batted .331 over his career and set National League ( NL ) records for career hits ( 3 @,@ 630 ) , runs batted in ( 1 @,@ 951 ) , games played ( 3 @,@ 026 ) , at bats ( 10 @,@ 972 ) , runs scored ( 1 @,@ 949 ) and doubles ( 725 ) , most of which were later broken by Pete Rose ; his 475 career home runs then ranked second in NL history behind Mel Ott 's total of 511 . His 6 @,@ 134 total bases remained a major league record until surpassed by Hank Aaron , and his hit total still ranks fourth all @-@ time , and is the highest by any player who spent his career with only one team . A seven @-@ time batting champion with identical totals of 1 @,@ 815 hits at home and on the road , he was named the National League 's ( NL ) Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) three times and led St. Louis to three World Series championship titles . He also shares the major league record for the most All @-@ Star Games played ( 24 ) with Hank Aaron and Willie Mays . 
 Musial was born in Donora , Pennsylvania , where he frequently played baseball , whether informally or in organized settings , eventually playing on the baseball team at Donora High School . Signed to a professional contract by the St. Louis Cardinals as a pitcher in 1938 , Musial was converted into an outfielder prior to his major league debut in 1941 . Noted for his unique batting stance , he quickly established himself as a consistent and productive hitter . In his first full season , 1942 , the Cardinals won the World Series . The following year , he led the NL in six different offensive categories and earned his first MVP award . He was also named to the NL All @-@ Star squad for the first time ; he appeared in every All @-@ Star game in every subsequent season he played . Musial won his second World Series championship in 1944 , then missed the entire 1945 season while serving with the Navy . 
 When he returned to baseball in 1946 , Musial resumed his consistent hitting . That year he earned his second MVP award and third World Series title . His third MVP award came in 1948 , when he finished one home run shy of winning baseball 's Triple Crown . After struggling offensively in 1959 , Musial used a personal trainer to help maintain his productivity until he decided to retire in 1963 . At the time of his retirement , he held or shared 17 major league records , 29 National League records , and nine All @-@ Star Game records . Ironically , in 1964 , the season following his retirement , the Cardinals went on to defeat the New York Yankees in an epic 7 @-@ game clash , for St. Louis ' first World Series championship in nearly two decades ( a team which included future Hall of Famer Lou Brock performing what would have likely been Musial 's left field duties ) . In addition to overseeing businesses , such as a restaurant both before and after his playing career , Musial served as the Cardinals ' general manager in 1967 , winning the pennant and World Series , then quitting that position . He also became noted for his harmonica playing , a skill he acquired during his playing career . Known for his modesty and sportsmanship , Musial was selected for the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team in 1999 . In February 2011 , President Barack Obama presented Musial with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , one of the highest civilian awards that can be bestowed on a person by the United States government . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Musial was born in Donora , Pennsylvania , the fifth of the six children ( four girls and two boys ) of Lukasz and Mary ( <unk> ) <unk> ( / <unk> / , <unk> @-@ show ) . His mother was of Carpatho @-@ <unk> descent and his father was a Polish immigrant who chose the name Stanisław Franciszek for his first son , though his father always referred to Musial using the Polish nickname <unk> , pronounced " <unk> " . Musial frequently played baseball with his brother Ed and other friends during his childhood , and considered Lefty Grove his favorite ballplayer . Musial also had the benefit of learning about baseball from his neighbor Joe <unk> , a former minor league pitcher . When he enrolled in school , his name was formally changed to Stanley Frank Musial . 
 At age 15 Musial joined the Donora <unk> , a semi @-@ professional team managed by <unk> . In his <unk> debut he pitched 6 innings and struck out 13 batters , all of them adults . Musial also played one season on the newly revived Donora High School baseball team , where one of his teammates was Buddy Griffey , father of MLB player Ken Griffey , Sr. and grandfather to Ken Griffey , Jr . Baseball statistician Bill James described the younger Griffey , in comparison to Musial , as " the second @-@ best left @-@ handed hitting , left @-@ handed throwing outfielder ever born in Donora , Pennsylvania , on November 21 . " His exploits as a rising player in Pennsylvania earned him the nickname " The Donora Greyhound " . 
 Musial also played basketball , for which he was offered a scholarship by the University of Pittsburgh . Meanwhile , the St. Louis Cardinals had scouted Musial as a pitcher and , in 1937 , offered him a professional contract after a workout with their Class D Penn State League affiliate . Musial 's father initially resisted the idea of his son pursuing a baseball career , but reluctantly gave his consent after lobbying by both Musial and his mother . Musial also credited his school librarian Helen <unk> for pointing out that baseball was his dream and advising him to pursue it professionally . In what was then a common practice , the Cardinals did not file the contract with the baseball commissioner 's office until June 1938 . This preserved Musial 's amateur eligibility , and he was still able to participate in high school sports , leading Donora High School 's basketball team to a playoff appearance . He then reported to the Cardinals ' Class D affiliate in West Virginia , the Williamson Red Birds . 
 = = Professional baseball career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1938 – 41 ) = = = 
 Musial 's rookie year with Williamson in 1938 was a period of adjustment both on and off the field . He began gaining more in @-@ depth knowledge about baseball strategy while posting a 6 – 6 win – loss record and a 4 @.@ 66 earned run average ( ERA ) , to go along with a .258 batting average . Off the field he confronted feelings of homesickness , while learning to live comfortably and independently on his $ 65 @-@ per @-@ month salary . Musial finished his high school education before returning to Williamson in spring 1939 . That season his numbers improved to a 9 – 2 record , a 4 @.@ 30 ERA , and a .352 batting average . 
 Musial spent the 1940 season with the Cardinals ' other Class D team , the Daytona Beach Islanders , where he developed a lifelong friendship with manager Dickie Kerr . His pitching skills improved under the guidance of Kerr , who also recognized his hitting talent , playing him in the outfield between pitching starts . On May 25 , 1940 , Musial married fellow Donora resident , Lillian " Lil " <unk> , in Daytona Beach , and the couple 's first child followed in August . During late August , Musial suffered a shoulder injury while playing in the outfield , and later made an early exit as the starting pitcher in a 12 – 5 playoff game loss . For a while Musial considered leaving baseball entirely , complaining that he could not afford to support himself and his wife on the $ 16 a week pay . Kerr talked him out of it , and even took the <unk> into his own home to relieve the financial burden . To repay the debt Musial bought Kerr a $ 20 @,@ 000 home in Houston in 1958 . In 113 games in 1940 he hit .311 , while compiling an 18 – 5 pitching record that included 176 strikeouts and 145 walks . 
 Musial was assigned to the Class AA Columbus Red Birds to begin 1941 , though manager , Burt Shotton , and Musial himself quickly realized that the previous year 's injury had considerably weakened his arm . He was reassigned to the Class C Springfield Cardinals as a full @-@ time outfielder , and he later credited manager Ollie Vanek for displaying confidence in his hitting ability . During 87 games with Springfield , Musial hit a league @-@ leading .379 before being promoted to the Rochester Red Wings of the International League . He was noted for his unique batting stance , a crouch in which his back was seemingly square to the pitcher . This stance was later described by pitcher Ted Lyons as " a kid peeking around the corner to see if the cops were coming " . According to a 1950 description by author Tom Meany , " The bent knees and the crouch give him the appearance of a coiled spring , although most pitchers think of him as a coiled rattlesnake . " Musial continued to play well in Rochester — in one three @-@ game stretch , he had 11 hits . He was called up to the Cardinals for the last two weeks of the 1941 season . 
 = = = Major leagues ( 1941 – 44 ) = = = 
 Musial made his major league debut during the second game of a doubleheader at Sportsman 's Park on September 17 , 1941 . The Cardinals were in the midst of a pennant race with the Brooklyn Dodgers ; in 12 games , Musial collected 20 hits for a .426 batting average . Despite Musial 's late contributions , the Cardinals finished two and one @-@ half games behind the 100 @-@ game @-@ winning Dodgers . 
 Cardinals manager Billy Southworth used Musial as a left fielder to begin 1942 , sometimes lifting him for a pinch @-@ hitter against left @-@ handed pitching . Musial was hitting .315 by late June , as the Cardinals resumed battling the Dodgers for first place in the National League ( NL ) . The Cardinals took sole possession of first place on September 13 , and when Musial caught a fly ball to end the first game of a doubleheader on September 27 they clinched the pennant with their 105th win . He finished the season with a .315 batting average and 72 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 140 games . Musial received national publicity when he was named by St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch sports editor J. Roy Stockton as his choice for Rookie of the Year in a Saturday Evening Post article . 
 The Cardinals played the American League champion New York Yankees in the 1942 World Series . Representing the winning run in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 1 at Sportsman 's Park , Musial grounded out with the bases loaded to seal a Yankees victory . Musial 's first hit of the Series was an RBI single that provided the margin of victory in Game 2 , allowing the Cardinals to tie the Series . Over the next three games at Yankee Stadium , Musial had three more hits as the Cardinals defeated the Yankees in the Series four games to one . Musial batted .222 for the Series , with two runs scored . 
 Musial 's 1943 season started with a brief contract holdout in spring training . He made the National League All @-@ Star team for the first time as a starting left fielder and got a double in the All @-@ Star Game on July 13 . He finished the season leading the major leagues in hitting with a .357 batting average and led the NL in hits ( 220 ) , doubles ( 48 ) , triples ( 20 ) , total bases ( 347 ) , on @-@ base percentage ( .425 ) , and slugging percentage ( <unk> ) . This performance earned him his first NL Most Valuable Player Award , ahead of teammate and catcher Walker Cooper ( .318 batting average ) . After romping to another NL pennant by 18 games , the Cardinals again faced the Yankees in the 1943 World Series . Musial had a single in the Cardinals ' Game 1 loss , and scored a run in a Game 2 win . The Cardinals did not win another game in the Series , but the loser 's bonus share paid to each Cardinals player ( $ 4 @,@ 321 @.@ 99 ) still amounted to nearly two @-@ thirds of Musial 's regular season salary . 
 United States involvement in World War II began to impinge on Musial 's baseball career in 1944 , as he underwent a physical examination in prelude to possible service in the armed forces . He ultimately remained with the Cardinals for the entire season , posting a .347 batting average with 197 hits . The Cardinals claimed the NL pennant for the third consecutive season , and faced St. Louis 's other major league team , the Browns , in the 1944 World Series . The Browns took a 2 – 1 lead , while Musial hit .250 with zero RBI . He broke out in Game 4 with a two @-@ run home run , single , double , and a walk as part of a 5 – 1 Cardinals win . The Cardinals went on to defeat the Browns in six games , and Musial posted a .304 batting average for the Series . 
 = = = Sojourn in the U.S. Navy ( 1945 – 46 ) = = = 
 Musial enlisted in the United States Navy on January 23 , 1945 , during World War II . He was initially assigned to noncombat duty at the Naval Training Station in Bainbridge , Maryland . In June 1945 , he was assigned to Special Services in Hawaii , and was assigned to a ferry launch unit to bring back damaged ship crews entering Pearl Harbor where he was able to play baseball every afternoon in the naval base 's eight @-@ team league . After being granted emergency leave to see his ailing father in January 1946 , he was briefly assigned to the Philadelphia Navy Yard before his honorable discharge from the Navy as a Seaman Second Class in March 1946 . 
 In 2007 , Musial received the Navy Memorial 's Lone Sailor Award , which honors Navy veterans who have excelled in civilian life . 
 = = = Major leagues ( 1946 – 63 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1946 – 49 = = = = 
 Rejoining the Cardinals under new manager Eddie Dyer , Musial posted a .388 batting average by the middle of May 1946 . He also became close friends with new teammate Red Schoendienst , who had joined the Cardinals during Musial 's absence in 1945 . During the season , Musial ( who was under contract to the Cardinals for $ 13 @,@ 500 in 1946 ) was offered a five @-@ year , $ 125 @,@ 000 contract , plus a $ 50 @,@ 000 bonus , to join the Mexican League . He declined the offer , and after manager Dyer spoke to club owner Sam Breadon , Musial was given a $ 5 @,@ 000 raise later in 1946 . 
 It was also during the 1946 season that Musial acquired his nickname of " The Man " . During the June 23 game against the Dodgers at Ebbets Field , St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch sportswriter Bob Broeg heard Dodger fans chanting whenever Musial came to bat , but could not understand the words . Later that day over dinner , Broeg asked Cardinals traveling secretary Leo Ward if he had understood what the Dodger fans had been chanting . Ward said , " Every time Stan came up they chanted , ' Here comes the man ! ' " " ' That man , ' you mean " , Broeg said . " No , the man " , replied Ward . Broeg mentioned this story in his Post @-@ Dispatch column , and Musial was thereafter known as Stan " The Man " . 
 In June 1946 , Dyer began to use Musial as a first baseman . The Cardinals finished the season tied with the Dodgers , prompting a three @-@ game playoff for the pennant . Musial 's Game 1 triple and Game 2 double contributed to the Cardinals ' two @-@ games @-@ to @-@ none series victory . Facing the Boston Red Sox , the Cardinals won the 1946 World Series four games to three , as Musial had six hits and four RBI . He batted .365 for the season and won his second NL MVP Award , receiving 22 out of a possible 24 first @-@ place votes , finishing ahead of Brooklyn 's Dixie Walker ( .319 batting average ) . 
 Musial began the 1947 season by hitting <unk> in April . On May 9 , team doctor Dr. Robert Hyland confirmed a previous diagnosis of appendicitis , while discovering that Musial was concurrently suffering from tonsillitis . He received treatment , but did not have either his appendix or tonsils surgically removed until after the season ended . Despite his health woes , he finished the year with a batting average of .312 . 
