 = = = = Rocky Maivia ( 1996 – 1997 ) = = = = 
 Johnson made his WWF debut as Rocky Maivia , a combination of his father and grandfather 's ring names , although his real name was acknowledged by the announcers . He was initially reluctant to take this ring name , but was persuaded by Vince McMahon and Jim Ross . He was given the nickname " The Blue Chipper " , and his lineage was played to on TV , where he was hyped as the WWF 's first third @-@ generation wrestler . Maivia , a clean @-@ cut face character , was pushed heavily from the start despite his wrestling inexperience . He debuted on Monday Night Raw as a member of " The Stalker " Barry Windham 's entourage on November 4 , 1996 , and had his first match at Survivor Series on November 17 , in an eight @-@ man elimination tag match ; he was the sole survivor . WWF fans generally rejected him because of his cheesy character . At In Your House 12 : It 's Time , Maivia defeated Salvatore Sincere in his first singles match at a pay @-@ per @-@ view event . On February 13 , 1997 , he won the Intercontinental Championship from Hunter Hearst Helmsley on Monday Night Raw . Maivia successfully defended the title at In Your House 13 : Final Four against Hunter Hearst Helmsley and at WrestleMania 13 against The Sultan . He defeated Bret Hart by disqualification in a title defense on March 31 episode of Raw . On April 20 , at In Your House 14 : Revenge of the ' Taker , he lost to Savio Vega by countout , retaining the title for the final time . Audiences became increasingly hostile toward Maivia , with chants of " Die , Rocky , die ! " and " Rocky sucks ! " being heard during his matches . 
 = = = = The Nation of Domination ( 1997 – 1998 ) = = = = 
 After losing the Intercontinental Championship to Owen Hart on April 28 , 1997 Raw Is War , and suffering a knee injury in a match against Mankind , Maivia returned as a heel . Along with Faarooq , D 'Lo Brown , and Kama , he formed a stable called the Nation of Domination . During this time , he refused to acknowledge the " Rocky Maivia " name , instead referring to himself in the third person as " The Rock " . He insulted the audience in his promos , as well as WWF television interviewers , once calling Kevin Kelly an " ugly hermaphrodite " . 
 At D @-@ Generation X : In Your House , Stone Cold Steve Austin defeated The Rock in under six minutes to retain the Intercontinental Championship . The next night , on Raw Is War , Austin was ordered by Mr. McMahon to defend the title in a rematch , but forfeited it to The Rock instead , handing him the belt before hitting him with the Stone Cold Stunner . The Rock feuded with Austin and Ken Shamrock through the end of 1997 and beginning of 1998 . In March 1998 , The Rock overthrew Faarooq as leader of the Nation of Domination , sparking a feud . He successfully defended the Intercontinental title against Faarooq at Over the Edge : In Your House on May 31 , 1998 . 
 He and The Nation then feuded with Triple H and D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) . The two stable leaders first had a two out of three falls match at Fully Loaded : In Your House for the Intercontinental title , which The Rock retained in controversial fashion . This led to a ladder match at SummerSlam , in which Triple H won the title . At Breakdown : In Your House , The Rock defeated Ken Shamrock and Mankind in a triple threat steel cage match to become the number one contender for the WWF Championship . He then feuded with fellow Nation member Mark Henry , effectively breaking up the stable . 
 = = = = The Corporation ( 1998 – 1999 ) = = = = 
 The Rock 's entertaining promos and ensuing popularity led to a face turn , in which he called himself " The People 's Champion " . This led to a feud with Mr. McMahon , who said he had " a problem with the people " and would thus target " The People 's Champion " . A double turn occurred at Survivor Series , when The Rock defeated McMahon 's associate , Mankind , in the finals of the " Deadly Game " tournament for the vacant WWF Championship in a fashion reminiscent of the Montreal Screwjob . The Rock allied with Vince and Shane McMahon as the crown jewel of their stable , The Corporation . 
 On December 13 , 1998 , at the pay @-@ per @-@ view named for him , Rock Bottom : In Your House , The Rock had a rematch with Mankind for the WWF Championship . Mankind appeared to win the match when The Rock passed out in the Mandible Claw submission move , but Mr. McMahon ruled that since The Rock did not tap out , he retained his title . The Rock continued to feud with Mankind over the WWF Championship , which was traded back and forth between them . First , in the main event of January 4 , 1999 Raw Is War , Mankind defeated The Rock after interference from Steve Austin . Then , in an " I Quit " match at Royal Rumble on January 24 , The Rock regained the title , when a recording of Mankind saying " I quit " from an earlier interview was played over the PA system . On Halftime Heat ( an episode of Sunday Night Heat aired in the same timeslot as the Super Bowl XXXIII halftime show ) on January 31 , Mankind pinned The Rock using a forklift truck in an empty arena match . The two faced off again , at St. Valentine 's Day Massacre : In Your House , in a last man standing match . The bout ended in a draw , meaning Mankind retained the title . Their feud ended on February 15 Raw Is War , when The Rock won his third WWF Championship in a ladder match after Big Show chokeslammed Mankind off the ladder . 
 The Rock lost the WWF Championship to Steve Austin at WrestleMania XV . He also lost the title rematch at Backlash : In Your House . Though he was a heel , his amusing verbal skills led many fans to cheer The Rock . He turned face again after Shane McMahon betrayed him , and began a feud with Triple H , The Undertaker , and The Corporate Ministry . He defeated Triple H at Over the Edge , then lost to the WWF Champion , The Undertaker , at King of the Ring . He lost a number one contender 's match to Triple H at Fully Loaded , after interference from Mr. Ass . This sparked a feud with Mr. Ass , culminating in a " Kiss My Ass " match at SummerSlam , which The Rock won . 
 = = = = The People 's Champion ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 Toward the latter part of 1999 , The Rock had several singles and tag team championship opportunities . He teamed with former enemy Mankind as The Rock ' n ' Sock Connection , after he challenged WWF Tag Team Champions The Undertaker and Big Show , and Mankind offered his help . They won the title for the first of three times . The two performed numerous comedic skits together , including one on Raw Is War called " This Is Your Life " ( based on the TV show ) , in which Mankind produced people from The Rock 's past , such as his high school girlfriend and his high school football coach . The segment earned an 8 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating , one of the highest ratings ever for a Raw segment . 
 At Royal Rumble on January 23 , 2000 , The Rock entered the Royal Rumble match and was one of the final two remaining , along with Big Show ; Show seemingly intended to throw The Rock over the top rope in a running powerslam @-@ like position , but Rock countered the move on the ring apron , sending Big Show to the floor before re @-@ entering the ring as the winner . However , The Rock 's feet hit the floor first , although those watching the event on TV did not see that , until Big Show proved this with additional video footage , and claimed to be the rightful winner . Despite this proof , the original decision could not be reversed , so a number one contender 's match for the WWF Championship was held at No Way Out , which Big Show won after Shane McMahon interfered and hit The Rock in the head with a steel chair as he attempted to execute a People 's Elbow . The Rock defeated Big Show on March 13 episode of Raw Is War to regain the right to face the WWF Champion , Triple H , at WrestleMania 2000 in a fatal four @-@ way elimination match , also including Big Show and Mick Foley . Each wrestler had a McMahon in his corner ; Triple H had his wife , Stephanie , Foley had Linda , The Rock had Vince , and Big Show had Shane . Triple H retained the title after Vince betrayed The Rock by hitting him with a chair . 
 Over the next few months , The Rock feuded with Triple H over the WWF Championship . On April 30 , at Backlash , The Rock defeated Triple H for his fourth WWF Championship reign , after Steve Austin intervened on The Rock 's behalf . On 21 May , at Judgment Day , the two had an Iron Man match , with Shawn Michaels as the special guest referee . With the score tied at five falls each , and with seconds left on the time limit , The Rock was disqualified when The Undertaker attacked Triple H , giving Triple H the 6 – 5 win and the title . The next night on Raw is War , The Rock got his revenge , taking out the entire McMahon @-@ Helmsley Faction with The Undertaker 's help . He won the WWF Championship for a fifth time at King of the Ring on June 25 , by scoring the winning pin in a tag team match , teamed with Kane and The Undertaker against Vince McMahon , Shane McMahon , and Triple H. He successfully defended the championship against Chris Benoit at Fully Loaded , Kurt Angle and Triple H at SummerSlam , and Benoit , Kane , and The Undertaker at Unforgiven . 
 The Rock lost the WWF Championship to Angle at No Mercy in October . Around this time , he feuded with Rikishi , and defeated him at Survivor Series . He wrestled a six @-@ man Hell in a Cell match for the WWF Championship at Armageddon , which Kurt Angle won to retain the title . On December 18 on Raw , The Rock won the WWF Tag Team Championship with The Undertaker , defeating Edge and Christian , then losing it back to them the next night at a SmackDown ! taping . In 2001 , The Rock continued to feud with Angle over the WWF Championship , culminating at No Way Out in February , where he pinned Angle to win the WWF Championship for a sixth time . 
 He then feuded with the Royal Rumble winner , Steve Austin . The Rock lost the title to Austin at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven after Austin allied with Mr. McMahon , who interfered on his behalf . On the next night 's Raw Is War , during a steel cage title rematch , Triple H came to the ring with a sledgehammer and it seemed he would help The Rock , because of the rivalry between Austin and Triple H ( and an argument with McMahon earlier in the night ) , but he attacked him instead , allying with McMahon and Austin . Austin and Triple H formed a tag team called The Power Trip , while The Rock was indefinitely suspended . Johnson used this time off to act in the movie The Mummy Returns . 
 = = = = The Invasion ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 The Rock returned to the WWF in late July 2001 , and had to decide whether to join the WWF or The Alliance ( a group of former WCW and ECW wrestlers ) during The Invasion , eventually siding with the WWF . At SummerSlam , The Rock defeated Booker T to win the WCW Championship . He lost the title to Chris Jericho at No Mercy . The next night on Raw , he teamed with Jericho to win the WWF Tag Team Championship from The Dudley Boyz . 
 The Rock defeated Jericho on November 5 episode of Raw for his second WCW Championship . As part of the WWF 's battle against The Alliance , The Rock wrestled in a " winner takes all " ten @-@ man elimination match at Survivor Series . In the end , it came down to a one @-@ on @-@ one with Steve Austin ( who had recently joined The Alliance ) . The Rock seemed to have the upper hand , until Jericho ( a member of Team WWF , who was eliminated a few minutes earlier ) , entered the ring and attacked The Rock . Austin tried to capitalize on this by pinning The Rock , but Kurt Angle , a Team Alliance member , revealed his true allegiance by hitting Austin in the head with a title belt . The Rock then pinned Austin , forcing The Alliance to disband . 
 The Rock closed out 2001 by losing the WCW Championship at Vengeance to Chris Jericho , who would unify the WWF and WCW titles later that night . The Rock unsuccessfully challenged Jericho for both titles , now the Undisputed WWF Championship , at Royal Rumble , ending their feud . The Rock defeated The Undertaker at No Way Out . Three weeks before WrestleMania , The Rock headlined WWE 's Asian tour to Japan , Singapore and Malaysia . The first show was in <unk> Arena and had sold 18 @,@ 000 tickets in sixty minutes . Jericho , who was booked to face him for all three shows , said he brought out the best in him and described his reaction as " one of the loudest I 'd ever heard in my career . It was as if Elvis had joined The Beatles and all of them were wearing Godzilla costumes . " He then feuded with the New World Order , after challenging Hollywood Hulk Hogan to a match at WrestleMania X8 . The match was billed as icon versus icon , with both men representing the top tier of two generations of wrestling ; ultimately Rock pinned Hogan at WrestleMania X8 . After the nWo turned on Hogan for losing the match , The Rock allied with him and then took a short sabbatical from wrestling . 
 = = = = Hollywood gimmick ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 When he returned , The Rock won his ( then ) record @-@ breaking seventh WWF Championship ( which had been renamed the Undisputed WWE Championship ) at Vengeance , defeating Kurt Angle and The Undertaker in a Triple Threat match . He successfully defended the title at Global Warning against Triple H and Brock Lesnar by pinning Triple H. After the match , Lesnar attacked The Rock , until Triple H saved him . At SummerSlam , after interference from Lesnar 's manager , Paul Heyman , and the use of a steel chair , Rock lost the WWE Championship to Lesnar along with the record for the youngest WWE Champion , which Rock had set in 1998 . 
 Following the loss against Lesnar , The Rock publicly declared that whether or not the crowd booed him he would always be the People 's Champion , criticizing the fans in the arena and again taking a sabbatical from wrestling in order to focus on his film career . 
 The Rock returned on January 30 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! to publicly criticize Hulk Hogan and make it clear that because of the success of his Hollywood career , WWE was no longer a priority . This reestablished him as a heel . The Rock defeated Hogan again at No Way Out and drafted himself to the Raw brand where he had various feuds , including one with The Hurricane . He also performed " Rock concerts " , segments in which he played the guitar and mocked the show 's host city . 
 After failing to win number one contendership for the World Heavyweight Championship , The Rock turned his attention to Steve Austin who , to The Rock 's chagrin , had been chosen as " Superstar of the Decade " . This led to a match at WrestleMania XIX , which called back to their previous two WrestleMania encounters , both of which Austin had won . The Rock won after delivering three consecutive Rock Bottoms , ending their long @-@ running feud in what turned out to be Austin 's final match . 
 The next night , Raw was billed as " The Rock Appreciation Night " , in honour of his victory over Austin . That night , he was attacked by a debuting Goldberg . At Backlash , Goldberg defeated The Rock , who then left WWE to focus on his film career . 
 = = = = Final feuds and departure ( 2003 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 The Rock then occasionally returned to WWE in non @-@ wrestling roles , gradually turning face again by engaging in one night feuds against heels such as Chris Jericho and Christian . The Rock aided Mick Foley in his feud against Evolution , leading to a reunion of The Rock ' n ' Sock Connection . They faced Ric Flair , Randy Orton and Batista in a handicap match at WrestleMania XX , losing when Orton pinned Foley after the RKO . The Rock appeared in WWE sporadically following WrestleMania XX . He stood up for Eugene , made a cameo in his hometown of Miami and helped Mick Foley turn back La Résistance . In 2004 , he hosted a pie @-@ eating contest , as part of the WWE Diva Search and ended the segment by giving Jonathan Coachman a spinebuster and a People 's Elbow . After this , he stated in several interviews that he was no longer under contract to WWE . He stated that he would continue using the trademarked name " The Rock " , per a dual ownership deal between him and WWE . 
 = = = = Sporadic appearances ( 2004 − 2009 ) = = = = 
 On August 23 , 2004 episode of Raw , The Rock returned and took out Jonathan Coachman and La Résistance . In October 2005 , The Rock did a tell all interview with WWE.com , he talked his contract with WWE , movies and feelings on a dream match with Shawn Michaels . On March 12 , 2007 , The Rock appeared on a WWE show after nearly three years , via a pre @-@ taped promo shown during Raw . He correctly predicted that Bobby Lashley would defeat Umaga at WrestleMania 23 in Donald Trump and Vince McMahon 's " Battle of the Billionaires " match . On March 29 , 2008 , The Rock inducted his father , Rocky Johnson , and his grandfather , Peter Maivia , into the WWE Hall of Fame . During his induction speech , he roasted wrestlers John Cena , Santino Marella , Chris Jericho , Mick Foley , Shawn Michaels , and Stone Cold Steve Austin . In September 2009 , he appeared at a World Xtreme Wrestling ( WXW ) show to support the pro wrestling debut of Sarona Snuka , the daughter of his long @-@ time friend and mentor Jimmy Snuka . On October 2 , 2009 , the ten @-@ year anniversary of SmackDown , The Rock ( with his usual flattop hair shaved off ) cut a promo via pre @-@ recorded video . 
 = = = Return to WWE = = = 
 = = = = Feud with John Cena ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 On February 14 , 2011 , episode of Raw , The Rock was revealed as the host of WrestleMania XXVII , appearing live on Raw for the first time in almost seven years . During a lengthy promo , he addressed the fans , Michael Cole , The Miz and John Cena , calling Cena a " big fat bowl of Fruity Pebbles " , inspiring a popular crowd chant and sign . The Rock claimed to love wrestling , having been born into the business , a claim Cena argued . After numerous appearances via satellite , The Rock appeared live on the Raw before WrestleMania XXVII to confront Cena , with whom he had been feuding through Twitter , making fun of Cena 's clothing and calling him a " homeless Power Ranger " and " Vanilla Ice " . After he and Cena exchanged insults , The Miz and Alex Riley appeared and attacked The Rock ; he fended off Miz and Riley , only for Cena to blindside him with an Attitude Adjustment . 
 On April 3 at WrestleMania XXVII , The Rock opened the show by cutting a promo . After appearing in numerous backstage segments , The Rock came to ringside to restart the main event between Cena and The Miz as a No Disqualification match , after it had ended in a draw . As revenge for the Attitude Adjustment Cena had given him on Raw , Rock hit Cena with the Rock Bottom , allowing The Miz to pin him and retain the WWE Championship . After the match , Rock attacked Miz and hit him with the People 's Elbow . The following night on Raw , Cena challenged The Rock to a match at WrestleMania XXVIII the next year , which Rock accepted . They then worked together to fend off an attack by The Corre , which at the time consisted of Wade Barrett , Heath Slater , Justin Gabriel , and Ezekiel Jackson . The Rock appeared live on Raw in his hometown of Miami on 2 May , to celebrate his 39th birthday . 
 On September 16 , WWE announced The Rock would wrestle in a traditional 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 Survivor Series tag team match , teaming with Cena at Survivor Series in November . However , on October 24 episode of Raw , Cena instead chose The Rock to be his partner in a standard tag team match against Awesome Truth ( The Miz and R @-@ Truth ) , which Rock which agreed to the following week via satellite . On November 14 , during the special Raw Gets Rocked , The Rock appeared live , delivering Rock Bottoms to Mick Foley , who had been hosting a " This Is Your Life " -style segment for Cena , and later both members of Awesome Truth . Despite their <unk> , The Rock and Cena defeated Awesome Truth on November 20 at Survivor Series , when The Rock pinned The Miz with the People 's Elbow . After the match , The Rock gave Cena a Rock Bottom . 
 Leading up to WrestleMania , The Rock and Cena had several verbal confrontations on Raw . On March 12 , 2012 , episode , The Rock hosted his first " Rock Concert " segment since 2004 , mocking Cena in his songs . He opined that , having beaten Hulk Hogan and Stone Cold Steve Austin at previous <unk> , beating Cena would make him the greatest wrestler of all time . On April 1 at WrestleMania XXVIII , The Rock faced Cena in the main event hyped for a year and billed with the tagline " Once in a Lifetime " . When an overconfident Cena attempted the People 's Elbow on The Rock , he countered with a Rock Bottom for the pin and the win . The following night on Raw , The Rock praised Cena for putting up a good fight , calling their match " an honor " . He then vowed to once again become WWE Champion . 
 = = = = WWE Champion ( 2012 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 On July 23 at Raw 1000 , The Rock announced he would face the WWE Champion at the Royal Rumble . During the show , he encountered WWE Champion CM Punk , Daniel Bryan , and John Cena , all of whom expressed a desire to face him . He later saved Cena from an assault by Big Show , only to be laid out by CM Punk . 
 On January 7 , 2013 Raw , The Rock returned to WWE to confront his Rumble opponent , then reigning champion CM Punk . He also made his first SmackDown appearance in ten years on January 11 episode , attacking Team Rhodes Scholars with a Rock Bottom to Damien Sandow and a People 's Elbow to Cody Rhodes . The Rock closed out the 20th anniversary episode of Raw on January 14 with one of his famous " Rock concerts " , leading to a brawl with CM Punk . The following week on Raw , The Rock was attacked by The Shield . Vince McMahon then asserted that if The Shield attacked The Rock in his title match with CM Punk , Punk would be stripped of the WWE Championship . On January 27 at the Royal Rumble , Punk defeated The Rock after The Shield interfered . McMahon was about to strip Punk of the championship , however , at The Rock 's request , he instead restarted the match . This culminated in The Rock defeating Punk to win his eighth WWE Championship , a win which marked The Rock 's first WWE Championship reign in over ten years , and ending Punk 's long reign as champion at 434 days . Punk received a title rematch with The Rock at Elimination Chamber , with the added stipulation that if The Rock was disqualified or counted out , he would lose the title , but Rock pinned Punk to retain the championship . The following night on Raw , The Rock unveiled the new WWE Championship during his championship celebration , with an entirely new center plate and his signature Brahma Bull logo on the side plates . The Rock then resumed his rivalry with John Cena , with Cena blaming his personal and professional troubles on his loss to The Rock the previous year . On April 7 at WrestleMania 29 , Rock lost the WWE Championship to Cena , ending his reign at 70 days . Despite being advertised for the Raw after WrestleMania , where it was stated by SmackDown General Manager Booker T that The Rock was still entitled a re @-@ match for the WWE Championship , The Rock did not appear because of a legitimate injury sustained during WrestleMania , in which his abdominal and adductor tendons tore from his pelvis . Johnson underwent surgery on April 23 to reattach the torn tendons . 
 In August 2013 , The Rock hinted at possible retirement , but ultimately did not rule out a return . 
 = = = = Part @-@ time appearances ( 2014 – present ) = = = = 
 In April 2014 , the Rock appeared in the opening segment of WrestleMania XXX along with Stone Cold Steve Austin and Hulk Hogan . On October 6 episode of Raw , the Rock made a surprise appearance to confront Rusev and Lana ; this resulted in the Rock clearing Rusev from the ring . Later that week , off @-@ air footage from the night of a staredown between the Rock and Triple H aired on the 15th anniversary show of Smackdown . 
 The Rock appeared at the 2015 Royal Rumble event during the main event match , where he helped Roman Reigns fend off Big Show and Kane , and was booed ( " for the first time in forever " ( 2003 ) as described by Dave Scherer of <unk> ) for doing so . The Rock endorsed Reigns ' eventual victory , but the crowd still booed both him and Reigns . The Rock appeared at WrestleMania 31 alongside Ronda Rousey , getting into an in @-@ ring altercation with Triple H and Stephanie McMahon ( The Authority ) . Rock and Rousey prevailed after he attacked Triple H and she overpowered McMahon . On June 27 , 2015 , The Rock appeared at a live event in Boston where he confronted Bo Dallas , giving him a Rock Bottom in the process . 
 At WrestleMania 32 , The Rock announced that WWE had broken the all time WrestleMania attendance record before being interrupted by The Wyatt Family . The Rock defeated Wyatt Family member Erick Rowan in an impromptu match , giving him a Rock Bottom and pinning him in six seconds and setting the record for the fastest win in WrestleMania history . The Rock was then aided by the returning John Cena to fend off the remaining members of The Wyatt Family , Bray Wyatt and Braun <unk> . 
 = = Mainstream popularity in wrestling = = 
 The success of Johnson 's wrestling character allowed him to cross over into mainstream pop culture . He appeared on Wyclef Jean 's 2000 single " It Doesn 't Matter " and in its music video . He also recorded " Pie " with Slick Rick for WWF The Music , Vol . 5 . In 2000 , he hosted Saturday Night Live . Fellow wrestlers Triple H , The Big Show , and Mick Foley also appeared on the show . Johnson has stated the success of that episode is the reason he began receiving offers from Hollywood studios . Johnson had guest roles on Star Trek : Voyager , as an alien wrestler that uses The Rock 's famous moves , and on That ' 70s Show , as his father , Rocky Johnson . 
 In 1999 , The Rock was listed # 5 on Entertainment Weekly 's Top 12 Entertainers of the Year . In 2000 , on an Access Hollywood ’ s prime @-@ time special , The Rock was ranked number six in the Top 10 Celebrities Of 2000 . Rock was also listed in Forbes Celebrity 100 that year and People Magazine 's 25 Most Intriguing People . 
 The Rock made a surprise appearance at the official Xbox unveiling during Bill Gates ' keynote speech at the ongoing Computer Electronics Show in 2001 . Rock was also listed on E ! ' s 20 Top Entertainers and Entertainment Weekly 's 101 Most Influential People that year and the previous year ( 2000 ) . 
 In 2002 , Rock was listed on E ! ' s 25 Toughest Stars . In 2003 , Rock was listed in VH1 's 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons and # 13 on People Magazine 's 50 Favorite TV Stars . 
 Johnson 's motion picture debut was a brief appearance as The Scorpion King in the opening sequence of The Mummy Returns . The character appears in the movie 's climax in CGI form . The movie 's financial success led to his first leading role , in the spin @-@ off The Scorpion King . He was listed in the 2007 Guinness World Records as the highest @-@ paid actor in his first starring role , receiving US $ 5 @.@ 5 million for this movie . The Mummy Returns , featuring The Rock , shattered a two @-@ year record by earning $ 28 @,@ 594 @,@ 667 , making it the highest @-@ grossing single day for any film in history . 
 The Rock has appeared on the cover of many magazines , including Rolling Stone , Entertainment Weekly , Newsweek , and TV Guide . 
 = = Legacy in wrestling = = 
 The Rock is widely considered as one of the all @-@ time greatest professional wrestlers as well as one of the top box office draws in wrestling history . 
 WWE legend Hulk Hogan called The Rock " the biggest superstar in this business " , 15 @-@ time world champion John Cena described him as " the biggest superstar in the history of WWE " and " the most successful WWE superstar ever " . WCW icon Diamond Dallas Page described him as " the biggest star in our business , of all time " . Vince Russo , the head writer of WWE 's most popular era The Attitude Era , stated : " I don 't think there 's ever going to be a star in the history of this business that is bigger than The Rock " . 
 Many WWE legends and superstars placed The Rock on their " Mount Rushmore of Wrestling " including Hulk Hogan , Ric Flair , Chris Jericho and John Cena . 
 In " Cable Visions : Television Beyond Broadcasting " , The Rock was described as " for a long time , the WWE 's biggest star and probably held the greatest international appeal " . R.D. Reynolds stated in his book " The <unk> Book of Lists " that The Rock was " the biggest star for WWE from 1999 until 2004 . " 
 He main evented the most bought pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) worldwide in WWE history ( WrestleMania XXVIII ) , the most bought pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) domestically in WWE history ( WrestleMania XVII ) , the second highest attended event in the history of WWE ( WrestleMania 29 ) , the highest rated Raw in history , and was part of the highest rated segment in Raw history . In addition , The Rock main evented the nine highest rated <unk> in history and 10 out of the 15 highest rated <unk> in history . His return in 2001 did a 7 @.@ 1 rating which was the highest rated segment of the entire year . 
 The Rock was also part of the highest rated match of 2000 . His steel cage match with Shane McMahon on 1 May did a 8 @.@ 3 rating on the regular time and a 9 @.@ 1 on the overrun making this match the most watched professional wrestling match in the United States of this millennium . 
 In 2011 , The Rock 's return generated a lot of buzz , an average of 4 @.@ 7 million people watched that episode of RAW , but 7 @.@ 4 million tuned in just during The Rock ’ s promo . His return also led the following episode of Raw on March 7 to be the highest rated episode of that year . In that same year , The Rock wrestled his first match in years at 2011 Survivor Series in Madison Square Garden . The event sold out in less than 90 minutes and was the highest attended Survivor Series in almost a decade ( since 2002 ) . The Rock was also part of the highest rated Raw segment in 2012 in a segment on Raw 1000 with WWE superstars CM Punk and Daniel Bryan which drew a 4 @.@ 3 rating and was also part of the highest rated overrun of that year ( 4 @.@ 4 ) the same night . 
 The Rock 's highly anticipated WWE title match at the 2013 Royal Rumble led the event to be the most bought non @-@ WrestleMania PPV in 7 years . The night after the 2013 Royal Rumble on January 28 which saw The Rock win the WWE Championship for the first time in over a decade was the highest rated Raw episode of that year . During that night , The Rock 's segment with CM Punk did a 4 @.@ 03 rating which was the highest rated segment since Raw 1000 . The Rock would also be part of the highest rated segment of 2013 in his segment with John Cena on Old School Raw which did a 4 @.@ 1 rating . 
 Rock headlined five WrestleManias ( XV , 2000 , X @-@ Seven , XXVIII , and WrestleMania 29 ) , and wrestled in five additional WrestleManias in non headlining matches . In 2011 , he became the first wrestler to ever host a WrestleMania ( WrestleMania XXVII ) . 
 Derived from one of his catchphrases " lay the smackdown " , WWE introduced its second flagship program SmackDown ! which would later become television 's second longest @-@ running weekly episodic program . The term " Smackdown " also has been included in Merriam @-@ Webster dictionaries since 2007 . 
 The Rock was the first wrestler to win the WWF / E Championship six times then seven times . Rock 's Intercontinental Championship 's reign in 1997 – 98 lasted 265 days and is the longest intercontinental title reign of the modern era ( the last 24 years ) . Rock is the only wrestler to introduce a different design of both the Intercontinental Championship ( shortly after WrestleMania XIV ) and the WWE Championship ( on February 18 , 2013 episode of Raw ) . He was the youngest Intercontinental Champion as well as the youngest WWF Champion of his time . 
 Rock was also the first wrestler to be part of a title match at five consecutive WrestleManias , having competed for the Intercontinental title at WrestleMania 13 and WrestleMania XIV , and for the WWF Championship at WrestleMania XV , WrestleMania 2000 , and WrestleMania X @-@ Seven . 
 He is one of three wrestlers ( along with Shawn Michaels and The Undertaker ) to main event WrestleMania in three different decades , doing so in the 90s ( WrestleMania XV ) , the 2000s ( WrestleMania 2000 and WrestleMania X @-@ Seven ) and the 2010s ( WrestleMania XXVIII and WrestleMania XXIX ) . He is also one of three wrestlers ( along with Hulk Hogan and Triple H ) to win the WWE title in three different decades doing so in the 90s , the 2000s and the 2010s . 
 The Rock also holds the record for most Raw shows main evented in one year ( 38 in 2000 ) , most Smackdown shows main evented in one year ( 36 in 2000 ) and tied with Stone Cold Steve Austin ( in 2001 ) for most PPV shows main evented in one year ( 12 in 2000 ) . Overall The Rock has headlined 35 PPV events in WWE ( including two Royal Rumble matches ) . 
 Rock was on the cover of the first three video games of the WWE games series including WWF SmackDown ! 2 : Know Your Role which ended up being the best @-@ selling combat sports game on a single format ( PlayStation 2 ) with 3 @.@ 2 million copies sold . 
 WWE listed The Rock as the funniest WWE superstar in history . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 In a the May 2004 issue , Vibe magazine stated " At six @-@ foot @-@ four , 245 pounds , Dwayne " the Rock " Johnson , 31 , may be the biggest star to hit the big screen since Arnold Schwarzenegger . " Johnson also continued to act on television , including in an episode of the Disney Channel show , Cory in the House , entitled " Never the Dwayne Shall Meet " . While Johnson was away from WWE , the company continued to sell " The Rock " merchandise , and he continued to be featured prominently in the opening montages of their television shows . 
 Johnson broke into the mainstream with roles in the blockbuster action films The Mummy Returns in 2001 and The Scorpion King in 2002 , the action comedy The Rundown in 2003 and the remake of Walking Tall in 2004 . He played a supporting role in 2005 's Be Cool and was the primary antagonist in Doom in 2006 . Roles in the Gridiron Gang and Reno 911 ! : Miami soon followed . Johnson played against type with The Rundown co @-@ star Sean William Scott in 2007 's Southland Tales . Johnson played the cocky famous football player , Joe Kingman , in The Game Plan , and Agent 23 in Get Smart . Johnson presented the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects at the 80th Academy Awards on February 24 , 2008 . He was nominated for the Favorite Movie Actor award at the 2008 Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards for his role in The Game Plan , but lost out to Johnny Depp in Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End . 
 Johnson hosted the 2009 Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards on March 28 . He appeared on the Wizards of Waverly Place episode , " Art Teacher " , as part of his stint with The Walt Disney Company . He has made several guest appearances on Saturday Night Live , reviving his character of " The Rock Obama " , a spoof of both President Barack Obama and The Hulk . Also in 2009 , Johnson played ex @-@ con cab driver Jack Bruno in Las Vegas in Race To Witch Mountain . He provided the voice of Capt. Charles " Chuck " Baker in Planet 51 . In 2010 , Johnson starred in the family comedy , Tooth Fairy . He made an uncredited cameo in the 2010 film , Why Did I Get Married Too ? as a psychiatrist who asks out the recently widowed Patricia Agnew ( Janet Jackson ) . He briefly appears in The Other Guys , as an action @-@ seeking detective . He returned to action films with the 2010 film Faster . 
 In 2011 , Johnson appeared in the fifth film of The Fast and the Furious film series , Fast Five , as Luke Hobbs , a Diplomatic Security Service agent assigned to hunt down the series ' protagonists . Johnson landed the role after series star Vin Diesel read comments and feedback from fans , one of whom wanted to see Diesel and Johnson in a movie together . Johnson , a fan of the franchise , had wanted to work with Universal again after they had given him his first film roles . Fast Five grossed over $ 86 million in its opening weekend , the biggest opening for a Fast & Furious film , the biggest opening for an April release , and the biggest opening for a Johnson movie . 
 In 2012 , Johnson starred in Journey 2 : The Mysterious Island . He starred in the 2013 true @-@ story film Snitch , which opened to mixed reviews ; however , Johnson 's performance was praised . He became known to reinvigorate film franchises after portraying Roadblock in G.I. Joe : Retaliation in 2013 , and reprised his role as Luke Hobbs , in Fast & Furious 6 , the same year . Johnson starred in true @-@ story films , Pain & Gain and Empire State in 2013 . In addition to these films , Johnson hosted and produced the reality competition / game show series The Hero , on TNT . He won the Favorite Male <unk> Award at the 2013 Nickelodeon Kid 's Choice Awards on March 23 , 2013 . In May 2013 , it was announced that he would executive produce and star in Ballers , a HBO comedy @-@ drama series about athletes living in Miami . 
 Johnson starred in Hercules ( 2014 ) , as the title character , and once again reprised his role of Luke Hobbs in Furious 7 ( 2015 ) . He hosted another reality series for TNT in 2014 , entitled Wake Up Call , which saw him " lending a helping hand to everyday people who were facing enormous challenges in their lives " alongside guest experts such as Rocco <unk> , Jillian Michaels , and Josh Shipp . He would also executive produce and star in the horror film Seal Team 666 , and is set to play Nick Schuyler in the drama film Not Without Hope . 
 On December 16 , 2013 , Forbes named Johnson the top @-@ grossing actor of 2013 , with his films bringing in $ 1 @.@ 3 billion worldwide for the year . Forbes credited the success of Fast & Furious 6 , which grossed $ 789 million globally , and Johnson 's frequent acting work as primary reasons for him topping the list . In March 2014 , Johnson confirmed that he would be working with DC Entertainment for an untitled film project . In September 2014 , it was announced that he would play Black Adam , the villain , in a film about Shazam as a part of the DC Extended Universe ; which he would also produce . 
 In 2016 , Johnson co @-@ starred with Kevin Hart in the action @-@ comedy Central Intelligence , and will have a voice role in the Disney animated film Moana , as the Hawaiian demigod Maui . After the continued success of The Fast and the Furious franchise , Fast 8 was announced with a release date of April 14 , 2017 . Johnson 's production company Seven Bucks Productions will produce various film projects in which he will star , namely : Baywatch ( 2017 ) , Rampage ( 2017 ) and the Jumanji remake . A sequel to the box @-@ office hit San Andreas was announced to be in the pre @-@ production stage with director of the first film , Brad Peyton , signed to return ( marking their fourth collaboration following Journey 2 , San Andreas , and Rampage respectively ) , along with the cast including Johnson . Johnson confirmed that he would star in the Jumanji remake via his Instagram social media page , something he has often done with previous project announcements . In an interview , Johnson also discussed the possibility of an earlier release date than was originally announced for the DC Extended Universe film , Shazam . Johnson signed on to return in two additional sequels to Warner Bros. Entertainment 's Journey film series , as well as a Jungle Cruise feature film being developed by Disney . In May 2016 Johnson confirmed his attachment to The Janson Directive as Paul Janson . The film will be produced by Universal Studios Pictures , with the intent to adapt more of Robert Ludlum 's work in the future in a larger project than just the announced first installment . Later that same month , it was announced that he would star in Legendary Entertainment 's Skyscraper movie which will be an action @-@ thriller film with Rawson Marshall Thurber signed on as director and writer of the film , as well as a rebooted version of the character Doc Savage in a film written and directed by Shane Black . Johnson had previously mentioned that he was signed on to film a remake of Big Trouble in Little China , and recently expressed that it is still currently in the development stages . In <unk> of 2016 , Johnson announced another television series which he will be involved in named , Muscle Beach . Johnson will be involved behind the scenes of the series for the time being . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Johnson married Dany Garcia on May 3 , 1997 . Their daughter , Simone Alexandra , was born August 14 , 2001 . On June 1 , 2007 , they announced they were splitting up amicably and intended to remain friends . Soon after the divorce , Johnson began dating Lauren Hashian , the daughter of Boston drummer Sib Hashian . They first met in 2006 while Johnson was filming The Game Plan , prompting rumors he left his marriage for Hashian . Their first child , a daughter named Jasmine , was born in December 2015 . 
 Johnson co @-@ wrote an autobiography with Joe Layden , titled The Rock Says .... It was published in 2000 , debuting at No. 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list and remaining on the list for several weeks . 
 Johnson is a good friend of actor and former Governor of California , Arnold Schwarzenegger . He has two nephews who play football : <unk> Maiava played at USC and was drafted by the Cleveland Browns in 2009 , and his brother , Kai Maiava , currently plays at UCLA . 
 Johnson attended the 2000 Democratic National Convention as part of WWE 's non @-@ partisan " Smackdown Your Vote " campaign , which aimed to influence young people to vote . 
 Because his mother , Ata <unk> Maivia , is a descendant of Samoan chiefs , and in recognition of his service to the Samoan people , Malietoa <unk> II bestowed upon Johnson the noble title of <unk> during his visit there in July 2004 . He received a partial Samoan pe 'a tattoo in 2003 . 
 In 2006 , Johnson founded the Dwayne Johnson Rock Foundation , a charity working with at @-@ risk and terminally ill children . On October 2 , 2007 , he and his ex @-@ wife donated $ 1 million to the University of Miami to support the renovation of its football facilities ; it was noted as the largest donation ever given to the university 's athletics department by former students . The University of Miami renamed the Hurricanes ' locker room in Johnson 's honor . 
 On May 21 , 2015 , Johnson set a Guinness World Record for most selfies in three minutes , taking 105 selfies with fans during the premiere of San Andreas in London . 
 On March 2016 , Johnson partnered with the new juggernaut in American fitness apparel Under Armour to release " Project Rock " . The first item in his partnership with Under Armour , a gym bag , was met with ferocious demand and was sold out in a couple of days . His second item , a black T @-@ shirt sporting the wrestler 's iconic " brahma bull " has sold out in record time for Under Armour after being worn at WrestleMania 32 . Johnson also released an alarm clock app as part of " Project Rock " that received over one million downloads in its first week of release . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves : 
 People 's Elbow / Corporate Elbow ( Running delayed high @-@ impact elbow drop , with theatrics ) – usually preceded by a spinebuster ; 1997 – present - innovated 
 Rock Bottom ( Falling side slam ) – 1997 – present 
 Running <unk> – 1996 
 Signature moves : 
 Float @-@ over DDT 
 Flowing snap DDT , sometimes followed by a kip @-@ up 
 Jumping clothesline 
 Running swinging neckbreaker 
 Running thrust lariat 
 Samoan drop 
 Sharpshooter 
 Snap overhead belly @-@ to @-@ belly suplex , sometimes to an oncoming opponent 
 Spinebuster , usually followed by a People 's Elbow 
 Managers : 
 Debra 
 Mr. McMahon 
 Shane McMahon 
 Nicknames : 
 " The People 's Champion " 
 " The Brahma Bull " 
 " The Corporate Champion " 
 " The Great One " 
 " The Most Electrifying Man in All of Entertainment " 
 " The Most Electrifying Man in Sports Entertainment " 
 " Rocky " 
 Entrance themes : 
 World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE 
 " Destiny " by Jim Johnston ( 1996 – 1997 ) 
 " Power " by Jim Johnston ( 1997 – 1998 ) 
 " You Smell It ? " by Jim Johnston ( 1998 ) 
 " The Rock Says " by Jim Johnston ( 1998 ) 
 " Do You Smell It ? " by Jim Johnston ( 1998 – 1999 ) 
 " Know Your Role " by Jim Johnston ( 1999 – 2001 , 2004 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 ) 
 " If You Smell ... " by Jim Johnston ( 2001 – 2003 ) 
 " Is Cookin ' " by Jim Johnston ( 2003 – 2004 ) 
 " Electrifying " by Jim Johnston ( 2011 – present ) 
 = = = Relatives in wrestling = = = 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Match of the Year ( 1999 ) vs. Mankind in an " I Quit " match at Royal Rumble 
 Match of the Year ( 2002 ) vs. Hulk Hogan at WrestleMania X8 
 Most Popular Wrestler of the Year ( 1999 , 2000 ) 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2000 ) 
 Ranked # 2 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2000 
 Ranked # 76 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 United States Wrestling Association 
 USWA World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Bart Sawyer 
 World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE 
 WCW / World Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWF / E ( Undisputed ) Championship ( 8 times ) 1 
 Deadly Games WWF Championship Tournament ( 1998 ) 
 WWF Intercontinental Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWF Tag Team Championship ( 5 times ) – with Mankind ( 3 ) , The Undertaker ( 1 ) , and Chris Jericho ( 1 ) 
 Royal Rumble ( 2000 ) 
 Sixth Triple Crown Champion 
 Slammy Awards ( 8 times ) 
 New Sensation ( 1997 ) 
 Game Changer of the Year ( 2011 ) – with John Cena 
 Guess Who 's Back or : Return of the Year ( 2011 ) 
 LOL ! Moment of the Year ( 2012 , 2013 ) – insulting John Cena using the history of Boston , Massachusetts – Rock Concert on the 20th anniversary episode of Raw 
 Match of the Year ( 2013 ) – vs. John Cena for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 29 
 Best Actor ( 2014 ) 
 " Tell Me You Didn 't Just Say That " Insult of the Year ( 2014 ) – <unk> Rusev and Lana 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Best Box Office Draw ( 2000 , 2011 , 2012 ) 
 Best Gimmick ( 1999 ) 
 Best on Interviews ( 1999 , 2000 ) 
 Most Charismatic ( 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , 2002 , 2011 , 2012 ) 
 Most Improved ( 1998 ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame ( Class of 2007 ) 
 1 The Rock 's seventh reign was as Undisputed WWE Champion . 
 = = Other awards and honors = = 
 1991 : NCAA National Championship – as a member of the Miami Hurricanes 
 2001 : Teen Choice Awards – Choice Movie Villain 
 2012 : CinemaCon Action Star of the Year 
 2013 : Kids Choice Awards – Favorite Male Butt Kicker 
 2016 : People 's Choice Award – Favorite Premium Cable TV Actor 
 2017 : Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame 
 = Birth control movement in the United States = 
 The birth control movement in the United States was a social reform campaign from 1914 to around 1945 that aimed to increase the availability of contraception in the U.S. through education and legalization . The movement began in 1914 when a group of political radicals in New York City , led by Emma Goldman , Mary Dennett , and Margaret Sanger , became concerned about the hardships that childbirth and self @-@ induced abortions brought to low @-@ income women . Sanger , in particular , simultaneously sought to connect birth control to the organized eugenics movement , regularly appealing to the authority of eugenic scientists Karl Pearson , Charles Davenport , and others in her Birth Control Review from the early 1920s Such figures sought to prevent population segments they deemed genetically ' undesirable ' from reproducing . While seeking legitimacy for the birth control movement partly through the approval of organized eugenics , Sanger and other activists also worked on the political front . Since contraception was considered to be obscene at the time , the activists targeted the Comstock laws , which prohibited distribution of any " obscene , lewd , and / or lascivious " materials through the mail . Hoping to provoke a favorable legal decision , Sanger deliberately broke the law by distributing The Woman Rebel , a newsletter containing a discussion of contraception . In 1916 , Sanger opened the first birth control clinic in the United States , but the clinic was immediately shut down by police , and Sanger was sentenced to 30 days in jail . 
 A major turning point for the movement came during World War I , when many U.S. servicemen were diagnosed with venereal diseases . The government 's response included an anti @-@ venereal disease campaign that framed sexual intercourse and contraception as issues of public health and legitimate topics of scientific research . This was the first time a U.S. government institution had engaged in a sustained , public discussion of sexual matters ; as a consequence , contraception transformed from an issue of morals to an issue of public health . 
 Encouraged by the public 's changing attitudes towards birth control , Sanger opened a second birth control clinic in 1923 , but this time there were no arrests or controversy . Throughout the 1920s , public discussion of contraception became more commonplace , and the term " birth control " became firmly established in the nation 's vernacular . The widespread availability of contraception signaled a transition from the stricter sexual mores of the Victorian era to a more sexually permissive society . 
 Legal victories in the 1930s continued to weaken anti @-@ contraception laws . The court victories motivated the American Medical Association in 1937 to adopt contraception as a core component of medical school curricula , but the medical community was slow to accept this new responsibility , and women continued to rely on unsafe and ineffective contraceptive advice from ill @-@ informed sources . In 1942 , the Planned Parenthood Federation of America was formed , creating a nationwide network of birth control clinics . After World War II , the movement to legalize birth control came to a gradual conclusion , as birth control was fully embraced by the medical profession , and the remaining anti @-@ contraception laws were no longer enforced . 
 = = Contraception in the nineteenth century = = 
 = = = Birth control practices = = = 
 The practice of birth control was common throughout the U.S. prior to 1914 , when the movement to legalize contraception began . Longstanding techniques included the rhythm method , withdrawal , diaphragms , contraceptive sponges , condoms , prolonged breastfeeding , and spermicides . Use of contraceptives increased throughout the nineteenth century , contributing to a 50 percent drop in the fertility rate in the United States between 1800 and 1900 , particularly in urban regions . The only known survey conducted during the nineteenth century of American women 's contraceptive habits was performed by <unk> Mosher from 1892 to 1912 . The survey was based on a small sample of upper @-@ class women , and shows that most of the women used contraception ( primarily douching , but also withdrawal , rhythm , condoms and <unk> ) and that they viewed sex as a pleasurable act that could be undertaken without the goal of procreation . 
 Although contraceptives were relatively common in middle @-@ class and upper @-@ class society , the topic was rarely discussed in public . The first book published in the United States which ventured to discuss contraception was Moral Physiology ; or , A Brief and Plain Treatise on the Population Question , published by Robert Dale Owen in 1831 . The book suggested that family planning was a laudable effort , and that sexual gratification – without the goal of reproduction – was not immoral . Owen recommended withdrawal , but he also discussed sponges and condoms . That book was followed by Fruits of Philosophy : The Private Companion of Young Married People , written in 1832 by Charles Knowlton , which recommended douching . Knowlton was prosecuted in Massachusetts on obscenity charges , and served three months in prison . 
 Birth control practices were generally adopted earlier in Europe than in the United States . Knowlton 's book was reprinted in 1877 in England by Charles Bradlaugh and Annie Besant , with the goal of challenging Britain 's obscenity laws . They were arrested ( and later acquitted ) but the publicity of their trial contributed to the formation , in 1877 , of the Malthusian League – the world 's first birth control advocacy group – which sought to limit population growth to avoid Thomas Malthus 's dire predictions of exponential population growth leading to worldwide poverty and famine . By 1930 , similar societies had been established in nearly all European countries , and birth control began to find acceptance in most Western European countries , except Catholic Ireland , Spain , and France . As the birth control societies spread across Europe , so did birth control clinics . The first birth control clinic in the world was established in the Netherlands in 1882 , run by the Netherlands ' first female physician , Aletta Jacobs . The first birth control clinic in England was established in 1921 by Marie Stopes , in London . 
 = = = Contraception outlawed = = = 
 Contraception was legal in the United States throughout most of the 19th century , but in the 1870s a social purity movement grew in strength , aimed at outlawing vice in general , and prostitution and obscenity in particular . Composed primarily of Protestant moral reformers and middle @-@ class women , the Victorian @-@ era campaign also attacked contraception , which was viewed as an immoral practice that promoted prostitution and venereal disease . Anthony Comstock , a postal inspector and leader in the purity movement , successfully lobbied for the passage of the 1873 Comstock Act , a federal law prohibiting mailing of " any article or thing designed or intended for the prevention of conception or procuring of abortion " as well as any form of contraceptive information . Many states also passed similar state laws ( collectively known as the Comstock laws ) , sometimes extending the federal law by outlawing the use of contraceptives , as well as their distribution . Comstock was proud of the fact that he was personally responsible for thousands of arrests and the destruction of hundreds of tons of books and pamphlets . 
 Comstock and his allies also took aim at the libertarians and <unk> who comprised the free love movement – an initiative to promote sexual freedom , equality for women , and abolition of marriage . The free love proponents were the only group to actively oppose the Comstock laws in the 19th century , setting the stage for the birth control movement . 
 The efforts of the free love movement were not successful and , at the beginning of the 20th century , federal and state governments began to enforce the Comstock laws more rigorously . In response , contraception went underground , but it was not extinguished . The number of publications on the topic dwindled , and advertisements , if they were found at all , used euphemisms such as " marital aids " or " hygienic devices " . Drug stores continued to sell condoms as " rubber goods " and cervical caps as " womb supporters " . 
 = = Beginning ( 1914 – 1916 ) = = 
 = = = Free speech movement = = = 
 At the turn of the century , an energetic movement arose , centered in Greenwich Village , that sought to overturn bans on free speech . Supported by radicals , feminists , anarchists , and atheists such as Ezra Heywood , Moses Harman , D. M. Bennett , and Emma Goldman , these activists regularly battled anti @-@ obscenity laws and , later , the government 's effort to suppress speech critical of involvement in World War I. Prior to 1914 , the free speech movement focused on politics , and rarely addressed contraception . 
 Goldman 's circle of radicals , socialists , and bohemians was joined in 1912 by a nurse , Margaret Sanger , whose mother had been through 18 pregnancies in 22 years , and died at age 50 of tuberculosis and cervical cancer . In 1913 , Sanger worked in New York 's Lower East Side , often with poor women who were suffering due to frequent childbirth and self @-@ induced abortions . After one particularly tragic medical case , Sanger wrote : " I threw my nursing bag in the corner and announced ... that I would never take another case until I had made it possible for working women in America to have the knowledge to control birth . " Sanger visited public libraries , searching for information on contraception , but nothing was available . She became outraged that working @-@ class women could not obtain contraception , yet upper @-@ class women who had access to private physicians could . 
 Under the influence of Goldman and the Free Speech League , Sanger became determined to challenge the Comstock laws that outlawed the dissemination of contraceptive information . With that goal in mind , in 1914 she launched The Woman Rebel , an eight @-@ page monthly newsletter which promoted contraception using the slogan " No Gods , No Masters " , and proclaimed that each woman should be " the absolute mistress of her own body . " Sanger coined the term birth control , which first appeared in the pages of Rebel , as a more candid alternative to euphemisms such as family limitation . 
 Sanger 's goal of challenging the law was fulfilled when she was indicted in August 1914 , but the prosecutors focused their attention on articles Sanger had written on assassination and marriage , rather than contraception . Afraid that she might be sent to prison without an opportunity to argue for birth control in court , she fled to England to escape arrest . 
 While Sanger was in Europe , her husband continued her work , which led to his arrest after he distributed a copy of a birth control pamphlet to an undercover postal worker . The arrest and his 30 @-@ day jail sentence prompted several mainstream publications , including Harper 's Weekly and the New @-@ York Tribune , to publish articles about the birth control controversy . Emma Goldman and Ben Reitman toured the country , speaking in support of the <unk> , and distributing copies of Sanger 's pamphlet Family Limitation . Sanger 's exile and her husband 's arrest propelled the birth control movement into the forefront of American news . 
 = = = Early birth control organizations = = = 
 In the spring of 1915 supporters of the <unk> – led by Mary Dennett – formed the National Birth Control League ( NBCL ) , which was the first American birth control organization . Throughout 1915 , smaller regional organizations were formed in San Francisco , Portland , Oregon , Seattle , and Los Angeles . 
 Sanger returned to the United States in October 1915 . She planned to open a birth control clinic modeled on the world 's first such clinic , which she had visited in Amsterdam . She first had to fight the charges outstanding against her . Noted attorney Clarence Darrow offered to defend Sanger free of charge but , bowing to public pressure , the government dropped the charges early in 1916 . No longer under the threat of jail , Sanger embarked on a successful cross @-@ country speaking tour , which catapulted her into the leadership of the U.S. birth control movement . Other leading figures , such as William J. Robinson and Mary Dennett , chose to work in the background , or turned their attention to other causes . Later in 1916 , Sanger traveled to Boston to lend her support to the Massachusetts Birth Control League and to jailed birth control activist Van Kleeck Allison . 
 = = = First birth control clinic = = = 
 During Sanger 's 1916 speaking tour , she promoted birth control clinics based on the Dutch model she had observed during her 1914 trip to Europe . Although she inspired many local communities to create birth control leagues , no clinics were established . Sanger therefore resolved to create a birth control clinic in New York that would provide free contraceptive services to women . New York state law prohibited the distribution of contraceptives or even contraceptive information , but Sanger hoped to exploit a provision in the law which permitted doctors to prescribe contraceptives for the prevention of disease . On October 16 , 1916 , she opened the Brownsville clinic in Brooklyn ; it was an immediate success , with over 100 women visiting on the first day . A few days after opening , an undercover policewoman purchased a cervical cap at the clinic , and Sanger was arrested . Refusing to walk , Sanger and a co @-@ worker were dragged out of the clinic by police officers . The clinic was shut down , and it was not until 1923 that another birth control clinic was opened in the United States . 
 Sanger 's trial began in January 1917 . She was supported by a large number of wealthy and influential women who came together to form the Committee of One Hundred , which was devoted to raising funds for Sanger and the NBCL . The committee also started publishing the monthly journal Birth Control Review , and established a network of connections to powerful politicians , activists , and press figures . Despite the strong support , Sanger was convicted ; the judge offered a lenient sentence if she promised not to break the law again , but Sanger replied " I cannot respect the law as it exists today . " She served a sentence of 30 days in jail . 
 Other activists were also pushing for progress . Emma Goldman was arrested in 1916 for circulating birth control information , and Abraham Jacobi unsuccessfully tried to persuade the New York medical community to push for a change in law to permit physicians to dispense contraceptive information . 
 = = Mainstream acceptance ( 1917 – 1923 ) = = 
 The publicity from Sanger 's trial generated immense enthusiasm for the cause , and by the end of 1917 there were over 30 birth control organizations in the United States . Sanger was always astute about public relations , and she seized on the publicity of the trial to advance her causes . After her trial , she emerged as the movement 's most visible leader . Other leaders , such as William J. Robinson , Mary Dennett , and Blanche Ames Ames , could not match Sanger 's charisma , charm and fervor . 
 The movement was evolving from radical , working @-@ class roots into a campaign backed by society women and liberal professionals . Sanger and her fellow advocates began to tone down their radical rhetoric and instead emphasized the socioeconomic benefits of birth control , a policy which led to increasing acceptance by mainstream Americans . Media coverage increased , and several silent motion pictures produced in the 1910s featured birth control as a theme ( including Birth Control , produced by Sanger and starring herself ) . 
 Opposition to birth control remained strong : state legislatures refused to legalize contraception or the distribution of contraceptive information ; religious leaders spoke out , attacking women who would choose " ease and fashion " over motherhood ; and eugenicists were worried that birth control would exacerbate the birth rate differential between " old stock " white Americans and " <unk> " or immigrants . 
 Sanger formed the New York Woman 's Publishing Company ( <unk> ) in 1918 and , under its auspices , became the publisher for the Birth Control Review . British suffragette activist Kitty Marion , standing on New York street corners , sold the Review at 20 cents per copy , enduring death threats , heckling , spitting , physical abuse , and police harassment . Over the course of the following ten years , Marion was arrested nine times for her birth control advocacy . 
 = = = Legal victory = = = 
 Sanger appealed her 1917 conviction and won a mixed victory in 1918 in a unanimous decision by the New York Court of Appeals written by Judge Frederick E. Crane . The court 's opinion upheld her conviction , but indicated that the courts would be willing to permit contraception if prescribed by doctors . This decision was only applicable within New York , where it opened the door for birth control clinics , under physician supervision , to be established . Sanger herself did not immediately take advantage of the opportunity , wrongly expecting that the medical profession would lead the way ; instead she focused on writing and lecturing . 
 = = = World War I and condoms = = = 
 The birth control movement received an unexpected boost during World War I , as a result of a crisis the U.S. military experienced when many of its soldiers were diagnosed with syphilis or gonorrhea . The military undertook an extensive education campaign , focusing on abstinence , but also offering some contraceptive guidance . The military , under pressure from purity advocates , did not distribute condoms , or even endorse their use , making the U.S. the only military force in World War I that did not supply condoms to its troops . When U.S. soldiers were in Europe , they found rubber condoms readily available , and when they returned to America , they continued to use condoms as their preferred method of birth control . 
 The military 's anti @-@ venereal disease campaign marked a major turning point for the movement : it was the first time a government institution had engaged in a sustained , public discussion of sexual matters . The government 's public discourse changed sex from a secret topic into a legitimate topic of scientific research , and it transformed contraception from an issue of morals to an issue of public health . 
 = = = Legislative efforts = = = 
 During World War I , Mary Dennett focused her efforts on the peace movement , but she returned to the birth control movement in 1918 . She continued to lead the NBCL , and collaborated with Sanger 's <unk> . In 1919 , Dennett published a widely distributed educational pamphlet , The Sex Side of Life , which treated sex as a natural and enjoyable act . However , in the same year , frustrated with the NBCL 's chronic lack of funding , Dennett broke away and formed the Voluntary Parenthood League ( VPL ) . Both Dennett and Sanger proposed legislative changes that would legalize birth control , but they took different approaches : Sanger endorsed contraception but only under a physician 's supervision ; Dennett pushed for unrestricted access to contraception . Sanger , a proponent of diaphragms , was concerned that unrestricted access would result in ill @-@ fitting diaphragms and would lead to medical quackery . Dennett was concerned that requiring women to get prescriptions from physicians would prevent poor women from receiving contraception , and she was concerned about a shortage of physicians trained in birth control . Both legislative initiatives failed , partly because some legislators felt that fear of pregnancy was the only thing that kept women chaste . In the early 1920s , Sanger 's leadership position in the movement solidified because she gave frequent public lectures , and because she took steps to exclude Dennett from meetings and events . 
 = = = American Birth Control League = = = 
 Although Sanger was busy publishing the Birth Control Review during the years 1919 – 1920 , she was not formally affiliated with either of the major birth control organizations ( NBCL or VPL ) during that time . In 1921 she became convinced that she needed to associate with a formal body to earn the support of professional societies and the scientific community . Rather than join an existing organization , she considered creating a new one . As a first step , she organized the First American Birth Control Conference , held in November 1921 in New York City . On the final night of the conference , as Sanger prepared to give a speech in the crowded Town Hall theater , police raided the meeting and arrested her for disorderly conduct . From the stage she shouted : " we have a right to hold [ this meeting ] under the Constitution ... let them club us if they want to . " She was soon released . The following day it was revealed that Patrick Joseph Hayes , the Archbishop of New York , had pressured the police to shut down the meeting . The Town Hall raid was a turning point for the movement : opposition from the government and medical community faded , and the Catholic Church emerged as its most vocal opponent . After the conference , Sanger and her supporters established the American Birth Control League ( ABCL ) . 
 = = = Second birth control clinic = = = 
 Four years after the New York Court of Appeals opened the doors for physicians to prescribe contraceptives , Sanger opened a second birth control clinic , which she staffed with physicians to make it legal under that court ruling ( the first clinic had employed nurses ) . This second clinic , the Clinical Research Bureau ( CRB ) , opened on January 2 , 1923 . To avoid police harassment the clinic 's existence was not publicized , its primary mission was stated to be conducting scientific research , and it only provided services to married women . The existence of the clinic was finally announced to the public in December 1923 , but this time there were no arrests or controversy . This convinced activists that , after ten years of struggle , birth control had finally become widely accepted in the United States . The CRB was the first legal birth control clinic in the United States , and quickly grew into the world 's leading contraceptive research center . 
 = = Progress and setbacks ( 1920s – 1940s ) = = 
 = = = Widespread acceptance = = = 
 Following the successful opening of the CRB in 1923 , public discussion of contraception became more commonplace , and the term " birth control " became firmly established in the nation 's vernacular . Of the hundreds of references to birth control in magazines and newspapers of the 1920s , more than two @-@ thirds were favorable . The availability of contraception signaled the end of the stricter morality of the Victorian era , and ushered in the emergence of a more sexually permissive society . Other factors that contributed to the new sexual norms included increased mobility brought by the automobile , anonymous urban lifestyles , and post @-@ war euphoria . Sociologists who surveyed women in Muncie , Indiana in 1925 found that all the upper class women approved of birth control , and more than 80 percent of the working class women approved . The birth rate in America declined 20 percent between 1920 and 1930 , primarily due to increased use of birth control . 
 = = = Opposition = = = 
 Although clinics became more common in the late 1920s , the movement still faced significant challenges : Large sectors of the medical community were still resistant to birth control ; birth control advocates were blacklisted by the radio industry ; and state and federal laws – though generally not enforced – still outlawed contraception . 
 The most significant opponent to birth control was the Catholic Church , which mobilized opposition in many venues during the 1920s . Catholics persuaded the Syracuse city council to ban Sanger from giving a speech in 1924 ; the National Catholic Welfare Conference lobbied against birth control ; the Knights of Columbus boycotted hotels that hosted birth control events ; the Catholic police commissioner of Albany prevented Sanger from speaking there ; the Catholic mayor of Boston , James Curley , blocked Sanger from speaking in public ; and several newsreel companies , succumbing to pressure from Catholics , refused to cover stories related to birth control . The ABCL turned some of the boycotted speaking events to their advantage by inviting the press , and the resultant news coverage often generated public sympathy for their cause . However , Catholic lobbying was particularly effective in the legislative arena , where their arguments – that contraception was unnatural , harmful , and indecent – impeded several initiatives , including an attempt in 1924 by Mary Dennett to overturn federal anti @-@ contraception laws . 
 Dozens of birth control clinics opened across the United States during the 1920s , but not without incident . In 1929 , New York police raided a clinic in New York and arrested two doctors and three nurses for distributing contraceptive information that was unrelated to the prevention of disease . The ABCL achieved a major victory in the trial , when the judge ruled that use of contraceptives to space births farther apart was a legitimate medical treatment that benefited the health of the mother . The trial , in which many prominent physicians served as witnesses for the defense , brought a large segment of the medical community onto the side of birth control advocates . 
 = = = Eugenics and race = = = 
 Before the advent of the birth control movement , eugenics had become very popular in Europe and the U.S. , and the subject was widely discussed in articles , movies , and lectures . <unk> had mixed feelings about birth control : they worried that it would exacerbate the birth rate differential between " superior " races and " inferior " races , but they also recognized its value as a tool to improving " racial fitness " . Leaders of the birth control movement never considered eugenics to be their primary goal , focusing instead on free speech and women 's rights , but around 1920 they started to make common cause with eugenicists , hoping to broaden the support base of the birth control movement . Eugenics buttressed the birth control movement 's aims by correlating excessive births with increased poverty , crime and disease . Sanger published two books in the early 1920s that endorsed eugenics : Woman and the New Race and The Pivot of Civilization . Sanger and other advocates endorsed negative eugenics ( discouraging procreation of " inferior " persons ) , but did not advocate euthanasia or positive eugenics ( encouraging procreation of " superior " persons ) . Many eugenicists refused to support the birth control movement because of Sanger 's insistence that a woman 's primary duty was to herself , not to the state . 
 Like many white Americans in the U.S. in the 1930s , some leaders of the birth control movement believed that lighter @-@ skinned races were superior to darker @-@ skinned races . They assumed that African Americans were intellectually backward , would be relatively incompetent in managing their own health , and would require special supervision from whites . The dominance of whites in the movement 's leadership and medical staff resulted in accusations of racism from blacks and suspicions that " race suicide " would be a consequence of large scale adoption of birth control . These suspicions were misinterpreted by some of the white birth control advocates as lack of interest in contraception . 
 In spite of these suspicions , many African @-@ American leaders supported efforts to supply birth control to the African @-@ American community . In 1929 , James H. Hubert , a black social worker and leader of New York 's Urban League , asked Sanger to open a clinic in Harlem . Sanger secured funding from the Julius Rosenwald Fund and opened the clinic , staffed with African @-@ American doctors , in 1930 . The clinic was guided by a 15 @-@ member advisory board consisting of African @-@ American doctors , nurses , clergy , journalists , and social workers . It was publicized in the African @-@ American press and African @-@ American churches , and received the approval of W. E. B. Du Bois , co @-@ founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) . In the early 1940s , the Birth Control Federation of America ( <unk> ) initiated a program called the Negro Project , managed by its Division of Negro Service ( DNS ) . As with the Harlem clinic , the primary aim of the DNS and its programs was to improve maternal and infant health . Based on her work at the Harlem clinic , Sanger suggested to the DNS that African Americans were more likely to take advice from a doctor of their own race , but other leaders prevailed and insisted that whites be employed in the outreach efforts . The discriminatory actions and statements by the movement 's leaders during the 1920s and 1930s have led to continuing allegations that the movement was racist . 
 = = = Expanding availability = = = 
 Two important legal decisions in the 1930s helped increase the accessibility of contraceptives . In 1930 , two condom manufacturers sued each other in the Youngs Rubber case , and the judge ruled that contraceptive manufacturing was a legitimate business enterprise . He went further , and declared that the federal law prohibiting the mailing of condoms was not legally sound . Sanger precipitated a second legal breakthrough when she ordered a diaphragm from Japan in 1932 , hoping to provoke a decisive battle in the courts . The diaphragm was confiscated by the U.S. government , and Sanger 's subsequent legal challenge led to the 1936 One Package legal ruling by Judge Augustus Hand . His decision overturned an important provision of the anti @-@ contraception laws that prohibited physicians from obtaining contraceptives . This court victory motivated the American Medical Association in 1937 to finally adopt contraception as a normal medical service and a core component of medical school curricula . However , the medical community was slow to accept this new responsibility , and women continued to rely on unsafe and ineffective contraceptive advice from ill @-@ informed sources until the 1960s . 
 By 1938 , over 400 contraceptive manufacturers were in business , over 600 brands of female contraceptives were available , and industry revenues exceeded $ 250 million per year . Condoms were sold in vending machines in some public restrooms , and men spent twice as much on condoms as on shaving . Although condoms had become commonplace in the 1930s , feminists in the movement felt that birth control should be the woman 's prerogative , and they continued to push for development of a contraceptive that was under the woman 's control , a campaign which ultimately led to the birth control pill decades later . To increase the availability of high @-@ quality contraceptives , birth control advocates established the Holland – <unk> company to manufacture contraceptives – primarily diaphragms , which were Sanger 's recommended method . By the 1930s , the diaphragm with spermicidal jelly had become the most commonly prescribed form of contraception ; in 1938 , female contraceptives accounted for 85 percent of annual contraceptive sales . 
 = = = Planned Parenthood = = = 
 The 1936 One Package court battle brought together two birth control organizations – the ABCL and the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau ( formerly the CRB ) – who had joined forces to craft the successful defense effort . Leaders of both groups viewed this as an auspicious time to merge the two organizations , so , in 1937 , the Birth Control Council of America , under the leadership of Sanger , was formed to effect a consolidation . The effort eventually led to the merger of the two organizations in 1939 as the Birth Control Federation of America ( <unk> ) . Although Sanger continued in the role of president , she no longer wielded the same power as she had in the early years of the movement , and , in 1942 , more conservative forces within the organization changed the name to Planned Parenthood Federation of America , a name Sanger objected to because she considered it too euphemistic . After World War II , the leadership of Planned Parenthood de @-@ emphasized radical feminism and shifted focus to more moderate themes such as family planning and population policy . 
 The movement to legalize birth control came to a gradual conclusion around the time Planned Parenthood was formed . In 1942 , there were over 400 birth control organizations in America , contraception was fully embraced by the medical profession , and the anti @-@ contraception Comstock laws ( which still remained on the books ) were rarely enforced . 
 = = Legalization and aftermath = = 
 After World War II advocacy for reproductive rights transitioned into a new era which focused on abortion , public funding , and insurance coverage . 
 Birth control advocacy also took on a global aspect as organizations around the world began to collaborate . In 1946 , Sanger helped found the International Committee on Planned Parenthood , which evolved into the International Planned Parenthood Federation and soon became the world 's largest non @-@ governmental international family planning organization . In 1952 , John D. Rockefeller III founded the influential Population Council . Fear of global overpopulation became a major issue in the 1960s , generating concerns about pollution , food shortages , and quality of life , leading to well @-@ funded birth control campaigns around the world . The 1994 International Conference on Population and Development and the 1995 Fourth World Conference on Women addressed birth control and influenced human rights declarations which asserted women 's rights to control their own bodies . 
 In the United States , a flurry of legal actions in the 1960s and 1970s changed the landscape of reproductive rights : in 1965 , the Supreme Court ruled in Griswold v. Connecticut that it was unconstitutional for the government to prohibit married couples from using birth control . In 1967 activist Bill Baird was arrested for distributing a contraceptive foam and a condom to a student during a lecture on birth control and abortion at Boston University . Baird 's appeal of his conviction resulted in the United States Supreme Court case Eisenstadt v. Baird ( 1972 ) , which extended the Griswold holding to unmarried couples , and thereby legalized birth control for all Americans . 
 In 1970 , Congress finally removed references to contraception from federal anti @-@ obscenity laws ; and in 1973 , the Roe v. Wade decision legalized abortion during the first trimester of pregnancy . 
 During the same time period , the pharmaceutical industry was steadily developing new modes of contraception . In the early 1950s , philanthropist Katharine McCormick provided funding for biologist Gregory Pincus to develop the birth control pill , which was approved by the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) in 1960 . The pill became very popular and had a major impact on society and culture . It contributed to a sharp increase in college attendance and graduation rates for women . New forms of intrauterine devices were introduced in the 1960s , increasing popularity of long acting reversible contraceptives . 
 In 1982 , European drug manufacturers developed mifepristone , which was initially utilized as a contraceptive , but is now generally prescribed with a <unk> to induce abortion in pregnancies up to the fourth month of gestation . To avoid consumer boycotts organized by anti @-@ abortion organizations , the manufacturer donated the U.S. manufacturing rights to <unk> Laboratories , a company formed by pro @-@ choice advocates , with the sole purpose of distributing mifepristone in the U.S , and thus immune to the effects of boycotts . 
 In 1997 , the FDA approved a prescription emergency contraception pill ( known as the morning @-@ after pill ) , which became available over the counter in 2006 . In 2010 , ulipristal acetate , a more effective emergency contraceptive was approved for use up to five days after unprotected sexual intercourse . Fifty to sixty percent of abortion patients became pregnant in circumstances in which emergency contraceptives could have been used . These emergency contraceptives , including Plan B and <unk> , proved to be another battleground in the war over reproductive rights . Opponents of emergency contraception consider it a form of abortion , because it may interfere with the ability of a fertilized embryo to implant in the uterus ; while proponents contend that it is not abortion , because the absence of implantation means that pregnancy never commenced . 
 = The Negro Motorist Green Book = 
 The Negro Motorist Green Book ( at times styled The Negro Motorist Green @-@ Book or titled The Negro Travelers ' Green Book ) was an annual guidebook for African @-@ American <unk> , commonly referred to simply as the Green Book . It was originated and published by New York City mailman Victor H. Green in the United States from 1936 to 1966 , during the Jim Crow era , when open and often legally prescribed discrimination against non @-@ whites was widespread . Although pervasive racial discrimination and black poverty limited ownership of cars among African Americans , the emerging black middle class became car owners . In response , Green expanded the coverage in his book from the New York area to much of North America , also founding a travel agency . 
 Many blacks took to driving , in part to avoid segregation on public transportation . As the writer George Schuyler put it in 1930 , " all Negroes who can do so purchase an automobile as soon as possible in order to be free of discomfort , discrimination , segregation and insult . " Black Americans employed as athletes , entertainers , and salesmen also traveled frequently for work purposes . African @-@ American travelers faced a variety of dangers and inconveniences , such as white @-@ owned businesses refusing to serve them or repair their vehicles , being refused accommodation or food by white @-@ owned hotels , and threats of physical violence and forcible expulsion from whites @-@ only " sundown towns " . Green founded and published The Negro Motorist Green Book to tackle such problems , compiling resources " to give the Negro traveler information that will keep him from running into difficulties , embarrassments and to make his trip more enjoyable . " 
 From a New York @-@ focused first edition published in 1936 , Green expanded the work to cover much of North America , including most of the United States and parts of Canada , Mexico , the Caribbean , and Bermuda . The Green Book became " the bible of black travel during Jim Crow " , enabling black travelers to find lodgings , businesses , and gas stations that would serve them along the road . It was little known outside the African @-@ American community . Shortly after passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which outlawed the types of racial discrimination that had made the Green Book necessary , publication ceased and it fell into obscurity . There has been a revived interest in it in the early 21st century in connection with studies of black travel during the Jim Crow era . 
 Los Angeles is now considering offering special protection to the sites that kept black travelers safe . Ken Bernstein , principal planner for the city 's Office of Historic Resources notes , " At the very least , these sites can be incorporated into our city 's online inventory system . They are part of the story of African Americans in Los Angeles , and the story of Los Angeles itself writ large . " 
 = = Traveling while black : the African @-@ American travel experience = = 
 Until long after the Civil Rights era ( 1955 – 1968 ) , black travelers in the United States faced major problems to which most whites were oblivious . White supremacists had long sought to restrict black mobility . As a result , simply undertaking an auto journey was fraught with difficulty for black people and was potentially a dangerous undertaking . They were subjected to racial profiling by police departments ( " Driving While Black " ) , faced being punished for being seen as " uppity " or " too prosperous " if they were driving a car ( an act that many whites regarded as a white prerogative ) , and risked harassment or worse on and off the highway . A bitter commentary published in a 1947 issue of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 's magazine , The Crisis , highlighted the uphill struggle blacks faced in undertaking recreational travel : 
 Would a Negro like to pursue a little happiness at a theater , a beach , pool , hotel , restaurant , on a train , plane , or ship , a golf course , summer or winter resort ? Would he like to stop overnight at a tourist camp while he motors about his native land ' Seeing America First ' ? Well , just let him try ! 
 Such restrictions had their origins dating back to colonial times , and were found throughout the United States . After the end of legal slavery in the North and then later in the South after the Civil War , most freedmen continued to live at little more than a subsistence level , but a minority of African Americans gained a measure of prosperity . They could plan leisure travel for the first time . Affluent blacks arranged large group excursions for as many as 2 @,@ 000 people at a time , for instance , traveling by rail from New Orleans to resorts along the coast of the Gulf of Mexico . In the pre @-@ Jim Crow era this necessarily meant mingling with whites in hotels , transportation and leisure facilities . They were aided in this by the Civil Rights Act of 1875 , which had made it illegal to discriminate against African Americans in public accommodations and public transportation . 
 They encountered a white backlash , particularly in the South , where by 1877 white Democrats controlled every state government . The Act was declared unconstitutional by the United States Supreme Court in 1883 , resulting in states and cities passing numerous segregation laws . White governments in the South required even interstate railroads to enforce their segregation laws , despite national legislation requiring equal treatment of passengers . The US Supreme Court ruled in Plessy v. Ferguson ( 1896 ) that " separate but equal " accommodations were constitutional but in practice , facilities for blacks were far from equal , generally being of lesser quality and underfunded . Blacks faced restrictions and exclusion throughout the United States . Generally if blacks were not barred entirely from facilities , they could use them only at different times from whites or in different places , such as segregated ( and usually inferior ) areas . 
 In 1917 , the black writer W. E. B. Du Bois observed that the impact of " ever @-@ recurring race discrimination " had made it so difficult to travel to any number of destinations , from popular resorts to major cities , that it was now " a puzzling query as to what to do with vacations " . It was a problem that came to affect an increasing number of black people in the first decades of the 20th century . Tens of thousands of southern African Americans migrated from farms in the south to factories and domestic service in the north . No longer confined to living at a subsistence level , many gained enough disposable income and time to engage in leisure travel . The development of affordable mass @-@ produced automobiles liberated black Americans from having to rely on the " Jim Crow cars " – smoky , battered and uncomfortable railroad carriages which were the separate but decidedly unequal alternatives to more salubrious whites @-@ only carriages . As one black magazine writer commented in 1933 , in an automobile " it 's mighty good to be the skipper for a change , and pilot our craft whither and where we will . We feel like Vikings . What if our craft is blunt of nose and limited of power and our sea is <unk> ; it 's good for the spirit to just give the old railroad Jim Crow the laugh . " 
 Middle @-@ class blacks throughout the United States " were not at all sure how to behave or how whites would behave toward them " , as Bart Landry puts it . In Cincinnati , Ohio , the African @-@ American newspaper editor Wendell Dabney wrote of the situation in the 1920s that " hotels , restaurants , eating and drinking places , almost universally are closed to all people in whom the least tincture of colored blood can be detected . " Areas without significant black populations outside the South often refused to accommodate them : not one hotel or other accommodation was open to blacks in Salt Lake City , Utah , in the 1920s . Black travelers were stranded if they had to stop there overnight . Only six percent of the more than 100 motels that lined U.S. Route 66 in Albuquerque , New Mexico , admitted black customers . Across the whole state of New Hampshire , only three motels in 1956 served African Americans . 
 George Schuyler reported in 1943 , " Many colored families have motored all across the United States without being able to secure overnight accommodations at a single tourist camp or hotel . " He suggested that black Americans would find it easier to travel abroad than in their own country . In Chicago in 1945 , St. Clair Drake and Horace A. Cayton reported that " the city 's hotel managers , by general agreement , do not sanction the use of hotel facilities by Negroes , particularly sleeping accommodations . " One incident reported by Drake and Cayton illustrated the discriminatory treatment meted out even to blacks within racially mixed groups : 
 Two colored schoolteachers and several white friends attended a luncheon at an exclusive coffee shop . The Negro women were allowed to sit down , but the waitress ignored them and served the white women . One of the colored women protested and was told that she could eat in the kitchen . 
 = = = Coping with discrimination on the road = = = 
 While automobiles made it much easier for black Americans to be independently mobile , the difficulties they faced in traveling were such that , as Lester B. Granger of the National Urban League puts it , " so far as travel is concerned , Negroes are America 's last pioneers . " Black travelers often had to carry buckets or portable toilets in the trunks of their cars because they were usually barred from bathrooms and rest areas in service stations and roadside stops . Travel essentials such as gasoline were difficult to purchase because of discrimination at gas stations . To avoid such problems on long trips , African Americans often packed meals and carried containers of gasoline in their cars . Writing of the road trips that he made as a boy in the 1950s , Courtland Milloy of the Washington Post recalled that his mother spent the evening before the trip frying chicken and boiling eggs so that his family would have something to eat along the way the next day . 
 One black motorist observed in the early 1940s that while black travelers felt free in the mornings , by the early afternoon a " small cloud " had appeared . By the late afternoon , " it casts a shadow of apprehension on our hearts and sours us a little . ' Where , ' it asks us , ' will you stay tonight ? ' " . They often had to spend hours in the evening trying to find somewhere to stay , sometimes resorting to sleeping in <unk> or in their own cars if they could not find anywhere . One alternative , if it was available , was to arrange in advance to sleep at the homes of black friends in towns or cities along their route . However , this meant detours and an abandonment of the spontaneity that for many was a key attraction of motoring . 
 The civil rights leader John Lewis has recalled how his family prepared for a trip in 1951 : 
 There would be no restaurant for us to stop at until we were well out of the South , so we took our restaurant right in the car with us .... Stopping for gas and to use the bathroom took careful planning . Uncle Otis had made this trip before , and he knew which places along the way offered ' colored ' bathrooms and which were better just to pass on by . Our map was marked and our route was planned that way , by the distances between service stations where it would be safe for us to stop . " 
 Finding accommodation was one of the greatest challenges faced by black travelers . Not only did many hotels , motels , and boarding houses refuse to serve black customers , but thousands of towns across the United States declared themselves " sundown towns , " which all non @-@ whites had to leave by sunset . Huge numbers of towns across the country were effectively off @-@ limits to African Americans . By the end of the 1960s , there were at least 10 @,@ 000 sundown towns across the U.S. – including large suburbs such as Glendale , California ( population 60 @,@ 000 at the time ) ; Levittown , New York ( 80 @,@ 000 ) ; and Warren , Michigan ( 180 @,@ 000 ) . Over half the incorporated communities in Illinois were sundown towns . The unofficial slogan of Anna , Illinois , which had violently expelled its African @-@ American population in 1909 , was " Ain 't No Niggers Allowed " . Even in towns which did not exclude overnight stays by blacks , accommodations were often very limited . African Americans migrating to California to find work in the early 1940s often found themselves camping by the roadside overnight for lack of any hotel accommodation along the way . They were acutely aware of the discriminatory treatment that they received . Courtland Milloy 's mother , who took him and his brother on road trips when they were children , recalled that " after riding all day , I 'd say to myself , ' Wouldn 't it be nice if we could spend the night in one of those hotels ? ' or , ' Wouldn 't it be great if we could stop for a real meal and a cup of coffee ? ' We 'd see the little white children jumping into motel swimming pools , and you all would be in the back seat of a hot car , sweating and fighting . " 
 African @-@ American travelers faced real physical risks because of the widely differing rules of segregation that existed from place to place , and the possibility of extrajudicial violence against them . Activities that were accepted in one place could provoke violence a few miles down the road . <unk> formal or unwritten racial codes , even inadvertently , could put travelers in considerable danger . Even driving etiquette was affected by racism ; in the Mississippi Delta region , local custom prohibited blacks from overtaking whites , to prevent their raising dust from the unpaved roads to cover white @-@ owned cars . A pattern emerged of whites purposefully damaging black @-@ owned cars to put their owners " in their place " . Stopping anywhere that was not known to be safe , even to allow children in a car to relieve themselves , presented a risk ; Milloy noted that his parents would urge him and his brother to control their need to use a bathroom until they could find a safe place to stop , as " those backroads were simply too dangerous for parents to stop to let their little black children pee " . 
 Racist local laws , discriminatory social codes , segregated commercial facilities , racial profiling by police , and sundown towns made road journeys a minefield of constant uncertainty and risk . Road trip narratives by blacks reflected their unease and the dangers they faced , presenting a more complex outlook from those written by whites extolling the joys of the road . Milloy recalls the menacing environment that he encountered during his childhood , in which he learned of " so many black travelers ... just not making it to their destinations . " 
 Even foreign black dignitaries were not immune to the discrimination that African @-@ American travelers routinely encountered . In one high @-@ profile incident , <unk> <unk> Gbedemah , the finance minister of newly independent Ghana , was refused service at a Howard Johnson 's restaurant at Dover , Delaware , while traveling to Washington , D.C. , even after identifying himself by his state position to the restaurant staff . The snub caused an international incident , to which an embarrassed President Dwight D. Eisenhower responded by inviting Gbedemah to breakfast at the White House . Repeated and sometimes violent incidents of discrimination directed against black African diplomats , particularly on U.S. Route 40 between New York and Washington , D.C. , led to the administration of President John F. Kennedy setting up a Special Protocol Service Section within the State Department to assist black diplomats traveling and living within the United States . The State Department considered issuing copies of The Negro Motorist Green Book to black diplomats , but eventually decided against steering them to black @-@ friendly public accommodations as it wanted them " to have all of the privileges of whiteness . " 
 John A. Williams wrote in his 1965 book , This Is My Country Too , that he did not believe " white travelers have any idea of how much nerve and courage it requires for a Negro to drive coast to coast in America . " He achieved it with " nerve , courage , and a great deal of luck , " supplemented by " a rifle and shotgun , a road atlas , and <unk> , a listing of places in America where Negroes can stay without being embarrassed , insulted , or worse . " He noted that black drivers needed to be particularly cautious in the South , where they were advised to wear a chauffeur 's cap or have one visible on the front seat and pretend they were delivering a car for a white person . Along the way , he had to endure a stream of " insults of clerks , <unk> , attendants , cops , and strangers in passing cars . " There was a constant need to keep his mind on the danger he faced ; as he was well aware , " [ black ] people have a way of disappearing on the road . " 
 = = Navigating Jim Crow : the role of the Green Book = = 
 Segregation meant that facilities for African @-@ American motorists were limited , but entrepreneurs of both races realized that lucrative opportunities existed in marketing goods and services exclusively to black patrons . The challenge for travelers was to find such oases in the middle of a desert of discrimination . To address this problem , African @-@ American writers produced a number of guides to provide advice on traveling . These included directories of which hotels , camps , road houses , and restaurants would serve African Americans . Jewish travelers , who had long experienced discrimination at many vacation spots , created guides for their own community though they were at least able to visibly blend in more easily with the general population . African Americans followed suit with publications such as Hackley and Harrison 's Hotel and Apartment Guide for Colored Travelers , published in 1930 to cover " Board , Rooms , Garage Accommodations , etc. in 300 Cities in the United States and Canada " . 
 The Negro Motorist Green Book was one of the best known examples of the African @-@ American travel guide . It was conceived in 1932 and first published in 1936 by Victor H. Green , a World War I veteran from New York City who worked as a postal carrier and later as a travel agent . He said his aim was " to give the Negro traveler information that will keep him from running into difficulties , embarrassments and to make his trip more enjoyable . " According to an editorial written by <unk> C. Dashiell in the Spring 1956 edition of the Green Book , " the idea crystallized when not only [ Green ] but several friends and acquaintances complained of the difficulties encountered ; oftentimes painful embarrassments suffered which ruined a vacation or business trip . " 
 Green asked his readers to provide information " on the Negro motoring conditions , scenic wonders in your travels , places visited of interest and short stories on one 's motoring experience . " He offered a reward of one dollar for each accepted account , which he increased to five dollars by 1941 . He also obtained information from colleagues in the US Postal Service , who would " ask around on their routes " to find suitable public accommodations . At that time , like it is now , the Postal Service was one of the largest employers of African Americans in the US , and its employees were ideally situated to inform Green of which places were safe and hospitable to African @-@ American travelers . 
 The Green Book 's motto , displayed on the front cover , was for black travelers to " carry your Green Book with you – You may need it " . The 1949 edition included a quote from Mark Twain : " Travel is fatal to prejudice " , inverting Twain 's original meaning ; as Cotton Seiler puts it , " here it was the visited , rather than the visitors , who would find themselves enriched by the encounter . " Green commented in 1940 that the Green Book had given black Americans " something authentic to travel by and to make traveling better for the Negro . " Its principal goal was to provide accurate information on black @-@ friendly accommodations to answer the constant question that faced black drivers : " Where will you spend the night ? " As well as essential information on lodgings , service stations and garages , it provided details of leisure facilities open to African Americans , including beauty salons , restaurants , nightclubs and country clubs . The listings focused on four main categories – hotels , motels , tourist homes ( private residences , usually owned by African Americans , which provided accommodation to travelers ) , and restaurants . They were arranged by state and subdivided by city , giving the name and address of each business . For an extra payment , the listed businesses could have their listing displayed in bold type or to have a star next to it to denote that they were " recommended " . 
 Many such establishments were run by and for African Americans and in some cases were named after prominent figures in African @-@ American history . In North Carolina , such black @-@ owned businesses included the Carver , Lincoln , and Booker T. Washington hotels , the Friendly City beauty parlor , the Black Beauty Tea Room , the New Progressive tailor shop , the Big Buster tavern , and the Blue Duck Inn . Each edition also included feature articles on travel and destinations , and included a listing of black resorts such as Idlewild , Michigan ; Oak Bluffs , Massachusetts ; and Belmar , New Jersey . The state of New Mexico was particularly recommended as a place where most motels would welcome " guests on the basis of ‘ cash rather than color " . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 The Green Book attracted sponsorship from a number of businesses , including the African @-@ American newspapers Call and Post of Cleveland , Ohio , and the Louisville Leader of Louisville , Kentucky . Standard Oil ( later Esso ) was also a sponsor , owing to the efforts of James " Billboard " Jackson , a pioneering African @-@ American Esso sales representative . Esso 's " race group " , part of its marketing division , promoted the Green Book as enabling Esso 's black customers to " go further with less anxiety " . By contrast , Shell gas stations were known to refuse serving black customers . The 1949 edition included an Esso endorsement message that told readers : " As representatives of the Esso Standard Oil Co . , we are pleased to recommend the Green Book for your travel convenience . Keep one on hand each year and when you are planning your trips , let Esso Touring Service supply you with maps and complete routings , and for real ' Happy Motoring ' – use Esso Products and Esso Service wherever you find the Esso sign . " Photographs of some African @-@ American entrepreneurs who owned Esso gas stations appeared in the pages of the Green Book . 
 Although Green usually refrained from editorializing in the Green Book , he let his readers ' letters speak for the influence of his guide . William Smith of Hackensack , New Jersey , described it as a " credit to the Negro Race " in a letter published in the 1938 edition . He commented : 
 It is a book badly needed among our Race since the advent of the motor age . Realizing the only way we knew where and how to reach our pleasure resorts was in a way of speaking , by word of mouth , until the publication of The Negro Motorist Green Book ... We earnestly believe that [ it ] will mean as much if not more to us as the A.A.A. means to the white race . " 
 Earl Hutchinson Sr. , the father of journalist Earl <unk> Hutchinson , wrote of a 1955 move from Chicago to California that " you literally didn 't leave home without [ the Green Book ] . " Ernest Green , one of the Little Rock Nine , used the Green Book to navigate the 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) from Arkansas to Virginia in the 1950s and comments that " it was one of the survival tools of segregated life " . According to the civil rights leader Julian Bond , recalling his parents ' use of the Green Book , " it was a guidebook that told you not where the best places were to eat , but where there was any place . " Bond comments : 
 You think about the things that most travelers take for granted , or most people today take for granted . If I go to New York City and want a hair cut , it 's pretty easy for me to find a place where that can happen , but it wasn 't easy then . White barbers would not cut black peoples ' hair . White beauty parlors would not take black women as customers — hotels and so on , down the line . You needed the Green Book to tell you where you can go without having doors slammed in your face . 
 While the Green Book was intended to make life easier for those living under Jim Crow , its publisher looked forward to a time when such guidebooks would no longer be necessary . As Green wrote , " there will be a day sometime in the near future when this guide will not have to be published . That is when we as a race will have equal opportunities and privileges in the United States . It will be a great day for us to suspend this publication for then we can go as we please , and without embarrassment . " 
 = = = Publishing history = = = 
 The Green Book was published locally in New York , but its popularity was such that from 1937 it was distributed nationally with input from Charles McDowell , a collaborator on Negro Affairs for the United States Travel Bureau , a government agency . With new editions published annually from 1936 to 1940 , the Green Book 's publication was suspended during World War II and resumed in 1946 . Its scope expanded greatly during its years of publication ; from covering only the New York City metropolitan area in the first edition , it eventually covered facilities in most of the United States and parts of Canada ( primarily Montreal ) , Mexico and Bermuda . Coverage was good in the eastern US and weak in Plains states such as North Dakota , where there were few black residents . It eventually sold around 15 @,@ 000 copies per year , distributed by mail order , by black @-@ owned businesses , and through Esso service stations , some of which – unusual for the oil industry at the time – were franchised to African Americans . 
 It originally sold for 25 cents , increasing to $ 1 @.@ 25 by 1957 . With the book 's growing success , Green retired from the post office and hired a small publishing staff that operated from 200 West 135th Street in Harlem . He also established a vacation reservation service in 1947 to take advantage of the post @-@ war boom in automobile travel . From 10 pages in its first edition , by 1949 he had expanded the Green Book to more than 80 pages , including advertisements . 
 The 1951 Green Book recommended that black @-@ owned businesses raise their standards , as travelers were " no longer content to pay top prices for inferior accommodations and services " . The quality of black @-@ owned lodgings was coming under scrutiny , as many prosperous blacks found them to be second @-@ rate compared to the white @-@ owned lodgings from which they were excluded . In 1952 , Green renamed the publication The Negro Travelers ' Green Book , in recognition of its coverage of international destinations requiring travel by plane and ship . Although segregation was still in force , by state laws in the South and often by practice elsewhere , the wide circulation of the Green Book had attracted growing interest from white businesses that wanted to tap into the potential sales of the black market . The 1955 edition noted : 
 " A few years after its publication ... white business has also recognized its [ The Green Book ’ s ] value and it is now in use by the Esso Standard Oil Co . , The American Automobile <unk> and its affiliate automobile clubs throughout the country , other automobile clubs , air lines , travel bureaus , travelers aid , libraries and thousands of subscribers . " 
 By the start of the 1960s , the Green Book ′ s market was beginning to erode ; civil rights activism was having effects , even before the passage of legislation later in the decade to prohibit racial segregation in public facilities . An increasing number of middle @-@ class African Americans were beginning to question whether guides such as the Green Book were accommodating Jim Crow by steering black travelers to segregated businesses , rather than encouraging them to push for equal access . Black @-@ owned motels in remote locations off state highways lost customers to a new generation of integrated interstate motels located near freeway exits . The 1963 Green Book acknowledged that the activism of the civil rights movement had " widened the areas of public accommodations accessible to all , " but it defended the continued listing of black @-@ friendly businesses because " a family planning for a vacation hopes for one that is free of tensions and problems . " 
 The 1966 edition was the last to be published after the Civil Rights Act of 1964 made the guide effectively obsolete , by outlawing racial discrimination in public accommodations . The last edition of the Green Book included significant changes that reflected the post @-@ Civil Rights Act outlook . The title was changed to Traveler 's Green Book : International Edition – no longer just for the Negro , or the motorist – as its publishers sought to widen its appeal . Although the content continued to proclaim its mission of highlighting leisure options for black travelers , the cover featured an affluent white blonde water @-@ skiing – a sign of how , as Michael Ra @-@ Shon Hall puts it , " the Green Book ‘ whitened ’ its surface and internationalized its scope , while still remaining true to its founding mission to ensure the security of African @-@ American travelers both in the US and abroad . " 
 = = Representation in other media = = 
 In the 2000s , academics , artists , curators , and writers exploring the history of African @-@ American travel in the United States during the Jim Crow era revived interest in the Green Book . The result has been a number of projects , books and other works referring to the Green Book . The book itself has acquired a high value as a collectors ' item ; a " partly perished " copy of the 1941 edition sold at auction in March 2015 for $ 22 @,@ 500 . Some examples are listed below . 
 = = = Digital projects = = = 
 The New York Public Library 's Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture has published digitized copies of 21 issues of the Green Book , dating from 1937 to 1964 . To accompany the <unk> , the NYPL Labs have developed an interactive visualization of the books ' data to enable web users to plot their own road trips and see heat maps of listings . 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 In 2003 , the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of American History included the Green Book in an exhibition , America on the Move . 
 In 2007 , the book was featured in a traveling exhibition called Places of Refuge : The Dresser Trunk Project , organized by William Daryl Williams , the director of the School of Architecture and Interior Design at the University of Cincinnati . The exhibition drew on the Green Book to highlight artifacts and locations associated with travel by blacks during segregation , using dresser trunks to reflect venues such as hotels , restaurants , nightclubs and a Negro league baseball park . 
 In late 2014 , the Gilmore Car Museum in Hickory Corners , MI installed a permanent exhibit on the Green Book that features a 1956 copy of the book that guests can review as well as video interviews of those that utilized it . 
 In 2016 , a 1941 copy of the book will be displayed at the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture , when the museum opens . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Calvin Alexander Ramsey and Becky <unk> Searles interviewed people who traveled with the Green Book as well as Victor Green 's relatives as part of producing a documentary , The Green Book Chronicles ( 2016 ) . 
 100 Miles to Lordsburg ( 2017 ) , is a short film about a black couple crossing New Mexico in 1961 with aid of the Green Book . > 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 African @-@ American playwright Calvin Alexander Ramsey published a children 's book , Ruth and the Green Book ( 2010 ) , about a Chicago family 's journey to Alabama in 1952 , in which they use the Green Book as a guide . 
 Ramsey also wrote a play , called The Green Book : A Play in Two Acts , which debuted in Atlanta in August 2011 after a staged reading at the Lincoln Theatre in Washington , DC in 2010 . It centers on a tourist home in Jefferson City , Missouri . A black military officer , his wife , and a Jewish survivor of the Holocaust spend the night in the home just before the civil rights activist W. E. B. Du Bois is scheduled to deliver a speech in town . The Jewish traveler comes to the home after being shocked to find that the hotel where he planned to stay has a " No Negroes Allowed " notice posted in its lobby – an allusion to the problems of discrimination that Jews and blacks both faced at the time . The play was highly successful , gaining an extension of several weeks beyond its planned closing date . 
 = = = Photography projects = = = 
 Architecture at sites listed in the Green Book is being documented by photographer <unk> Taylor in collaboration with the National Park Service 's Route 66 Corridor Preservation Program . She is also planning to publish other materials and apps featuring such sites . 
 = Greeks = 
 The Greeks or Hellenes ( Greek : <unk> [ <unk> ] ) are an ethnic group native to Greece , Cyprus , Albania , Turkey , Southern Italy , and other regions . They also form a significant diaspora , with Greek communities established around the world . 
 Greek colonies and communities have been historically established on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea , but the Greek people have always been centered on the Aegean and Ionian seas , where the Greek language has been spoken since the Bronze Age . Until the early 20th century , Greeks were distributed between the Greek peninsula , the western coast of Asia Minor , the Black Sea coast , Cappadocia in central Anatolia , Egypt , the Balkans , Cyprus , and Constantinople . Many of these regions coincided to a large extent with the borders of the Byzantine Empire of the late 11th century and the Eastern Mediterranean areas of ancient Greek colonization . The cultural centers of the Greeks have included Athens , Thessalonica , Alexandria , Smyrna , and Constantinople at various periods . 
 Most ethnic Greeks live nowadays within the borders of the modern Greek state and Cyprus . The Greek genocide and population exchange between Greece and Turkey nearly ended the three millennia @-@ old Greek presence in Asia Minor . Other longstanding Greek populations can be found from southern Italy to the Caucasus and southern Russia and Ukraine and in the Greek diaspora communities in a number of other countries . Today , most Greeks are officially registered as members of the Greek Orthodox Church . 
 Greeks have greatly influenced and contributed to culture , arts , exploration , literature , philosophy , politics , architecture , music , mathematics , science and technology , business , cuisine , and sports , both historically and contemporarily . 
 = = History = = 
 The Greeks speak the Greek language , which forms its own unique branch within the Indo @-@ European family of languages , the Hellenic . They are part of a group of pre @-@ modern ethnicities , described by Anthony D. Smith as an " archetypal diaspora people " . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The evolution of Proto @-@ Greek should be considered within the context of an early Paleo @-@ Balkan sprachbund that makes it difficult to delineate exact boundaries between individual languages . The characteristically Greek representation of word @-@ initial laryngeals by <unk> vowels is shared , for one , by the Armenian language , which also seems to share some other phonological and morphological peculiarities of Greek ; this has led some linguists to propose a hypothetically closer relationship between Greek and Armenian , although evidence remains scant . 
 Proto @-@ Greek speakers are mostly placed in the Early Helladic period ( 3rd millennium BC ) , i.e. towards the end of the European Neolithic . Russell Gray and Quentin Atkinson in a 2003 paper using computational methods on Swadesh lists have arrived at a somewhat earlier estimate , around 5000 BC for Greco @-@ Armenian split and the emergence of Greek as a separate linguistic lineage around 4000 BC . 
 = = = Mycenaean = = = 
 In circa 1600 BC , the Mycenaean Greeks borrowed from the Minoan civilization its syllabic writing system ( i.e. Linear A ) and developed their own syllabic script known as Linear B , providing the first and oldest written evidence of Greek . The Mycenaeans quickly penetrated the Aegean Sea and , by the 15th century BC , had reached Rhodes , Crete , Cyprus and the shores of Asia Minor . 
 Around 1200 BC , the Dorians , another Greek @-@ speaking people , followed from Epirus . Traditionally , historians have believed that the Dorian invasion caused the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization , but it is likely the main attack was made by seafaring raiders ( Sea Peoples ) who sailed into the eastern Mediterranean around 1180 BC . The Dorian invasion was followed by a poorly attested period of migrations , appropriately called the Greek Dark Ages , but by 800 BC the landscape of Archaic and Classical Greece was discernible . 
 The Greeks of classical antiquity idealized their Mycenaean ancestors and the Mycenaean period as a glorious era of heroes , closeness of the gods and material wealth . The Homeric Epics ( i.e. Iliad and Odyssey ) were especially and generally accepted as part of the Greek past and it was not until the 19th century that scholars began to question Homer 's historicity . As part of the Mycenaean heritage that survived , the names of the gods and goddesses of Mycenaean Greece ( e.g. Zeus , Poseidon and Hades ) became major figures of the Olympian Pantheon of later antiquity . 
 = = = Classical = = = 
 The ethnogenesis of the Greek nation is linked to the development of Pan @-@ Hellenism in the 8th century BC . According to some scholars , the foundational event was the Olympic Games in 776 BC , when the idea of a common Hellenism among the Greek tribes was first translated into a shared cultural experience and Hellenism was primarily a matter of common culture . The works of Homer ( i.e. Iliad and Odyssey ) and Hesiod ( i.e. Theogony ) were written in the 8th century BC , becoming the basis of the national religion , ethos , history and mythology . The Oracle of Apollo at Delphi was established in this period . 
 The classical period of Greek civilization covers a time spanning from the early 5th century BC to the death of Alexander the Great , in 323 BC ( some authors prefer to split this period into " Classical " , from the end of the Persian wars to the end of the Peloponnesian War , and " Fourth Century " , up to the death of Alexander ) . It is so named because it set the standards by which Greek civilization would be judged in later eras . The Classical period is also described as the " Golden Age " of Greek civilization , and its art , philosophy , architecture and literature would be instrumental in the formation and development of Western culture . 
 While the Greeks of the classical era understood themselves to belong to a common Hellenic genos , their first loyalty was to their city and they saw nothing incongruous about warring , often brutally , with other Greek city @-@ states . The Peloponnesian War , the large scale civil war between the two most powerful Greek city @-@ states Athens and Sparta and their allies , left both greatly weakened . 
 Most of the feuding Greek city @-@ states were , in some scholars ' opinions , united under the banner of Philip 's and Alexander the Great 's Pan @-@ Hellenic ideals , though others might generally opt , rather , for an explanation of " Macedonian conquest for the sake of conquest " or at least conquest for the sake of riches , glory and power and view the " ideal " as useful propaganda directed towards the city @-@ states . 
 In any case , Alexander 's toppling of the Achaemenid Empire , after his victories at the battles of the Granicus , Issus and Gaugamela , and his advance as far as modern @-@ day Pakistan and Tajikistan , provided an important outlet for Greek culture , via the creation of colonies and trade routes along the way . While the Alexandrian empire did not survive its creator 's death intact , the cultural implications of the spread of Hellenism across much of the Middle East and Asia were to prove long lived as Greek became the lingua franca , a position it retained even in Roman times . Many Greeks settled in Hellenistic cities like Alexandria , Antioch and Seleucia . Two thousand years later , there are still communities in Pakistan and Afghanistan , like the <unk> , who claim to be descended from Greek settlers . 
 = = = Hellenistic = = = 
 The Hellenistic civilization was the next period of Greek civilization , the beginnings of which are usually placed at Alexander 's death . This Hellenistic age , so called because it saw the partial Hellenization of many non @-@ Greek cultures , lasted until the conquest of Egypt by Rome in 30 BC . 
 This age saw the Greeks move towards larger cities and a reduction in the importance of the city @-@ state . These larger cities were parts of the still larger Kingdoms of the Diadochi . Greeks , however , remained aware of their past , chiefly through the study of the works of Homer and the classical authors . An important factor in maintaining Greek identity was contact with barbarian ( non @-@ Greek ) peoples , which was deepened in the new cosmopolitan environment of the multi @-@ ethnic Hellenistic kingdoms . This led to a strong desire among Greeks to organize the transmission of the Hellenic paideia to the next generation . Greek science , technology and mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the Hellenistic period . 
 In the Indo @-@ Greek and Greco @-@ Bactrian kingdoms , Greco @-@ Buddhism was spreading and Greek missionaries would play an important role in propagating it to China . Further east , the Greeks of Alexandria <unk> became known to the Chinese people as the Dayuan . 
 = = = Roman Empire = = = 
 Following the time of the conquest of the last of the independent Greek city @-@ states and Hellenistic ( post @-@ Alexandrine ) kingdoms , almost all of the world 's Greek speakers lived as citizens or subjects of the Roman Empire . Despite their military superiority , the Romans admired and became heavily influenced by the achievements of Greek culture , hence Horace 's famous statement : Graecia <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Greece , although captured , took its wild conqueror captive " ) . 
 In the religious sphere , this was a period of profound change . The spiritual revolution that took place , saw a waning of the old Greek religion , whose decline beginning in the 3rd century BC continued with the introduction of new religious movements from the East . The cults of deities like Isis and Mithra were introduced into the Greek world . Greek @-@ speaking communities of the Hellenized East were instrumental in the spread of early Christianity in the 2nd and 3rd centuries , and Christianity 's early leaders and writers ( notably Saint Paul ) were generally Greek @-@ speaking , though none were from Greece . However , Greece itself had a tendency to cling to paganism and was not one of the influential centers of early Christianity : in fact , some ancient Greek religious practices remained in vogue until the end of the 4th century , with some areas such as the southeastern Peloponnese remaining pagan until well into the 10th century AD . 
 = = = Byzantine Empire = = = 
 Of the new eastern religions introduced into the Greek world , the most successful was Christianity . From the early centuries of the Common Era , the Greeks self @-@ identified as Romaioi ( " Romans " ) , as well as Graikoi ( " Greeks " ) ; by that time , the name Hellenes denoted pagans but was revived as an ethnonym in the 11th century . While ethnic distinctions still existed in the Roman Empire , they became secondary to religious considerations and the renewed empire used Christianity as a tool to support its cohesion and promoted a robust Roman national identity . Concurrently , the secular , urban civilization of Late Antiquity survived in the Eastern Mediterranean along with the Greco @-@ Roman educational system ; the Greeks ' essential values were drawn from both Christianity and the Homeric tradition of their classical ancestors . 
 The Eastern Roman Empire ( today conventionally named the Byzantine Empire , a name not used during its own time ) became increasingly influenced by Greek culture after the 7th century when Emperor Heraclius ( r . 610 @-@ 641 AD ) decided to make Greek the empire 's official language . Certainly from then on , but likely earlier , the Greek and Roman cultures were virtually fused into a single Greco @-@ Roman world . Although the Latin West recognized the Eastern Empire 's claim to the Roman legacy for several centuries , after Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne , king of the Franks , as the " Roman Emperor " on 25 December 800 , an act which eventually led to the formation of the Holy Roman Empire , the Latin West started to favour the Franks and began to refer to the Eastern Roman Empire largely as the Empire of the Greeks ( Imperium Graecorum ) . 
 These Byzantine Greeks were largely responsible for the preservation of the literature of the classical era . Byzantine grammarians were those principally responsible for carrying , in person and in writing , ancient Greek grammatical and literary studies to the West during the 15th century , giving the Italian Renaissance a major boost . The Aristotelian philosophical tradition was nearly unbroken in the Greek world for almost two thousand years , until the Fall of Constantinople in 1453 . 
 To the Slavic world , Roman @-@ era Greeks contributed by the dissemination of literacy and Christianity . The most notable example of the later was the work of the two Byzantine Greek brothers , the monks Saints Cyril and Methodius from the port city of Thessalonica , in Greek Macedonia , who are credited today with formalizing the first Slavic alphabet . 
 A distinct Greek political identity re @-@ emerged in the 11th century in educated circles and became more forceful after the fall of Constantinople to the Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade in 1204 , so that when the empire was revived in 1261 , it became in many ways a Greek national state . That new notion of nationhood engendered a deep interest in the classical past culminating in the ideas of the Neoplatonist philosopher <unk> <unk> , who abandoned Christianity . However , it was the combination of Orthodox Christianity with a specifically Greek identity that shaped the Greeks ' notion of themselves in the empire 's twilight years . The interest in the Classical Greek heritage was complemented by a renewed emphasis on Greek Orthodox identity , which was reinforced in the late Medieval and Ottoman Greeks ' links with their fellow Orthodox Christians in the Russian Empire . These were further strengthened following the fall of the Empire of Trebizond in 1461 , after which and until the second Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1828 @-@ 29 hundreds of thousands of Pontic Greeks fled or migrated from the Pontic Alps and Armenian Highlands to southern Russia and the Russian South Caucasus ( see also Greeks in Russia , Greeks in Armenia , Greeks in Georgia , and Caucasian Greeks ) . 
 = = = Ottoman Empire = = = 
 Following the Fall of Constantinople on 29 May 1453 , many Greeks sought better employment and education opportunities by leaving for the West , particularly Italy , Central Europe , Germany and Russia . Greeks are greatly credited for the European cultural revolution , later called , the Renaissance . In Greek @-@ inhabited territory itself , Greeks came to play a leading role in the Ottoman Empire , due in part to the fact that the central hub of the empire , politically , culturally , and socially , was based on Western Thrace and Greek Macedonia , both in Northern Greece , and of course was centred on the mainly Greek @-@ populated , former Byzantine capital , Constantinople . As a direct consequence of this situation , Greek @-@ speakers came to play a hugely important role in the Ottoman trading and diplomatic establishment , as well as in the church . Added to this , in the first half of the Ottoman period men of Greek origin made up a significant proportion of the Ottoman army , navy , and state bureaucracy , having been levied as adolescents ( along with especially Albanians and Serbs ) into Ottoman service through the devshirme . Many Ottomans of Greek ( or Albanian or Serb ) origin were therefore to be found within the Ottoman forces which governed the provinces , from Ottoman Egypt , to Ottomans occupied Yemen and Algeria , frequently as provincial governors . 
 For those that remained under the Ottoman Empire 's millet system , religion was the defining characteristic of national groups ( <unk> ) , so the exonym " Greeks " ( <unk> from the name <unk> ) was applied by the Ottomans to all members of the Orthodox Church , regardless of their language or ethnic origin . The Greek speakers were the only ethnic group to actually call themselves Romioi , ( as opposed to being so named by others ) and , at least those educated , considered their ethnicity ( genos ) to be Hellenic . There were , however , many Greeks who escaped the second @-@ class status of Christians inherent in the Ottoman millet system , according to which Muslims were explicitly awarded senior status and preferential treatment . These Greeks either emigrated , particularly to their fellow Greek Orthodox protector , the Russian Empire , or simply converted to Islam , often only very superficially and whilst remaining crypto @-@ Christian . The most notable examples of large @-@ scale conversion to Turkish Islam among those today defined as Greek Muslims - excluding those who had to convert as a matter of course on being recruited through the devshirme - were to be found in Crete ( Cretan Turks ) , Greek Macedonia ( for example among the <unk> of western Macedonia ) , and among Pontic Greeks in the Pontic Alps and Armenian Highlands . Several Ottoman sultans and princes were also of part Greek origin , with mothers who were either Greek concubines or princesses from Byzantine noble families , one famous example being sultan Selim the Grim ( r . 1517 – 1520 ) , whose mother <unk> Hatun was a Pontic Greek . 
 The roots of Greek success in the Ottoman Empire can be traced to the Greek tradition of education and commerce exemplified in the Phanariotes . It was the wealth of the extensive merchant class that provided the material basis for the intellectual revival that was the prominent feature of Greek life in the half century and more leading to the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence in 1821 . Not coincidentally , on the eve of 1821 , the three most important centres of Greek learning were situated in Chios , Smyrna and <unk> , all three major centres of Greek commerce . Greek success was also favoured by Greek domination of the Christian Orthodox church . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 The relationship between ethnic Greek identity and Greek Orthodox religion continued after the creation of the modern Greek nation @-@ state in 1830 . According to the second article of the first Greek constitution of 1822 , a Greek was defined as any native Christian resident of the Kingdom of Greece , a clause removed by 1840 . A century later , when the Treaty of Lausanne was signed between Greece and Turkey in 1923 , the two countries agreed to use religion as the determinant for ethnic identity for the purposes of population exchange , although most of the Greeks displaced ( over a million of the total 1 @.@ 5 million ) had already been driven out by the time the agreement was signed . The Greek genocide , in particular the harsh removal of Pontian Greeks from the southern shore area of the Black Sea , contemporaneous with and following the failed Greek Asia Minor Campaign , was part of this process of Turkification of the Ottoman Empire and the placement of its economy and trade , then largely in Greek hands under ethnic Turkish control . 
 While most Greeks today are descended from Greek @-@ speaking Romioi / Graikoi , there are sizeable groups of ethnic Greeks who trace their descent to Aromanian @-@ speaking Vlachs , Albanian @-@ speaking <unk> , <unk> , Armenians , Georgians , and Turkish @-@ speaking <unk> . Today , Greeks are to be found all around the world . 
 = = Identity = = 
 The terms used to define <unk> have varied throughout history but were never limited or completely identified with membership to a Greek state . By Western standards , the term Greeks has traditionally referred to any native speakers of the Greek language , whether Mycenaean , Byzantine or modern Greek . Byzantine Greeks self @-@ identified as Romaioi ( " Romans " ) , Graikoi ( " Greeks " ) and <unk> ( " Christians " ) since they were the political heirs of imperial Rome , the descendants of their classical Greek forebears and followers of the Apostles ; during the mid @-@ to @-@ late Byzantine period ( 11th – 13th century ) , a growing number of Byzantine Greek intellectuals deemed themselves Hellenes although for most Greek @-@ speakers , " Hellene " still meant pagan . On the eve of the Fall of Constantinople the Last Emperor urged his soldiers to remember that they were the descendants of Greeks and Romans . 
 Before the establishment of the modern Greek nation @-@ state , the link between ancient and modern Greeks was emphasized by the scholars of Greek Enlightenment especially by Rigas Feraios . In his " Political Constitution " , he addresses to the nation as " the people descendant of the Greeks " . The modern Greek state was created in 1829 , when the Greeks liberated a part of their historic homelands , Peloponnese , from the Ottoman Empire . The large Greek diaspora and merchant class were instrumental in transmitting the ideas of western romantic nationalism and <unk> , which together with the conception of Hellenism , formulated during the last centuries of the Byzantine Empire , formed the basis of the Diafotismos and the current conception of Hellenism . 
 The Greeks today are a nation in the meaning of an <unk> , defined by possessing Greek culture and having a Greek mother tongue , not by citizenship , race , and religion or by being subjects of any particular state . In ancient and medieval times and to a lesser extent today the Greek term was genos , which also indicates a common ancestry . 
 = = = Names = = = 
 Throughout the centuries , Greeks and Greek @-@ speakers have developed and used different names to refer to themselves collectively . The term Achaeans ( <unk> ) constitutes one of the collective names for the Greeks in Homer 's Iliad and Odyssey ( the Homeric " long @-@ haired Achaeans " would have been a part of the Mycenaean civilization that dominated Greece from circa 1600 BC until 1100 BC ) . The other common names are Danaans ( <unk> ) and Argives ( <unk> ) while <unk> ( <unk> ) and Hellenes ( Ἕλληνες ) both appear only once in the Iliad ; all of the aforementioned terms were used synonymously to denote a common Greek civilizational identity . In the historical period , Herodotus identified the Achaeans of the northern Peloponnese as descendants of the earlier , Homeric Achaeans . 
 Homer refers to the " Hellenes " ( / <unk> / ) as a relatively small tribe settled in <unk> Phthia , with its warriors under the command of <unk> . The Parian Chronicle says that Phthia was the homeland of the Hellenes and that this name was given to those previously called Greeks ( Γραικοί ) . In Greek mythology , Hellen , the patriarch of the Hellenes who ruled around Phthia , was the son of Pyrrha and Deucalion , the only survivors after the Great Deluge . The Greek philosopher Aristotle names ancient Hellas as an area in Epirus between Dodona and the Achelous river , the location of the Great Deluge of Deucalion , a land occupied by the <unk> and the " Greeks " who later came to be known as " Hellenes " . In the Homeric tradition , the <unk> were the priests of <unk> Zeus . 
 In the Hesiodic Catalogue of Women , Graecus is presented as the son of Zeus and Pandora II , sister of Hellen the patriarch of the Hellenes . According to the Parian Chronicle , when Deucalion became king of Phthia , the Graikoi ( Γραικοί ) were named Hellenes . Aristotle notes in his Meteorologica that the Hellenes were related to the Graikoi . 
 = = = Ancient and Modern = = = 
 The most obvious link between modern and ancient Greeks is their language , which has a documented tradition from at least the 14th century BC to the present day , albeit with a break during the Greek Dark Ages ( lasting from the 11th to the 8th century BC ) . Scholars compare its continuity of tradition to Chinese alone . Since its inception , Hellenism was primarily a matter of common culture and the national continuity of the Greek world is a lot more certain than its demographic . Yet , Hellenism also embodied an ancestral dimension through aspects of Athenian literature that developed and influenced ideas of descent based on <unk> . During the later years of the Eastern Roman Empire , areas such as Ionia and Constantinople experienced a Hellenic revival in language , philosophy , and literature and on classical models of thought and scholarship . This revival provided a powerful impetus to the sense of cultural affinity with ancient Greece and its classical heritage . Throughout their history , the Greeks have retained their language and alphabet , certain values and cultural traditions , customs , a sense of religious and cultural difference and exclusion ( the word barbarian was used by 12th @-@ century historian Anna Komnene to describe non @-@ Greek speakers ) , a sense of Greek identity and common sense of ethnicity despite the undeniable socio @-@ political changes of the past two millennia . In recent anthropological studies , both ancient and modern Greek osteological samples were analyzed demonstrating a bio @-@ genetic affinity and continuity shared between both groups . 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 Today , Greeks are the majority ethnic group in the Hellenic Republic , where they constitute 93 % of the country 's population , and the Republic of Cyprus where they make up 78 % of the island 's population ( excluding Turkish settlers in the occupied part of the country ) . Greek populations have not traditionally exhibited high rates of growth ; a large percentage of Greek population growth since Greece 's foundation in 1832 was attributed to annexation of new territories , as well as the influx of 1 @.@ 5 million Greek refugees after the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey . About 80 % of the population of Greece is urban , with 28 % concentrated in the city of Athens . 
 Greeks from Cyprus have a similar history of emigration , usually to the English @-@ speaking world because of the island 's colonization by the British Empire . Waves of emigration followed the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974 , while the population decreased between mid @-@ 1974 and 1977 as a result of emigration , war losses , and a temporary decline in fertility . After the ethnic cleansing of a third of the Greek population of the island in 1974 , there was also an increase in the number of Greek Cypriots leaving , especially for the Middle East , which contributed to a decrease in population that tapered off in the 1990s . Today more than two @-@ thirds of the Greek population in Cyprus is urban . 
 There is a sizeable Greek minority of approximately 200 @,@ 000 people in Albania . The Greek minority of Turkey , which numbered upwards of 200 @,@ 000 people after the 1923 exchange , has now dwindled to a few thousand , after the 1955 Constantinople Pogrom and other state sponsored violence and discrimination . This effectively ended , though not entirely , the three @-@ thousand @-@ year @-@ old presence of Hellenism in Asia Minor . There are smaller Greek minorities in the rest of the Balkan countries , the Levant and the Black Sea states , remnants of the Old Greek Diaspora ( pre @-@ 19th century ) . 
 = = = Diaspora = = = 
 The total number of Greeks living outside Greece and Cyprus today is a contentious issue . Where Census figures are available , they show around 3 million Greeks outside Greece and Cyprus . Estimates provided by the SAE - World Council of Hellenes Abroad put the figure at around 7 million worldwide . According to George Prevelakis of Sorbonne University , the number is closer to just below 5 million . Integration , intermarriage , and loss of the Greek language influence the self @-@ identification of the <unk> . Important centres of the New Greek Diaspora today are London , New York , Melbourne and Toronto . In 2010 , the Hellenic Parliament introduced a law that enables Diaspora Greeks in Greece to vote in the elections of the Greek state . This law was later repealed in early 2014 . 
 = = = = Ancient = = = = 
 In ancient times , the trading and colonizing activities of the Greek tribes and city states spread the Greek culture , religion and language around the Mediterranean and Black Sea basins , especially in Sicily and southern Italy ( also known as Magna Grecia ) , Spain , the south of France and the Black sea coasts . Under Alexander the Great 's empire and successor states , Greek and <unk> ruling classes were established in the Middle East , India and in Egypt . The Hellenistic period is characterized by a new wave of Greek colonization that established Greek cities and kingdoms in Asia and Africa . Under the Roman Empire , easier movement of people spread Greeks across the Empire and in the eastern territories , Greek became the lingua franca rather than Latin . The modern @-@ day Griko community of southern Italy , numbering about 60 @,@ 000 , may represent a living remnant of the ancient Greek populations of Italy . 
 = = = = Modern = = = = 
 During and after the Greek War of Independence , Greeks of the diaspora were important in establishing the fledgling state , raising funds and awareness abroad . Greek merchant families already had contacts in other countries and during the disturbances many set up home around the Mediterranean ( notably Marseilles in France , Livorno in Italy , Alexandria in Egypt ) , Russia ( Odessa and Saint Petersburg ) , and Britain ( London and Liverpool ) from where they traded , typically in textiles and grain . Businesses frequently comprised the extended family , and with them they brought schools teaching Greek and the Greek Orthodox Church . 
 As markets changed and they became more established , some families grew their operations to become shippers , financed through the local Greek community , notably with the aid of the Ralli or <unk> Brothers . With economic success , the Diaspora expanded further across the Levant , North Africa , India and the USA . 
 In the 20th century , many Greeks left their traditional homelands for economic reasons resulting in large migrations from Greece and Cyprus to the United States , Great Britain , Australia , Canada , Germany , and South Africa , especially after the Second World War ( 1939 – 1945 ) , the Greek Civil War ( 1946 – 1949 ) , and the Turkish Invasion of Cyprus in 1974 . 
 While official figures remain scarce , polls and anecdotal evidence point to renewed Greek emigration as a result of the Greek financial crisis . According to data published by the Federal Statistical Office of Germany in 2011 , 23 @,@ 800 Greeks emigrated to Germany , a significant increase over the previous year . By comparison , about 9 @,@ 000 Greeks emigrated to Germany in 2009 and 12 @,@ 000 in 2010 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Greek culture has evolved over thousands of years , with its beginning in the Mycenaean civilization , continuing through the classical era , the Hellenistic period , the Roman and Byzantine periods and was profoundly affected by Christianity , which it in turn influenced and shaped . Ottoman Greeks had to endure through several centuries of adversity that culminated in genocide in the 20th century . The Diafotismos is credited with revitalizing Greek culture and giving birth to the synthesis of ancient and medieval elements that characterize it today . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Most Greeks speak the Greek language , an Indo @-@ European language that forms a branch itself , with its closest relations being Armenian ( see Graeco @-@ Armenian ) and the Indo @-@ Iranian languages ( see Graeco @-@ Aryan ) . It has one of the longest documented histories of any language and Greek literature has a continuous history of over 2 @,@ 500 years . Several notable literary works , including the Homeric epics , Euclid 's Elements and the New Testament , were originally written in Greek . 
 Greek demonstrates several linguistic features that are shared with other Balkan languages , such as Albanian , Bulgarian and Eastern Romance languages ( see Balkan sprachbund ) , and has absorbed many foreign words , primarily of Western European and Turkish origin . Because of the movements of <unk> and the Diafotismos in the 19th century , which emphasized the modern Greeks ' ancient heritage , these foreign influences were excluded from official use via the creation of Katharevousa , a somewhat artificial form of Greek purged of all foreign influence and words , as the official language of the Greek state . In 1976 , however , the Hellenic Parliament voted to make the spoken <unk> the official language , making Katharevousa obsolete . 
 Modern Greek has , in addition to Standard Modern Greek or <unk> , a wide variety of dialects of varying levels of mutual intelligibility , including Cypriot , Pontic , Cappadocian , Griko and <unk> ( the only surviving representative of ancient Doric Greek ) . <unk> is the language of the Romaniotes , and survives in small communities in Greece , New York and Israel . In addition to Greek , many Greeks in Greece and the Diaspora are bilingual in other languages or dialects such as English , <unk> / Albanian , Aromanian , Macedonian Slavic , Russian and Turkish . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Most Greeks are Christians , belonging to the Greek Orthodox Church . During the first centuries after Jesus Christ , the New Testament was originally written in Koine Greek , which remains the liturgical language of the Greek Orthodox Church , and most of the early Christians and Church Fathers were Greek @-@ speaking . There are small groups of ethnic Greeks adhering to other Christian denominations like Greek Catholics , Greek Evangelicals , Pentecostals , and groups adhering to other religions including <unk> and Sephardic Jews and Greek Muslims . About 2 @,@ 000 Greeks are members of Hellenic <unk> <unk> congregations . 
 Greek @-@ speaking Muslims live mainly outside Greece in the contemporary era . There are both Christian and Muslim Greek @-@ speaking communities in Lebanon and Syria , while in the Pontus region of Turkey there is a large community of indeterminate size who were spared from the population exchange because of their religious affiliation . 
 = = = Arts = = = 
 Greek art has a long and varied history . Greeks have contributed to the visual , literary and performing arts . In the West , classical Greek art was influential in shaping the Roman and later the modern Western artistic heritage . Following the Renaissance in Europe , the humanist aesthetic and the high technical standards of Greek art inspired generations of European artists . Well into the 19th century , the classical tradition derived from Greece played an important role in the art of the Western world . In the East , Alexander the Great 's conquests initiated several centuries of exchange between Greek , Central Asian and Indian cultures , resulting in Greco @-@ Buddhist art , whose influence reached as far as Japan . 
 Byzantine Greek art , which grew from classical art and adapted the pagan motifs in the service of Christianity , provided a stimulus to the art of many nations . Its influences can be traced from Venice in the West to Kazakhstan in the East . In turn , Greek art was influenced by eastern civilizations ( i.e. Egypt , Persia , etc . ) during various periods of its history . 
 Notable modern Greek artists include Renaissance painter <unk> <unk> ( El Greco ) , Panagiotis <unk> , Nikolaos <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Yannis <unk> , Nikos <unk> , Constantine Andreou , <unk> <unk> , sculptors such as Leonidas <unk> , Georgios <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , conductor Dimitri Mitropoulos , soprano Maria Callas , composers such as <unk> <unk> , Nikos <unk> , Iannis Xenakis , Manos <unk> , Eleni <unk> , Yanni and Vangelis , one of the best @-@ selling singers worldwide Nana Mouskouri and poets such as Kostis Palamas , Dionysios Solomos , Angelos Sikelianos and Yannis <unk> . Alexandrian Constantine P. <unk> and Nobel laureates Giorgos Seferis and <unk> <unk> are among the most important poets of the 20th century . Novel is also represented by Alexandros <unk> and Nikos Kazantzakis . 
 Notable Greek actors include Marika <unk> , Melina <unk> , Ellie <unk> , Academy Award winner Katina <unk> , Dimitris Horn , Manos <unk> and Irene Papas . <unk> <unk> , Michael <unk> and Theo Angelopoulos are among the most important directors . 
 = = = Science = = = 
 The Greeks of the Classical era made several notable contributions to science and helped lay the foundations of several western scientific traditions , like philosophy , historiography and mathematics . The scholarly tradition of the Greek academies was maintained during Roman times with several academic institutions in Constantinople , Antioch , Alexandria and other centres of Greek learning while Eastern Roman ( or Byzantine ) science was essentially a continuation of classical science . Greeks have a long tradition of valuing and investing in paideia ( education ) . <unk> was one of the highest societal values in the Greek and Hellenistic world while the first European institution described as a university was founded in 5th century Constantinople and operated in various incarnations until the city 's fall to the Ottomans in 1453 . The University of Constantinople was Christian Europe 's first secular institution of higher learning since no theological subjects were taught , and considering the original meaning of the world university as a corporation of students , the world ’ s first university as well . 
 As of 2007 , Greece had the eighth highest percentage of tertiary enrollment in the world ( with the percentages for female students being higher than for male ) while Greeks of the Diaspora are equally active in the field of education . Hundreds of thousands of Greek students attend western universities every year while the faculty lists of leading Western universities contain a striking number of Greek names . Notable modern Greek scientists of modern times include Dimitrios Galanos , Georgios Papanikolaou ( inventor of the Pap test ) , Nicholas Negroponte , Constantin Carathéodory , <unk> Andronikos , Michael <unk> , John <unk> , Panagiotis <unk> , John <unk> ( 2007 Dirac Prize for his contributions on the physics of the charm quark , a major contribution to the birth of the Standard Model , the modern theory of Elementary Particles ) , Joseph <unk> ( 2007 Turing Award , the " Nobel Prize " of Computer Science ) , Christos <unk> ( 2002 Knuth Prize , 2012 Gödel Prize ) , Mihalis Yannakakis ( 2005 Knuth Prize ) and Dimitri <unk> . 
 = = = Symbols = = = 
 The most widely used symbol is the flag of Greece , which features nine equal horizontal stripes of blue alternating with white representing the nine syllables of the Greek national motto <unk> i Thanatos ( Freedom or Death ) , which was the motto of the Greek War of Independence . The blue square in the upper hoist @-@ side corner bears a white cross , which represents Greek Orthodoxy . The Greek flag is widely used by the Greek Cypriots , although Cyprus has officially adopted a neutral flag to ease ethnic tensions with the Turkish Cypriot minority – see flag of Cyprus ) . 
 The pre @-@ 1978 ( and first ) flag of Greece , which features a Greek cross ( crux <unk> quadrata ) on a blue background , is widely used as an alternative to the official flag , and they are often flown together . The national emblem of Greece features a blue escutcheon with a white cross surrounded by two laurel branches . A common design involves the current flag of Greece and the pre @-@ 1978 flag of Greece with crossed flagpoles and the national emblem placed in front . 
 Another highly recognizable and popular Greek symbol is the double @-@ headed eagle , the imperial emblem of the last dynasty of the Roman Empire and a common symbol in Asia Minor and , later , Eastern Europe . It is not part of the modern Greek flag or coat @-@ of @-@ arms , although it is officially the insignia of the Greek Army and the flag of the Church of Greece . It had been incorporated in the Greek coat of arms between 1925 and 1926 . 
 = = = Surnames = = = 
 Greek surnames were widely in use by the 9th century supplanting the ancient tradition of using the father ’ s name , however Greek surnames are most commonly patronymics . Commonly , Greek male surnames end in -s , which is the common ending for Greek masculine proper nouns in the nominative case . Exceptionally , some end in <unk> , indicating the genitive case of this proper noun for patronymic reasons . Although surnames in mainland Greece are static today , dynamic and changing patronymic usage survives in middle names where the genitive of father 's first name is commonly the middle name ( this usage having been passed on to the Russians ) . In Cyprus , by contrast , surnames follow the ancient tradition of being given according to the father ’ s name . Finally , in addition to Greek @-@ derived surnames many have Latin , Turkish and Italian origin . 
 With respect to personal names , the two main influences are Christianity and classical Hellenism ; ancient Greek <unk> were never forgotten but have become more widely bestowed from the 18th century onwards . 
 = = = Sea = = = 
 The traditional Greek homelands have been the Greek peninsula and the Aegean Sea , Southern Italy ( Magna Graecia ) , the Black Sea , the Ionian coasts of Asia Minor and the islands of Cyprus and Sicily . In Plato 's Phaidon , Socrates remarks , " we ( Greeks ) live around a sea like frogs around a pond " when describing to his friends the Greek cities of the Aegean . This image is attested by the map of the Old Greek Diaspora , which corresponded to the Greek world until the creation of the Greek state in 1832 . The sea and trade were natural outlets for Greeks since the Greek peninsula is rocky and does not offer good prospects for agriculture . 
 Notable Greek seafarers include people such as Pytheas of Marseilles , Scylax of <unk> who sailed to Iberia and beyond , Nearchus , the 6th century merchant and later monk Cosmas Indicopleustes ( Cosmas who Sailed to India ) and the explorer of the Northwestern Passage , Apostolos <unk> also known as Juan de Fuca . In later times , the Byzantine Greeks plied the sea @-@ lanes of the Mediterranean and controlled trade until an embargo imposed by the Byzantine emperor on trade with the Caliphate opened the door for the later Italian pre @-@ eminence in trade . 
 The Greek shipping tradition recovered during Ottoman rule when a substantial merchant middle class developed , which played an important part in the Greek War of Independence . Today , Greek shipping continues to prosper to the extent that Greece has the largest merchant fleet in the world , while many more ships under Greek ownership fly flags of convenience . The most notable shipping magnate of the 20th century was Aristotle Onassis , others being Yiannis <unk> , George Livanos , and Stavros Niarchos . 
 = = Physical appearance = = 
 A study from 2013 for prediction of hair and eye colour from DNA of the Greek people showed that the self @-@ reported phenotype frequencies according to hair and eye colour categories was as follows : 119 individuals - hair colour , 11 was blond , 45 dark blond / light brown , 49 dark brown , 3 brown red / auburn and 11 had black hair ; eye colour , 13 with blue , 15 with intermediate ( green , heterochromia ) and 91 had brown eye colour . 
 Another study from 2012 included 150 dental school students from the University of Athens , and the results of the study showed that light hair colour ( blonde / light ash brown ) was predominant in 10 @.@ 7 % of the students . 36 % had medium hair colour ( light brown / medium darkest brown ) , 32 % had darkest brown and 21 % black ( 15 @.@ 3 off black , 6 % midnight black ) . In conclusion , the hair colour of young Greeks are mostly brown , ranging from light to dark brown with significant minorities having black and blonde hair . The same study also showed that the eye colour of the students was 14 @.@ 6 % blue / green , 28 % medium ( light brown ) and 57 @.@ 4 % dark brown . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 The history of the Greek people is closely associated with the history of Greece , Cyprus , Constantinople , Asia Minor and the Black Sea . During the Ottoman rule of Greece , a number of Greek enclaves around the Mediterranean were cut off from the core , notably in Southern Italy , the Caucasus , Syria and Egypt . By the early 20th century , over half of the overall Greek @-@ speaking population was settled in Asia Minor ( now Turkey ) , while later that century a huge wave of migration to the United States , Australia , Canada and elsewhere created the modern Greek diaspora . 
 = William de Corbeil = 
 William de Corbeil or William of Corbeil ( c . 1070 – 1136 ) was a medieval Archbishop of Canterbury . Very little is known of William 's early life or his family , except that he was born at Corbeil in the outskirts of Paris and that he had two brothers . Educated as a theologian , he taught briefly before serving the bishops of Durham and London as a clerk and subsequently becoming a canon , a priest who lived a communal life . William was elected to the see of Canterbury as a compromise candidate in 1123 , the first canon to become an English archbishop . He succeeded Ralph d 'Escures , who had employed him as a chaplain . 
 Throughout his archbishopric , William was embroiled in a dispute with Thurstan , the Archbishop of York , over the primacy of Canterbury . As a temporary solution , the pope appointed William the papal legate for England , giving him powers superior to those of York . William concerned himself with the morals of the clergy , and presided over three legatine councils , which among other things condemned the purchase of benefices or priesthoods , and admonished the clergy to live a celibate life . He was also known as a builder ; among his constructions is the keep of Rochester Castle . Towards the end of his life William was instrumental in the selection of Count Stephen of Boulogne as King of England , despite his oath to the dying King Henry I that he would support the succession of his daughter , the Empress Matilda . Although some chroniclers considered him a perjurer and a traitor for crowning Stephen , none doubted his piety . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William de Corbeil was probably born at Corbeil on the Seine , possibly in about 1070 . He was educated at Laon , where he studied under Anselm of Laon , the noted scholastic and teacher of theology . William taught for a time at Laon , but nothing else is known of his early life . All that is known of his parents or ancestry is that he had two brothers , Ranulf and <unk> ; his brothers appear as witnesses on William 's charters . 
 William joined the service of Ranulf Flambard , Bishop of Durham , as a clerk , and was present at the translation of the body of Saint Cuthbert in 1104 . His name appears high in a list of those who were present at the event , implying that he may have held an important position in Flambard 's household , but appended to his name is " subsequently archbishop " , suggesting that his inclusion could have been a later interpolation . He was a teacher to Flambard 's children , probably in about 1107 to 1109 , but at some unknown date William appears to have transferred to the household of the Archbishop of Canterbury . Between 1107 and 1112 he went to Laon and attended lectures given by Anselm of Laon . By 1116 he was a clerk for Ralph d 'Escures , Archbishop of Canterbury , with whom he travelled to Rome in 1117 when Ralph was in dispute with Thurstan , the Archbishop of York , over the primacy of Canterbury . 
 In 1118 , William entered the Augustinian order at Holy Trinity Priory in Aldgate , a house of canons rather than monks . Subsequently he became prior of the Augustinian priory at St Osyth in Essex , appointed by Richard de Beaumis , Bishop of London , in 1121 . 
 = = Election as archbishop = = 
 After the death of Ralph d 'Escures in October 1122 , King Henry I decided to allow a free election , with the new primate to be chosen by the leading men of the realm , both ecclesiastical and secular . The monks of the cathedral chapter and the bishops of the kingdom disagreed on who should be appointed . The bishops insisted that it should not be a clerk ( a non @-@ monastic member of the clergy ) , but Canterbury 's monastic cathedral chapter preferred a monk , and insisted that they alone had the right to elect the archbishop . However , only two bishops in England or Normandy were monks ( Ernulf , Bishop of Rochester , and Serlo , Bishop of Séez ) , and no monks other than Anselm of Canterbury , Ernulf , and Ralph d 'Escures , had been elected to an English or Norman see since 1091 ; recent precedent therefore favoured a clerk . King Henry sided with the bishops , and told the monks that they could elect their choice from a short list selected by the bishops . Perhaps unsurprisingly , the list contained no monks . 
 On 2 February or 4 February 1123 , William was chosen from among four candidates to the see of Canterbury ; the names of the three unsuccessful candidates are unknown . He appears to have been a compromise candidate , as he was at least a canon , if not the monk that the chapter had sought . William was the first Augustinian canon to become an archbishop in England , a striking break with the tradition that had favoured monks in the see of Canterbury . Although most contemporaries would not have considered there to be much of a distinction between monks and canons , William 's election still occasioned some trepidation among the monks of the Canterbury chapter , who were " alarmed at the appointment , since he was a clerk " . 
 = = Primacy dispute = = 
 William , like every other Canterbury archbishop since Lanfranc , maintained that Canterbury held primacy — in essence , overlordship — over all other dioceses in Great Britain , including the archbishopric of York . Thurstan had claimed independence , and refused to consecrate William when the latter demanded recognition of Canterbury 's primacy ; the ceremony was performed instead by William 's own suffragan bishops on 18 February 1123 . Previous popes had generally favoured York 's side of the dispute , and the successive popes Paschal II , Gelasius II , and Calixtus II had issued rulings in the late 1110s and early 1120s siding with York . Calixtus had also consecrated Thurstan when both King Henry and William 's predecessor had attempted to prevent Thurstan 's consecration unless Thurstan submitted to Canterbury . 
 After travelling to Rome to receive his pallium , the symbol of his authority as an archbishop , William discovered that Thurstan had arrived before him , and had presented a case against William 's election to Pope Callixtus II . There were four objections to William 's election : first that he was elected in the king 's court ; second that the chapter of Canterbury had been coerced and was unwilling ; third that his consecration was unlawful because it was not performed by Thurstan ; and fourth that a monk should be elected to the see of Canterbury , which had been founded by Augustine of Canterbury , a monk . However , King Henry I and the Emperor Henry V , Henry I 's son @-@ in @-@ law , persuaded the pope to overlook the irregularities of the election , with the proviso that William swore to obey " all things that the Pope imposed upon him . " At the conclusion of the visit the pope denied the primacy of Canterbury over York , dismissing the Canterbury cathedral chapter 's supposed papal documents as forgeries . The outcome was in accordance with most earlier papal rulings on the primacy issue , which involved not taking sides and thus reinforcing papal supremacy . William returned to England , and was enthroned at Canterbury on 22 July 1123 . 
 The archbishop 's next opponent was the papal legate of the new Pope Honorius II , Cardinal John of Crema , who arrived in England in 1125 . A compromise between York and Canterbury was negotiated , which involved Canterbury allowing York the supervision of the dioceses of Bangor , Chester , and St <unk> in return for Thurstan 's verbal submission and the written submission of his successors . The pope , however , rejected the agreement , likely because he wished to preserve his own primacy , and substituted his own . The papal solution was that Honorius would appoint William papal legate in England and Scotland , which was done in 1126 , giving William the position over York , but it was dependent on the will of the pope , and would lapse on the pope 's death . The arrangement merely postponed the problem however , as neither Thurstan nor William renounced their claims . That Christmas , at a royal court , Thurstan unsuccessfully attempted to claim the right to ceremonially crown the king as well as have his episcopal cross carried before him in Canterbury 's province . As a result of his lengthy dispute with Thurstan , William travelled to Rome more frequently than any bishop before him except for Wilfrid in the 7th century . 
 = = <unk> activities = = 
 <unk> councils in 1125 , 1127 and 1129 were held in Westminster , the last two called by Archbishop William . The council of 1125 met under the direction of John of Crema and prohibited simony , purchase of the sacraments , and the inheritance of clerical benefices . John of Crema had been sent to England not only to seek a compromise in the Canterbury – York dispute , but to publicize the decrees of the First Council of the Lateran held in 1123 , which neither William nor Thurstan had attended . Included in canons were the rejection of hereditary claims to a benefice or prebend , which was a source of consternation to the clergy . Also prohibited was the presence of any women in clergy 's households unless they were relatives . In 1127 the council condemned the purchase of benefices , priesthoods , or places in monastic houses . It also enacted canons declaring that clergy who refused to give up their wives or concubines would be deprived of their benefices , and that any such women who did not leave the parish where they had been could be expelled and even forced into slavery . Lastly , in 1129 the clergy were once more admonished to live a celibate life and to put aside their wives . This council was presided over by King Henry , who then undermined the force of the prohibition of concubines by permitting the clergy to pay a fine to the royal treasury to keep their women . William 's allowance of this royal fine was condemned by the chronicler Henry of Huntingdon . The festival of the Conception was also allowed at one of these councils . 
 As well as the councils , William was active in his diocese , and was interested in reforming the churches in his diocese . A conflict with Alexander of Lincoln over a church in Alexander 's diocese led to further condemnation by Henry of <unk> and prompted Henry to write that " no one can sing [ William 's ] praises because there 's nothing to sing about . " William seems to have been somewhat eclipsed in ecclesiastical administration and appointments by Roger of Salisbury , Bishop of Salisbury , and King Henry 's primary advisor . William reformed the nunnery of Minster @-@ in @-@ Sheppey however , and he installed a college of regular canons at the church of St. Gregory 's , in Canterbury . He also secured a profession of obedience from the newly installed abbot of St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury . His legateship from Honorius lapsed when the pope died in February 1130 , but it was renewed by Honorius ' successor Pope Innocent II in 1132 . 
 During William 's last years he attempted to reform St Martin 's , Dover . The king had granted the church to the archbishop and the diocese of Canterbury in 1130 , and William had a new church building constructed near Dover . The archbishop had planned to install canons regular into the church , and on William 's deathbed dispatched a party of canons from Merton Priory to take over St Martin 's . However , the party of canons , who had been accompanied by two bishops and some other clergy , were prevented from entering by a monk of Canterbury Cathedral , who claimed that St Martin 's belonged to the monks of the cathedral chapter . The canons from Merton did not press the issue in the face of the Canterbury chapter 's appeal to Rome , and after William 's death , the cathedral chapter sent 12 monks to St Martin 's instead . 
 The construction of the keep of Rochester Castle — at 115 feet ( 35 m ) , the tallest Norman @-@ built keep in England — was initiated at William 's orders . Built for King Henry , it is still intact , although it no longer has a roof or floors . The work at Rochester was built within the stone curtain walls that Gundulf of Rochester had erected in the late 11th century . The keep was designed not only for defence but also to provide comfortable living quarters , which were probably intended for use by the archbishops when they visited Rochester . In 1127 , the custody of Rochester Castle was granted to William and his successors as archbishop by King Henry , including the right to fortify the place as the archbishops wished , and the right to garrison the castle with their own men . In the view of the historian Judith Green , the grant of the castle was partly to secure the loyalty of the archbishop to the king , and partly to help secure the defences of the coast . William also completed the construction of Canterbury Cathedral , which was dedicated in May 1130 . 
 = = Final years = = 
 The archbishop swore to Henry I that he would support Henry 's daughter Matilda 's claim to the English throne , but after Henry 's death he instead crowned Stephen , on 22 December 1135 . He was persuaded to do so by Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester and Stephen 's brother , and Roger of Salisbury , Bishop of Salisbury . The bishops argued that Henry had no right to impose the oath , and that the dying king had released the barons and the bishops from the oath in any event . The royal steward , Hugh Bigod , swore that he had been present at the king 's deathbed and had heard the king say that he released the oath . 
 William did not long outlive Henry , dying at Canterbury on 21 November 1136 . He was buried in the north transept of Canterbury Cathedral . Contemporaries were grudging in their praise , and William 's reputation suffered after the accession of Matilda 's son , Henry II , to the English throne . William of Malmesbury said that William was a courteous and sober man , with little of the flamboyant lifestyle of the more " modern " bishops . The author of the Gesta Stephani claimed that William was avaricious and hoarded money . None of the chroniclers , however , doubted his piety , even when they named him a perjurer and a traitor for his coronation of Stephen . 
 = Successful ( song ) = 
 " Successful " is a song by Canadian recording artist Drake . American R & B singer Trey Songz is featured as well as Drake 's mentor and labelmate Lil Wayne . It was produced by Noah " 40 " Shebib . The song was written by the trio and its producer , Noah " 40 " Shebib . The song served as the second single from Drake 's mixtape , So Far Gone , and was included on Trey Songz 's third studio album , Ready , sans Wayne and the addition of a new verse by Songz . Accompanied by a dark tone , the songs lyrics contain quips of self @-@ determination . 
 " Successful " received critical acclaim from critics , some of which referred to the song as a standout track on Ready . While reaching seventeen on the Billboard Hot 100 , the song peaked at two and three , respectively on the Rap Songs and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs charts . The accompanying music video features Drake and Songz venturing off into Toronto nightlife , interspersed with contemplative scenes . The song received several accolades , including being ranked seventeen on Rolling Stone 's " 25 Best Songs of 2009 " list , and ranking ten on Spin 's " The 20 Best Songs of 2009 " roll . Complex named it the 82nd best song of the decade . Two years after its initial release , the track was certified Gold by the ( RIAA ) for sales exceeding 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States alone . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was first released as Drake 's follow @-@ up track to " Best I Ever Had " for his So Far Gone mixtape , with Songz and Lil Wayne received featuring credits . After the success of the two singles , Drake decided to release a retail version of the mixtape in the form of an extended play , including the song . On Songz 's third album , Ready , he included the track , however Drake 's verse was moved to the middle and Lil Wayne 's rap was taken out in order to include a new verse by Songz . 
 The song was originally set to be on Drake 's debut album , Thank Me Later , but after Drake forwent the song , he insisted that Songz include it on Ready . Songz stated in an interview what fan reception to the track mostly had been that he should put a verse in on " Successful " , but Songz told <unk> , 
 " I was like , ' That 's my <unk> 's song . ' Then initially , Drake came up to me with the idea like ' Nah dog . That 's your song . I 'm not putting it on my album . So it 's going to be a waste . So it 's going to be a big record with no one to go retrieve it . ' So we put the verse on there just to give me a little more presence on the record for it to be on my album . " 
 In an interview with MTV News , Drake explained how the song came about , stating , " It has this pocket , and there was no melody yet . I remember [ producer Noah ' 40 ' Shebib ] kind of making the joint , and then he hit this sound , which is the chords that are in there . It was so eerie . Like it was haunting , almost . I was like , ' Yo , that 's it . You need to use that . ' He started playing this patch , and just every note that he played fell into place . I had this beat sitting here that I love so much , and I didn 't know what to do with it ... " 
 = = Writing = = 
 Drake then contacted Songz , who had been working with Drake back since 2007 on mixtapes . Songz said that Drake originally called him on advice of segueing his singing into rapping on interludes , then the terms of what records he would be featured on the mixtape , as he sent him the " Successful " track . After Drake still could not settle on the direction for the track , Songz came up with the his hook . He explained to MTV News , " The first thing that came to mind was ' I want the money , money and the cars / Cars and the clothes / The ho 's / I suppose I just wanna be , I just wanna be successful . ' When I 'm saying all that , conceptually for me , the deepest part of the record was when I say , ' I suppose . ' I supposed that 's what success is about . That 's what [ we 're ] led to believe . " After hearing the hook , Drake called it " powerful " , commenting , 
 " And it 's like , it 's almost like it made me feel like it may not be right what I want , you know ? All these things , it 's like it made me feel young . It kind of made me feel ignorant to the game . But it was an exciting record even though the tempo is slow . That 's what I want ... The ' I suppose ' moment in there is like , it 's almost like you 're doubting yourself for a second . But at the end of the day , I just want to be successful . So that 's what the record meant to me . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Drake has described the song as " eerie " and " dark " , and as " simplistic " having a " reverb @-@ driven harmony . " Shaheem Reid of MTV News said this about the song : " Trey Songz 's hook expresses the dreams of a young black male coming from nothing to something , and Drake 's raps put the hip @-@ hop nation on notice , while conveying his own desperation and hope and revealing family struggles . Let 's not forget Lil Wayne 's magnificent at bat as cleanup hitter ... " An " endearing and revealing " moment happens in the record when Drake refers to an incident when his mother contemplated leaving home during family troubles . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 David Jeffries of Allmusic noted the song as a standout track from Ready . Andrew Rennie of Now Magazine called a " cautionary anthem " and the song the top track on the album . Rennie also said that " Successful " and " Black Roses " , showcase Songz 's developed , more mature side . Sean Fennessey of The Village Voice said , " The calm , yearning song is a bona fide hit , and also the best example of where r & b lives today . " DJBooth said that there was " no reason to doubt that this track will become a mainstream smash . " Shaheem Reid of MTV News said , " It 's not a record that will kill the clubs , but when you just want to listen to superb lyricism and enthralling harmony , it 's a must have . " Rolling Stone ranked the song seventeen on their list of " Best 25 Songs of 2009 " list , and Spin ranked it the tenth best song of 2009 on their " The 20 Best Songs of 2009 " list . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week labeled August 1 , 2009 , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number eighty @-@ eight . Weeks later , the song peaked at number seventeen , where it spent one week . The song spent eighteen weeks on the chart dropping off on the week ending November 28 , 2009 . Additionally the song reached three on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and two on the Rap Songs chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the Ready version of the song , filmed in Drake 's hometown of Toronto , Ontario , was directed by Jake White . An on set video and stills were released on August 12 , 2009 , followed by a preview of the clip on August 27 , 2009 . The full video was released on August 31 , 2009 . The video was nominated for <unk> Hiphop Video of the Year and Cinematographer of the Year the 2010 MuchMusic Video Awards , winning both awards . It ranked at number eight on BET : Notarized Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 While accompanying Songz on 106 & Park when promoting , Ready , Drake explained the video , stating : 
 " The concept of the video is the fact that ' successful , ' it applies to so many people that me and Trey just want to get the point across that we see ourselves and we see success in other individuals so really , it 's a video about potential . It 's a video about understanding that no matter what you do , there 's a way to be successful doing it . It 's one of those motivational videos . It actually ends with a quote from Barack Obama which is one of my favorite quotes I 've ever read , so we decided to put it in the video . It 's vivid . " 
 The video begins with Drake going up an elevator while Songz sings shirtless on the edge of a bed with a woman laying on the other side looking on . Drake then ends up on a balcony singing in front of the Toronto skyline . Both are shown in scenes contemplating intermixed with Songz joining Drake on the balcony . Subsequently scenes are shown of Drake and Songz riding through Toronto nightlife , along with the contemplative scenes , such as a young boy playing basketball in which Songz has an illusion that it is him , and little girl blowing a dandelion . The video ends with the skyline and a quote stating , 
 " Making your mark on the world is hard . If it were easy , everybody would do it . But it 's not . It takes patience , it takes commitment , and it comes with plenty of failure along the way . The real test is not whether you avoid this failure , because you won 't . It 's whether you let it harden or shame you into inaction , or whether you learn from it ; whether you choose to persevere . " 
 - Barack Obama 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Songz and Drake performed the song on 106 & Park on September 2 , 2009 , as a part of a medley of " I Need a Girl " and " LOL Smiley Face . " 
 = = Remixes = = 
 The song was remixed and renamed " <unk> " by Joell Ortiz & Novel for their critically acclaimed mixtape Defying the Predictable . 
 T @-@ Pain made a remix called " More Careful " as an apology to Jay @-@ Z. There was an unreleased version with a phone call instead of Trey Songz 's intro and a new Drake verse . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 7 : 27 ( alternate mixtape version ) 
 6 : 15 ( mixtape version ) 
 5 : 51 ( EP version ) 
 4 : 26 ( Ready / video version ) 
 3 : 25 ( Radio edit ) 
 2 : 02 ( good version ) 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Noah " 40 " Shebib , Tremaine <unk> , Aubrey Graham , Dwayne Carter 
 Production , recording and mixing – Noah " 40 " Shebib 
 * A ^ <unk> for the original single and So Far Gone mixtape and extended play versions . 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Z @-@ 4 Plan = 
 The Z @-@ 4 Plan was a proposed basis for negotiations to end the Croatian War of Independence with a political settlement . It was drafted by Peter W. Galbraith , Leonid Kerestedjiants and Geert @-@ Hinrich Ahrens on behalf of a mini @-@ Contact Group comprising United Nations envoys and diplomats from the United States , Russia and the European Union . The co @-@ chairs of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia , David Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg , were closely involved in the political process surrounding the plan . The document was prepared in the final months of 1994 and early 1995 before being presented to Croatian President Franjo Tuđman and the leaders of the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) on 30 January 1995 . Although Tuđman was displeased with the proposal , the RSK authorities — influenced by Serbian President Slobodan Milošević — refused to receive the document , let alone discuss it . Milošević was concerned that the plan might be used to force the settlement of a crisis in Serbia 's Kosovo province . 
 Three more attempts to revive the plan were made after Operation Flash in early May , when Croatia captured a portion of western Slavonia previously controlled by the RSK . The first initiative , begun later that month , failed because the RSK demanded that the Croatian forces pull back from western Slavonia ( which Croatia declined to do ) . The second attempt failed simply because neither party wanted to negotiate . The final round of negotiations where the Z @-@ 4 Plan was proposed by international diplomats occurred in early August , when a major Croatian attack against the RSK seemed imminent . Despite last @-@ ditch efforts by Galbraith to persuade Milošević and the RSK leadership to accept the plan , disagreement among the RSK leaders allowed Croatia to claim that the RSK had no intention of negotiating . The Croatian delegation , which had little interest in the negotiations and wanted to lay the diplomatic groundwork for the imminent military operation , presented its own demands to the RSK ( which were also rejected ) . On 4 August Croatia launched Operation Storm , defeated the RSK and effectively ended the political process which led to the creation of the Z @-@ 4 Plan . 
 Elements of the plan made their way into two proposals on resolving the Kosovo crisis : in 1999 ( during the Kosovo War ) and in 2005 as a part of the Kosovo status process . Neither was accepted by the parties to that conflict . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1990 an insurgency known as the Log Revolution took place in Croatia , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , parts of the Lika , Kordun , and Banovina regions , and settlements in eastern Croatia with significant Serb populations . These areas were subsequently named the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) and , after the RSK declared its intention to unite with Serbia , the Government of Croatia declared the RSK a breakaway state . By March 1991 the conflict escalated , resulting in the Croatian War of Independence . In June 1991 , Croatia declared its independence as Yugoslavia disintegrated . A three @-@ month moratorium on Croatia and the RSK 's declarations followed , after which their decisions were implemented on 8 October . 
 Since the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) increasingly supported the RSK and the Croatian Police were unable to cope with the situation , the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) was formed in May 1991 . The ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( HV ) in November . The establishment of the Croatian military was hampered by a September UN arms embargo . The final months of 1991 saw JNA advances and the fiercest fighting of the war , culminating in the Siege of Dubrovnik and the Battle of Vukovar . In November a ceasefire was negotiated pending a political settlement ( which became known as the Vance plan ) , and it was implemented in early January 1992 . The ceasefire collapsed in January 1993 when the HV launched Operation Maslenica , and small @-@ scale clashes continued for more than a year . On 16 March 1994 , Russian envoy Vitaly Churkin brokered negotiations between Croatia and the RSK which produced a new ceasefire on 30 March . Further negotiations produced agreements on reopening a section of the Zagreb – Belgrade motorway ( crossing the RSK @-@ held part of western Slavonia , the Adria oil pipeline and several water @-@ supply lines ) by the end of 1994 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The Z @-@ 4 Plan was drafted by United States ambassador to Croatia Peter W. Galbraith , Russian ambassador to Croatia Leonid Kerestedjiants and German diplomat Geert @-@ Hinrich Ahrens , representing the European Union ( EU ) in a " mini @-@ Contact Group " . The Z in the plan 's name stood for Zagreb ( Croatia 's capital ) , and 4 represented the involvement of the United States , Russia , the EU and the UN . The plan was the product of a process begun on 23 March 1994 , with Galbraith considering himself its principal author . It was a well @-@ developed legal document intended as the basis for negotiations and , according to Ahrens , designed to commit Croatia to an internationally agreed settlement and prevent it from turning to a military resolution of the war ( while being generous to the Croatian Serbs ) . According to Ahrens , the plan was actually too generous to the Serbs ; in essence , it created the legal foundation for a permanent Serb state in Croatia . 
 The heart of the plan was the Constitutional Agreement on Krajina ( Part One ) . Part One defined Krajina as an autonomous region of Croatia , with borders based on the results of the 1991 Croatian census ( which identified eleven municipalities with an absolute Serb majority ) . Those areas would enjoy a high level of autonomy , with most authority transferred from the central government in Zagreb to Krajina . The region would have its own president , cabinet , legislation , courts , police force , emblem , flag and currency , and the right to levy taxes and make international agreements . Part One also provided for demilitarising the autonomous area . Part Two of the plan , the Agreements Concerning Slavonia , Southern Baranja , Western Sirmium and Other Areas , related to areas where the Croatian Serbs did not form the majority in 1991 ( including eastern and western Slavonia ) and contained transitional provisions . Part Three of the plan spelled out safeguards on human rights , fundamental freedoms , prosecution of war crimes , a human @-@ rights court with international judges , and provisions allowing dual Croatian and Yugoslav citizenship for Croatian Serbs . The plan envisaged that western Slavonia would be the first to be restored to Croatian control , followed by eastern Slavonia ( where a transitional UN administration would be set up before the handover ) . 
 = = = Proposed changes = = = 
 The first draft of the Z @-@ 4 Plan was prepared in September 1994 , and further developed and amended on several occasions during the following four months . Over this period , International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia ( ICFY ) co @-@ chairs David Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg requested amendments to the plan and opposed its presentation to Croatian or RSK authorities . The first set of changes requested was to include a provision that Croatia cede territory around the city of Županja ( on the north bank of the Sava River ) to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , allowing better communication between Belgrade and the Bosnian Serb territory around Banja Luka . The request , submitted on 8 September , was turned down by the plan authors . That day , Owen requested that the plan allow Krajina to form a confederation with either Serbia or FR Yugoslavia . Owen and Stoltenberg sought to create a network of confederations between the former Yugoslav republics , but the authors of the Z @-@ 4 Plan deemed that impossible . German foreign minister Klaus Kinkel , on behalf of the German EU presidency , cautioned Owen that Krajina Serbs formed only 5 percent of Croatia 's population and a confederation between Kosovo and Albania would be more natural . On 6 October Russia declared its opposition to the confederation , but Owen regained the country 's support for the idea four days later ( shortly before it was abandoned ) . 
 The third group of requested amendments pertained to eastern Slavonia . Owen and Stoltenberg requested its status to be left unresolved , instead of gradually reverting to Croatian control over a five @-@ year period and applying the postwar ethnic composition of the area as a formula for the ethnic mix of the local police and establishing a joint Croatian @-@ Yugoslav company to extract crude oil in <unk> . The proposal was turned down , but it led to local autonomy for Serb villages in the area and reduced the transitional period to two years . The fourth group of proposed amendments , tabled by Owen , included a proposal for continued Serb armed presence in Krajina and additional authority for Krajina concerning mineral resources and international treaties . After the proposals , the text of the plan became the subject of lengthy discussions between the contact group countries , the EU and the ICFY co @-@ chairs . The co @-@ chairs began drafting their version of the plan ; Stoltenberg stalled the plan through Norwegian diplomat ( and ICFY ambassador ) Kai Eide , creating a conflict between Eide and Galbraith . 
 = = = First news of the plan = = = 
 On 1 October , Galbraith informed Croatian President Franjo Tuđman of the plan without providing any details . Similarly , Ahrens and Eide informed RSK president Milan Martić . Although early Z @-@ 4 Plan negotiations were planned without actually disclosing the plan to Croatia and the RSK , elements of the plan were leaked to Belgrade and Zagreb newspapers in mid @-@ October . According to Florence Hartmann , in October representatives of Tuđman and those of Serbian president Slobodan Milošević met in Graz , Austria to discuss the proposed reintegration of the RSK into Croatia and their opposition to the Z @-@ 4 Plan . Tuđman disliked the plan because it envisaged a Serb state in Croatia , while Milošević saw it as a dangerous precedent that could be applied to majority non @-@ Serb or ethnically @-@ mixed regions of rump Yugoslavia , such as Kosovo , Vojvodina and the Sandžak . 
 Galbraith , Eide and Kerestedjiants agreed to deliver the plan to Croatia and the RSK on 21 October , opposed by Owen and Stoltenberg . Owen also asked Vitaly Churkin to instruct his envoy to oppose the delivery . As instructed by Moscow , Kerestedjiants pulled out of the move and Galbraith accused Owen of sabotaging the Z @-@ 4 Plan . 
 = = = Final version = = = 
 The 53 @-@ page final version of the Z @-@ 4 Plan was prepared on 18 January 1995 . Entitled " Draft Agreement on the Krajina , Slavonia , Southern Baranja and Western Sirmium " , it consisted of three documents and two provisional maps . The maps were considered provisional because of concerns that the inclusion of Benkovac in Krajina would be contested by Croatia ; a portion of the municipality had been predominantly inhabited by Croats , and it was on the Adriatic coast . Another territorial issue was the municipality of Slunj ; it was not included in Krajina , and the omission effectively cut Krajina in two . A possible solution to the problem was to split the municipality in two and award the areas east of Slunj to Krajina . In anticipation of this , planning began for a road bypassing Slunj . Despite the unresolved issues , delivery of the plan to Croatia and the RSK was scheduled for January . On 12 January , shortly before the plan 's final version was drafted , Tuđman announced in a letter to the UN that Croatia would not grant an extension of the UN peacekeeping mandate beyond 31 March and United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) troops deployed to the RSK would have to leave . 
 = = Presentation = = 
 On 30 January the Z @-@ 4 Plan was presented to Tuđman by the French ambassador to Croatia , accompanied by Galbraith , Kerestedjiants , Ahrens and Italian ambassador Alfredo <unk> ( replacing Eide ) . Tuđman did not hide his displeasure with the plan , receiving the draft with the knowledge that Milošević 's opposition to the plan ( because of his concerns for Kosovo ) would not allow it to be implemented . Tuđman accepted the plan ( which Croatia considered unacceptable ) as a base for negotiations with the RSK , hoping that they would dismiss it . 
 The five diplomats then travelled to Knin to present the Z @-@ 4 Plan to the RSK leadership . There they met with Martić , RSK prime minister Borislav Mikelić and foreign minister Milan Babić . Martić refused to receive the draft before the UN Security Council issued a written statement extending the UNPROFOR mandate to protect the RSK . Kerestedjiants and Ahrens suggested that Martić should acknowledge receipt of the plan and then say that the RSK would not negotiate before the UNPROFOR issue was resolved , but he refused . The diplomats then attempted to meet Milošević in Belgrade about the matter , but Milošević refused to see them and the group returned to Zagreb the next day . Ahrens described the events of 30 January as " a fiasco " . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Ahrens noted that Croatia and the RSK were satisfied with the outcome . Owen and Stoltenberg expressed their understanding of the RSK 's and Milošević 's rejection of the plan , provoking a sharp reaction from Galbraith . The RSK parliament convened on 8 February with the Z @-@ 4 Plan as the sole item on the agenda . In their speeches there , Martić , Mikelić and Babić described the plan as provocative to the RSK and saw Milošević 's support in refusing the plan as greatly encouraging . A number of other influential Serbian politicians rejected the plan in addition to Milošević , including Borisav Jović — a close ally of Milošević , who considered the RSK strong enough militarily to resist Croatia — and Vojislav Šešelj , who considered the plan totally unacceptable . The opposition politicians in Serbia were split . Zoran Đinđić said that since the RSK refused the plan Serbia should not accept it either , while Vuk Drašković favoured the plan as an historic opportunity . Drašković 's views ultimately prevailed in the Serbian media , but not before late August . The only official reaction from Croatia was from its chief negotiator , Hrvoje Šarinić . Šarinić said that Croatia endorsed the restoration of Croatian rule , the return of refugees and local self @-@ government for Croatian Serbs , but dismissed plan solutions incompatible with the Constitution of Croatia . In Croatia , the plan and its authors ( especially Galbraith ) were strongly criticised in what Ahrens described as a " vicious campaign " . 
 = = Attempts of reintroduction = = 
 = = = May and June 1995 = = = 
 There were several more attempts to advocate the Z @-@ 4 Plan as the basis of a political settlement of the Croatian War of Independence . After Croatia captured western Slavonia from the RSK in Operation Flash in early May , Owen and Stoltenberg invited Croatian and RSK officials to Geneva in an effort to revive the plan . The initiative was endorsed by the UN Security Council and the G7 , which was preparing its summit in Halifax at the time . The meeting was attended by Owen , Stoltenberg , Galbraith , Kerestedjiants , Eide and Ahrens as the international diplomats ; the RSK was represented by Martić , Mikelić and Babić , and the Croatian delegation was led by Šarinić . Šarinić accepted the invitation , claiming that the venue was a Croatian concession because Croatian authorities considered the issue an internal matter which should normally be dealt with in Croatia . On the other hand , the RSK delegation insisted on Croatian withdrawal from the territory captured earlier that month before negotiations could proceed . Since no such withdrawal was requested by the UN Security Council , Croatia rejected the demand and the initiative collapsed . 
 A second attempt to revive the plan arose from talks between Kinkel and French foreign minister Hervé de Charette on 28 June . They proposed establishing zones of separation to enforce a ceasefire , monitoring the RSK 's external borders , specific guarantees for the safety of Croatian Serbs and <unk> confidence @-@ building measures by economic cooperation between Croatia and the RSK . The initiative , however , did not gain ground when the RSK refused to negotiate . 
 = = = August 1995 = = = 
 Another effort involving the plan came about after Milošević asked the United States to stop an imminent Croatian attack against the RSK on 30 July . Although in his request he indicated that negotiations should be held based on the Z @-@ 4 Plan , he refused to meet Galbraith ( who wanted Milošević to pressure the RSK into accepting it ) on 2 August . Instead , Galbraith met Babić in Belgrade in an effort to persuade him to accept the plan . He told Babić that the RSK could not expect international sympathy because of its involvement in the Siege of Bihać , and they would have to accept Croatian terms to avoid war . As an alternative , Galbraith advised Babić to accept negotiations based on the Z @-@ 4 Plan . Babić complied , and Stoltenberg invited Croatian and RSK delegations to talks on 3 August . <unk> , near Geneva , was selected as the location to avoid media attention . The RSK delegation was headed by Major General Mile Novaković of the Army of the Republic of Serb Krajina and the Croatian delegation was headed by Tuđman 's advisor , Ivić Pašalić . 
 At the meeting the RSK insisted on the withdrawal of the HV from western Slavonia and the gradual implementation of a ceasefire , followed by economic cooperation before a political settlement was discussed . The Croatian delegation did not intend to negotiate , but to prepare diplomatically for a military resolution of the war . Stoltenberg proposed a seven @-@ point compromise , including negotiations based on the Z @-@ 4 Plan , beginning on 10 August . The proposal was initially accepted by Babić , who then expressed reservations about the Z @-@ 4 Plan as a political settlement when he was asked to publicly declare support for the Stoltenberg proposal ( so the Novaković delegation would follow his lead ) . Pašalić then asked Novaković to accept Croatia 's seven demands , including immediate replacement of the RSK with a Croatian civilian government . Novaković refused Pašalić 's proposal , indicating that he accepted the Stoltenberg proposal instead , and Pašalić declared that the RSK had declined a Croatian offer to negotiate . Croatia did not consider Babić powerful enough to secure support for an initiative from Martić , and thus unable to commit the RSK to an agreement . This view was supported by Babić himself , who told Galbraith during their 2 August meeting in Belgrade that Martić would only obey Milošević . On 4 August Croatia launched Operation Storm against the RSK and , according to Galbraith , effectively terminated the Z @-@ 4 Plan and its associated political process . 
 One final attempt , organised by Babić , was made to revive the Z @-@ 4 Plan on 16 August . This initiative called for negotiating each point of the plan and extending the autonomous areas to eastern Slavonia . However , Ahrens and Stoltenberg considered any talks between Croatia and the exiled , discredited leaders of the RSK impossible . When they consulted Šarinić about the initiative , he dismissed any possibility of negotiation . 
 = = = September 1995 and beyond = = = 
 Following Croatian military success against the RSK during Operation Storm in August , and in Bosnia and Herzegovina against the Republika Srpska during Operation Mistral 2 in September , US President Bill Clinton announced a new peace initiative for Bosnia and Herzegovina . This initiative , which aimed to restore eastern Slavonia to Croatia , was based on Croatian sovereignty and the Z @-@ 4 Plan . <unk> sought to reconcile the plan with new circumstances in the field ; an example was limited self @-@ government for Croatian Serbs in eastern Slavonian municipalities where they comprised a majority of the 1991 population ; after Croatia objected , the proposal was replaced with provisions from the Constitution of Croatia . By early October the process led to the Erdut Agreement , establishing a framework for restoring eastern Slavonia to Croatian rule . When the agreement was first implemented in 1996 , there were concerns in Croatia that the process might result in " covert " implementation of the Z @-@ 4 Plan in eastern Slavonia and political autonomy for the region . 
 The Z @-@ 4 Plan was again resurrected in 1999 as a template for the Rambouillet Agreement , a proposed peace treaty negotiated between FR Yugoslavia and ethnic Albanians living in Kosovo . In 2005 , after the Kosovo War , Serbia and Montenegro attempted to resolve the Kosovo status process by tabling a peace plan offering broad autonomy for Kosovo . According to Drašković , then foreign minister of Serbia and Montenegro , the plan was a " mirror image of the Z @-@ 4 Plan " . That year an " RSK government @-@ in @-@ exile " was set up in Belgrade , demanding the revival of the Z @-@ 4 Plan in Croatia ( a move condemned by Drašković and Serbian President Boris Tadić ) . The same idea was put forward in 2010 by a Serb refugee organisation led by Savo <unk> . 
 = Nathan Horton = 
 Nathan Russell Horton ( born May 29 , 1985 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player who is currently under contract with the Toronto Maple Leafs in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He won the Stanley Cup in 2011 with the Boston Bruins . During his career , Horton has also played for the Columbus Blue Jackets and the Florida Panthers . 
 Horton has not played in an NHL game since April 2014 , due to a back injury . Though he is not officially retired , the surgery required to fix Horton 's back would end his career . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor Hockey = = = 
 Horton grew up in Dunnville , Ontario playing much of his minor hockey with the Welland Tigers of the OMHA South Central AAA League until his Minor Peewee year before making the move to play in the Greater Toronto Hockey League with the Toronto Red Wings . Going into his Peewee season he left the Red Wings to go play for the Thorold Blackhawks <unk> club of the OHA 's Golden Horseshoe League at the age of 13 . For much of his career with Welland , Horton played up on the " ' 84 " Tigers team with future NHL 'ers Daniel Girardi , Daniel <unk> ( a future Bruins teammate ) and Andre Deveaux . 
 = = = Junior career = = = 
 Horton first entered junior hockey as a player for the Thorold Blackhawks . In one season with Thorold he scored 16 goals and registered 31 assists in 41 games . Prior to the 2001 OHL Draft , a 16 – year old Horton stated that if he was drafted first overall by the Mississauga Ice Dogs , he would not report to the team . He was instead selected second overall in the draft by the Oshawa Generals . As a rookie in the OHL , Horton totaled 31 goals and 36 assists in 64 games for the Generals . During two seasons with Oshawa , Horton would score 64 goals and recorded 71 assists . 
 To begin the 2002 – 03 season , Horton missed 13 games out of 22 but still ended up scoring 9 goals with 18 points during that span . Horton was named to the Canadian national junior team 's selection camp in December but was one of the first cuts . He ended his final season in Oshawa with 33 goals and 35 assists in 54 games . 
 = = = 2003 NHL Entry Draft = = = 
 In January 2002 , Horton , along with Patrick O 'Sullivan and Kevin Klein , was regarded as a top prospect from the OHL for the 2003 NHL Entry Draft . Eleven months later in December , Horton was called , " an almost sure @-@ fire top five pick " by USA Today . Midway through the 2002 – 03 season , Horton was regarded as a top @-@ five North American prospect by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . Scouts likened Horton , who considered him a " power forward " , to John LeClair who was considered to be one of the best power forwards in the NHL . However , Horton stated that he saw himself to be more like Jeremy Roenick or Peter Forsberg , both of whom were faster than LeClair . 
 The Florida Panthers originally held the first overall pick , but traded it and the 73rd pick ( Daniel Carcillo ) to the Pittsburgh Penguins for the third pick ( Horton ) , the 55th pick ( Stefan Meyer ) , and Mikael Samuelsson . Goaltender Marc @-@ André Fleury ( Pittsburgh ) and centre Eric Staal ( Carolina ) were selected before him . 
 = = = Florida Panthers = = = 
 Horton signed with the Panthers on October 6 , 2003 . After his signing , Panthers coach Mike Keenan compared Horton to future New York Rangers Hall of Famer Mark Messier . 
 Against the Minnesota Wild on October 24 , Horton recorded his first career point with an assist on an Ivan <unk> goal . Horton recorded his first career goal on November 1 against the San Jose Sharks . In the next game for the Panthers against the Los Angeles Kings , Horton scored his second goal in as many games . On January 9 , 2004 , Horton became the first rookie in NHL history to record a goal on a penalty shot , scoring against Philadelphia Flyers goalie Jeff Hackett . Three seasons later , on October 22 , 2006 , Penguins rookie Jordan Staal matched the feat and surpassed Horton as the youngest player to score ; Staal was 183 days younger than Horton was when he scored . Four days after his penalty shot goal , Horton suffered a torn rotator cuff and labrum which would potentially end his season . At the time , he was third on the Panthers with 10 goals . Following an examination by surgeon Tony <unk> , Horton was told that he could rehabilitate naturally and did not require surgery on his shoulder . He returned to the Panthers in early March and scored in one of his first games back against the Tampa Bay Lightning . However , his shoulder troubles continued and it was determined that surgery was required . Horton ended his rookie campaign with 14 goals and 8 assists in 55 games . 
 The 2004 – 05 NHL season ended up being locked out which forced Horton and other players to sign with other teams . Horton eventually signed with the Panthers ' AHL affiliate , the San Antonio Rampage after a controversy ensued as to whether junior hockey eligible players such as Horton were obligated to return to their junior teams . Despite not signing with the Rampage until October 29 , Horton still participated in their training camp . Seven minutes into his second AHL game , Horton scored his first goal of the season . He recorded his first career AHL assist on a Gregory Campbell goal . On December 3 , 2004 , against the Houston Aeros , Horton scored both of the Rampage 's goals to help the team win in overtime . 
 For the second straight season , the Panthers did not allow Horton to play for the Canadian national junior team . He and Houston Aeros defenceman Brent Burns were the only two players not allowed to play for the team . Days before the announcement that Horton would not play for Team Canada , he suffered another shoulder injury which allegedly played into the Panthers ' decision . Horton suffered the shoulder injury in a fight in December and missed 14 games . He was informed he would again have to undergo surgery . In 21 games for San Antonio , Horton scored 5 goals and recorded 4 assists . 
 Entering the 2005 – 06 season , Horton stated in response to a question about his shoulders , " I feel better . I feel stronger , bigger . " In the season opener against the Atlanta Thrashers , Horton scored the first goal for the Panthers . Through the first games of the season , Horton was tied for the team lead in goals . On November 8 , 2005 , Horton was placed on injured reserve because of a knee injury . He was activated on December 1 and scored in his first game back against the Washington Capitals to help the Panthers win 3 – 2 . Horton added 2 goals against the Chicago Blackhawks in the Panthers ' next game to bring his season total to 10 in 17 games . Against the Nashville Predators on December 13 , Horton recorded his first career hat trick and stated after the game that , " It 's a pretty nice feeling . I felt like there was no one on me . I just tried to get it to the net and it went in every time . " Despite missing 10 games to injury , Horton was tied with teammate Olli Jokinen for the team lead in goals with 16 after 38 games . Against Washington on January 9 , Horton and Joe Nieuwendyk scored a goal in the shootout to help the Panthers win 4 – 3 . Two days after his shootout goal , Horton was promoted to the Panthers ' first line . Despite his promotion to the first line , Horton 's name was mentioned in a potential trade with the Vancouver Canucks ; however , nothing materialized . In a 6 – 2 win over the Ottawa Senators , Horton scored 2 goals including one on a rebound , after which he said , " It just popped right out to me . It was a long time coming for goals for me . I got lucky tonight and hopefully they keep going in . " In March , Horton began playing in penalty kill situations for the first time in his career . Also against the Lightning , Horton scored the Panthers ' only goal with his 27th goal of the season . Horton completed the season playing 71 games , scoring 28 goals and adding 19 assists . 
 Following the 2005 – 06 season , Horton 's rookie contract expired . He was re @-@ signed by Florida on July 12 , 2006 , to a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 1 million contract . Against the Boston Bruins , Horton scored his first goal of the season to help the Panthers win 8 – 3 . He scored his third goal of the season on October 18 in a 5 – 2 loss against the Washington Capitals , who the Panthers had not lost to in regulation since the 2004 – 05 season . After Horton was called for a second @-@ period penalty against Atlanta , coach Jacques Martin demoted Horton to the fourth line in an attempt to send a message to Horton . Before long , however , Horton was again promoted to the first line , with Finnish players Olli Jokinen and Ville Peltonen . They gave Horton the name " Nathan <unk> " in an attempt to make his name Finnish . Against the Montreal Canadiens on November 16 , Horton assisted on all goals that Jokinen recorded . Against Tampa Bay on February 17 , Horton scored the game @-@ winning goal for Florida , 29 seconds into overtime . 
 For the second straight season , Horton 's name was brought up in trade offers ; however Canadian sports writer , Bruce <unk> called it " doubtful " that Horton would be traded despite Horton being unhappy playing in Florida . Against Tampa Bay on March 28 , Horton scored two goals , which brought his season total for goals against the Lightning up to 8 . In the Panthers ' next game against the Lightning , Horton had 1 goal which made it 9 goals and 3 assists for him against Tampa Bay in the 2006 – 07 season . The goal also gave Horton his career @-@ high 31st goal on the season . He ended the season with 31 goals and 31 assists in 82 games . 
 Horton re @-@ signed with the Panthers on June 21 , 2007 , to a six @-@ year , US $ 24 million <unk> despite previous rumours he would not . Through seven games for the Panthers to open the 2007 – 08 NHL season , Horton recorded 3 goals and 3 assists , during which he had a four @-@ game point streak . Horton scored the only goal for the Panthers in a 2 – 1 loss against the Carolina Hurricanes on November 18 . Against the Washington Capitals on November 28 , Horton along with teammates Olli Jokinen , Kamil Kreps and Stephen Weiss scored shootout goals to help Florida win the game . For the first time since March 2007 , Horton scored 2 goals in a game to help the Panthers win over the Atlanta Thrashers on December 28 . Horton and linemate David Booth combined for three goals against the New York Islanders , of which Horton scored two . In the Panthers ' 5 – 3 win over the Ottawa Senators on January 22 , 2008 , Horton recorded 4 assists , which was a career – high . Horton scored against Vancouver Canucks goalie and former Panther Roberto Luongo in a shootout to help the Panthers win 4 – 3 , giving them their first win over Vancouver since 1999 . Horton scored a goal against the Washington Capitals to help Florida win 4 – 2 in the game after Richard <unk> suffered a neck injury in which he had his external carotid artery cut by a skate . Twenty @-@ two seconds into overtime against the Boston Bruins on March 5 , Horton scored to give the Panthers a 1 – 0 victory . Four days later on March 9 , Horton scored again in overtime with 23 seconds left , causing the Miami Herald to nickname him the " King of Overtime " . On April 5 , Horton scored his 100th career goal . 
 Prior to the start of the 2008 – 09 NHL season , Panthers head coach Peter DeBoer , who first saw Horton play at seven years old , said about his hopes for Horton , " If I 'm looking for guys to do more , he wouldn 't be at the top of the list . If he can give us 30 @-@ plus , I 'd be happy with Nathan . There 's a group of guys underneath him that I think can make a lot bigger jumps than I need out of Nathan Horton goal @-@ wise . " Horton was also moved from his position of right wing to centre before the season . After playing a few games at centre , Horton said , " It 's not as easy as wing . You can play wing and all you have to concentrate on is getting the puck and shooting it . At center , you have more responsibilities . " Against the Nashville Predators on November 1 , Horton played in his 300th career game , but failed to record a point . On November 26 , Horton suffered a deep cut in his leg after it was stepped on by a skate . At the time of the injury , Horton had 6 goals and 7 assists . In early December , the Ottawa Sun reported that the Panthers might have been looking to trade Horton after he was reportedly unhappy playing for the team . Horton returned to the lineup on December 17 after missing eight games . After the game , Horton commented , " I 'm excited to play . It 's kind of a different Panthers team than the past . It 's really changed in a matter of a month . Things are going good now , and everybody 's really buying into what Pete has been telling us all year . " On January 17 , Horton recorded 3 assists to help the Panthers defeat Tampa Bay , 4 – 3 . For the second time during the season , Horton 's name came up in trade rumours , this time with the Chicago Blackhawks . In early March , days after the trade deadline , Horton suffered a finger injury that forced him to have surgery . He returned to the lineup on March 23 , recording an assist in a Panthers loss to the Carolina Hurricanes . Horton ended the season with 22 goals and 23 assists in 67 games . 
 = = = Boston Bruins = = = 
 Horton was traded to the Boston Bruins on June 22 , 2010 along with Gregory Campbell for Dennis Wideman , the Bruins first round pick ( 15th overall ) in the 2010 NHL Entry Draft , and third round pick in the 2011 NHL Entry Draft . He got off to a great start in his first season in Boston , with seven goals and six assists , including a six game point streak , in the first 12 games of the season . He finished second on the team in goals and fourth in assists . 
 During the first round of the 2011 NHL playoffs , Horton scored a game @-@ winning overtime goal for the Bruins in both games five and seven to help the Bruins win the series over the Montreal Canadiens . A third period goal by Horton against the Tampa Bay Lightning , the only goal of game 7 , later sent the Bruins to the Stanley Cup Finals . 
 In game three of the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , Horton suffered a devastating late hit by Vancouver Canucks defenseman Aaron Rome . Rome received a five @-@ minute major for interference and a game misconduct . Horton was unresponsive as he was carried out on a stretcher and put into an ambulance . He was moving all his extremities in the ambulance . He was later diagnosed with a severe concussion and missed the remainder of the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals . This was arguably the turning point in the series , as the Bruins would go on to win 4 of the next 5 games , and score 21 of the next 25 goals after the hit . Rome was suspended for 4 games . Although Horton missed the remainder of the finals , he was able to hoist the Stanley Cup in Vancouver on June 15 after the Bruins won game 7 . 
 On January 22 , 2012 , Horton sustained another concussion , this time from Philadelphia Flyers forward Tom Sestito . Horton would not return for the remainder of the season or for the playoffs . Nathan Horton did not play for another team during the 2012 @-@ 2013 NHL lockout , and made his 2013 season debut for the Bruins on January 19 , 2013 , opening night against the New York Rangers . 
 On the day of the 2013 NHL Entry Draft , Horton 's representatives confirmed that he had informed Bruins general manager Peter Chiarelli that he would not be re @-@ signing with Boston . 
 = = = Columbus Blue Jackets = = = 
 On July 5 , 2013 , Horton signed a seven @-@ year free agent contract worth $ 37 @.@ 1 million with the Columbus Blue Jackets . Offseason shoulder surgery however would sideline Horton until January 2 , 2014 when he finally made his Blue Jackets debut and scored the game @-@ winning goal in a 2 @-@ 0 victory over the Phoenix Coyotes . 
 In October 2014 , Horton was diagnosed with a degenerative back injury of the lumbar region that ended his 2014 – 15 season and threatens to end his career . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 On February 26 , 2015 , with Horton on the long @-@ term injured list and with no sign of return , he was traded due to financial considerations by the Blue Jackets to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for David Clarkson . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Horton married Canadian model Tammy Plante , the great @-@ niece of NHL goaltending great Jacques Plante , on July 7 , 2007 . They have two sons , Dylan and Zachary . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 All statistics are from NHL.com. 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = OHL = = = 
 = = = NHL = = = 
 = M @-@ 39 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 39 is a 16 miles ( 26 km ) long state trunkline highway in Metro Detroit area of the US state of Michigan that runs from Lincoln Park , on the south end , to Southfield on the north . The official southern terminus of M @-@ 39 is at the corner of Southfield Road and Lafayette Boulevard in Lincoln Park , one block southeast of the junction of Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 , Fisher Freeway ) and two blocks northwest of M @-@ 85 ( Fort Street ) . From there the highway heads northward . The first 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) of the highway follows Southfield Road , a divided highway in the Downriver area . It then transitions into the Southfield Freeway , which is a 13 @.@ 7 miles ( 22 @.@ 0 km ) long freeway that runs from Allen Park north through Dearborn , and then the west side of Detroit , to Southfield . The northern terminus is at M @-@ 10 ( Lodge Freeway ) in Southfield . 
 The current M @-@ 39 is the third highway to bear the designation . The first dated back to the origins of the state highway system in 1919 and ran between Grand Rapids and Lansing . This highway was replaced in segments through the 1920s and 1930s by realignments or extensions of other highways in the area . The second was part of Schaefer Highway in the Detroit area from 1939 until the end of the 1950s . The current highway was commissioned when the M @-@ 39 designation was moved to Southfield Road from Schaefer Highway . During the 1960s , it was converted into a freeway in stages . Afterwards , it was extended to end at M @-@ 85 ( Fort Street ) before a change in the 1980s gave the trunkline its present termini . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 39 begins at Lafayette Boulevard a block east of its junction with I @-@ 75 in Lincoln Park . From there the road is a six @-@ lane boulevard through residential areas as it runs west @-@ northwesterly to pass under I @-@ 75 . In Allen Park , the highway continues through residential and commercial areas . Southfield Road crosses lines of the Norfolk Southern Railway and Conrail Shared Assets Operations near the location where the highway turns to the northeast and transitions into a six @-@ lane limited @-@ access freeway . Immediately after this transition , the Southfield Freeway , as M @-@ 39 is now called , has an interchange with I @-@ 94 . There is a second , adjacent interchange that connects to Van Born Road , and the freeway winds its way northeasterly through Dearborn . The freeway is bordered by service drives that carry one @-@ way traffic and bear the Southfield Road name on either side . M @-@ 39 meets Outer Drive near the campus of the University of Michigan – Dearborn . The adjoining properties are residential to the west and commercial to the east . Near Greenfield Village , the freeway curves to the northwest around the Ford Proving Grounds before turning to the north , a direction it will maintain until the end of its run . The freeway crosses the River Rouge and meets US Highway 12 ( Michigan Avenue ) next to the Fairlane Town Center and Ford Motor Company 's world headquarters in Dearborn . 
 North of the interchange for M @-@ 153 , ( Ford Road ) , M @-@ 39 crosses into Detroit . From there the road continues through the densely populated areas of the west side of the city . Next to the Chicago Road overpass , the freeway runs under a CSX Transportation rail line . The trunkline continues traveling to the north through a series of interchanges . The first is a partial interchange for Plymouth Road ; northbound traffic exiting here is directed to use the service drive northbound to access Schoolcraft Road , and traffic can enter M @-@ 39 southbound . Next is the stack interchange with I @-@ 96 ( Jeffries Freeway ) with access to both the local and express lanes of that freeway . The last of the series is another partial interchange with Schoolcraft Road . As a counterpart to the Plymouth Road interchange , this one provides access from southbound M @-@ 39 to the cross street with a signed connection along the southbound service drive to Plymouth Road and an entry point for northbound traffic . Continuing north , M @-@ 39 comes to an interchange with M @-@ 5 ( Grand River Avenue ) which also connects to <unk> Avenue , the 5 Mile Road equivalent on Detroit 's mile road system . 
 There are three more interchanges along M @-@ 39 in Detroit as the freeway continues through the residential upper west side . Near the Wayne Community College District , the freeway meets McNichols Road ( 6 Mile ) . There is another interchange approximately one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north at 7 Mile Road as well . The road then crosses the border between Wayne and Oakland counties to enter Southfield at the interchange with M @-@ 102 ( 8 Mile Road ) . The Southfield Freeway , and M @-@ 39 , terminates at an interchange with M @-@ 10 ( John C. Lodge Freeway ) near 9 Mile Road . Southfield Road continues northward from the end of the freeway under local maintenance . 
 M @-@ 39 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 39 were the 159 @,@ 400 vehicles daily between Schoolcraft Road and Grand River Avenue in Detroit ; the lowest counts were the 20 @,@ 400 vehicles per day between the I @-@ 94 and Van Born Road interchanges . All of M @-@ 39 , and Southfield Road on either end that is not under state maintenance , has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 Two previous highways bore the M @-@ 39 designation . When the state highway system was first signed in 1919 , the number was assigned to a highway that ran between Grand Rapids and Lansing . The westernmost end in Kent County near Alto was replaced by a realigned M @-@ 16 . Within the next few years , the western end was scaled back further to the Woodbury area when M @-@ 50 was extended , with the remainder replaced by an extended M @-@ 43 around 1938 . 
 The next trunkline to be designated M @-@ 39 was Schaefer Highway in 1939 , running north – south from US 25 ( Dix Avenue ) in Melvindale to US 16 ( Grand River Avenue ) in western Detroit . Since M @-@ 39 was moved to Southfield Road in the end of the 1950s , Schaefer Highway has been a locally maintained road . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 M @-@ 39 was reassigned to Southfield Road , connecting I @-@ 94 with Northwestern Highway in 1958 @-@ 59 . By 1961 , the freeway was marked as under construction on maps . The first section opened in December 1961 was 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) from Ford Road north to Chicago Road . The remainder of the freeway between I @-@ 94 and the Lodge Freeway and 9 Mile Road was opened by the middle of 1964 at a total cost of $ 40 million . The highway designation was extended southeasterly along Southfield Road to the new I @-@ 75 freeway and a terminus at M @-@ 85 ( Fort Street ) in 1966 . In 1987 , the M @-@ 39 designation was truncated slightly so that the trunkline no longer officially connects to M @-@ 85 . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Whitefish Point Bird Observatory = 
 The Whitefish Point Bird Observatory ( WPBO ) is located in Chippewa County , Michigan , USA , adjacent to the Whitefish Point Unit of the Seney National Wildlife Refuge . It operates as a non @-@ profit , affiliate education and research facility of the Michigan Audubon Society . The Society and the WPBO together have recorded over 300 species of birds at Whitefish Point . As one of a network of bird observatories in the Canadian Migration Monitoring Network , the WPBO documents the bird population of the Great Lakes region through bird banding , data collection , and research studies . 
 = = History = = 
 Birders from the Ontario Bird Banding Association and the Cranbrook Institute of Science established a spring hawk banding project in 1966 at Whitefish Point that was later expanded to survey migrating owls . This project lasted from 1966 – 1971 and was the forerunner of the WPBO . 
 Michigan Audubon formed a Whitefish Point Committee in 1976 to secure a license for access to the U.S. Coast Guard Whitefish Point Light Station except for the automated light and foghorn . The WPBO was established in 1978 as a non @-@ profit organization supported by membership fees , donations and gifts , voluntary service , and grants from private and government institutions . 
 WPBO began annual monitoring of spring migrations beginning in 1979 . By 1989 it expanded to include the monitoring of fall migrations and additional interpretative and research activities . In 1998 , Michigan Audubon received a federal land patent for 2 @.@ 69 acres ( 0 @.@ <unk> km2 ; 0 @.@ <unk> sq mi ) of the old light station property , which is now managed by the WPBO for research and educational activities . 
 Due to the researchers ' exposure to extreme weather , WPBO adopted the procedures of observatories in Britain that use small buildings along the rocky points of the coast where people can stay to monitor migrating birds and keep records and report observations at the stations during migration . The WPBO has collaborated with Michigan Audubon to record over 300 species of birds at Whitefish Point . 
 = = Features = = 
 The American Bird Conservancy designated Whitefish Point a Globally Important Bird Area . Whitefish Point 's land and water features create a natural corridor that funnels thousands of birds during spring and fall migrations , providing unique opportunities for research , education , and conservation programs . Golden eagles , peregrine falcons , merlins , boreal owls , great gray owls , red @-@ throated loons , red @-@ necked grebes , scoters , and <unk> ( also known as skuas ) are just some of the birds that can be seen during migration . 
 Thousands of birds use Whitefish Point as critical stopover habitat to replenish energy reserves before venturing across Lake Superior during spring and fall migrations . A WPBO study found the highest density of migrant landbirds within 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) of Whitefish Point , with higher densities along the shore than at inland locations . 
 The federally endangered piping plover returned annually at Whitefish Point for the first time in twenty three years when a pair of nesting plovers fledged three chicks at Whitefish Point in 2009 . By 2012 , three piping plover nests were confirmed at Whitefish Point . The sparsely vegetated , sand @-@ cobblestone beaches at Whitefish are ideal breeding grounds for the piping plover . The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service designated approximately 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) of Whitefish Point shoreline as critical habitat for the bird , giving it protection under the Federal Endangered Species Act at Whitefish Point . 
 = = Research programs = = 
 = = = Staff and volunteers = = = 
 WPBO has a paid staff during migration that includes a field <unk> , two owl banders , a waterbird counter , a hawk counter , and a gift shop <unk> birders lead field trips to some of " Michigan 's best birding ' hot spots ' " <unk> annual fund raiser called the " Spring Fling " celebrates bird migration at Whitefish Point . 
 = = = Diurnal raptor census = = = 
 Professional staff document the migration of hawks , falcons and eagles that provides comparative data for long @-@ term monitoring of raptor populations . The daily Raptor Census is conducted from the " Hawk Dune " , which is about 200 metres ( 660 ft ) west of the Whitefish Point Lighthouse and about 20 metres ( 66 ft ) above Lake Superior 's water level . 
 Raptor banders licensed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( USFWS ) " lure the birds from the sky into nearly invisible nets . Each bird is immediately released after it is banded and the details are recorded on an official log sheet which includes the date , time , location , and the bird 's species , age and sex . " Researchers report that the increased capture of merlin falcons at Whitefish Point in 2004 was " an environmental indicator that the merlins had come back ( after the ban on the pesticide DDT ) . " 
 = = = Owls = = = 
 WPBO conducts the spring and fall banding of migrating owls using mist nests , as well as summer study of juvenile northern saw @-@ whet owl dispersal at Whitefish Point 
 The 20 @-@ year owl banding project has recently increased the number of owls banded by as much as eightfold by the addition of audio lures that are used to broadcast owl calls . Owls are captured in 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) wide specialty nets strung along clearings in the trees . Data are recorded with each banding and the owls are then released . 
 Researchers report that " nearly one @-@ third of the Boreal Owls banded in North America have been banded by WPBO .... The recent success of all three owl research seasons has begun to document that , on annual basis , Whitefish Point may very well play host to the largest and most diverse owl migration in North America . " 
 = = = Waterbirds = = = 
 Whitefish Point is an important spot for documenting and monitoring waterbird movements in the upper Great Lakes . The Audubon Society reports , " Between 18 @,@ 000 and 21 @,@ 000 red @-@ necked grebes pass by the point each fall , representing approximately 25 – 40 % of the estimated North American Population . " Other significant counts at Whitefish Point include the common loon , red @-@ breasted merganser , common tern , and Bonaparte 's gull . 
 The waterbird count is conducted during both spring and fall migrations from the beach near the tip of Whitefish Point . The daily eight @-@ hour count starts at sunrise with some the highest numbers occurring on inclement days , but Whitefish Point 's frequent fog makes it difficult to count during this weather condition . 
 = = = Shorebirds = = = 
 For the first time in twenty three years , piping plovers nested at Whitefish Point and successfully fledged offspring in 2009 . By 2012 , three nesting pairs were confirmed at Whitefish Point that successfully fledged eleven young . In 2010 , the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation awarded a $ 150 @,@ 000 grant to Lake Superior State University to intensely monitor nesting piping plovers at Vermilion , Whitefish Point , and other shoreline areas in the Eastern Upper Peninsula . The USFWS designated the shoreline from Whitefish Point to Grand Marais , Michigan as critical habitat for the piping plover . The Great Lakes population of piping plover are isolated and extremely vulnerable to extirpation from the Great Lakes region . On August 30 , 2012 , the USFWS added 19 @.@ 85 acres ( 8 @.@ 03 ha ) acres and more than 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) of Lake Superior shoreline as critical piping plover habitat to Whitefish Point Unit of the Seney National Wildlife Refuge . 
 = = = Songbirds = = = 
 The observatory conducts a census program to document migrant passerines at the Point , as well as songbird populations throughout the Upper Peninsula , with a special emphasis on rare species and neotropical migrants . The daily songbird census is combined with the hawk and waterbird counts " to produce a Daily Estimated Total for all species migrating through Whitefish Point . " 
 = = = Canadian Migration Monitoring Network = = = 
 Whitefish Point Bird Observatory is the only U.S.-based bird observatory in the Canadian Migration Monitoring Network . This North American network of observatories studies , tracks , processes , and shares enormous volumes of data about migrating birds from the Atlantic to the Pacific to show the " ' big picture ' of what birds populations are doing across the northern half of the North America . " 
 = Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning = 
 " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " is a song written by Irving Berlin in 1918 that gives a comic perspective on military life . Berlin composed the song as an expression of protest against the indignities of Army routine shortly after being drafted into the United States Army in 1918 . The song soon made the rounds of camp and became popular with other soldiers , partly because hatred of reveille was universal . 
 The commanding officer of Camp Upton in eastern Long Island took an interest in Berlin 's talents and assigned him to write and produce a fundraising benefit to raise funds for a new visitors ' center at the base ; the show was entitled Yip , Yip , Yaphank after the Camp Upton locale in Yaphank , New York . 
 Although Berlin initially wrote " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " without commercial intent , it eventually appeared in three different Broadway shows , including Ziegfeld Follies of 1918 , and the film This Is the Army . More than any other Irving Berlin song , it became the one most associated with Berlin as a performer . 
 = = Background = = 
 Irving Berlin was born in the Russian Empire in 1888 , either in <unk> or Tyumen , and had moved with his family to New York City in 1893 . He acquired United States citizenship in early 1918 with the expectation that his medical history would exempt him from his final year of draft eligibility . So it came as an unpleasant surprise that within months Berlin was drafted and serving as a private at Camp Upton at a salary of $ 30 a month , far below his usual earnings . Although as a civilian he employed a private valet , as an Army private he was compelled to perform unskilled labor in support of camp operations . " There were a lot of things about army life I didn 't like " , said Berlin , " and the thing I didn 't like most of all was reveille . " 
 During World War I , Berlin was drafted into the United States Army 's 152nd Depot Brigade shortly after he became a naturalized United States citizen in 1918 . By the time he entered the service the war was in its final months and prospects for victory were steadily improving . He was assigned to a camp on eastern Long Island that was mainly an interim station for infantry troops headed overseas . 
 According to the New York Times , 
 Commentators on Berlin 's life agree that he cannot read music , does not know the instruments of the orchestra and plays the piano in a solitary key . He has a piano which is equipped with a shifting device which enables him to play in that key while the piano transposes . His melodies are " dictated " to a music assistant . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The incident that inspired Berlin to write " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " was an occasion when a colonel wanted a group of buglers to play George M. Cohan 's " Over There " . The buglers were unable to comply because it exceeded the range of their instruments , so the oblivious officer ordered them to practice Cohan 's song . He wrote it as " a thin little sergeant . " 
 Berlin 's civilian work schedule had been that of a hardworking night owl , generally writing material until two or three in the morning . His efforts to adjust to military life and become a good soldier included springing out of bed obediently each morning , which earned him the resentment of fellow soldiers because he concealed his hatred of reveille too well and appeared eager to wake up in the mornings . 
 So during an era when popular songs about war praised its heroism , Berlin instead gave voice to the subversive impulses shared by ordinary soldiers . The lyrics begin with a mundane recounting of a newly recruited soldier 's camp life and progress to hyperbole as he describes a series of increasingly absurd plans to escape from morning reveille . 
 " Someday I 'm going to murder the bugler , 
 Someday they 're going to find him dead ; 
 I 'll amputate his reveille 
 and step upon it heavily , 
 and spend the rest of my life in bed . " 
 Berlin would later describe the song as " a protest written from the heart out , absolutely without the slightest thought that it would ever earn a cent " . He wrote the song before any plans for a larger production were underway and it soon gained popularity around the camp . 
 = = Production = = 
 The camp 's commanding officer Major General J. Franklin Bell called Berlin into his office and asked the showman to raise funds for a new community house to lodge families of service members who visited the camp . The projected expense of the project was $ 35 @,@ 000 . At first , Berlin called in favors from civilian colleagues to visit and put on local performances to boost morale , but news of a Navy fundraising show on Broadway called Boom Boom inspired Berlin to request permission to write and stage a full Broadway production of their own . 
 The songwriter not only obtained permission for the show , but also received General Bell 's personal permission to return to Berlin 's normal creative working schedule and a special exemption from reveille . Civilian musician Harry Ruby joined Berlin in camp to transcribe and arrange the music and collaborate on the show . 
 = = Alternate Verse = = 
 During World War II , school children in New York City sang the verse as : 
 " Someday I 'm going to murder the bugler , 
 Someday they 're going to find him dead ; 
 And then I 'll get that other pup , 
 the guy that wakes the bugler up , 
 and spend the rest of my life in bed . " 
 = = Parodies = = 
 Berlin 's song " inspired a dozen parodies . " An uncredited parody was recounted in the New York Times : 
 Oh , how I hate to go into the mess hall ! 
 Oh , how I long for the foods at home ! 
 For it isn 't hard to guess 
 Why they call the meals a <unk> 
 You 've got to eat beans , you 've got to eat beans , 
 You 've got to eat beans in the Army . 
 = = Performances = = 
 The song was performed in soldier revues including 1918 's Yip Yip Yaphank , and Ziegfeld Follies of 1918 , as well as in 113 Broadway performances of This Is the Army in 1942 . Jack Haley sang " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " in the 1938 movie Alexander 's Ragtime Band and in 1938 Alice Faye and Ethel Merman also sang the song at the Roxy Theatre in New York City . It was sung at a 1941 war rally against the America First Committee by New York City Mayor Fiorello La Guardia in Philadelphia . 
 = = = Yip Yip Yaphank = = = 
 The song appeared in two shows of 1918 : Yip Yip Yaphank and Ziegfeld Follies of 1918 . Yip Yip Yaphank opened on August 19 and Berlin made his entrance late in the show , being dragged from a pup tent by two other soldiers as he pretended to be asleep on his feet to sing " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " . The song was a centerpiece of the show ; both it and Berlin 's performance received favorable reviews . According to reviewers , Berlin 's voice was thin but his timing was perfect and he presented a hilarious stage persona . 24 years later , the New York Times declared Yip " an immediate hit . " 
 George M. Cohan may have conveyed the spirit of the aggressive patriotism in his rousing " Over There " , but it was Berlin who caught the more human emotions of the lowly soldier in such poignant pieces as " Oh , How I Hate to Get Up In the Morning " and " Kitchen Police " ... 
 The show was extended twice and exceeded its fundraising goal of $ 35 @,@ 000 . Estimates of the proceeds range from $ 83 @,@ 000 to over $ 158 @,@ 000 , but the planned visitor center was never built because the war ended shortly afterward and Berlin was never informed what happened to the money . Berlin received no financial benefit beyond his ordinary sergeant 's pay , but he was well compensated in publicity . He was recognized as a Broadway star wherever he went after he returned to civilian life . Along with the acclaim , however , he also " received a death threat and a kidnapping threat " , which he took seriously enough to purchase a bulletproof limousine and hire a bodyguard / chauffeur . 
 = = = This Is the Army = = = 
 Berlin also performed " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " in the 1942 stage play This Is the Army , which ran for 113 performances on Broadway and was adapted as a Warner Brothers musical the following year . It was declared the " modern version of Yip , Yip , Yaphank , " and contained " all @-@ new music " except for two or three songs . Twenty @-@ five years after the original show , he was still dark haired and wiry , but his face was strained . More importantly , his voice — which had never been strong — was weakened from months of recent stage touring . The number was filmed in late afternoon when he expected his voice to be at its best , but an internal studio memo still reported , " Irving Berlin is no singer . " Berlin wrote about the filming in an April 10 , 1943 letter : 
 Today they finished shooting my portion of the picture and I am certainly glad it 's over with . All I do is sing " Hate to Get Up in the Morning " as I did in the show , but the camera is a severe judge and I am afraid even with the great amount of care and fuss they can 't improve what the Fates decreed to be a homely face . As for my voice , I made a recording . When the record was first played on the set , one of the electricians , who didn 't know whose voice it was , said , " If the guy who wrote that song could hear the record , he would turn over in his grave " <unk> gives you a fair idea . However I am hoping it won 't be too bad . 
 In May 1988 The Tonight Show Band honored Irving Berlin 's one hundredth birthday by playing " Oh ! How I Hate to Get Up in the Morning " as part of a medley in tribute to the songwriter at the close of a show . 
 In 2016 , June and earlier , the song was used in ads by McDonald 's restaurants for the breakfast menu . 
 = = External Links = = 
 View the sheet music cover and a song MP3 here . 
 = Rory Storm = 
 Rory Storm ( 7 January 1938 – 28 September 1972 ) was an English musician and vocalist . Born Alan Ernest Caldwell in Liverpool , Storm was the singer and leader of Rory Storm and the Hurricanes , a Liverpudlian band who were contemporaries of the Beatles in the late 1950s and early 1960s . Ringo Starr was the drummer for the Hurricanes before joining the Beatles in August 1962 , replacing original drummer Pete Best . 
 The Hurricanes were one of the most popular acts on the Liverpool and Hamburg club scenes during their existence , although their attempt at a recording career was not successful . They released only two singles ( and one additional compilation track ) during their early 1960s heyday , and none of their material made the charts . Their second and final single was a version of the West Side Story song " America " , and was produced by the Beatles ' manager Brian Epstein . 
 When Storm 's father died , he returned from Amsterdam to Liverpool to be with his mother at Stormsville , at 54 Broad Green Road , Broadgreen , Liverpool . On 27 September 1972 , Storm developed a chest infection and could not sleep properly , so he took sleeping pills . The next day Storm and his mother were both found dead . A post mortem determined that Storm had not taken enough pills to kill himself , but it was suspected that , after finding her son 's body , his mother had . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Rory Storm was the stage name of Alan Caldwell , born 7 January 1938 , in Oakhill Park Estate , <unk> , Liverpool to Violet ( née Disley ) and Ernest " Ernie " George W Caldwell . His father was a window cleaner by profession , and a part @-@ time porter at the Broadgreen Hospital , often singing songs to patients . Storm had one sister ; Iris Caldwell , who later dated George Harrison when she was 12 , and Paul McCartney , when she was 17 . Iris later married Shane Fenton , later known as Alvin Stardust . Apart from music , Storm was interested in sports , particularly athletics ; he ran for an amateur team in Liverpool called the Pembroke Harriers , and set the Pembroke Athletics and Cycle Club steeplechase record . Instead of being driven home after concerts in Liverpool , Storm preferred to run home . 
 Storm played football regularly and was a good skater and swimmer ( once swimming the 12 @.@ 5 @-@ mile length of Windermere ) . Liverpool F.C. used to train at Melwood and he went to watch them in training , later putting up a large photo of himself training with the team on his wall at home . He was the captain of Mersey Beat magazine 's football team , called the Mersey Beat XI . Storm was born with a stutter ( a speech impediment ) , which did not affect his singing . Because of Storm 's bad stammer , his friends never allowed him to tell a joke or to order a round of drinks , as it took too long . He became a cotton salesman ( as was Jim McCartney , Paul McCartney 's father ) before forming a skiffle group . 
 = = Music = = 
 Storm 's first name for a group was " Dracula & the Werewolves " , but he then settled on " Al Caldwell 's Texans " . Still known as Alan Caldwell , Storm opened the Morgue Skiffle Club in the cellar of a large Victorian house , " <unk> " , at 25 Oakhill Park , Broadgreen , on 13 March 1958 . The cellar consisted of two rooms , painted black and connected by a long corridor , with skeletons painted on the walls and one blue light . Groups played on Tuesdays and Thursdays for up to 100 people ( above the age of 15 ) starting at 7 : 30 pm , including Storm 's group ( later called " The Raving Texans " ) and the Quarrymen ( who later became " the Beatles " ) . After complaints about the noise , the police closed down the club on 1 April 1958 , but Storm reopened it on 22 April 1958 . It was in the Morgue Skiffle Club that George Harrison auditioned for the Quarrymen , playing " Guitar Boogie Shuffle " by Bert Weedon , before being admitted as a member of the band . Harrison later asked Storm if he could join his group , but Storm 's mother refused to allow it , as she thought Harrison was too young . 
 Storm went to London , on 11 April 1958 , to participate in a cross @-@ country running competition . During his stay , he took part in a jam session at Chas McDevitt 's Skiffle Cellar , which resulted in an appearance on 30 April 1958 on Radio Luxembourg 's Skiffle club programme , playing " Midnight Special " . In 1959 , Storm 's group consisted of himself , Paul Murphy , and Johnny " Guitar " Byrne all performing on guitar and vocals , Reg Hale ( washboard ) and Jeff Truman ( tea @-@ chest bass ) . " Spud " Ward , a former member of the Swinging Blue Jeans , later played bass guitar . Storm met Ringo Starr at a talent contest called " 6 @.@ 5 Special " . Starr had previously played with the Eddie Clayton Skiffle Group and was then drumming with a group called " <unk> Skiffle " . Starr 's first concert with Storm was on 25 March 1959 , at the Mardi Gras in Mount Pleasant , Liverpool . 
 = = = Rory Storm and the Hurricanes = = = 
 Storm changed the name of his group to " Al Storm and the Hurricanes " , then " Jett Storm and the Hurricanes " , and finally to " Rory Storm and the Hurricanes " . The original line @-@ up was Storm , Byrne , Ty Brian , Lu Walters , and Ritchie Starkey ( drums ) . Storm and the Hurricanes entered a competition managed by Carrol Levis called " Search for Stars " at the Liverpool Empire Theatre on 11 October 1959 , reaching second place ahead of 150 acts . The line @-@ up of the Hurricanes finally solidified with Storm ( vocals ) , Byrne ( rhythm guitar ) , Ty ( Charles ) O ’ Brien ( lead guitar ) , Walters ( bass guitar / vocals ) and Ringo Starr . The group played at the Cavern Club with the Cy Laurie Jazz Band on Sunday 2 January 1960 , and a week later supported the Saints Jazz Band and Terry Lightfoot 's New Orleans Jazz Band . Playing rock ' n ' roll music was a problem at the Cavern Club , as it was not accepted by the customers or management . When Storm and the Hurricanes performed there on 17 January 1960 , with Micky Ashman 's Jazz Band and the Swinging Blue Jeans , their first song was " Cumberland Gap " ( a skiffle song ) by Lonnie Donegan . Then they played " Whole Lotta Shakin ' Goin On " by Jerry Lee Lewis . The jazz and skiffle audience were outraged , booed and threw copper coins at the group . The Cavern 's manager Ray McFall , fined them six shillings , but the coins collected from the stage floor were worth more than the fine . 
 Storm and the Hurricanes performed at the Liverpool Stadium on 3 May 1960 , on the same bill as Gene Vincent . Larry Parnes became interested in the Hurricanes , and invited them to audition at the Wyvern Club as a backing group for Billy Fury . Storm turned up at the audition , but only so he could have his picture taken with Fury . In July 1960 , the group secured a residency at Butlins holiday camp in Pwllheli ( playing in the Rock ' n ' Calypso Ballroom ) for £ 25 each per week . Starr was not sure about giving up his job as an apprentice at Henry Hunt 's , where he made climbing frames for schools , until Storm put forward the idea of " Starr @-@ time " ( a solo spot ) with Starr singing songs like " Boys " by the Shirelles . Starr finally agreed when Storm told him about how many women would be " available " . It was during this season that Starr ( who had been known as " Ritchie " until then ) changed his name to " Ringo " . 
 = = = Hamburg = = = 
 After playing for more than 16 hours per week , the group were contacted by Allan Williams , who wanted them to go to Hamburg . Derry and the Seniors were successful there , and Williams wanted an additional group . As Storm and the group were committed to Butlins , they turned Williams ' offer down ( as did Gerry and the Pacemakers ) so Williams sent the Beatles to Hamburg instead . After the summer season ended in early October 1960 , Storm and the Hurricanes were free to travel to Hamburg , replacing Derry and the Seniors at the Kaiserkeller . They arrived in Hamburg on 1 October 1960 , having negotiated to be paid more than the Seniors or the Beatles . They played five or six 90 @-@ minute sets every day alternating with The Beatles . Storm and The Hurricanes were later presented with a special certificate by Bruno Koschmider ( the owner of the Kaiserkeller ) for their performances . 
 The stage of the Kaiserkeller was made of planks of wood balanced on the top of beer crates , so the two groups made a bet to see to who would be the first to break it . After punishing the stage for days , a slight crack appeared , and when Storm jumped off the top of the upright piano , during a performance of " Blue Suede Shoes " , it finally broke . Byrne remembered that as Storm hit the stage , it cracked loudly and formed a V @-@ shape around Storm . He disappeared into it , and all the amplifiers and Starr 's cymbals slid into the hole . Koschmider was furious , and had to replace the live music with a juke box . Both groups went across the road to Harold 's cafe for breakfast , but were followed by Koschmider 's doormen with <unk> , who beat the musicians as punishment . 
 During their eight @-@ week residency Williams arranged a recording session at the <unk> Studio , which was a small booth on the fifth floor of 57 <unk> ( the <unk> @-@ House ) on Saturday 18 October 1960 . Williams asked Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison from the Beatles to play and sing harmonies for Walters ( of the Hurricanes ) on the recording . Pete Best ( the Beatles ' regular drummer at the time ) was in town buying drumsticks , so Starr played drums , which was the first time Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr recorded together . They recorded three songs : " Fever " , " September Song " and " Summertime " . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Storm and the Hurricanes were the headlining group at the first " Beat Night " , in the Orrell Park Ballroom , in March 1961 . They were also invited for a season at the Butlins camp in Skegness in Lincolnshire . Sam Leach ( a Liverpool promoter ) arranged a series of dance nights at the Palais Ballroom in Aldershot , starting on 9 December 1961 . The first Saturday featured The Beatles , but as the local newspaper forgot to run the advertisement only 18 people turned up . The second Saturday was arranged for Rory Storm and the Hurricanes to perform , and as it was advertised this time , 210 people paid to get in . Leach 's idea was to attract London agents to watch the series of concerts , but when he realised they would never travel out of London he abandoned the idea . 
 Starr considered leaving Storm at that time to join Derry and the Seniors , but accepted a job with Tony Sheridan at the Top Ten Club on 30 December 1961 , as Sheridan 's offer of more money , a flat and a car was too good to refuse . Starr 's stay with Sheridan was short @-@ lived , as he found Sheridan 's habit of changing the set list without telling his backing group beforehand frustrating , so he rejoined the Hurricanes . On 5 February 1962 , Best fell ill and the Beatles had to play a lunchtime concert at the Cavern and an evening concert at the Kingsway club in Southport . As the Hurricanes had no concert that day Starr played with them live on stage for the first time ( although he had recorded with them in Hamburg ) . 
 During a Hurricanes ' residency at Butlins , Lennon and McCartney drove from Liverpool to Skegness , on 15 August 1962 , to ask Starr to join the Beatles . Shortly before , Starr had agreed to join Kingsize Taylor in Hamburg , as Taylor was offering £ 20 a week , but Lennon and McCartney offered £ 25 a week , which Starr accepted . Lennon and McCartney offered Storm to swap drummers ( with Best replacing Starr ) but Best rejected the idea . According to Epstein in his autobiography , Storm was , " One of the liveliest and most likeable young men on the scene ... was very annoyed when Ringo left and he complained to me . I apologised , and Rory , with immense good humour said , ' Okay . Forget it . The best of luck to the lot of you ' " . The Hurricanes then became known for having a succession of drummers , including Gibson Kemp , Brian Johnson , John Morrison , Keef Hartley ( August 1963 ) , Ian Broad and Trevor Morais , who all stayed with the group for a short period before leaving . 
 Despite Starr joining the Beatles , both groups would perform on the same bill during 1961 , and at many concerts thereafter . In 1962 , both groups performed together at St Patrick 's Night Rock Gala ( Knotty Ash Village Hall ) Queen 's Hall ( Widnes ) and with Little Richard at the Tower Ballroom . In 1963 , Storm and the Hurricanes were filmed as part of the " Beat City " documentary , which was broadcast by Associated @-@ Rediffusion Television . 
 = = Stage persona and lifestyle = = 
 When Storm became a professional singer , he changed his name to Rory Storm by deed poll , and changed the name of his family 's home in Broadgreen to Stormsville . Storm was known for the extravagant clothes he wore and the cars he drove , once buying a pink Vauxhall Cresta for £ 800 in cash . A young man was once caught by a porter at Bootle railway station writing " I love Rory " over the walls , and when questioned , it turned out to be Storm himself . The Hurricanes wore matching suits on stage , but Storm sometimes wore a pink suit and pink tie , and during concerts he would walk over to the piano and comb his blond hair with an oversized comb . Their stage wear changed from sunglasses and palm tree @-@ decorated shirts to red ( and blue ) suits . Storm also wore an Elvis @-@ style gold lamé suit . When they first appeared at Butlins holiday camp Storm wore a turquoise suit with a gold lamé shirt , while the group wore fluorescent suits . 
 Rod Pont ( also known as Steve Day in Steve Day and the Drifters ) remembered Storm arriving at the Orrell Park Ballroom for a concert with a boil on his face . When told about it , Storm pulled out a black velvet hood which had slits for his eyes and mouth , and played the whole concert with the hood on . At one concert at Bankfield House Youth club , Garston , Liverpool , in 1965 , the stage lighting failed between sets . Storm was upset until someone walked in with a torch , which Storm used to finish the concert . He occasionally used a pet monkey in some of the group 's performances , as it attracted more people . At a New Brighton swimming baths performance for 1 @,@ 600 people in 1963 , Storm climbed to the top diving board , undressed to a pair of swimming trunks , and then dived into the water at the end of a song . In January 1964 , during a performance at the Majestic Ballroom , Birkenhead , he climbed up one of the columns supporting the balcony , but slipped and fell 30 feet ( 9 m ) to the floor below , fracturing his leg . At another performance on the New Brighton Pier , Storm made his way onto the Pavilion roof , but fell through the glass skylight . 
 Storm and the Hurricanes received the most votes in the first Mersey Beat magazine poll , but many votes were disqualified as they had been posted from the same place at the same time , and were written in green ink ; although never proven , it was thought that Storm had posted the votes . This meant that the Beatles reached the top position , with the Hurricanes coming fourth , even though the Beatles had also been sending in extra votes themselves . Storm was often photographed for the magazine , such as being surrounded by nurses when he left hospital after breaking a leg during a performance , or playing for the Mersey Beat XI football team . 
 = = The Hurricanes ' set list = = 
 The group 's typical 40 @-@ minute set list during 1963 / 1964 : 
 " Brand New Cadillac " – Storm , vocals ( Vince Taylor & the Playboys ) ; 
 " Roll Over Beethoven " – Storm , vocals ( Chuck Berry ) ; 
 " I 'll Be Your Hero " – Storm , vocals ( Taylor & the Playboys ) ; 
 " Beautiful Dreamer " – Walters , vocals ( Stephen Foster song as rewritten by Gerry Goffin and Jack Keller and released by Tony Orlando in January 1963 ) ; 
