 " Since You Broke My Heart " – Walters / Byrne , vocals ( The Everly Brothers ) ; 
 " America " – Storm , vocals ( Leonard Bernstein ) ; 
 " Danny " – Storm , vocals ( Marty Wilde ) ; 
 " Green Onions " ( instrumental ) ( Booker T & the MG 's ) ; 
 " Down The Line " – Storm , vocals ( Jerry Lee Lewis ) ; and 
 " Whole Lotta Shakin ' Goin On " – Storm , vocals ( Jerry Lee Lewis ) . 
 Other songs included in the set were : 
 " Fever " – Walters , vocals ( written by Eddie Cooley and John Davenport — a pseudonym for Otis Blackwell ) ; 
 " Let It Be Me " – Walters , vocals ( Gilbert <unk> ) ; 
 " Summertime " – Walters , vocals ( George Gershwin ) ; and 
 " Dr Feelgood " – Storm , vocals . 
 The Hurricanes recorded songs for Oriole 's two This is Mersey Beat albums , but only released two singles : " Dr Feelgood " / " I Can Tell " , Oriole ( 45 @-@ CB 1858 12 / 63 ) and " America " / " Since You Broke My Heart " , Parlophone ( R <unk> 11 / 64 ) which was produced by Epstein at IBC Studios in London . Epstein also sang backing vocals on " America " , and Starr added percussion and sang . Storm later asked Epstein to manage the group , but Epstein refused . The Hurricanes later recorded two songs at Abbey Road Studios in 1964 : " Ubangi Stomp " and " I 'll Be There " , although they were never released . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In 1967 , at the age of 26 , O 'Brien collapsed on stage during a performance , and later died due to complications after an appendicitis operation . Storm disbanded the Hurricanes and became a disc jockey , working at the Silver Blades Ice Rink in Liverpool , in Benidorm ( he was also a water @-@ skiing instructor there ) in Jersey and Amsterdam . When Storm 's father died , he returned from Amsterdam to Liverpool to be with his mother . He developed a chest infection and could not sleep properly , so he took sleeping pills . On 28 September 1972 , Storm and his mother were both found dead , at Stormsville . The post mortem revealed that Storm had alcohol and sleeping pills in his blood ( as had his mother ) but not enough to cause his death , which was ruled accidental . Although it could not be proven , it is thought that his mother had committed suicide after finding Storm 's body . 
 The funeral for Storm and his mother was at <unk> Congregational Church , Broadgreen , on 19 October 1972 . Mourners sang Storm 's favourite song , " You 'll Never Walk Alone " . The two coffins were carried from the hearse to the cremation ( at Anfield Crematorium ) by former band members . Storm 's remains were scattered on section 23 at Anfield Crematorium 's Gardens of Remembrance . When Starr was asked why he did not attend , he said , " I wasn 't there when he was born either . " Although Starr had often offered to arrange for Storm to record whenever he wanted to , Storm was not interested in finding new or original material . His sister said : " He [ Storm ] was happy to be the King of Liverpool — he was never keen on touring , he didn 't want to give up running for the Pembroke Harriers ... and he 'd never miss a Liverpool football match ! " 
 Billy Fury , who Storm had met at the Wyvern Club auditions , later played the part of a fictional singer called Stormy Tempest ( based on Storm ) , in the film That 'll Be the Day ( 1973 ) , which also starred Starr . In 1987 , a musical was staged in Liverpool about Storm and the Hurricanes called A Need For Heroes . 
 Johnny Guitar Byrne died in Liverpool on 18 August 1999 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Ringo pays tribute to him in both his songs " Liverpool 8 " on his Liverpool 8 album and " Rory and the Hurricanes " on his Postcards from Paradise album . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 1963 – Dr. Feel Good b / w I Can Tell , Oriole , CB 1858 
 1964 – America b / w Since You Broke My Heart , Parlophone , R <unk> 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 1994 – The Complete Works , Oriole 270 ( unofficial release ) 
 2012 – Live at the Jive Hive March 1960 , Rockstar Records , <unk> 033 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 1963 – This Is Merseybeat volume 1 , Oriole , PS <unk> ( tracks : Dr. Feel Good and Beautiful Dreamer ) 
 1963 – This Is Merseybeat volume 2 , Oriole , PS <unk> ( tracks : I Can Tell ) 
 1974 – Mersey Beat 1962 – 64 , United Artists , USD 305 ( tracks : I Can Tell , <unk> Minnie , Dr. Feel Good and Let 's Stomp ) 
 2004 – Unearthed Merseybeat Volume 2 , Viper CD @-@ 027 ( tracks : Lend Me Your Comb ) 
 = Brütal Legend = 
 Brütal Legend is an action @-@ adventure game with real @-@ time strategy game elements created by Double Fine Productions and published by Electronic Arts for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The game was released during October 2009 in North America , Europe , and Australia . Though Brütal Legend was originally to be published by Vivendi Games prior to its merger with Activision , Activision dropped the game from its portfolio after the merger . It was later picked up by Electronic Arts , though Activision and Double Fine brought counter @-@ lawsuits against each other over publishing issues . The issues were settled out of court . Later , Double Fine announced a port of the game for Microsoft Windows via Steam , which was released in February 2013 . Mac OS X and Linux versions of the game were made available as part of the Humble Bundle in May 2013 . 
 Tim Schafer , the game 's creative director , was inspired to create the game by his own past musical experiences . The game features the character of Eddie Riggs , voiced by and modeled after Jack Black , a roadie who is transported to a fantasy world inspired by the artwork of heavy metal album covers . Eddie becomes the world 's savior , leading the down @-@ trodden humans against a range of supernatural overlords using a battle axe , his Flying V guitar that can tap into the magical powers of the world , and a customizable hot rod . 
 The game , a hybrid of the action @-@ adventure and real @-@ time strategy genres , includes Stage Battles in both the single @-@ player and multiplayer mode , where the player must command troops to defeat their foes while defending their own stage . In addition to Black , the game features voices of heavy metal musicians including Lemmy Kilmister , Rob Halford , Ozzy Osbourne and Lita Ford and other celebrities such as Tim Curry , as well as more than one hundred metal songs selected by Schafer for inclusion in the game . 
 Brütal Legend was generally well received by game reviewers , praising Schafer 's vision and writing of the heavy metal @-@ inspired world , and the performances of the voice cast , particularly Black and Osbourne . Some felt that the hybrid gameplay of action and real @-@ time strategy games did not mix well , however , blaming console control limitations and missing features normally found in games of either genre . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Brütal Legend is a third person action / adventure game incorporating real time strategy elements . The game uses an open world that Tim Schafer has described as being approximately 40 square miles ( 100 km2 ) in area . The player controls the protagonist Eddie Riggs , a roadie who one day finds himself transported into a fantasy heavy metal world . Eddie acquires three tools that are used for combat and transportation : a broad axe called " The Separator " , his Flying V guitar " Clementine " from his own world which has the ability to cast magic spells in the heavy metal world , and a hot rod that Eddie builds called " The Druid Plow " , a.k.a. " The Deuce " . Spells , referred to as " Solo 's " , from Clementine are performed by playing a minigame akin to the note @-@ matching aspect of Guitar Hero or Rock Band over a brief guitar riff ; however , Eddie cannot use the metal generated by Clementine constantly , as prolonged usage of the guitar will cause it to overheat , and the player will have to wait for a cool @-@ off period before using the guitar 's power again . Eddie may also find more solo 's hidden throughout the world , ranging from support to offensive spells . The player can spend in @-@ game currency called " Fire Tributes " , earned from completing missions , at the Motor Forge to gain new abilities and upgrades for each tool . These tools can be used in combination with each other to take out Eddie 's foes ; for example , the player can use his guitar Clementine to create pyrotechnics to launch a foe into the air and follow up by attack it with the Separator axe . In a case of a specific boss fight , the player must use the Deuce hot rod to lure the boss to a spiked gate held up by counterweights , and then play the " Earthshaker " move on Clementine to destroy the weights and sever the creature 's head . 
 Within the open world , the player can use a map and the Deuce 's turn signals to guide them towards either story @-@ advancing missions or side missions . Side missions include hot @-@ rod races against a demon , defending Eddie 's allies from a pending attack , or helping a cannon operator spot his targets . There are about 23 main missions in the story with 30 side missions that the player can optionally take . The player can also explore the game 's world to find statues bound in leather or chains that can be freed to gain a health boost for Eddie or to reveal part of the game 's backstory , and can look through special telescopes at vistas or complete certain jumps to earn additional Fire Tributes . The player can also find monuments they can raise that unlock an additional heavy metal song from the game 's soundtrack that can be played on the Deuce 's radio , " The Mouth of Metal " ; the player can further customize its set list with songs they have been rewarded with or have collected . 
 Several main story missions of the game are Stage Battles based on real time strategy elements . The player , while still in control of Eddie , is required to defend a giant stage where new allies will spawn , holding out until a specific objective is completed . The player creates an army for attacks by building merchandise booths on " fan geysers " through Clementine 's magic . Once enough fans are collected , the player can summon different allies , each consuming a specific number of fans , or upgrade their stage to allow them to produce more powerful allies . A character known as Mangus acts as the " sound guy " to help in the construction of these units and stage upgrades , and also warns the player of enemy attacks . Once the player has gathered their army , they can then seek out and attack their opponents . Eddie is able to control the entire army to follow , attack , or defend a point , and can use specialized squads of specific units to perform certain tasks , such as having a group of headbangers use their headbanging to destroy statues . The player can also use Eddie directly in combat during this battles . Ultimately , Eddie transforms into a winged demon who can fly above the battlefields to issue orders or lay out attacks . Spells in Eddie 's arsenal can help control the performance of his armies , such as temporarily boosting their attack skills or creating a rally flag which troops will gather at , while others hinder the performance of the enemy faction by removing enemy buffs or preventing the creation of enemy units for a short time . Each of the different units , including special allies that Eddie meets in the game , has a special co @-@ op move they can perform with Eddie ; for example , Eddie 's first ally , Ophelia , can be tossed at foes by Eddie in the style of the <unk> Special . These co @-@ op moves are also available outside of Stage Battle missions . 
 The game has a multiplayer mode , described by Schafer as " your typical head @-@ to @-@ head , battle of the bands scenario . But with axes . " The multiplayer modes are team @-@ based and play in the same manner as the single @-@ player Stage Battles , with team sizes from one @-@ versus @-@ one to four @-@ versus @-@ four . Each team selects from one of three factions which affect what resources and troops they can summon , and are tasked with defending their stage from attack by the other team . The three factions available are Ironheade , mostly human @-@ based troops led by Eddie Riggs ; The Drowning Doom , with more Goth / Black Metal creatures led by Ophelia ; and The Tainted Coil , evil creatures controlled by Doviculus . Each player controls a single main avatar who has the same abilities as in the main game for combat and magic spells and can also fly about the map , but also is in control of troops that they may summon from the team 's shared resources — fans as generated by fan geysers across the map . Different types of troops are available , costing various amounts of fans to summon , with the potential to upgrade to improved units through different routes . The number and types of troops that can be summoned is limited by a cap to prevent either team from becoming too overpowered . All of the troops can be engaged by the player to initiate various " Double Team " moves as with the single player game . The game can also be played by a single player with computer @-@ controller opponents at one of five difficulty levels . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Brütal Legend follows the story of Eddie Riggs ( voiced by Jack Black ) , who is " the world 's best roadie " for " the world 's worst ' heavy metal ' band " , Kabbage Boy . Much of the game takes place in an unnamed world inspired by heavy metal music , created by , according to the game 's mythology , Ormagöden , The Eternal <unk> , <unk> of the Sky , and Destroyer of the Ancient World . In this alternate world , the human race is enslaved a race of demons , led by Doviculus , Emperor of the Tainted Coil , ( voiced by Tim Curry ) . Doviculus is assisted by his glam metal human minion , General Lionwhyte ( voiced by Rob Halford and based on David Bowie with the name being an allusion to <unk> band White Lion ) whose hair is so big " and luscious " that he uses it to fly , flapping it like a pair of broad wings . Leading the fight against Doviculus are a small band of human resistance fighters with whom Eddie joins forces : Lars Halford ( voiced by Zach Hanks ) , his sister Lita ( voiced by Kath Soucie ) , and Ophelia ( voiced by Jennifer Hale ) , whom Eddie takes a romantic interest in . Their group is later joined by the stage manager Mangus ( Alex Fernandez ) , the bass @-@ playing healer Kill Master ( voiced by , and patterned after Lemmy Kilmister ) , the motorcycle @-@ riding Fire Baron ( also voiced by Halford , as well as visually inspired by him too ) , and the Amazonian Rima ( voiced by Lita Ford and based on KISS characters ) . Also supporting Eddie is the Guardian of Metal ( voiced by Ozzy Osbourne , who also lent his appearance to the character ) that assists in upgrading his equipment . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 During a gig for Kabbage Boy , Eddie is crushed by falling scenery while trying to save a member of the band ; his blood lands on his belt buckle , in reality an amulet for Ormagöden . The stage is transformed into Ormagöden , who kills the band and takes the unconscious Eddie to the heavy metal world . Awaking in the Temple of Ormagöden , Eddie meets with Ophelia while fighting Doviculus ' forces , developing a crush on her . They discover writings left by the Titans that Eddie is able to comprehend , and build a hot @-@ rod , the " Deuce " , that they use to escape the Temple and travel to <unk> , the base for the small human resistance force led by Lars and Lita . When they meet Eddie and learn he can understand the Titans ' messages , they see him as a prophetical " Chosen One " , though unsure if he will be the savior or destroyer of the world . Ophelia also becomes concerned when Eddie , in the heat of battle , transforms into a winged creature , an effect Eddie decides to use to his advantage at the time . 
 Eddie helps Lars , Lita , and Ophelia create an army , named " Ironheade " to fight against General Lionwhyte . They successfully raid Lionwhyte 's " Pleasure Tower " and defeat him . However , as they celebrate , Doviculus arrives , sending the group into hiding . Doviculus is aware of the presence of his spy " Succoria " by the smell of her blood as it was at the Temple ; Eddie and his allies come to believe Ophelia is Doviculus ' spy . Lars leaves his hiding spot to face Doviculus , but is quickly killed . As the Tainted Coil destroy the tower , Ironheade escapes into the nearby mountains ; Eddie is forced to leave with Lita leaving Ophelia behind despite their shared love . Heartbroken , Ophelia is drawn toward the Sea of Black Tears , cursed waters that grant humans supernatural abilities at the cost of humanity . After leaping into the black waters , the Sea creates a dark doppelganger of Ophelia , who raises an army of other Black Tear @-@ corrupted humans , the goth " Drowning Doom " . After three months , she leads an attack on Ironheade 's mountain camp . Though Ironheade defeats the assault , Eddie determines they must destroy the Sea to end her threat . As they travel through exotic lands and finding more allies out of the <unk> Fire Barons and the amazonian <unk> tribe , they come across evidence of Eddie 's father , the hero known as Riggnarok in this time . It tells that Riggnarok traveled to the future to attempt to learn the secrets of the Titans to bring back to the past in the humans ' ongoing fight against the demons , but never returned . 
 With their new allies , Ironheade manages to push the Drowning Doom back towards the Sea of Black Tears ; defeated , Ophelia denies Eddie 's belief that she is Doviculus ' spy , again claiming that Eddie 's the traitor . As they argue , Doviculus arrives and confirms that Succoria is not Ophelia , but Eddie 's mother . In the past , Succoria , an even more vicious demon empress , also sought the Titans ' secrets in the future . However , after discovering that humans eventually become the dominant species , Succoria fell into a deep despair . Riggnarok , who had followed Succoria through time to assassinate her , took pity on her in her misery , and the two fell in love and bore Eddie . Now in the past , Eddie 's demon nature has borne out , and has also inadvertently revealed the Titans ' secrets to Doviculus as well . Having no more use for Ophelia , Doviculus rips out her heart , taking her powers alongside his own and causing Ophelia to dissipate . While Ironheade battles Doviculus ' forces , Eddie engages Doviculus in a one @-@ on @-@ one confrontation , which ends with the demon emperor 's decapitation . As Eddie escapes the Sea , he recovers Ophelia 's heart from Doviculus , containing his mother 's necklace he gave her when they first met , and then proceeds to rescue the real Ophelia from the ocean floor . Ashore , they rekindle their love as Ironheade celebrates their victory over Doviculus and the Tainted Coil . Back at <unk> , a statue to Lars is erected , while Lita continues to lead the troops against the remaining demons . Eddie insists on maintaining his " roadie " presence , staying behind the scenes and making others look good . After he promises he is not leaving to his assembled friends , Eddie takes off to complete a few errands , with Ophelia watching as he drives off into the sunset , shedding a single black tear . 
 = = Development = = 
 Creator Tim Schafer has said that he has been a heavy metal music fan since high school , and roadies have long fascinated him . As Schafer said in 2007 , " The name was one of the very first things I thought of , over fifteen years ago . I was riding a bus , thinking about a game that would be the complete opposite of what we were working on , The Secret of Monkey Island [ a Lucasfilm Games title released in 1990 ] . And Brütal Legend leapt into my head . I 've been hanging on to that name ever since . " The title , which he describes as sounding " like the hardest core fantasy thing out there " , makes use of the metal umlaut . The idea behind the game first came to Schafer about fifteen years prior to its release , but its core concepts did not completely come together until after the completion of Psychonauts ( 2005 ) , when he presented his idea for the game to the team , they became excited at the concept and decided to make that their next title . 
 Part of the game 's inspiration came from the fantasy worlds that the lyrics and album covers of metal bands implied but rarely made it to music videos , thus allowing Brütal Legend to " fulfill the promise " of such lore . Schafer also credits a Megadeth roadie named Tony he once met as having given him the idea to make a game about a roadie , with the character of Eddie Riggs becoming a re @-@ imagined version of him . Schafer had previously explored the idea of a roadie sent back in time with the character of Hoagie from Day of the Tentacle , but Brütal Legend represented an opportunity to expand on it further . The 2003 movie School of Rock also reminded Schafer of his idea for Brütal Legend , and made him more excited to publish it . Double Fine 's philosophy on game development was also another reason for Brütal Legend 's creation , as Schafer has stated that his team attempts to make each game radically different from the company 's previous release , contrasting Brütal Legend to Psychonauts . Schafer stated that the commercial tie @-@ ins of Brütal Legend , such as " hot babes and Jack Black " , is due to this philosophy and not due to market pressures . Schafer was not concerned about the commercial success of Brütal Legend , as despite poor sales of Psychonauts , " as long as you make a cool game , publishers want to talk to you " . When Schafer was pitching the game before 2006 , he received feedback about changing the game 's style to hip hop or country . He credits Harmonix Music Systems for influencing the rhythm game market through the release of the widely successful Guitar Hero with a soundtrack that heavily emphasized metal music ; with the popularity of Guitar Hero , the metal approach in Brütal Legend was readily accepted . 
 Schafer has pointed out that there are music term inspired attacks , such as a " Face @-@ Melting " guitar solo , which literally will melt the foe 's faces off . The metal / motorcyclist lifestyles and Norse mythology also inspired the game 's open @-@ world environments , such as amps carved into the face of a mountain , a forest where tires replace leaves , giant axes and swords piercing the ground , spandex covered temples , and mining facilities where human slaves excavated car and motorcycle parts . However , Schafer noted that they attempted to make sure that non @-@ metal fans would be able to get the jokes as well . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 The art style for the game was based on the work of Frank Frazetta and inspired by heavy metal and rock album covers . The team only considered the addition of elements to the artwork if they felt it would be something that could be seen on such covers . The setting includes hot rod @-@ like engines that grow from the earth like a " V8 Truffle Of Speed " , with design inspired by the designs of Ed " Big Daddy " Roth . The art team wanted to avoid creating " another brown @-@ gray game " , and strove to use the wide color palettes that are associated with heavy metal art . Cutscenes in the game use the game 's engine , though some pre @-@ recorded scenes from the engine have also been prepared with the help of Tasha Harris , a former Pixar employee who helped to animate character 's faces during cutscenes . 
 The game features over 80 unique characters in addition to the main protagonist , Eddie Riggs . Initial designs for Riggs was modeled after Lemmy Kilmister , and though the model was changed , the signature vest , tour pass and cigarette of the character remained part of the character design . As the character continued to develop , they began to add more aspects of Black 's character , an " enthusiastic fan " of music , from School of Rock . Ultimately , Riggs ' design came to become half Jack Black and half Glenn Danzig . The art team was able to use videos of Black 's performances to add additional features to the character , such as " all his crazy eyebrow stuff he does " . General Lionwhyte , who has " fabulous hair " , and his minions are based on the glam metal fad of the 1980s which displaced heavy metal to the disappointment of Schafer and other development team members , and became the opponents of the game . To help create a more mature game with concepts that could be used to pitch the game , the art team created several factions that represented different parts of the heavy metal experience . Each faction had their own " exaggerated , simplified shapes and strong silhouettes " as to help distinguish each faction while also reducing the development costs . Inspirations for such factions include Nordic imagery , goth metal , and the artwork of Hieronymus Bosch . Additional characters include headbangers , " gravediggers " , and " battle nuns " . As the game features over two hours of spoken dialog , the art team wants to make the characters ' faces and performances stand out , creating " clean , easy @-@ to @-@ read faces " . The team had to change from their initial cartoony textures into more detailed ones that stood out on high @-@ definition displays while exaggerating other features of the characters . 
 The user interface and menus were created by Joe Kowalski , who had previously worked on similar game elements for Guitar Hero , Guitar Hero II , and the Rock Band series . Much of the game 's interface elements used a medieval woodcut art style , and were designed to contrast well against the world 's graphics . The introductory menu is presented as an interactive movie created from live action clips of Jack Black manipulating a prop gatefold vinyl record album , using Adobe After Effects to provide the on @-@ screen text , controls handling , and stitching of separate scenes into a seamless movie . 
 = = = Characters and voice acting = = = 
 Brütal Legend includes over 35 @,@ 000 lines of spoken dialog , mostly written by Schafer . In addition to Black , Lemmy , Judas Priest 's Rob Halford , The Runaways ' Lita Ford , and Ozzy Osbourne provide character voices for these lines . 
 Schafer 's original vision for the game had not anticipated a celebrity cast . In particular , though Eddie came to resemble Black , the team had not planned on having Jack Black voice the character . After learning that Black was a fan of Schafer 's previous game , Psychonauts , they met with the actor / musician and recognized he was an avid gamer and metal fan and understood all the choices the team made in the game , and subsequently signed on for the voice work . Black also performed live @-@ action sequences as himself used for the in @-@ game menu screens and additional promotional material . Once Black had signed up for the project , Schafer found that other artists and people involved in the heavy metal scene became very interested in participating though a domino effect and word of mouth , allowing Schafer to sign them on as voice talent or as part of the game 's soundtrack . 
 Lemmy was brought on board to play The Kill Master after Schafer and his team had developed the character 's role in the story who assists Eddie by healing his allies through a giant bass harp on the back of a chopper . The original character , a man with a top hat and beard , was considered out of place by Schafer , leading him to consider famous bass guitar players and quickly recognizing the need to have Lemmy play that role . Halford plays two characters , General Lionwhyte and The Baron . Schafer had selected Lionwhyte to capture Halford 's ability to scream , and found his abilities in the studio beyond what they expected . They created The Baron character specifically for Halford , as while Lionwhyte was considered a " heavy metal Stewie [ from Family Guy ] " , that character was the complete opposite of Halford , while The Baron captures both Halford and Judas Priest 's attitude . Lita Ford voices Rima , queen of a group of " Amazon @-@ like jungle women " ; Schafer considered the similarities between the lack of clothing that Rima was designed with and Ford 's outfits from the 1980s , staying true to the development teams ' memories of her . Osbourne plays The Guardian of Metal who helps the player upgrade their equipment ; Schafer commented that both the character and Osbourne , while dark and brooding , are " really upbeat " and " optimistic " . 
 Though Ronnie James Dio of the band Dio had performed parts for the game , his role was replaced with voice work from Tim Curry . While the change was speculated to be due to tense issues between Osbourne and Dio , Schafer noted that as Dio 's intended character , " Doviculus , Emperor of the Tainted Coil " , grew , they found that Curry fit the role better for the part , citing Curry 's role of the Lord of Darkness in the film Legend as a key factor ; Schafer would also later state that Dio 's part was cut due to a combination of " really complicated reasons " and other circumstances outside their control . Curry considered the role " perfect " for him when Schafer described Doviculus to him as " big and tough , but also has this kinky side who , when hit with an ax , might scream in pain or squeal with delight " . 
 Similar to their experience with bringing Black onto the project , obtaining the voicework of the metal artists were also unexpected but beneficial . This led to some confusion during voice recording sessions ; both Lita Ford and Rob Halford had difficulties with lines involving a character named " Lita Halford " . Furthermore , both Black and Osbourne frequently injected profanity into their scripted lines during recording sessions . Instead of rerecording these , the development left these in the game , but included the option for a profanity content filter to be enabled by the player to " bleep " out these words and mask such word on screen using the Parents Music Resource Center " Parental Advisory " label , an icon that Schafer considered to be part of the history of heavy metal . A similar filter exists for gore in the game , preventing any dismemberment and disabling blood in the game . Schafer stated the filters were added to the game in consideration of older players that may not wish to see such aspects , or for parents who opt to play the game with younger children . During development , Schafer stated that while he could not confirm what other musicians and bands would be in the game , there would be more than already stated , and that these musicians were " especially conducive to character creation " due to the amount of theatrics used in their concert shows . 
 Kyle Gass , Black 's collaborator with Tenacious D , voices and lends his facial likeness to a neurotic cannon operator in the game . Comedians David Cross , Steve Agee , Brian Posehn , and Wil Wheaton have also provided voice work for the game ; Posehn had previously worked with Schafer on their high school newspaper . David Sobolov was also confirmed as a voice actor for other roles in the game ; Sobolov noted that he recorded his lines separate from Black 's despite his characters ' having direct interaction with Riggs . Richard Horvitz , who voiced protagonist Raz in Schafer 's previous game , Psychonauts , cameos as the lead guitarist of Kabbage Boy and as a car @-@ lift operator that assigns Eddie certain side missions . Further voice acting work has been provided by veteran video game actors such as Zach Hanks , Kath Soucie , Dino Andrade and Jennifer Hale . 
 = = = Development history = = = 
 According to Schafer , Brütal Legend had been in development since 2007 , prior to the completion of Psychonauts . Schafer noted that in Psychonauts , they attempted to bring together a lot of assets , including characters and environments , but were not able to successfully integrate them on their first attempt and had to start over on the development of some . In several cases for Psychonauts , changes made in gameplay required them to return and redesign levels to account for the new features . The company decided at the start to use the scrum development approach for Brütal Legend , which they found worked well with their company 's culture , allowing them to quickly arrive at playable targets at every milestone . For example , the team was able to bring about their terrain engine , renderer , and a playable Eddie Riggs within a month of development , and by the third month , the ability for Eddie to drive about the terrain , running over hordes of enemies . 
 Schafer stated that they began the development with the character of Eddie , and recognizing what he should be doing in the game — specifically , swinging around his axe , playing his guitar , and driving his hot rod . Once they found this combination of elements to work well in combat and general gameplay , they were able to expand out the rest of the game from there , as these elements provided a means of testing the game to make sure it remained enjoyable . The first major feature developed for the game was the multiplayer element , given that no previous game from Double Fine had included this feature , and was the highest risk element to the game . The multiplayer gameplay itself was inspired by older strategy games , in particular , 1989 's Herzog Zwei ; in this game , the player controlled a transforming aircraft mecha that would normally fly about the field to issue orders for constructing new units , airlifting units to other areas , and directing combat , but the player could opt to transform the craft into a giant robot and engage directly in combat . For Brütal Legend , Schafer kept the same concept of a split @-@ mode RTS , but wanted more focus on the ground combat ; instead of spending 90 % of the time controlling units as in Zwei , the player would only spend about 30 % in this fashion within Brütal Legend . This subsequently led to much of the action and combat @-@ driven gameplay outside of the stage battles . In a 2015 interview , Schafer said that much of the gameplay outside of stage battles were to provide tutorials for the Stage Battles , and to make the game more of an action @-@ adventure than an RTS to avoid the stigma that impacts sales of RTS games . This caused the production to expand considerably around the merger of Vivendi @-@ Activision , and Double Fine had difficulties convincing the new publishers to fund the expanded game . 
 The team used Unreal Engine 2 @.@ 5 to build and test prototypes of the real @-@ time strategy elements , allowing the designers and gameplay programmers to commence work while another team focused on creating a new game engine . Having completed the multiplayer stage battle portion of the game first , Double Fine found it easy to gradually introduce the player to its more advanced aspects during the single @-@ player campaign . The game @-@ world 's large size and varied content necessitated a game engine with streaming capabilities , allowing the game to seamlessly load and unload content as needed — this was also something the team had no prior experience with . Double Fine developed several in @-@ house tools to help streamline the content @-@ creation process for the game 's world : an automated testing bot , <unk> ( so named after one of the test engineers ) , was created to put daily builds of the game through continuous and rigorous testing , automatically reporting any errors to developers , while the Multi @-@ User @-@ Editor allowed the game 's artists to simultaneously work on the game @-@ world without fear of overwriting each other 's work . The team ran into content management issues late in the game 's development as more of the game 's assets neared completion . Within the span of a few months the combined asset size tripled , endangering the game 's ability to fit on a DVD and causing performance problems throughout the company 's development systems . With the help of the engineering team , they were eventually able to overcome the performance issues and re @-@ optimize the content for space . 
 With the popularity of the Guitar Hero and Rock Band franchises , many wondered if Brütal Legend would take advantage of these games ' guitar @-@ themed controllers . Schafer mentioned that while he had entertained the idea , he could not find an acceptable way for players to repeatedly switch between standard and guitar controllers , so he abandoned it . Players who preordered the game through GameStop were able to unlock a special promotional in @-@ game guitar designed in conjunction with Jack Black 's band Tenacious D , and includes voices provided by both Black and Kyle Gass . 
 While Brütal Legend 's fate was unclear , Schafer was not able to talk about the project to avoid causing problems with any potential business deals , until EA Partners picked up the game in December 2008 . However , even when the fate of the publication of the game was unsure , the team continued to work on its development . Schafer reflected that the time spent during development without a publisher was beneficial , allowing them to design the game without pressure from the publisher 's goals . EA CEO John <unk> , when asked about EA picking up Brütal Legend for distribution prior to December 2008 , commented that " Sometimes significant creative risks end up being some of the world ’ s best products " . 
 = = = Other platforms = = = 
 When rumors of a possible Wii port arose in March 2009 , Schafer stated that " We are making an Xbox 360 and a PS3 version of Brütal Legend . " However , according to Ben Fritz at Variety , another studio has been engaged by Electronic Arts to bring the game to the Wii , albeit at a later date than the other console versions , suggesting that it may follow the same model as Dead Space : Extraction , a Wii title scheduled to be released about a year after Dead Space 's first release . However , further industry rumors , which claimed that the Wii version was being done by Electronic Arts in @-@ house , have stated that the effort to port the game to the Wii has been canceled due to quality and technical concerns . 
 Initially after its release , Double Fine had not planned on a PC version of the game , as Schafer has stated that the game is primarily an action game and " meant to be on a console " . However , in February 2013 , Double Fine announced that a Windows version of the game will be released on February 26 , 2013 . The Windows port has been updated for higher resolutions of modern computers , and includes both DLC packs released for consoles . The multiplayer aspects of the PC version include a number of tweaks that Double Fine had tracked that they wanted to have made to the console version but could not do ; while the full list of changes are not expected to be present in the initial PC release , Schafer has stated that if sales of the PC version are successful , they will look at adding new units , factions , and gameplay modes that they had originally scoped out for the console version . Mac and Linux ports were released in May 2013 , premiering as part of the Humble Double Fine Bundle . 
 = = = Cancelled sequel = = = 
 Double Fine believed they were given the go @-@ ahead to develop a sequel to Brütal Legend after the game 's release , and had invested a great deal of development time towards this , but were later told by EA that it was cancelled . Schafer stated that the sequel would likely incorporate much of what they had to drop prior to the game 's release . This game world would have been three times larger than what Brütal Legend contained . The sequel would have likely included a fourth faction that was cut from the original game which would have been the last major group the player would have to fight through , including a major boss character , before the final battles with Doviculus . Schafer further noted that at the end of the original game , Doviculus ' head falls into the Sea of Black Tears , and implied that the same effect that the Sea had on Ophelia could happen to Doviculus . Schafer also had ideas for a plot using a character voiced by Ronnie James Dio , but will not likely be used due to Dio 's death . 
 The cancellation of the sequel nearly ruined Double Fine , as they had invested all current efforts toward the title . Instead of a sequel , Double Fine began work on four smaller projects , Costume Quest , <unk> , Iron Brigade ( formerly titled <unk> ) and Sesame Street : Once Upon a Monster , based on prototypes they had created from " Amnesia <unk> " during the development period where they had lacked a publisher . In these two @-@ weeks sessions , the Double Fine team was split into four groups and each tasked with creating a small prototype game to share with the rest of the company ; all four mini @-@ games were well received internally . Upon hearing of the cancellation of the sequel , Schafer and his team began to promote these games around , and were able to obtain publishing deals for all four titles . The games will be able to take advantage of the custom game world engine and other assets they had created for Brütal Legend . The titles were considered financial successes , allowing Double Fine to recover and pursue further game development though steering away from major AAA releases . 
 As of 2013 , Schafer is still interested in a sequel to Brütal Legend , but would require appropriate funding and resources to make it happen as an independent developer . Since then , Double Fine launched a crowd @-@ funded drive for Psychonauts 2 in December 2015 ; Schafer said that if that game does well , there is a good chance that a sequel to Brütal Legend would be possible . 
 = = = Publishing issues = = = 
 Brütal Legend was originally to be published by Vivendi Games ' subsidiary Sierra Entertainment . In 2008 , Activision merged with Vivendi 's game division ( which included Blizzard Entertainment ) to become Activision Blizzard , gaining the rights to publication of Brütal Legend . Upon evaluation of their assets , Activision Blizzard chose to drop Brütal Legend along with several other games , leaving the project in limbo . Activision CEO Robert Kotick later claimed the reason for dropping the project was due to : the project running late ; missing milestones ; overspending the budget and not looking like a good game . Double Fine themselves were unaware that Activision had chosen to drop the game , having been informed through an Activision press release that omitted the game from their upcoming release schedule , according to studio producer Caroline Esmurdoc . Industry rumors suggested that Electronic Arts was interested in publishing the property , and it was confirmed in December 2008 that Electronic Arts would publish the game . During the period when Brütal Legend 's fate was unclear , Schafer was not able to talk about the project to avoid causing problems with any potential business deals . 
 In February 2009 , Activision Blizzard had asserted that the Electronic Arts deal was invalid , believing that they were still in negotiations with Double Fine to publish the game . It was believed that Activision was seeking monetary compensation in a similar manner as it received from Atari for Ghostbusters : The Video Game and The Chronicles of Riddick : Assault on Dark Athena , games that were dropped when Activision Blizzard re @-@ evaluated their assets . On June 4 , 2009 , Activision filed suit to prevent publishing of the game , claiming that they had invested $ 15 million in the title and still had a valid contract to release the game . Activision 's suit also contends that Double Fine had missed a deadline for the game last year , requesting more time and an additional $ 7 million in development fees . Activision 's considers both the loss of the money they spent on the game as well as potential sales and Brütal Legend @-@ related merchandise as part of the harm done in the lawsuit . 
 In July 2009 , Double Fine issued a countersuit against Activision , citing that the latter company had abandoned the project before , and was trying to harm Brütal Legend during its critical marketing phase , as well as trying to protect its Guitar Hero franchise . The countersuit stated that Activision had dropped the game after its merger with Vivendi and a failed attempt to convert the game into a Guitar Hero sequel . Schafer was infamously quoted as saying , in commenting on their actions , " Hey , if Activision liked it , then they should have put a ring on it . Oh great , now Beyonce is going to sue me too . " 
 In late July , the presiding judge , Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Craig <unk> , reported that a preliminary ruling that could have affected the game 's release would have been given on August 6 , 2009 , with <unk> tentatively ready to deny Activision 's motion to delay the game . However , prior to the ruling , the companies announced they had reached an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement on the lawsuits , though details were not available . 
 Though most of the developers involved in the game were shielded from the effects of the lawsuit , Double Fine 's Caroline Esmurdoc noted that it took a significant toll on Schafer and the other lead executives at the company . Activision 's lawsuit had been filed at the time the game had reached the alpha release state , and would need to be concluded prior to the game 's final release ; this required the executives to dedicate their time towards information gathering , interviewing , and other legal matters " during the <unk> , most critical time of development " . As such , while they ultimately were able to settle the legal matter , Esmurdoc believed that the impact of the effort in settling the lawsuit impacted the quality of the final product . Schafer wrote more than 50 % of the game 's dialog in the few months following the completion of the lawsuit and prior to release , a " big crunch " for him . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Schafer , prior to the game 's release , stated that Double Fine had " something awesome " planned for downloadable content to further support the game after release . Two downloadable packs have since been released . The first , " Tears of the <unk> " , was released in early November 2009 , containing two new multiplayer maps and a new single @-@ player weapon . The pack was initially free on the PlayStation Network for the first two weeks of release . The second pack , " The Hammer of Infinite Fate " , was released in mid @-@ December 2009 , and in addition to new multiplayer maps , expands the single @-@ player experience by incorporating new weaponry for the Deuce , outfits for Eddie , a GPS system to track collectibles in the game 's world , and other additional content , including figureheads of <unk> , the lead character from Psychonauts , and Schafer himself . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Brütal Legend was officially announced in October 2007 through a feature article in Game Informer ; gaming journalists had received a vinyl record from Activision that contained a backwards message alluding to the game 's story . The game 's release in October 2009 was promoted as " <unk> " in official literature about the game from Electronic Arts . At the 2009 Download Festival in Donington Park in England , Electronic Arts arranged for 440 fans of Brütal Legend to help to break the Guinness World Record for the largest number of air guitar players , all simultaneously playing to " Ace of Spades " by Motörhead . A series of short online videos featuring Black ( and Schafer in two instances ) , entitled " Brutal Thoughts with Jack Black " , have been used to promote the game since May 2009 . At the 2009 Video Music Awards , Black appeared in cosplay as Eddie to promote the game . 
 A promotional concert for the game was held at the 2009 Comic @-@ Con International Convention in July 2009 , and featured the metal artists Gwar , 3 Inches of Blood , Unholy Pink , and Keith Morris . It has also been announced that Brutal Legend was the official sponsor of the 2009 Mastodon / Dethklok tour . Schafer appeared on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon on October 2 , 2009 to promote the game . Black appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on October 14 , 2009 , dressed as Eddie Riggs and staying in character during his interview . 
 A demo version of the game was made available on the Xbox 360 Marketplace and PlayStation Network Store ; it was available for a limited time on September 17 , 2009 for North American users who had pre @-@ ordered the product through GameStop . The demo became available to all Xbox Live Gold users on September 24 , 2009 , and to Xbox Live Silver users and all PlayStation 3 users the following week . The demo is based on the game 's beginning , showing Eddie 's arrival and his encounters up until the first boss character fight . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Brütal Legend features 107 heavy metal tracks from 75 different bands , selected by Schafer and Music Director Emily Ridgway as listed below , each song being a " completely sincere choice " by Schafer and Ridgway , with the whole track list being " designed to be loved by Metal fans . " Schafer sought to include songs from most main subgenres of metal , including classic heavy metal , industrial metal , black metal , and doom metal , with each faction in the game favoring a specific type . Though Schafer and others on the Double Fine team had vast knowledge of specific types of metal , Ridgway turned to a used @-@ CD store owner named Allan from Aquarius Records who had " encyclopedic knowledge " of the entire genre , and who provided the team with sample CDs to help them discover some of the more obscure metal bands . Schafer had identified many of the more well @-@ known songs on the list , while Ridgway was able to locate mission @-@ appropriate , more obscure titles for inclusion ; for example , one mission , given by the <unk> ( voiced by Lemmy Kilmister ) , involves rescuing female troops for Ironheade 's army ; Ridgway had been able to locate a cover of " Bomber " , originally recorded by Motörhead ( Kilmister 's band ) and performed by the all @-@ female metal band Girlschool , recorded in their 1981 split EP St. Valentine 's Day Massacre . Schafer also credits Black with some of the music selections for the game . Instead of relying on labels or bands to provide them with a list of possible songs to select from , the development team sought permission to use specific songs they wanted in the game . In some cases , obtaining appropriate licensing proved difficult , as for songs from bands that had long split up , Double Fine needed to contact each band member to gain permission . This proved to be valuable , as some original bands were excited about their music being used in the game ; in one case , Lita Ford was able to provide the game with a song with slight modifications to the lyrics from a version that she was about to release . One song is from the in @-@ game band " Kabbage Boy " for which Eddie is a roadie at the start of the game . 
 Schafer had tried to get music from groups like Metallica and AC / DC , but their licensing fees were too high . He further tried to work with Iron Maiden , but the group was hesitant to participate after recognizing that the character name " Eddie Riggs " suggested an attachment with the band 's mascot , named " Eddie " and designed by Derek Riggs ; the band 's marketing group pointed out that this could imply that Iron Maiden had endorsed the game . 
 In addition to licensed music , the game includes over 70 minutes of original score by Tim Schafer 's long term collaborator Peter McConnell . McConnell composed pieces for orchestra and Metal band to tie in with the licensed music in the game . Also , the in @-@ game soundtrack contains an instrumental drum track played by Slough Feg drummer Harry Cantwell , all other " real " drums ( 6 tracks ) were played by Y & T drummer Mike <unk> and recorded by Jory Prum . The solos triggered by the player during the game were composed and recorded by Judas Priest guitarists Glenn Tipton ( Eddie 's solos ) and K.K. Downing ( Ophelia 's and Doviculus ' solos ) . While Schafer would like to have a soundtrack album for the game , he stated that there were already difficulties in securing the licenses for songs within the game and was not sure if it would be possible to extend them to a soundtrack . Schafer helped to select three songs — " We Are The Road Crew " by Motörhead , " The Metal " by Tenacious D , and " More Than Meets The Eye " by Testament — to appear in a pack of Rock Band downloadable songs that was made available the same day as Brütal Legend 's release . 
 ^ a The track is merged with the song " More Than Meets the Eye " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Brütal Legend received positive response from gaming journalists , with reviewers praising the story and characters of the game , and driven vocal performances of the voice actors , particularly Black and Osbourne . Daemon Hatfield of IGN felt Black was " completely committed " to the role of Riggs , while Giant Bomb 's Ryan Davis found it relieving that Black reined in his typical " loud @-@ talking heavy @-@ metal goofball " act that he is known for and instead performed well , " bringing just the right amount of working @-@ man 's matter @-@ of @-@ fact @-@ ness to the role " . Osbourne 's role was considered " amazing ( and surprisingly coherent ) " by Gamespot 's Giancarlo Varanini and " played brilliantly " by Computer and Video Games ' Andrew Kelly . The full cast was commended for their roles ; the heavy metal musicians were effective at playing themselves in the game , while the other voice talent performed well and " [ did ] their part to balance out the star power " in the game . The strength of the characters was considered to be enhanced by the quality of writing of the story , and the use of facial animation . Eurogamer 's Christian Donlan considered the characters of Brütal Legend to be the strongest aspect to the game , distancing the title from other video games due to " rounded , personable leads who are distinctly superior to the usual throngs of <unk> and super @-@ vixens " , and a facet of Schafer 's signature work . Wired 's Chris Kohler further attested the strength of the game 's story to Schafer 's skill , considering that " After Brütal Legend , he should be considered one of the best storytellers in gaming , period . " 1UP.com 's Justin Haywald noted that the game lacks the ability to review cutscenes , forcing the player to restart the story if they wanted to see these again . 
 The heavy metal @-@ inspired world of Brütal Legend was also well received , and considered to show a clear reverence for the genre . Gerald Villoria of Gamespy considered the game to be " dedicated to an unabashed love of metal " and " heavy metal fan @-@ service to the highest degree " . Davis believed that the juxtaposition of all the elements that made up the heavy metal fantasy world were the game 's greatest strength , often being " both giddily ridiculous and fist @-@ <unk> badass " at the same time . Critics found that while the graphics for the game may not be the most sophisticated for the current console generation , the detailed art aspects of the world were impressive ; Varanini considered that " no matter where you are in the world , there 's always some cool object to look at " , while Donlan considered the world to be a " constant unfolding delight " . The incorporation of heavy metal music into the game also benefited the game . Both Kelly and Villoria considered the soundtrack essential to the game , and praised the moments where specific songs , such as Dragonforce 's " Through the Fire and Flames " would be used as background music during specific game sequences . Kelly further praised the game for using the songs to define the action of the game instead of relegated to random background music . Villoria also considered the soundtrack to have " enormous breadth of sound and diversity " , introducing the player to heavy metal genres they may not have known even existed . G4TV 's Jake Gaskill considered listening to the soundtrack to be the equivalent of " taking a class in heavy metal appreciation . " 
 The actual gameplay was seen as Brütal Legend 's largest weakness . Many reviewers were critical of the incorporation of real @-@ time strategy ( RTS ) elements into the game , a fact that was not well advertised prior to the game 's release and does not become apparent to the player in the first hours of the game . Though Schafer had set out to make the console @-@ based game like an RTS from the start , they were warned by both Vivendi and Electronic Arts that " RTS " was " a naughty word in the console space " , and instead marketed it as an action game . Despite this , reviewers found that the game was still difficult to play on a console due to the selected controls that made it difficult to target objectives or troops , the lack of a mini @-@ map to track friends and foes , and the frantic pace of battle . 
 Critics did appreciate the slow introduction to the various aspects of the game as part of the single player game , but felt the game did not adequately introduce or explain all of the game 's RTS features , such as the ability to mount a final stand on one 's stage . Some also considered the single @-@ player campaign Stage Battles to be too easy , winnable by brute force , and that more advanced tactics would only become apparent as one played in multiplayer games , including learning the abilities and advantages of the other units of the factions other than Ironheade . The mix of gaming genres between the RTS and third @-@ person action was found particularly confusing ; Kohler commented that the handling of the individual genres was accomplished well , leading to " an astoundingly complex design instead of a simple one " that diminished the enjoyment of the game , while Davis considered that " perhaps there wasn 't enough confidence in any one piece to let it carry the whole game " . However , some felt that the various genres helped to create " a variety of gameplay opportunities " , and made for " rather elegant " Stage Battles . In retrospect , Schafer lamented that they did not include enough tutorials in the game to guide the player as to " naturally how to play the strategy part a bit better " , as they had come to accept over the years of development , and tried to use the Double Fine blog to explain some of these aspects . Though some critics argued that stripping out the RTS elements and leaving an action combat game wrapped in the metal @-@ themed world would have been a better game , Schafer countered that this would have not been true to the vision that he had from the start . Schafer would later jokingly refer to the RTS elements of Brütal Legend ; during the fundraising for Broken Age , Schafer teasingly threatened to add RTS elements to the point @-@ and @-@ click if the funding had reached certain levels . 
 Gameplay outside of the Stage Battles was also met with mixed impressions . Most considered the side missions highly repetitive , which included mission types that are generally disliked by gamers , such as escort missions . The lack of a mini @-@ map , replaced by either following a glowing light from the sky illuminating the player 's target or by navigating based on the Deuce 's turn signals , was criticized for making it difficult to explore the game 's world . The information about the world that players can access in the game 's pause menu was also found to be lacking , neither showing the collectible elements of the game on the main map , nor easily identifying the alliance of the various troops in the in @-@ game guidebook . Though Eddie gains the ability to fly during Stage Battles , the inability to use this or to make the character jump led to reviewers getting the character stuck on the landscape at times when exploring . Some reviewers found the number of progress checkpoints in the game to be lacking , requiring the player to repeat a long mission if they should die before reaching one . The single @-@ player game was also considered to be short , lasting as little as four hours if one only completed the main story missions . 
 According to the NPD Group , Brütal Legend sold approximately 215 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in October 2009 , with about 150 @,@ 000 copies being for the Xbox 360 platform , making it the 12th @-@ top @-@ selling game in that month . These numbers were not considered to be strong , and were attributed to the difficult marketing of the game , which emphasized Jack Black 's involvement and the heavy metal nature of the game , but did not assert what the gameplay would actually be like , with the possibility that the mention of the RTS elements of the game would have possibly driven more players away from the game . In an interview in February 2011 , Schafer claimed that the game had sold over 1 @.@ 4 million copies . According to data collected through Nielsen SoundScan , some songs contained within Brütal Legend 's soundtrack saw digital sales increases of up to 700 % following the game 's release , similar to the effects of Guitar Hero and Rock Band , though impact on overall sales of these songs was rather small . 
 Black was given the Best Voice award at the Spike Video Game Awards 2009 . Brütal Legend won the " Best Strategy / Simulation Game " and " Outstanding Achievement in Soundtrack " awards in the 13th @-@ annual Interactive Achievement Awards from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences , and was nominated for " Outstanding Character Performance " ( for Eddie Riggs ) , " Outstanding Achievement in Original Story " , and " Outstanding Achievement in Game Direction " . The game was also nominated for the Game Developers Choice Awards for " Best Writing " and " Best Audio " . 
 = Joe Cada = 
 Joseph " Joe " Cada ( born November 18 , 1987 ) is an American professional poker player from Shelby Charter Township , Michigan , best known as the winner of the Main Event at the 2009 World Series of Poker ( WSOP ) . 
 By winning the 6 @,@ 494 @-@ entrant Main Event at the age of 21 , Cada surpassed Peter Eastgate as the youngest champion ever . Cada had two previous WSOP in the money finishes , both in 2009 . Cada had been a regular online poker player for several years prior to winning the live WSOP event . He is primarily an online poker player , with more than $ 500 @,@ 000 in online tournament winnings at present . As of August 2014 , his total live tournament winnings exceed $ 10 @,@ 290 @,@ 000 . Cada became a representative of Team PokerStars in 2009 in the weeks prior to becoming World Champion . On June 18 , 2012 , he lost heads up in the 2 @,@ 811 @-@ entrant $ 1 @,@ 500 No Limit Texas hold ' em event at the 2012 World Series of Poker . 
 He is from a family of card enthusiasts although his parents disapproved of his chosen profession . His agent dubbed him " The Kid " and he has also taken on the role as a statesman of the profession in the media and political circles , where he is a proponent of legalization of gambling . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Cada started playing online poker at about the age of 16 . He twice staked accounts , but lost all the money in the accounts that he shared with his brother Jerome . His first online account was with <unk> . Although he was not legally able to play in casinos prior to age 21 in the United States , he could in Canada at age 19 and play online . After a brief sabbatical from the game subsequent to losing his money , he began to play at a casino in Windsor , Ontario across the Canadian border from his Detroit @-@ area home . He earned enough to enter contests in the Bahamas and Costa Rica . 
 At the time of his WSOP success , he was playing approximately 2 @,@ 000 hands per day online at PokerStars under the User ID jcada99 . Cada had been a professional poker player for six years at the time of his world championship . Between the end of 2008 and the 2009 November Nine , Cada had earned $ 551 @,@ 788 online . Prior to the tournament , he had a $ 150 @,@ 000 downswing that necessitated him finding a financial backer for the WSOP . Professional poker financiers Eric Haber and Cliff <unk> paid his entry fee in exchange for half of his winnings . 
 Cada enjoys playing the " Sunday Major " tournaments at various online sites and says he honed his skill pursuing the knowledge and experience of better players at online training sites . He typically hosts many poker playing friends on Sundays to keep each other company while going through the grueling Sundays of playing the various majors . Usually , on Sundays , Cada hosts about fifteen friends to play online at his house . According to his <unk> magazine profile , Cada used several similar aliases to play with various online poker hosts : jcada99 and Joe Cada on the Full Tilt Poker website , jcada99 on PokerStars and <unk> on Absolute Poker . 
 = = World Series of Poker = = 
 = = = 2009 World Series of Poker = = = 
 At the 2009 World Series of Poker he had three in the money finishes ( all in No limit Texas hold ' em ) : 64th in the 1 @,@ 088 @-@ entrant June 5 – 7 Event 13 , $ 2 @,@ 500 No Limit Hold 'em , which earned him $ 6 @,@ 681 ; 17th in the 2 @,@ 095 @-@ entrant June 16 – 18 Event 35 , $ 1 @,@ 500 No Limit Hold 'em , which earned him $ 21 @,@ 533 ; and 1st in the 6 @,@ 494 @-@ entrant July 3 – 15 , November 7 and November 9 Event 57 $ 10 @,@ 000 World Championship No Limit Hold 'em , which earned him $ 8 @,@ 546 @,@ 435 . 
 Prior to his final table victory , Cada earned a $ 1 million contract with PokerStars that pays for all his hotels , travels , and some of his buy @-@ ins . His signing with Pokerstars resulted from an interview on ESPN with Phil Gordon where he expressed an interest in signing with that specific company . His agent had already procured him offers from UltimateBet and <unk> as a result of his November Nine qualification . Cada was represented by agent Dan Frank . 
 In the main event , Cada was the tournament chip leader after day 1C , which was the third of the four opening day sessions , but he began the final table with the fifth largest <unk> . In the 122nd final table hand Cada 's stack was reduced to 2 @,@ 275 @,@ 000 — enough for only four big blinds and about 1 @.@ 2 % of the combined total stack at play — due to calling Jeff Shulman 's " all in " pre @-@ flop with A ♦ J ♣ against A ♣ K ♥ . No community cards hit either player , and Shulman was rewarded by his better high card . Cada later went all in twice pre @-@ flop with small pocket pairs and was dominated by higher pocket pairs on both occasions , once with 3 ♥ 3 ♣ vs. J ♦ J ♣ and the other with 2 ♠ 2 ♣ vs Q ♠ Q ♥ . Both times Cada flopped the winning three of a kind . By the time the field was reduced to two players he had 135 million chips to 58 million for Darvin Moon . During the final heads @-@ up duel , Cada surrendered the chip lead , but he eventually climbed back to 120 @.@ 1 million before the last hand of the heads @-@ up with Moon . He regained the chip lead on the 80th hand . His winning hand was 9 ♣ 9 ♦ , which he got all @-@ in pre @-@ flop against Moon 's Q ♦ J ♦ . The board ran 8 ♣ 2 ♣ 7 ♠ K ♥ 7 ♣ . This hand was the 88th hand of heads @-@ up play between Cada and Moon . 
 These three events account for his total cumulative career live event earnings of over $ 8 @.@ 5 million . With the November 2009 victory , which occurred just over a week before his 22nd birthday , Cada supplanted Peter Eastgate , who won at age 22 , as the youngest World Series of Poker Main Event champion . He was 340 days younger than Eastgate had been at the time of becoming world champion . In the week following the WSOP win , Cada made numerous publicity appearances as a poker ambassador . His media events included appearances on CNN , CBS News , CNBC , Late Show with David Letterman , numerous ESPN outlets including First Take , The Scott Van Pelt Show , ESPNU , ESPNews , ESPN Inside Deal and ESPN.com as well as a taping for SportsCenter that was never aired plus a visit to WWE Raw . During the publicity run , Dennis Phillips served as Cada 's advisor . 
 He has a total of seven cashes in the World Series of Poker , with three in the 2009 event , two in the 2011 event and two in the 2012 event . Aside from his main event win , his most notable WSOP finish was second in the <unk> @-@ entrant June 16 – 18 , 2012 $ 1 @,@ 500 No @-@ Limit Hold 'em Event # 31 , which earned him $ 412 @,@ 424 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Anne Cada , Joe 's mother , is a blackjack card dealer at the MotorCity Casino . Cada has an older brother , Jerome . Cada 's father , Jerry , was affected by the late @-@ 2000s recession when his automobile industry job was eliminated in a layoff . During the 2009 World Series of Poker 's November Nine , dozens of Cada 's fans wore T @-@ shirts with Michigan Wolverines team colors ( maize and blue ) with the words , " PokerStars Michigan Joe Cada ' The Kid ' " emblazoned across the front and Michigan baseball caps with " The Kid " on the back . His agent came up with the nickname " The Kid " . In an interview in Time , Cada estimates he had about 100 friends in his cheering section . 
 In the Time interview , Cada expressed his thoughts on legislation related to the legality of gambling : " I support the right to play poker online . Poker isn 't gambling . It 's a hobby , an activity , a game . It 's not about luck — it 's about logic , decision @-@ making , math . We all should be able to play poker on the Web if we want to , and I believe that making it illegal strips us of our rights . This is an important issue , and hopefully we 'll see it resolved soon . " Outside of poker , Cada also plays indoor soccer . As of 2009 , he was considering purchasing a second home in Las Vegas , Nevada and possibly opening a bar . 
 = Trinity ( nuclear test ) = 
 Trinity was the code name of the first detonation of a nuclear weapon , conducted by the United States Army on July 16 , 1945 , as part of the Manhattan Project . The test was conducted in the Jornada del Muerto desert about 35 miles ( 56 km ) southeast of Socorro , New Mexico , on what was then the USAAF Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range ( now part of White Sands Missile Range ) . The only structures originally in the vicinity were the McDonald Ranch House and its ancillary buildings , which scientists used as a laboratory for testing bomb components . A base camp was constructed , and there were 425 people present on the weekend of the test . 
 The code name " Trinity " was assigned by J. Robert Oppenheimer , the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory , inspired by the poetry of John Donne . The test was of an implosion @-@ design plutonium device , informally nicknamed " The Gadget " , of the same design as the Fat Man bomb later detonated over Nagasaki , Japan , on August 9 , 1945 . The complexity of the design required a major effort from the Los Alamos Laboratory , and concerns about whether it would work led to a decision to conduct the first nuclear test . The test was planned and directed by Kenneth Bainbridge . 
 Fears of a fizzle led to the construction of a steel containment vessel called Jumbo that could contain the plutonium , allowing it to be recovered , but Jumbo was not used . A rehearsal was held on May 7 , 1945 , in which 108 long tons ( 110 t ) of high explosive spiked with radioactive isotopes were detonated . The Gadget 's detonation released the explosive energy of about 22 kilotons of TNT ( 92 TJ ) . Observers included Vannevar Bush , James Chadwick , James Conant , Thomas Farrell , Enrico Fermi , Richard Feynman , Leslie Groves , Robert Oppenheimer , Geoffrey Taylor , and Richard Tolman . 
 The test site was declared a National Historic Landmark district in 1965 , and listed on the National Register of Historic Places the following year . 
 = = Background = = 
 The creation of nuclear weapons arose from scientific and political developments of the 1930s . The decade saw many new discoveries about the nature of atoms , including the existence of nuclear fission . The concurrent rise of fascist governments in Europe led to a fear of a German nuclear weapon project , especially among scientists who were refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries . When their calculations showed that nuclear weapons were theoretically feasible , the British and United States governments supported an all @-@ out effort to build them . 
 These efforts were transferred to the authority of the U.S. Army in June 1942 , and became the Manhattan Project . Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , was appointed its director in September 1942 . The weapons development portion of this project was located at the Los Alamos Laboratory in northern New Mexico , under the directorship of physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer . The University of Chicago , Columbia University and the Radiation Laboratory at the University of California , Berkeley conducted other development work . 
 Production of the fissile isotopes uranium @-@ 235 and plutonium @-@ 239 were enormous undertakings given the technology of the 1940s , and accounted for 80 % of the total costs of the project . Uranium enrichment was carried out at the Clinton Engineer Works near Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Theoretically , enriching uranium was feasible through pre @-@ existing techniques , but it proved difficult to scale to industrial levels and was extremely costly . Only 0 @.@ 71 percent of natural uranium was uranium @-@ 235 , and it was estimated that it would take 27 @,@ 000 years to produce a gram of uranium with mass spectrometers , but kilogram amounts were required . 
 Plutonium is a synthetic element with complicated physical , chemical and metallurgical properties . It is not found in nature in appreciable quantities . Until mid @-@ 1944 , the only plutonium that had been isolated had been produced in cyclotrons in microgram amounts , whereas weapons required kilograms . In April 1944 , physicist Emilio Segrè , the head of the Los Alamos Laboratory 's P @-@ 5 ( Radioactivity ) Group , received the first sample of reactor @-@ bred plutonium from the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge . He discovered that , in addition to the plutonium @-@ 239 isotope , it also contained significant amounts of plutonium @-@ 240 . The Manhattan Project produced plutonium in nuclear reactors at the Hanford Engineer Works near Hanford , Washington . 
 The longer the plutonium remained irradiated inside a reactor — necessary for high yields of the metal — the greater the content of the plutonium @-@ 240 isotope , which undergoes spontaneous fission at thousands of times the rate of plutonium @-@ 239 . The extra neutrons it released meant that there was an unacceptably high probability that plutonium in a gun @-@ type fission weapon would detonate too soon after a critical mass was formed , producing a " fizzle " — a nuclear explosion many times smaller than a full explosion . This meant that the Thin Man bomb design that the laboratory had developed would not work properly . 
 The Laboratory turned to an alternative , albeit more technically difficult , design , an implosion @-@ type nuclear weapon . In September 1943 , mathematician John von Neumann had proposed a design in which a fissile core would be surrounded by two different high explosives that produced shock waves of different speeds . Alternating the <unk> and slower @-@ burning explosives in a carefully calculated configuration would produce a compressive wave upon their simultaneous detonation . This so @-@ called " explosive lens " focused the shock waves inward with enough force to rapidly compress the plutonium core to several times its original density . This reduced the size of a critical mass , making it supercritical . It also activated a small neutron source at the center of the core , which assured that the chain reaction began in earnest at the right moment . Such a complicated process required research and experimentation in engineering and hydrodynamics before a practical design could be developed . The entire Los Alamos Laboratory was reorganized in August 1944 to focus on design of a workable implosion bomb . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 The idea of testing the implosion device was brought up in discussions at Los Alamos in January 1944 , and attracted enough support for Oppenheimer to approach Groves . Groves gave approval , but he had concerns . The Manhattan Project had spent a great deal of money and effort to produce the plutonium and he wanted to know if there would be a way to recover it . The Laboratory 's Governing Board then directed Norman Ramsey to investigate how this could be done . Ramsey reported back in February 1944 , proposing a small @-@ scale test in which the explosion was limited in size by reducing the number of generations of chain reactions , and that it take place inside a sealed containment vessel from which the plutonium could be recovered . 
 The means of generating such a controlled reaction were uncertain , and the data obtained would not be as useful as that from a full @-@ scale explosion . Oppenheimer argued that the " implosion gadget must be tested in a range where the energy release is comparable with that contemplated for final use . " In March 1944 , he obtained Groves 's tentative approval for testing a full @-@ scale explosion inside a containment vessel , although Groves was still worried about how he would explain the loss of a billion dollars worth of plutonium to a Senate Committee in the event of a failure . 
 = = = Code name = = = 
 The exact origin of the code name " Trinity " for the test is unknown , but it is often attributed to Oppenheimer as a reference to the poetry of John Donne , which in turn references the Christian notion of the Trinity ( three @-@ fold nature of God ) . In 1962 , Groves wrote to Oppenheimer about the origin of the name , asking if he had chosen it because it was a name common to rivers and peaks in the West and would not attract attention , and elicited this reply : 
 I did suggest it , but not on that ground ... Why I chose the name is not clear , but I know what thoughts were in my mind . There is a poem of John Donne , written just before his death , which I know and love . From it a quotation : 
 As West and East 
 In all <unk> Maps — and I am one — are one , 
 So death doth touch the Resurrection . 
 That still does not make a Trinity , but in another , better known devotional poem Donne opens , 
 Batter my heart , three person 'd God . 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 In March 1944 , planning for the test was assigned to Kenneth Bainbridge , a professor of physics at Harvard University , working under explosives expert George Kistiakowsky . Bainbridge 's group was known as the E @-@ 9 ( Explosives Development ) Group . Stanley Kershaw , formerly from the National Safety Council , was made responsible for safety . Captain Samuel P. Davalos , the assistant post engineer at Los Alamos , was placed in charge of construction . First Lieutenant Harold C. Bush became commander of the Base Camp at Trinity . Scientists William Penney , Victor Weisskopf and Philip Moon were consultants . Eventually seven subgroups were formed : 
 TR @-@ 1 ( Services ) under John H. Williams 
 TR @-@ 2 ( Shock and Blast ) under John H. Manley 
 TR @-@ 3 ( Measurements ) under Robert R. Wilson 
 TR @-@ 4 ( Meteorology ) under J. M. Hubbard 
 TR @-@ 5 ( Spectrographic and Photographic ) under Julian E. Mack 
 TR @-@ 6 ( Airborne Measurements ) under Bernard Waldman 
 TR @-@ 7 ( Medical ) under Louis H. Hempelmann 
 The E @-@ 9 group was renamed the X @-@ 2 ( Development , Engineering and Tests ) Group in the August 1944 reorganization . 
 = = = Test site = = = 
 Safety and security required a remote , isolated and unpopulated area . The scientists also wanted a flat area to minimize secondary effects of the blast , and with little wind to spread radioactive fallout . Eight candidate sites were considered : the Tularosa Valley ; the Jornada del Muerto Valley ; the area southwest of Cuba , New Mexico , and north of Thoreau ; and the lava flats of the El <unk> National Monument , all in New Mexico ; the San Luis Valley near the Great Sand Dunes National Monument in Colorado ; the Desert Training Area and San Nicolas Island in Southern California ; and the sand bars of Padre Island , Texas . 
 The sites were surveyed by car and by air by Bainbridge , R. W. Henderson , Major W. A. Stevens and Major Peer de Silva . The site finally chosen , after consulting with Major General Uzal Ent , the commander of the Second Air Force on September 7 , 1944 , lay at the northern end of the Alamogordo Bombing Range , in Socorro County between the towns of Carrizozo and San Antonio , in the Jornada del Muerto ( 33 @.@ 6773 ° N 106 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 33 @.@ 6773 ; <unk> ) . 
 The only structures in the vicinity were the McDonald Ranch House and its ancillary buildings , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the southeast . Like the rest of the Alamogordo Bombing Range , it had been acquired by the government in 1942 . The patented land had been condemned and grazing rights suspended . Scientists used this as a laboratory for testing bomb components . Bainbridge and Davalos drew up plans for a base camp with accommodation and facilities for 160 personnel , along with the technical infrastructure to support the test . A construction firm from Lubbock , Texas built the barracks , officers ' quarters , mess hall and other basic facilities . The requirements expanded and , by July 1945 , 250 people worked at the Trinity test site . On the weekend of the test , there were 425 present . 
 Lieutenant Bush 's twelve @-@ man military police unit arrived at the site from Los Alamos on December 30 , 1944 . This unit established initial security checkpoints and horse patrols . The distances around the site proved too great for the horses , so they resorted to using jeeps and trucks for transportation . The horses were used for playing polo . Maintenance of morale among men working long hours under harsh conditions along with dangerous reptiles and insects was a challenge . Bush strove to improve the food and accommodation , and to provide organized games and nightly movies . 
 Throughout 1945 , other personnel arrived at the Trinity Site to help prepare for the bomb test . They tried to use water out of the ranch wells , but found the water so alkaline they could not drink it . They were forced to use U.S. Navy saltwater soap and hauled drinking water in from the firehouse in Socorro . Gasoline and diesel were purchased from the Standard Oil plant there . Military and civilian construction personnel built warehouses , workshops , a magazine and commissary . The railroad siding at Pope , New Mexico , was upgraded by adding an unloading platform . Roads were built , and 200 miles ( 320 km ) of telephone wire was strung . Electricity was supplied by portable generators . 
 Due to its proximity to the bombing range , the base camp was accidentally bombed twice in May . When the lead plane on a practice night raid accidentally knocked out the generator or otherwise doused the lights illuminating their target , they went in search of the lights , and since they had not been informed of the presence of the Trinity base camp , and it was lit , bombed it instead . The accidental bombing damaged the stables and the carpentry shop , and a small fire resulted . 
 = = = Jumbo = = = 
 Responsibility for the design of a containment vessel for an unsuccessful explosion , known as " Jumbo " , was assigned to Robert W. Henderson and Roy W. Carlson of the Los Alamos Laboratory 's X @-@ 2A Section . The bomb would be placed into the heart of Jumbo , and if the bomb 's detonation was unsuccessful , the outer walls of Jumbo would not be breached , making it possible to recover the bomb 's plutonium . Hans Bethe , Victor Weisskopf , and Joseph O. Hirschfelder , made the initial calculations , followed by a more detailed analysis by Henderson and Carlson . They drew up specifications for a steel sphere 13 to 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 6 m ) in diameter , weighing 150 long tons ( 150 t ) and capable of handling a pressure of 50 @,@ 000 pounds per square inch ( 340 @,@ 000 kPa ) . After consulting with the steel companies and the railroads , Carlson produced a scaled @-@ back cylindrical design that would be much easier to manufacture , but still difficult to transport . Carlson identified a company that normally made boilers for the Navy , Babcock & Wilcox , had made something similar and were willing to attempt its manufacture . 
 As delivered in May 1945 , Jumbo was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in diameter and 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) long with walls 14 inches ( 360 mm ) thick , and weighed 214 long tons ( 217 t ) . A special train brought it from Barberton , Ohio , to the siding at Pope , where it was loaded on a large trailer and towed 25 miles ( 40 km ) across the desert by tractors . At the time , it was the heaviest item ever shipped by rail . 
 For many of the Los Alamos scientists , Jumbo was " the physical manifestation of the lowest point in the Laboratory 's hopes for the success of an implosion bomb . " By the time it arrived , the reactors at Hanford produced plutonium in quantity , and Oppenheimer was confident that there would be enough for a second test . The use of Jumbo would interfere with the gathering of data on the explosion , the primary objective of the test . An explosion of more than 500 tons of TNT ( 2 @,@ 100 GJ ) would vaporize the steel and make it hard to measure the thermal effects . Even 100 tons of TNT ( 420 GJ ) would send fragments flying , presenting a hazard to personnel and measuring equipment . It was therefore decided not to use it . Instead , it was hoisted up a steel tower 800 yards ( 730 m ) from the explosion , where it could be used for a subsequent test . In the end , Jumbo survived the explosion , although its tower did not . 
 The development team also considered other methods of recovering active material in the event of a dud explosion . One idea was to cover it with a cone of sand . Another was to suspend the bomb in a tank of water . As with Jumbo , it was decided not to proceed with these means of containment either . The CM @-@ 10 ( Chemistry and Metallurgy ) group at Los Alamos also studied how the active material could be chemically recovered after a contained or failed explosion . 
 = = = 100 @-@ ton test = = = 
 Because there would be only one chance to carry out the test correctly , Bainbridge decided that a rehearsal be carried out to allow the plans and procedures to be verified , and the instrumentation to be tested and calibrated . Oppenheimer was initially skeptical , but gave permission , and later agreed that it contributed to the success of the Trinity test . 
 A 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high wooden platform was constructed 800 yards ( 730 m ) to the south @-@ east of Trinity ground zero ( 33 @.@ 67123 ° N 106 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 33 @.@ 67123 ; <unk> ) and 108 long tons ( 110 t ) of TNT were stacked on top of it . Kistiakowsky assured Bainbridge that the explosives used were not susceptible to shock . This was proven correct when some boxes fell off the elevator lifting them up to the platform . Flexible tubing was threaded through the pile of boxes of explosives . A radioactive slug from Hanford with 1 @,@ 000 curies ( 37 TBq ) of beta ray activity and 400 curies ( 15 TBq ) of gamma ray activity was dissolved , and Hempelmann poured it into the tubing . 
 The test was scheduled for May 5 , but was postponed for two days to allow for more equipment to be installed . Requests for further postponements had to be refused because they would have impacted the schedule for the main test . The detonation time was set for 04 : 00 Mountain Daylight Time , also known as Mountain War time , on May 7 , but there was a 37 @-@ minute delay to allow the observation plane , a Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress from the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit flown by Major Clyde " Stan " Shields , to get into position . 
 The fireball of the conventional explosion was visible from Alamogordo Army Air Field 60 miles ( 97 km ) away , but there was little shock at the base camp 10 miles ( 16 km ) away . Shields thought that the explosion looked " beautiful " , but it was hardly felt at 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) . Herbert L. Anderson practiced using a converted M4 Sherman tank lined with lead to approach the 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep and 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide blast crater and take a sample of dirt , although the radioactivity was low enough to allow several hours of unprotected exposure . An electrical signal of unknown origin caused the explosion to go off 0 @.@ 25 seconds early , ruining experiments that required split @-@ second timing . The piezoelectric gauges developed by Anderson 's team correctly indicated an explosion of 108 tons of TNT ( 450 GJ ) , but Luis Alvarez and Waldman 's airborne condenser gauges were far less accurate . 
 In addition to uncovering scientific and technological issues , the rehearsal test revealed practical concerns as well . Over 100 vehicles were used for the rehearsal test but it was realized more would be required for the main test , and they would need better roads and repair facilities . More radios were required , and more telephone lines , as the telephone system had become overloaded . Lines needed to be buried to prevent damage by vehicles . A teletype was installed to allow better communication with Los Alamos . A town hall was built to allow for large conferences and briefings , and the mess hall had to be upgraded . Because dust thrown up by vehicles interfered with some of the instrumentation , some 20 miles ( 32 km ) of road was sealed at a cost of $ 5 @,@ 000 a mile . 
 = = = The Gadget = = = 
 The term " Gadget " was a laboratory euphemism for a bomb , from which the laboratory 's weapon physics division , " G Division " , took its name in August 1944 . At that time it did not refer specifically to the Trinity Test device as it had yet to be developed , but once it was , it became the laboratory code name . The Trinity Gadget was officially a Y @-@ 1561 device , as was the Fat Man used a few weeks later in the bombing of Nagasaki . The two were very similar , with only minor differences , the most obvious being the absence of fuzing and the external ballistic casing . The bombs were still under development , and small changes continued to be made to the Fat Man design . 
 To keep the design as simple as possible , a near solid spherical core was chosen rather than a hollow one , although calculations showed that a hollow core would be more efficient in its use of plutonium . The hollow core design was initially pursued , but it was found difficult to produce the more stringent hollow pit implosion requirements that would be necessary . The core 's sub @-@ critical mass was instead manufactured into a geometry that closely resembled a near perfect solid sphere , which could then be compressed to prompt super @-@ criticality by a less technically demanding implosion , generated by the high explosive lens . This design became known as a " Christy Core " or " Christy pit " after physicist Robert F. Christy , who made the solid pit design a reality after it was initially proposed by Edward Teller . Along with the pit , the whole physics package was also informally nicknamed " Christy [ ' s ] Gadget " . 
 Of the several allotropes of plutonium , the metallurgists preferred the malleable δ phase . This was stabilized at room temperature by alloying it with gallium . Two equal hemispheres of plutonium @-@ gallium alloy were plated with silver , and designated by serial numbers HS @-@ 1 and HS @-@ 2 . The 6 @.@ 19 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 6 lb ) radioactive core generated 15 W of heat , which warmed it up to about 100 to 110 ° F ( 38 to 43 ° C ) , and the silver plating developed blisters that had to be filed down and covered with gold foil ; later cores were plated with nickel instead . The Trinity core consisted of just these two hemispheres . Later cores also included a ring with a triangular cross @-@ section to prevent jets forming in the gap between them . 
 A trial assembly of the Gadget without the active components or explosive lenses was carried out by the bomb assembly team headed by Norris Bradbury at Los Alamos on July 3 . It was driven to Trinity and back . A set of explosive lenses arrived on July 7 , followed by a second set on July 10 . Each was examined by Bradbury and Kistiakowsky , and the best ones were selected for use . The remainder were handed over to Edward Creutz , who conducted a test detonation at Pajarito Canyon near Los Alamos without nuclear material . This test brought bad news : magnetic measurements of the simultaneity of the implosion seemed to indicate that the Trinity test would fail . Bethe worked through the night to assess the results , and reported that they were consistent with a perfect explosion . 
 Assembly of the nuclear capsule began on July 13 at the McDonald Ranch House , where the master bedroom had been turned into a clean room . The polonium @-@ beryllium " Urchin " initiator was assembled , and Louis Slotin placed it inside the two hemispheres of the plutonium core . Cyril Smith then placed the core in the uranium tamper plug , or " slug . " Air gaps were filled with 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mil ( 0 @.@ 013 mm ) gold foil , and the two halves of the plug were held together with uranium washers and screws which fit smoothly into the domed ends of the plug . The completed capsule was then driven to the base of the tower . 
 At the tower a temporary eyebolt was screwed into the 105 @-@ pound ( 48 kg ) capsule , and a chain hoist was used to lower the capsule into the gadget . As the capsule entered the hole in the uranium tamper , it stuck . Robert Bacher realized that the heat from the plutonium core had caused the capsule to expand , while the explosives assembly with the tamper had cooled during the night in the desert . By leaving the capsule in contact with the tamper , the temperatures equalized and in a few minutes the capsule had slipped completely into the tamper . The eyebolt was then removed from the capsule and replaced with a threaded uranium plug , a boron disk was placed on top of the capsule , an aluminum plug was screwed into the hole in the pusher , and the two remaining high explosive lenses were installed . Finally , the upper Dural polar cap was bolted into place . Assembly was completed at about 16 : 45 on July 13 . 
 The Gadget was hoisted to the top of a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) steel tower . The height would give a better indication of how the weapon would behave when dropped from a bomber , as detonation in the air would maximize the amount of energy applied directly to the target ( as the explosion expanded in a spherical shape ) and would generate less nuclear fallout . The tower stood on four legs that went 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) into the ground , with concrete footings . Atop it was an oak platform , and a shack made of corrugated iron that was open on the western side . The Gadget was hauled up with an electric winch . A truckload of mattresses was placed underneath in case the cable broke and the Gadget fell . The seven man arming party , consisting of Bainbridge , Kistiakowsky , Joseph McKibben and four soldiers including Lieutenant Bush , drove out to the tower to perform the final arming shortly after 22 : 00 on July 15 . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 In the final two weeks before the test , some 250 personnel from Los Alamos were at work at the Trinity site , and Lieutenant Bush 's command had ballooned to 125 men guarding and maintaining the base camp . Another 160 men under Major T.O. Palmer were stationed outside the area with vehicles to evacuate the civilian population in the surrounding region should that prove necessary . They had enough vehicles to move 450 people to safety , and had food and supplies to last them for two days . Arrangements were made for Alamogordo Army Air Field to provide accommodation . Groves had warned the Governor of New Mexico , John J. Dempsey , that martial law might have to be declared in the southwestern part of the state . 
 Shelters were established 10 @,@ 000 yards ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) due north , west and south of the tower , known as N @-@ 10 @,@ 000 , W @-@ 10 @,@ 000 and S @-@ 10 @,@ 000 . Each had its own shelter chief : Robert Wilson at N @-@ 10 @,@ 000 , John Manley at W @-@ 10 @,@ 000 and Frank Oppenheimer at S @-@ 10 @,@ 000 . Many other observers were around 20 miles ( 32 km ) away , and some others were scattered at different distances , some in more informal situations . Richard Feynman claimed to be the only person to see the explosion without the goggles provided , relying on a truck windshield to screen out harmful ultraviolet wavelengths . 
 Bainbridge asked Groves to keep his VIP list down to just ten . He chose himself , Oppenheimer , Richard Tolman , Vannevar Bush , James Conant , Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , Charles Lauritsen , Isidor Isaac Rabi , Sir Geoffrey Taylor and Sir James Chadwick . The VIPs viewed the test from Compania Hill , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) northwest of the tower . The observers set up a betting pool on the results of the test . Edward Teller was the most optimistic , predicting 45 kilotons of TNT ( 190 TJ ) . He wore gloves to protect his hands , and sunglasses underneath the welding goggles that the government had supplied everyone with . Teller was also one of the few scientists to actually watch the test ( with eye protection ) , instead of following orders to lie on the ground with his back turned . He also brought suntan lotion , which he shared with the others . 
 Others were less optimistic . Ramsey chose zero ( a complete dud ) , Robert Oppenheimer chose 300 tons of TNT ( 1 @,@ 300 GJ ) ) , Kistiakowsky 1 @,@ 400 tons of TNT ( 5 @,@ 900 GJ ) , and Bethe chose 8 @,@ 000 tons of TNT ( 33 @,@ 000 GJ ) . Rabi , the last to arrive , won the pool with a prediction of 18 @,@ 000 tons of TNT ( 75 @,@ 000 GJ ) . Bethe 's choice of 8 kt was exactly the value calculated by Segrè , with Bethe stating that he was swayed by Segrè 's authority over that of a more junior member of Segrè 's group who had calculated 20 kt . Enrico Fermi offered to take wagers among the top physicists and military present on whether the atmosphere would ignite , and if so whether it would destroy just the state , or incinerate the entire planet . This last result had been previously calculated by Bethe to be almost impossible , although for a while it had caused some of the scientists some anxiety . Bainbridge was furious with Fermi for scaring the guards who , unlike the physicists , did not have the advantage of their knowledge about the scientific possibilities . His own biggest fear was that nothing would happen , in which case he would have to head back to the tower to investigate . 
 Julian Mack and Berlyn <unk> were responsible for photography . The photography group employed some fifty different cameras , taking motion and still photographs . Special Fastax cameras taking 10 @,@ 000 frames per second would record the minute details of the explosion . Spectrograph cameras would record the wavelengths of light emitted by the explosion , and pinhole cameras would record gamma rays . A rotating drum spectrograph at the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) station would obtain the spectrum over the first hundredth of a second . Another , slow recording one would track the fireball . Cameras were placed in bunkers only 800 yards ( 730 m ) from the tower , protected by steel and lead glass , and mounted on sleds so they could be towed out by the lead @-@ lined tank . Some observers brought their own cameras despite the security . <unk> brought in Jack <unk> 's 35 mm <unk> 44 . It would take the only known well @-@ exposed color photograph of the detonation explosion . 
 = = Explosion = = 
 = = = Detonation = = = 
 The scientists wanted good visibility , low humidity , light winds at low altitude and westerly winds at high altitude for the test . The best weather was predicted between July 18 and 21 , but the Potsdam Conference was due to start on July 16 and President Harry S. Truman wanted the test to be conducted before the conference began . It was therefore scheduled for July 16 , the earliest date at which the bomb components would be available . 
 The detonation was initially planned for 04 : 00 MWT but was postponed because of rain and lightning from early that morning . It was feared that the danger from radiation and fallout would be increased by rain , and lightning had the scientists concerned about a premature detonation . A crucial favorable weather report came in at 04 : 45 , and the final twenty @-@ minute countdown began at 05 : 10 , read by Samuel Allison . By 05 : 30 the rain had gone . There were some communication problems . The shortwave radio frequency for communicating with the B @-@ 29s was shared with the Voice of America , and the FM radios shared a frequency with a railroad freight yard in San Antonio , Texas . 
 Two circling B @-@ 29s observed the test , with Shields again flying the lead plane . They carried members of Project Alberta , who would carry out airborne measurements during the atomic missions . These included Captain Deak Parsons , the Associate Director of the Los Alamos Laboratory and the head of Project Alberta ; Luis Alvarez , Harold Agnew , Bernard Waldman , Wolfgang Panofsky and William Penney . The overcast obscured their view of the test site . 
 At 05 : 29 : 21 MWT ( ± 2 seconds ) , the device exploded with an energy equivalent to around 20 kilotons of TNT ( 84 TJ ) . The desert sand , largely made of silica , melted and became a mildly radioactive light green glass , which was named trinitite . It left a crater in the desert 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide . At the time of detonation , the surrounding mountains were illuminated " brighter than daytime " for one to two seconds , and the heat was reported as " being as hot as an oven " at the base camp . The observed colors of the illumination changed from purple to green and eventually to white . The roar of the shock wave took 40 seconds to reach the observers . It was felt over 100 miles ( 160 km ) away , and the mushroom cloud reached 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) in height . 
 Ralph Carlisle Smith , watching from Compania Hill , wrote : 
 I was staring straight ahead with my open left eye covered by a welder 's glass and my right eye remaining open and uncovered . Suddenly , my right eye was blinded by a light which appeared instantaneously all about without any build up of intensity . My left eye could see the ball of fire start up like a tremendous bubble or nob @-@ like mushroom . I dropped the glass from my left eye almost immediately and watched the light climb upward . The light intensity fell rapidly hence did not blind my left eye but it was still amazingly bright . It turned yellow , then red , and then beautiful purple . At first it had a translucent character but shortly turned to a tinted or colored white smoke appearance . The ball of fire seemed to rise in something of toadstool effect . Later the column proceeded as a cylinder of white smoke ; it seemed to move ponderously . A hole was punched through the clouds but two fog rings appeared well above the white smoke column . There was a spontaneous cheer from the observers . Dr. von Neumann said " that was at least 5 @,@ 000 tons and probably a lot more . " 
 In his official report on the test , Farrell wrote : 
 The lighting effects <unk> description . The whole country was lighted by a searing light with the intensity many times that of the midday sun . It was golden , purple , violet , gray , and blue . It lighted every peak , crevasse and ridge of the nearby mountain range with a clarity and beauty that cannot be described but must be seen to be imagined ... 
 William L. Laurence of The New York Times had been transferred temporarily to the Manhattan Project at Groves 's request in early 1945 . Groves had arranged for Laurence to view significant events , including Trinity and the atomic bombing of Japan . Laurence wrote press releases with the help of the Manhattan Project 's public relations staff . He later recalled that 
 A loud cry filled the air . The little groups that hitherto had stood rooted to the earth like desert plants broke into dance , the rhythm of primitive man dancing at one of his fire festivals at the coming of Spring . 
 After the initial euphoria of witnessing the explosion had passed , Bainbridge told Oppenheimer , " Now we are all sons of bitches . " Rabi noticed Oppenheimer 's reaction : " I 'll never forget his walk ; " Rabi recalled , " I 'll never forget the way he stepped out of the car ... his walk was like High Noon ... this kind of strut . He had done it . " 
 Oppenheimer later recalled that , while witnessing the explosion , he thought of a verse from the Hindu holy book , the Bhagavad Gita ( XI , 12 ) : 
 <unk> ् मि <unk> ् <unk> ् प ् <unk> ् <unk> <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> प ् <unk> ् <unk> । <unk> त ् <unk> न <unk> ् <unk> ् ति सर ् <unk> <unk> ् <unk> प ् <unk> ् <unk> <unk> ॥ <unk> <unk> ॥ 
 If the radiance of a thousand suns were to burst at once into the sky , that would be like the splendor of the mighty one ... 
 Years later he would explain that another verse had also entered his head at that time : 
 We knew the world would not be the same . A few people laughed , a few people cried . Most people were silent . I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture , the Bhagavad Gita ; Vishnu is trying to persuade the Prince that he should do his duty and , to impress him , takes on his multi @-@ armed form and says , ' Now I am become Death , the destroyer of worlds . ' I suppose we all thought that , one way or another . 
 John R. Lugo was flying a U.S. Navy transport at 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , 30 miles ( 48 km ) east of Albuquerque , en route to the west coast . " My first impression was , like , the sun was coming up in the south . What a ball of fire ! It was so bright it lit up the cockpit of the plane . " Lugo radioed Albuquerque . He got no explanation for the blast but was told , " Don 't fly south . " 
 = = = Energy measurements = = = 
 The T ( Theoretical ) Division at Los Alamos had predicted a yield of between 5 and 10 kilotons of TNT ( 21 and 42 TJ ) . Immediately after the blast , the two lead @-@ lined Sherman tanks made their way to the crater . <unk> analysis of soil samples that they collected indicated that the total yield ( or energy release ) had been around 18 @.@ 6 kilotons of TNT ( 78 TJ ) . 
 Fifty beryllium @-@ copper diaphragm microphones were also used to record the pressure of the blast wave . These were supplemented by mechanical pressure gauges . These indicated a blast energy of 9 @.@ 9 kilotons of TNT ( 41 TJ ) ± 0 @.@ 1 kilotons of TNT ( 0 @.@ 42 TJ ) , with only one of the mechanical pressure gauges working correctly that indicated 10 kilotons of TNT ( 42 TJ ) . 
 Fermi prepared his own experiment to measure the energy that was released as blast . He later recalled that : 
 About 40 seconds after the explosion the air blast reached me . I tried to estimate its strength by dropping from about six feet small pieces of paper before , during , and after the passage of the blast wave . Since , at the time , there was no wind I could observe very distinctly and actually measure the displacement of the pieces of paper that were in the process of falling while the blast was passing . The shift was about 2 1 / 2 meters , which , at the time , I estimated to correspond to the blast that would be produced by ten thousand tons of T.N.T. 
 There were also several gamma ray and neutron detectors , although few survived the blast , with all the gauges within 200 feet ( 61 m ) of ground zero being destroyed , however sufficient data were recovered to measure the gamma ray component of the ionizing radiation released . 
 The official estimate for the total yield of the Trinity gadget , which includes the energy of the blast component together with the contributions from the explosion 's light output and both forms of ionizing radiation , is 21 kilotons of TNT ( 88 TJ ) , of which about 15 kilotons of TNT ( 63 TJ ) was contributed by fission of the plutonium core , and about 6 kilotons of TNT ( 25 TJ ) was from fission of the natural uranium tamper . However , a re @-@ analysis of data published in 2016 put the yield at 22 @.@ 1 kilotons of TNT ( 92 TJ ) , with a margin of error estimated at 2 @.@ 7 kilotons of TNT ( 11 TJ ) . 
 As a result of the data gathered on the size of the blast , the detonation height for the bombing of Hiroshima was set at 1 @,@ 885 feet ( 575 m ) to take advantage of the mach stem blast reinforcing effect . The final Nagasaki burst height was 1 @,@ 650 feet ( 500 m ) so the Mach stem started sooner . The knowledge that implosion worked led Oppenheimer to recommend to Groves that the uranium @-@ 235 used in a Little Boy gun @-@ type weapon could be used more economically in a composite core with plutonium . It was too late to do this with the first Little Boy , but the composite cores would soon enter production . 
 = = = Civilian detection = = = 
 Civilians noticed the bright lights and huge explosion . Groves therefore had the Second Air Force issue a press release with a cover story that he had prepared weeks before : 
 Alamogordo , N.M. , July 16 
 The commanding officer of the Alamogordo Army Air Base made the following statement today : " Several inquiries have been received concerning a heavy explosion which occurred on the Alamogordo Air base reservation this morning . A remotely located ammunition magazine containing a considerable amount of high explosives and pyrotechnics exploded . There was no loss of life or injury to anyone , and the property damage outside of the explosives magazine was negligible . Weather conditions affecting the content of gas shells exploded by the blast may make it desirable for the Army to evacuate temporarily a few civilians from their homes . " 
 The press release was written by Laurence . He had prepared four releases , covering outcomes ranging from an account of a successful test ( the one which was used ) to catastrophic scenarios involving serious damage to surrounding communities , evacuation of nearby residents , and a placeholder for the names of those killed . As Laurence was a witness to the test he knew that the last release , if used , might be his own obituary . A newspaper article published the same day stated that " the blast was seen and felt throughout an area extending from El Paso to Silver City , Gallup , Socorro , and Albuquerque . " An Associated Press article quoted a blind woman 150 miles ( 240 km ) away who asked " What 's that brilliant light ? " These articles appeared in New Mexico , but East Coast newspapers ignored them . 
 Information about the Trinity test was made public shortly after the bombing of Hiroshima . The Smyth Report , released on August 12 , 1945 , gave some information on the blast , and the edition released by Princeton University Press a few weeks later incorporated the War Department 's press release on the test as Appendix 6 , and contained the famous pictures of a " bulbous " Trinity fireball . Groves , Oppenheimer and other dignitaries visited the test site in September 1945 , wearing white canvas overshoes to prevent fallout from sticking to the soles of their shoes . 
 = = = Official notifications = = = 
 The results of the test were conveyed to the Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson at the Potsdam Conference in Germany in a coded message from his assistant George L. Harrison : 
 Operated on this morning . Diagnosis not yet complete but results seem satisfactory and already exceed expectations . Local press release necessary as interest extends great distance . Dr. Groves pleased . He returns tomorrow . I will keep you posted . 
 The message arrived at the " Little White House " in the Potsdam suburb of Babelsberg and was at once taken to Truman and Secretary of State James F. Byrnes . Harrison sent a follow @-@ up message which arrived on the morning of July 18 : 
 Doctor has just returned most enthusiastic and confident that the little boy is as husky as his big brother . The light in his eyes discernible from here to High Hold and I could have heard his screams from here to my farm . 
 Because Stimson 's summer home at High Hold was on Long Island and Harrison 's farm near Upperville , Virginia , this indicated that the explosion could be seen 200 miles ( 320 km ) away and heard 50 miles ( 80 km ) away . 
 = = = Fallout = = = 
 Film badges used to measure exposure to radioactivity indicated that no observers at N @-@ 10 @,@ 000 had been exposed to more than 0 @.@ 1 roentgens , but the shelter was evacuated before the radioactive cloud could reach it . The explosion was more efficient than expected and the thermal updraft drew most of the cloud high enough that little fallout fell on the test site . The crater was far more radioactive than expected due to the formation of trinitite , and the crews of the two lead @-@ lined Sherman tanks were subjected to considerable exposure . Anderson 's dosimeter and film badge recorded 7 to 10 roentgens , and one of the tank drivers , who made three trips , recorded 13 to 15 roentgens . 
 The heaviest fallout contamination outside the restricted test area was 30 miles ( 48 km ) from the detonation point , on <unk> Mesa . The fallout there was reported to have settled in a white mist onto some of the livestock in the area , resulting in local beta burns and a temporary loss of dorsal or back hair . Patches of hair grew back discolored white . The Army bought 75 cattle in all from ranchers ; the 17 most significantly marked were kept at Los Alamos , while the rest were shipped to Oak Ridge for long @-@ term observation . 
 Unlike the 100 or so atmospheric nuclear explosions later conducted at the Nevada Test Site , fallout doses to the local inhabitants have not been reconstructed for the Trinity event , due primarily to scarcity of data . In 2014 , a National Cancer Institute study commenced that will attempt to close this gap in the literature and complete a Trinity radiation dose reconstruction for the population of the state of New Mexico . 
 In August 1945 , shortly after the bombing of Hiroshima , the Kodak Company observed spotting and fogging on their film , which was at that time usually packaged in cardboard containers . Dr. J. H. Webb , a Kodak employee , studied the matter and concluded that the contamination must have come from a nuclear explosion somewhere in the United States . He discounted the possibility that the Hiroshima bomb was responsible due to the timing of the events . A hot spot of fallout contaminated the river water that the paper mill in Indiana used to manufacture the cardboard pulp from corn husks . Aware of the gravity of his discovery , Dr. Webb kept this secret until 1949 . 
 This incident along with the next continental US tests in 1951 set a precedent . In subsequent atmospheric nuclear tests at the Nevada test site , United States Atomic Energy Commission officials gave the photographic industry maps and forecasts of potential contamination , as well as expected fallout distributions , which enabled them to purchase uncontaminated materials and take other protective measures . 
 = = Site today = = 
 In September 1953 , about 650 people attended the first Trinity Site open house . Visitors to a Trinity Site open house are allowed to see the ground zero and McDonald Ranch House areas . More than seventy years after the test , residual radiation at the site is about ten times higher than normal background radiation in the area . The amount of radioactive exposure received during a one @-@ hour visit to the site is about half of the total radiation exposure which a U.S. adult receives on an average day from natural and medical sources . 
 On December 21 , 1965 , the 51 @,@ 500 @-@ acre ( 20 @,@ 800 ha ) Trinity Site was declared a National Historic Landmark district , and on October 15 , 1966 , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The landmark includes the base camp , where the scientists and support group lived ; ground zero , where the bomb was placed for the explosion ; and the McDonald ranch house , where the plutonium core to the bomb was assembled . One of the old instrumentation bunkers is visible beside the road just west of ground zero . An inner oblong fence was added in 1967 , and the corridor barbed wire fence that connects the outer fence to the inner one was completed in 1972 . Jumbo was moved to the parking lot in 1979 ; it is missing its ends from an attempt to destroy it in 1946 using eight 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) bombs . The Trinity monument , a rough @-@ sided , lava @-@ rock obelisk about 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high , marks the explosion 's hypocenter . It was erected in 1965 by Army personnel from the White Sands Missile Range using local rocks taken from the western boundary of the range . A simple metal plaque read : " Trinity Site Where the World 's First Nuclear Device Was Exploded on July 16 , 1945 . " A second memorial plaque on the obelisk was prepared by the Army and the National Park Service , and was unveiled on the 30th anniversary of the test in 1975 . 
 A special tour of the site was conducted on July 16 , 1995 , to mark the 50th anniversary of the Trinity test . About 5 @,@ 000 visitors arrived to commemorate the occasion , the largest crowd for any open house . Since then , the open houses have usually averaged two to three thousand visitors . The site is still a popular destination for those interested in atomic tourism , though it is only open to the public twice a year during the Trinity Site Open House on the first Saturdays of April and October . In 2014 , the White Sands Missile Range announced that due to budgetary constraints , the site would only be open once a year , on the first Saturday in April . In 2015 , this decision was reversed , and two events were scheduled , in April and October . The base commander , Brigadier General Timothy R. Coffin , explained that : 
 Trinity Site is a national historic testing landmark where the theories and engineering of some of the nation 's brightest minds were tested with the detonation of the first nuclear bomb , technologies which then helped end World War II . It is important for us to share Trinity with the public even though the site is located inside a very active military test range . We have travelers from as far away as Australia who travel to visit this historic landmark . Facilitating access twice per year allows more people the chance to visit this historic site . 
 = Karmichael Hunt = 
 Karmichael Neil Matthew Hunt ( born 17 November 1986 ) is a New Zealand @-@ born Australian professional football player , currently playing Rugby Union for the Queensland Reds in the Southern Hemisphere Super Rugby competition . 
 Hunt was formerly best known as a rugby league player for the Brisbane Broncos in the National Rugby League ( NRL ) . He primarily played in the fullback position , but has also played in the Centres , on the wing , at five @-@ eighth and at halfback . He played in the NRL for Brisbane from 2004 to 2009 and was part of the Broncos ' competition @-@ winning team in 2006 . He has represented the Queensland Maroons in the State of Origin series and the Australian Kangaroos at international level . 
 Hunt made his NRL debut in the 2004 and played every game that season , winning the Dally M Rookie of the Year award . In a controversial move , Hunt chose to play for Australia instead of his native New Zealand , citing a lifelong dream of playing for Queensland in State of Origin . Hunt 's performance in the 2006 NRL season resulted in his selection for Queensland and Australia between 2006 – 2009 . 
 In June 2009 , Hunt expressed a desire to leave the NRL competition and it was speculated he would play rugby overseas . However , he announced in July 2009 that he had signed a lucrative three @-@ year playing and promotional contract with Australian Football League expansion team , Gold Coast whose inaugural season would be 2011 . In 2010 , while contracted to the Gold Coast , he played a season with Biarritz Olympique in the Top 14 French rugby union competition . Hunt was named in the Courier Mail 2011 Queensland Australian rules football Team of the Year . Overall , however , his 4 @-@ year stint in the AFL was subject to mixed reviews . 
 Hunt is the first sportsperson in Australia to have reached elite professional level in three different football codes , a feat which prompted fitness coach Dean Benton to regard him as the greatest all @-@ round footballer Australia has produced . 
 On 19 February 2015 , Hunt was arrested and charged with four counts for the supply of cocaine for personal use or to on @-@ supply cocaine to friends and colleagues between June and December 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hunt was born on 17 November 1986 in Auckland , New Zealand , to Hans and Tera Hunt , from Samoa and the Cook Islands respectively . He began playing rugby league at the age of four for the Avondale Wolves before moving to Australia as an eleven @-@ year @-@ old in 1997 , the family moved to the suburb of <unk> in Brisbane , Australia . Upon moving to Brisbane , Hunt played junior rugby league for the Souths club in Acacia Ridge . Hunt 's childhood hero was Michael Jordan and , prior to his rugby league success , he dreamt of playing basketball in the United States . 
 In 2000 , Hunt made his representative debut with the Under @-@ 14 South – East team of the Queensland Rugby League ( <unk> ) , in the fullback position . In 2001 , he became part of the Under @-@ 15 Australian merit side , and , upon seeing him play rugby league , NRL club Brisbane Broncos scout Cyril Connell offered him a scholarship with the club . Hunt accepted the Broncos scholarship and , after strong performance at Souths Acacia Ridge and Sunnybank High School , received a scholarship to the Anglican Church Grammar School ( <unk> ) . 
 At <unk> , Hunt switched to rugby union and was a dominant figure in the school 's team , which played in the Queensland Great Public Schools ( GPS ) competition . As a fullback , he led his team to an undefeated season in 2003 , and he was one of the best players in the GPS competition . While playing rugby union at ACGS , Hunt also played for the Queensland Schoolboys rugby league team against New South Wales , in the position of lock . Along with Anton <unk> , he won the Bob Templeton Trophy for Queensland 's leading schoolboy player . During the rugby off @-@ season in 2003 , Hunt played six matches of Australian rules football code for the ACGS school side under captain Scott Harding . During which time he was identified by Australian Football League talent manager Mark Browning as an " AFL prospect " . 
 In 2003 , Hunt was selected for the Australian Schoolboys rugby league representative team to tour New Zealand , playing three matches under coach Rod <unk> . Hunt scored a try in each game and was named best back of the series . Australian Schoolboys ' coaching staff predicted that Hunt was the most likely Australian schoolboy to make a debut in the NRL . 
 In 2004 , St. George Illawarra Dragons coach Nathan Brown spoke about Hunt and a discussion he had with recruitment officer Craig Young a year earlier , when Hunt was still under contract with the Broncos . " He 's a terrific player . Craig Young who scouts for us watched him play last year and said give him $ 80 @,@ 000 ( to lure him to Sydney ) . I said ' where would we play him ? ' And he ( Young ) said ' wing , fullback , centre , five eighth , lock – doesn 't matter because he 'll play first grade and play for Australia for the next 12 years ' . " 
 = = Rugby League career = = 
 = = = Brisbane Broncos ( 2004 – 2009 ) = = = 
 = = = = Debut season = = = = 
 Hunt 's 2001 scholarship came to fruition when he joined the Brisbane Broncos ' main squad at the end of the 2003 season . He participated in the team 's off @-@ season training in early 2004 , under the guidance of Broncos ' coach Wayne Bennett , and was selected to participate in the Broncos ' pre @-@ season trial games in February . Hunt had expected to play most of the 2004 season in the Queensland Cup , the second @-@ tier rugby league competition in Queensland . However , after Darren Lockyer 's shift to the five @-@ eighth position and Hunt playing both trial games on the wing and scoring a try in the first game against the Melbourne Storm , he was selected to make his National Rugby League ( NRL ) debut for the Broncos in the first round of the 2004 season against the New Zealand Warriors , making him the youngest ever Bronco at seventeen . Coach Bennett 's decision to name Hunt as the starting fullback was somewhat surprising , due to Hunt 's original selection , the week before the match , on the interchange bench . He replaced Motu Tony in the fullback position . 
 Hunt described Bennett and Broncos team @-@ mate Darren Lockyer as the greatest influences on his league career . With Lockyer 's move from fullback to five @-@ eighth , Hunt had large shoes to fill in the position . Hunt proved to be a success for the Broncos ; he played every game in 2004 , missing just four minutes in total , and was the team 's top try @-@ scorer . Bennett remarked of him that " Karmichael has an attitude just like Darren Lockyer where he can make a mistake and kiss it off and just get on with the game , It 's a wonderful quality to have and you 'd like every player to have it . A lot of guys dwell on mistakes and it stays with them too long . " 
 Hunt drew criticism for his style of returning the football ; upon receiving the ball , he would run straight at opposition players rather than attempting to evade them . As a result , he received several high tackles , causing the Broncos to ask the NRL to protect Hunt by punishing opposition players more severely . The referees ' board supported this position , and stated that fullbacks such as Hunt needed to be protected due to greater risk of injury . 
 The performance of the 2004 NRL rookies , including Hunt , had been much anticipated . After a few games , his peers and the media singled Hunt out as the next superstar of the game . To minimise the impact of excessive media pressure on Hunt 's performance , Bennett banned him from speaking to the media . Hunt scored four tries in the Round 17 clash with the South Sydney Rabbitohs , equalling the team record . His form earned him the Brisbane Broncos and Dally M Rookie of the Year awards . 
 = = = = 2005 = = = = 
 At the end of 2004 , Hunt signed a contract with the Broncos for an additional two years , with the intention of staying at the club for the rest of his career . On re @-@ signing , Hunt stated , " I look around and see guys like <unk> and <unk> who have been here for their entire careers , and it 's something I would like to do . If I can , I want to be a one @-@ club player too . Playing footy is not just about 80 minutes out on the field every week . For me it is a career and I want to be happy where I am , satisfied that my game is progressing and that I am learning all the time to be a better player . " 
 Bennett advised Hunt to have fun and enjoy himself like any other teenager , so that it would not affect his second year in first @-@ grade rugby league . However , Hunt 's second season was not considered as successful as his first , despite his only missing one game , a situation that the media labelled " Karmichael 's second @-@ year syndrome " . Hunt was retained in the fullback position despite his perceived lack of form , which included fewer tries and fewer kick returns than in his debut season . 
 Hunt scored a try in each of the first two games of the season . In Round 6 , he was knocked unconscious by a high tackle from a St George Illawarra Dragons player , Shaun Timmins . The following week , still suffering from the effects of concussion , he missed his first NRL game since his debut . Hunt returned a week later and scored a try in each of the next three games . However , he only scored three more tries in the remaining sixteen weeks of the season . Hunt was a part of the junior Australian representative team at the end of the 2005 season , but was not considered for the game against Papua New Guinea for personal reasons . 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Prior to the 2006 National Rugby League season , Wayne Bennett , backed by former Broncos halfback Allan Langer , groomed Hunt as a key play @-@ maker , able to steer the play from the halfback position , with the intention of taking pressure off Darren Lockyer and then @-@ halfback , Brett Seymour . In a trial match against the North Queensland Cowboys , Hunt played in the halfback position but he returned to fullback for the opening NRL game . Hunt scored two tries against the Canberra Raiders in Round 8 of the competition , following this performance with another two tries against Manly in Round 10 . 
 Hunt sustained a foot injury in the Broncos Round 15 match and was sidelined for eight weeks . While out injured , early in the morning on 30 July 2006 , Hunt was at the scene of a fight outside a Brisbane night club in Brisbane 's CBD . The media , notably Channel 7 and Channel 10 , alleged Hunt was the instigator of the incident , claiming he squirted water on a woman . The Broncos denied he had any involvement in the incident although a woman gave his name to police . Hunt also denied involvement , insisting he was merely a bystander . 
 When Hunt 's contract ended at the end of 2006 , concern mounted as to whether the Broncos would be able to retain him . The Broncos could only offer Hunt about $ 200 @,@ 000 a season , while other teams were able to offer him $ 300 @,@ 000 . The South Sydney Rabbitohs reportedly offered Hunt up to $ 500 @,@ 000 a season , but despite these offers , on 29 June , he signed with the Broncos for a further three years . Brisbane Broncos chief executive Bruno Cullen announced that contract negotiations were " straightforward " and there was never any doubt that Hunt wanted to stay at the Broncos . 
 During Hunt 's injury , Bennett moved Broncos team mate Justin Hodges to fullback and Hodges was impressive in the position . When Hunt returned to the Broncos side in Round 25 against the Parramatta Eels , he was forced to play on the wing due to Hodges ' good form . Hunt and Hodges continued to switch the fullback position for the remainder of the season . Hunt missed the first week of the finals due to a hamstring problem but was able to return a week later . 
 The Broncos went on to reach the 2006 NRL Grand Final against the Melbourne Storm , with Hunt playing on the wing and Hodges at fullback , and Brisbane winning 15 – 8 . After that Hunt was selected to represent Australia in the 2006 Rugby League Tri @-@ Nations tournament , playing at fullback in the Kangaroos victory over New Zealand in the final . 
 = = = = 2007 = = = = 
 As NRL premiers , in the 2007 pre @-@ season the Broncos travelled to England for the 2007 World Club Challenge . Hunt played at fullback in Brisbane 's loss to St Helens . 
 Bennett pulled his first selection surprise of 2007 , experimenting with Hunt at halfback for the opening game of the season . At the time Bennett maintained that this would be a long term switch , but due to the Broncos ' poor form , Hunt returned to fullback for Round 3 . Hunt was selected to play for the Australian national team at fullback in the 2007 ANZAC Test match against New Zealand , scoring a try in the Kangaroos ' 30 @-@ 6 victory . 
 In Round 11 , the Broncos had their biggest victory yet , winning 71 – 6 over Newcastle . In that game Hunt set up three tries and scored one himself . The Brisbane newspaper The Sunday Mail described Hunt as not performing consistently throughout the 2007 season for the Broncos . However , Hunt played an exceptionally good game in Round 15 against the Wests Tigers , scoring three tries , assisting in a try and gaining 281 metres in the Broncos ' win . 
 Hunt 's skill on the field and positive influence on other team members led to his emergence , early in 2007 , as a future candidate for the Broncos captaincy . Broncos chief executive Bruno Cullen stated that such a move would have his and the Broncos management 's full support . Current captain Lockyer also gave his support to Hunt being the next captain , saying that he has the respect of fellow players and the necessary leadership qualities . 
 After Round 18 of the competition , during a training session on 20 July 2007 , Hunt injured his hamstring and was originally scheduled to miss six weeks . However , his recovery took longer than expected , and he was eventually ruled out for the rest of the season . Despite playing only thirteen games for the Broncos in 2007 , he received the Broncos award for Best Back . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Over the 2008 pre @-@ season Hunt recovered from his hamstring injury and played in his first match since being injured in a 23 February 2008 trial match against Canberra . After playing another trial in the position of five eighth , Hunt returned to first grade in Round 1 of the 2008 NRL competition playing fullback in the Broncos 48 – 12 win over Penrith . In Round 2 Hunt shoulder charged Sydney Roosters five eighth <unk> <unk> in the head and was subsequently placed on report . The NRL judiciary committee charged Hunt with a Grade @-@ Three Careless High tackle and if pleading guilty would miss one week of premiership competition . Pleading not guilty to the charge , Hunt was cleared to play by the judiciary with no penalty being given but missed one week anyway due to a knee injury . 
 In July 2008 , speculation began on what Hunt would do past the expiration of his contract at the end of the 2009 season . With some high @-@ profile defections of star league players to cashed @-@ up rugby union clubs from France , Hunt is expected to be the target of offers from overseas and within Australia . Australian rugby union club Queensland Reds stated their intentions to attempt to lure Hunt to the rugby union code , with the reasoning being his successful young career in rugby union . From within the NRL competition , Sydney based clubs Sydney Roosters and St. George Illawarra Dragons stated their intentions to make a bid for Hunt for his services in the 2010 season , claiming they could double Hunt 's three @-@ year deal from 2006 , reported to be around $ 200 @,@ 000 . The Broncos however , were still expected to be a factor in his decision with the possibility of the captaincy a possible lure to remain with the Broncos . 
 In the final round of the 2008 NRL competition , Hunt became the youngest player in premiership 's history to reach 100 first @-@ grade games . He set up three tries and scored one himself in the man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match performance against the Newcastle Knights in the game which secured the Broncos place in the competition finals . This performance came a day after his coach Wayne Bennett stated that Hunt was the " bravest " player he had coached because of the strong runs he made when returning the ball from fullback . 
 On 15 September 2008 , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old woman lodged a formal complaint about a sexual assault that allegedly occurred two days earlier . The people alleged to be at the centre of the incident were Hunt and Brisbane Broncos team mates Darius Boyd and Sam Thaiday . The players cooperated with police and the three were cleared of the allegations in November by police . Hunt later said he was ashamed and felt he let down his family , fans and the Broncos . However , in May 2009 , the woman stated she had a few drinks with Hunt , went into a toilet cubicle , and " after a few kisses , things went drastically wrong " and that in a " blink of an eye " Boyd and Thaiday were also in the cubicle . 
 = = = = 2009 = = = = 
 In March 2009 it was revealed the Broncos had withdrawn their contract extension offer to Hunt believed to be worth $ 1 million over three years . Hunt later revealed contract talks held with then Broncos CEO Bruno Cullen and Broncos coach Ivan <unk> in March 2009 were what turned him away from re @-@ signing with the club . On 11 June 2009 , tests confirmed Hunt tested positive to the swine flu influenza , and despite this , played in a 12 June 2009 game against the Bulldogs , despite health advice stating people with the influenza should remain isolated . Hunt 's final game for the Broncos was the loss to Melbourne in the 2009 Grand Final qualifier . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Representative rugby league career = = 
 = = = Allegiance and debut = = = 
 In his debut season in 2004 , Hunt was approached to play at international level for New Zealand in the ANZAC Test match . Although he was born in New Zealand , he had played all of his rugby league in Queensland , Australia . He was therefore eligible to play for either New Zealand or Australia , and he could have also played for the Cook Islands or Samoa due to his parents ' heritage . However , Hunt pledged his allegiance to Queensland , and therefore Australia , but was not selected for either country that season . Hunt became a possibility for the Australian squad for the 2004 Tri @-@ Nations , but Bennett , who was the Australian coach , decided not to select him due to his inexperience . In 2006 , media speculation suggested that Hunt intended to change his allegiance and play for the New Zealand team , but Hunt put the speculation to rest by confirming that he would play for Australia . 
 Though Hunt was considered for the 2004 State of Origin series among other fullbacks , he was ignored for the entire series in favour of Penrith Panthers fullback Rhys <unk> . Hunt 's good form in 2006 paid off when he was selected to play for the Australian team against New Zealand on 5 May as a replacement for the injured Anthony Minichiello . This decision proved controversial , due to his being preferred over the in @-@ form Matt Bowen . That game was Hunt 's representative and international debut , and though he performed well , he only played for 50 minutes , making one error and 83 metres in kick returns . However , he was unable to complete the game due to concussion sustained by a blow from Frank Pritchard . He was taken unconscious from the field and played no further part in the match . 
 After his Test debut , Hunt was expected to be the Queensland fullback in the first match of the three game State of Origin series . However , Queensland selectors decided to stay with incumbent Origin fullback Matt Bowen . The selectors reconsidered after Queensland lost the first game , selecting Hunt for the second match . In his State of Origin debut , Hunt ran with the ball seventeen times , making 196 metres . He missed the third Origin game because of a foot injury , sustained in the Broncos ' Round 15 match , and was replaced by Clinton <unk> . 
 = = = 2006 Tri @-@ Nations to 2008 = = = 
 Hunt was one of eight Broncos players selected for the Australian team for the end of year Tri @-@ Nations series . With the absence of injured rival Anthony Minichiello , Hunt retained his fullback position for the first Tri @-@ Nations match , scoring two tries in a man of the match performance . He played in the remainder of the Tri @-@ Nations series , which Australia won , Hunt scoring a total of three tries . The Tri @-@ Nations win ended a good year for Hunt , who made his debut for Australia and Queensland before being a part of the premiership @-@ winning Broncos team . 
 Hunt retained his fullback position for Australia in the 2007 ANZAC Test . Hunt ran the ball 18 times , the most of any player , and scored one try in a man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match performance as Australia won 30 – 6 . Hunt was named fullback for all three games of the 2007 State of Origin series , despite the club form of rival fullbacks Billy Slater and Matt Bowen . In the second game , Hunt played a full match despite aggravating his foot injury as Queensland won the match and the series . He also played in the third Origin game despite suffering a calf injury during training . Hunt was not considered for selection in the end of year Test for Australia against New Zealand due to a hamstring injury sustained earlier in the season . 
 A minor knee injury which only left Hunt out for two weeks was enough to deny him the opportunity to regain the fullback position for Australia in the Centenary Test against New Zealand in May 2008 . Hunt 's place in the Queensland team for the 2008 State of Origin series was assured by Queensland coach Mal Meninga but there was speculation that Hunt could play five @-@ eighth in place of injured team @-@ mate Darren Lockyer . While not the best five @-@ eighth possibility for the Queensland representative team , his selection there would make way for the Australian fullback Billy Slater . Hunt , having never played a senior rugby league game at five @-@ eighth , was controversially selected at the position for Queensland instead of the in @-@ form Scott Prince . 
 In a losing Queensland team , Hunt played neither well nor badly , being outstanding in defence but subdued in attack . As a result , Hunt 's position at five @-@ eighth was in question for the second game , but coach Mal Meninga stated that Hunt would remain in the team . Hunt was named on the interchange bench for the second game , making way for Queensland custodian and captain Lockyer in the five @-@ eighth role . However , Meninga made a late change before the game , starting Hunt at fullback and moving Slater to the interchange bench . Hunt played in the match , which Queensland won 30 – 0 , for only 51 minutes , being put on the interchange bench for 29 minutes in the middle part of the game . He retained his starting position for game three , which Queensland won to take the series . 
 = = = 2008 Rugby League World Cup and beyond = = = 
 In August 2008 , Hunt was named in the preliminary 46 @-@ man squad for Australia in the 2008 Rugby League World Cup . However he did not make the final 24 @-@ man squad because of 2008 grand final fullbacks Billy Slater and Brett Stewart who were selected ahead of Hunt . However Hunt was later called into the 24 @-@ man squad after Stewart was ruled out with injury . Hunt wasn 't picked for the first match , with Slater picked ahead of him , however in the match , interchange player Kurt Gidley sustained an injury which subsequently led to Hunt being picked on the interchange bench for the second match . In the third regulation match , with a semi @-@ final berth assured , coach Ricky Stuart choose to rest many of his regular players , including Slater , for the match . Hunt would play fullback for this match , and was moved back to the interchange bench for the semi @-@ final and the final of the World Cup which Australia lost . 
 In April 2009 , he was named in the preliminary 25 man squad to represent Queensland in the opening State of Origin match for 2009 and was subsequently picked on the interchange bench for the opening State of Origin match on 3 June . Hunt came on in the 25th minute of the game to replace the injured Justin Hodges and played in his centre position for the remainder of the match which Queensland won . The consequences of this game would be felt as part of the 2009 swine flu pandemic in Australia . Hunt 's Queensland teammate Ben <unk> tested positive to the Swine influenza and the Brisbane Broncos subsequently put all of their Origin players in quarantine . 
 = = Change of sports = = 
 On 29 July 2009 , Hunt signed a deal to switch codes and play Australian rules football for the newly formed Gold Coast Football Club which had joined the Australian Football League ( AFL ) in the 2011 season . The deal , reputed to be worth over $ 3 million , was subsidised by the AFL and included a substantial component of AFL development and promotional responsibility . The move generated significant controversy in both the NRL and the AFL and received international media coverage . 
 On 17 October 2009 , it was revealed that Hunt had agreed to play for the French professional rugby union team Biarritz Olympique based in Biarritz , Aquitaine . Hunt played in the Top 14 French club competition and the European Heineken Cup . The six @-@ month deal was arranged by his manager , David <unk> , after the previous deal fell through . He returned to Australia in May 2010 to begin his contract with the Gold Coast Suns . 
 At the commencement of his AFL contract in 2010 , Hunt became one of only three AFL players to have earned over a million a year , the others being Jonathan Brown and Chris Judd . He is the first player to appear in the senior grade of both the NRL and the AFL ( or their historical equivalents ) . 
 Before his AFL career had begun , Hunt featured in television commercials for <unk> Vitamins introduced as an Gold Coast AFL player . 
 The AFL 's experiment was largely derided by AFL personalities throughout Hunt 's early Australian rules career . Wayne Carey is quoted to have said that " I just think he 's really going to struggle . I 'm just not sure a rugby player - as good as he is - can do it . " Tony Shaw was quoted in 2011 to have said " he just cannot play the game naturally and it won 't work . Just say to him , ' Take your money , you 've been fantastic for us ' , maybe see the year out , but I wouldn 't be playing him very often any more . " Paul Roos is quoted to have said that " a player of Karmichael Hunt 's current ability would probably be worth only $ 100 @,@ 000 in the AFL " . Jason Akermanis is quoted to have said in reference to both Hunt and Israel Folau – who converted from rugby league to Australian rules football the year after Hunt – that " if they can 't run and they can 't handball - and we 're only talking basics like kick , run , chase , handball and get body @-@ to @-@ body collisions - and can 't get up to speed its going to be such a waste of time and money . " 
 = = Rugby Union career = = 
 = = = Biarritz Olympique ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Despite never playing Rugby Union professionally Hunt made his Rugby Union debut for the French Barbarians in Brussels , Belgium on 14 November 2009 . He would be selected at the outside center position in the Barbarians ' 39 @-@ 26 victory . Hunt made his debut for Biarritz on 21 November 2009 against Clermont . While competing in the Top 14 for Biarritz the team also competed in the 2009 – 10 Heineken Cup . After topping their group Biarritz would record victories over Welsh team Ospreys and Irish team Munster to reach the 2010 Heineken Cup Final . Hunt would score the only try in the final held at Stade de France in front of 78 @,@ 962 fans . This would be his last game for Biarritz on 22 May 2010 in the team 's 21 @-@ 19 loss . 
 = = = Queensland Reds ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 In August 2014 , Hunt joined the Queensland Reds on a three @-@ year contract ( starting from 2015 ) , with the Reds paying between $ 600 @,@ 000 and $ 700 @,@ 000 to secure his signature . Hunt 's signing coincided with the signing of Wallaby James O 'Connor from French Top 14 side Toulon . 
 On 16 January 2015 , Hunt , along with teammate Rob Simmons , were appointed vice @-@ captains of the Queensland Reds . 
 = = = International = = = 
 In 2016 , Hunt was named in the Wallabies preliminary 39 @-@ man squad for the 2016 series against England . 
 = = Australian rules football career = = 
 = = = Gold Coast Football Club ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 = = = = Victorian Football League ( 2010 ) = = = = 
 On 12 June 2010 , Hunt played his first Australian rules football match for Victorian Football League team the Gold Coast in their heavy loss against the Coburg Tigers at the Highgate Recreation Reserve in Craigieburn , Victoria . Playing at full @-@ forward Hunt had three shots at goal in the first quarter , two from free kicks . Hunt kicked two goals in quick succession after he was awarded a free kick for a late push from an opponent after his running goal in the <unk> . After this he was quiet with few possessions and left the field with cramp in the third quarter . 
 In his second match against Frankston Football Club on 26 June 2010 , Hunt was tried as a defender , playing fullback on a taller , heavier opponent . He drew some criticism for not getting any kicks and for an inability to read the play , however running a total around 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) during the game on and off the bench Hunt managed just a handful of possessions and tackles in his side 's convincing win . 
 Hunt 's coaching staff have speculated him to make an experimental shift into the midfield ( as centreman or ruck rover ) , however he was again selected at fullback for the match against the Box Hill Hawks . In the match Hunt had just three kicks , three handpasses and two marks before straining his groin in the final minutes and missed following games through injury . 
 In Cairns , Hunt had a breakthrough game against the Bendigo Bombers showing dramatic improvement . He followed the good form being named in the Gold Coast 's best and clearly the best <unk> against the Sandringham Football Club , again playing in defence showing good run and carry skills with 15 disposals . 
 = = = = Australian Football League ( 2011 – 2014 ) = = = = 
 Hunt 's Australian Football League pre @-@ season competition debut was at Blacktown Olympic Park on 19 February 2011 in front of a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 . Playing at fullback , he was named among the side 's best in the three point win against the Sydney Swans while playing on dual Brownlow Medallist Adam <unk> . In each of his two first pre @-@ season matches , the second against the Greater Western Sydney Giants , his performance statistics were consistent at six possessions and a tackle . 
 His first official AFL game was in the Suns ' debut match in round two of the 2011 season against Carlton . He kicked his first AFL goal on 28 May 2011 against Geelong at <unk> Stadium . In the same match , however , he earned a one @-@ week suspension for head @-@ high contact to Geelong 's Nathan Vardy . 
 Hunt 's promising first season was rewarded by being named on the half @-@ back flank in the Courier Mail 2011 Queensland Team of the Year . He followed this up by winning Gold Coast 's inaugural Most Improved Player Award at the club 's best and fairest awards on 9 September 2011 . 
 On 5 March 2012 , Hunt re @-@ signed with the Gold Coast until 2014 , continuing his AFL ambassador role , expressing ambitions to become a midfielder . He was elevated to the Gold Coast 's leadership group . 
 He began his second season solidly , ranking among the 3 best Gold Coast players in terms of clearances in round 3 against Essendon . Hunt had 16 disposals during the match , and received press notice for a " crunching tackle " of Angus <unk> . 
 In round 4 Hunt had a 20 @-@ possession display against Brisbane . In the following match against North Melbourne , he had 16 disposals , prompting North Melbourne coach Brad Scott to comment that " Anyone who has criticised Karmichael Hunt over the journey should be eating their words and should be apologizing to him because , on that performance , he 's a bona fide AFL midfielder . " Hunt continued to contribute to his side with a 22 @-@ disposal display against Fremantle in round 6 that included a goal . Going into round 7 , Greater Western Sydney coach Kevin Sheedy commented that the in form Hunt , rather than star player Ablett was the key threat in the match and would assign defensive taggers to him . Despite another consistent 16 disposal game , Hunt struggled to break the tag and some media commentators suggested that he had been outperformed by fellow league to Aussie Rules convert Israel Folau . 
 At Cazaly 's Stadium in Cairns in front of 10 @,@ 961 against Richmond in round 16 , Hunt broke the club 's losing drought with an after siren goal in a two @-@ goal performance which again put him in the club 's best . Following the conclusion of his second season Hunt was again named in the Courier Mail Queensland Team of the Year for 2012 , this time being named at half forward flank . 
 Hunt 's final two years in the AFL were plagued with injury , with Hunt playing just 9 games in 2013 , and just 1 game in 2014 . In August 2014 , Hunt announced that he would be leaving the AFL to return to rugby . A short time later , he signed with Australian Super Rugby team Queensland Reds . 
 Hunt 's 4 @-@ year stint in the AFL received mixed reviews , with praise particularly coming from his club , while it was criticised as " an ill @-@ advised , ill @-@ fated experiment " by former AFL player and coach Leigh Matthews . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 2010 season not counted in overall statistics as it was in the VFL . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = Castle Crashers = 
 Castle Crashers is a 2D beat ' em up video game developed by The Behemoth . It features music created by members of Newgrounds . The Xbox 360 version was released on August 27 , 2008 via Xbox Live Arcade as part of the Xbox Live Summer of Arcade . The PlayStation 3 version was released in North America on August 31 , 2010 and November 3 , 2010 in Europe via the PlayStation Network . A Microsoft Windows version , exclusive to Steam , was announced on August 16 , 2012 . The game is set in a fictional medieval universe in which a dark wizard steals a mystical gem and captures four princesses . Four knights are charged by the king to rescue the princesses , recover the jewel , and bring the wizard to justice . On June 15 , 2015 , The Behemoth announced a remastered version of the game for Xbox One . 
 Castle Crashers was well received by critics on all platforms on which it was released . The Xbox 360 version holds a score of 82 @.@ 73 % at GameRankings and 82 / 100 at Metacritic , while the PlayStation 3 version averages 88 @.@ 67 % and 85 / 100 at the same sites . The PC version holds a score of 7 @.@ 9 on Metacritic , indicating generally favorable reviews . The game was a commercial success , and the Xbox 360 version has sold over 2 @.@ 6 million copies alone as of year @-@ end 2011 . The PlayStation 3 version has also done well , moving over 181 @,@ 000 units as of December 2010 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Castle Crashers is a side @-@ scrolling beat @-@ em @-@ up that incorporates a small number of role @-@ playing video game elements . After selecting a character , the player then selects a starting stage through an overworld map . After completing a stage , the player has the choice to revisit it or to move to another stage . The map also displays shops where the player character can buy items and weaponry using coins gained from defeated foes . Arena stages can be unlocked where the player character can take on challenges to unlock additional characters . 
 Castle Crashers supports cooperative gameplay for up to four players , either locally or online . The game progression in terms of what stages are unlocked is defined by the player who is furthest along , although some levels require all players to have unlocked them before proceeding to them ; however , each player character will gain experience points and acquire wealth , weapons , and animal orbs independently as they progress with the rest of the party . In each stage , the player can use melee and combination attacks . Each character has a unique magical ability in order to defeat foes and a health meter that , if drained from enemy attacks , will cause the character to fall in battle . In single player mode , this ends the stage ; however , in cooperative multiplayer other players may attempt to revive the downed character . 
 Characters gain experience points by damaging foes which allow the character to level up . Each level gained allows the player to allocate points towards the character 's four basic combat attributes . Certain level advances also grant new combination attacks . Progress is tracked for each of the playable characters separately . The character 's magic level is also tracked by a meter and regenerates over time . Numerous weapons can be found in the game , each that have various effects to the character 's attributes when equipped . The player can find animal companions for their character that may assist in battle , improve the character 's attributes , or provide another special ability such as increased treasure earned from defeated foes . Each version of the game features two minigames . In Arena , the first minigame , player characters attempt to survive through several waves of enemies , or fight each other . This minigame is available on all versions . The Xbox 360 , Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows versions feature All You Can <unk> , a button @-@ mashing contest between all characters to attempt to eat as much food as possible . The PlayStation 3 version features a Volleyball minigame for up to four players and four AI characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Castle Crashers is set in a fictional medieval universe . It begins with four knights attending a party in a king 's castle . During the party a dark wizard arrives , stealing a floating mystical gem and capturing four princesses . The king sends the knights to retrieve the gem , rescue his daughters , and bring the wizard to justice . The knights encounter several enemies along the way , including other knights , multiple encounters with a cyclops , a giant " cat @-@ fish " , and alien invaders . 
 As the knights progress they succeed in rescuing the princesses , and ultimately the journey culminates in a final showdown with the wizard . The knights emerge victorious from the confrontation , having defeated the dark wizard , rescuing all of the king 's daughters , and recovering the mystical gem . The knights then ride the reclaimed gem through several empty battlefields on their trip back to the castle . At the castle the king brings one of his daughters for one of the knights to kiss , her face veiled . 
 = = Development and marketing = = 
 Castle Crashers was first revealed on July 14 , 2005 at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International ; however , the game did not receive its title until 2006 Comic @-@ Con , when it was announced for Xbox Live Arcade . Though the original Comic @-@ Con 2005 demo was shown running on a Nintendo GameCube , no mention has been made of a release on a Nintendo @-@ based platform . It was released for the Xbox 360 on August 27 , 2008 . On July 23 , 2009 The Behemoth announced that Castle Crashers would be coming to the PlayStation Network . The game was released on the PlayStation 3 in North America on August 31 , 2010 , and in Europe on November 3 , 2010 . A Microsoft Windows version exclusive to Steam was announced on August 16 , 2012 . 
 The game 's art style was developed by The Behemoth 's Lead Artist Dan Paladin . As the team created new locales and characters , placeholder art was used as a template for look , size and scale of the final art . Paladin drew multiple partial renditions of a game asset , then selected one for finalization . Although Paladin was the primary source for much of the art , programmer Tom Fulp assisted with the game 's art , creating some of the minion creatures for boss characters . Paladin cited River City Ransom as his primary inspiration for the game 's art style , noting the character 's expressions when damaged as a particular point of influence . Fulp added that several beat ' em ups from the 1980s and 90s influenced the game , such as Guardian Heroes , Final Fight and Double Dragon . Much of the music for the game was created by Newgrounds users , with The Behemoth contracting over twenty individuals for their tracks . Paladin himself scored two of the tracks in the game . The soundtrack was made available for free on September 1 , 2008 via the Newgrounds website . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 The Xbox 360 version of the game features four downloadable content packs . On January 14 , 2009 , the King Pack downloadable content was released and added two characters , another animal orb and three weapons . On August 26 , 2009 a second downloadable content pack known as the <unk> Pack was released and further added two characters , one animal orb and two weapons , as well as a picture pack for Xbox Live profiles . Both packs are included as part of the full game on the PlayStation 3 version of Castle Crashers . Additionally , the title character from The Behemoth 's previous title , Alien Hominid , is available to play on the Xbox 360 for those who have purchased Alien Hominid HD . As The Behemoth had no way of telling whether an individual had purchased the PlayStation 2 version of Alien Hominid , the character was included in the PS3 version free of charge . Writing on their blog , the developers explained " we are going to attempt what is the most fair and make the logical assumption that by this point everyone has PS2 Alien Hominid , right ? " The Behemoth announced A Pink Knight Pack , which features a Pink Knight , an unlockable character in the Xbox Live Arcade version of Super Meat Boy , and five new weapons on February 2 , 2011 . It was released for the PlayStation 3 on February 8 , 2011 , with a release on the Xbox 360 on August 27 , 2011 along with the Blacksmith Pack which adds one additional character and five new weapons . All proceeds from the content will be donated to the Breast Cancer Research Foundation . If Xbox 360 players own both Castle Crashers and Behemoth 's follow @-@ up title , <unk> Theater , players can unlock <unk> <unk> , a new orb and three new weapons , as well as Castle Crashers content in <unk> Theater . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Castle Crashers was well received on each platform . GameRankings reports an 82 @.@ 73 % aggregate score on the Xbox 360 , while the PlayStation 3 averaging an 86 @.@ 67 % . Metacritic reports similar scores , with 82 / 100 on the Xbox 360 and 85 / 100 for the PlayStation 3 . It has been a commercial success , with the Xbox 360 version selling over two million copies on the Xbox 360 alone as of year @-@ end 2010 . 2011 's totals were over 2 @.@ 6 million on Xbox Live Arcade alone . The PlayStation 3 version has also done well , moving over 181 @,@ 000 in 2010 . IGN editor Cam Shea ranked it third on his top 10 list of Xbox Live Arcade games . He praised it for being both a call @-@ back to a much @-@ loved genre and a great piece of game design . Additionally in a September 2010 ranking , IGN listed Castle Crashers fifth in their top twenty @-@ five Xbox Live Arcade titles of all time . It was voted 2008 Best Game of the Year at the Xbox Live Arcade Awards . Castle Crashers was also Xbox Live Arcade 's best @-@ selling title of 2008 . Gaming Target 's staff named the game as one of their " 40 Games We 'll Still Be Playing From 2008 . " 
 Reviewers universally praised the unique art style of Castle Crashers . GameSpot 's Don Francis noted that the " crisp art design really makes the game shine . " 1UP.com 's Andrew Hayward noted that the game 's hand @-@ drawn characters , effects , and scenery make the game " shine . " Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer stated the game 's art was more detailed and polished than The Behemoth 's previous title , Alien Hominid . The game 's humor was generally lauded by reviewers . Writing for Gaming Target , Troy <unk> stated the game was " bigger and funnier " than Alien Hominid . Francis and IGN 's Hilary Goldstein also praised the game 's humor . The gameplay also received high marks from reviewers . GameTrailers ' staff stated that the game has " a deceptive simplicity that sucks you right in . " Goldstein praised the simplistic gameplay , and said the game was a modern throwback to classic beat ' em ups . He additionally noted the high replay value , and cited the game 's four player multiplayer and number of unlockables as reasons to continually play the game . 
 Several reviewers expressed early frustration in regards to multiplayer connection issues , however these issues were resolved in a later title update to the game . Francis stated that the connection issues " handicap the multiplayer experience . " " Despite trying all day and night on launch day , we were only able to get a couple of two @-@ player games going for a couple of levels before the connections were lost " stated Whitehead . Hayward also reported slight connectivity issues in the PlayStation 3 version . The PlayStation 3 version of the game also received criticism from GameSpot 's Carolyn Petit for its additional Volleyball game mode , who described it simply as " lousy . " 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 Some users experienced problems finding available online games , as well as their Xbox 360 sometimes freezing when attempting to join an Xbox Live game , or while already in a game . " There are certain network settings , " said Paladin , " where , if you 're in a very specific network environment , it won 't work with another person 's connection and that 's what 's happening . But that 's something we 're already addressing by working with Microsoft to get a patch out as fast as possible . " In addition to multiplayer problems , the game could also occasionally suffer from corrupted save files , causing players to lose character progress . In an interview with Joystiq , Tom Fulp and Dan Paladin of the Behemoth stated that they were working with Microsoft to get a patch released as soon as possible in order to fix the issues . A patch for the game was released on December 24 , 2008 fixing glitches and exploits as well as resolving networking issues that were experienced at the game 's launch . Similar networking problems have also been reported for the PlayStation 3 version of the game . The PlayStation 3 version of the game only allows one profile to be signed in per console , with additional players being unable to use their own progress rather than of the profile in use . 
 = Break It Off = 
 " Break It Off " is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna from her second studio album A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) , and features guest vocals from Sean Paul . It was written by Donovan Bennett , Paul , K. Ford and Rihanna , while production was handled by Don Corleon . The song was released on November 13 , 2006 , as the album 's fourth and final single . " Break It Off " is a futuristic pop @-@ dancehall song , which is layered over an electro @-@ reggae beat . 
 Critical reception of the song was positive , with reviewers praising the collaboration between Rihanna and Paul and as a return to the former 's roots . " Break It Off " made chart appearances on the singles charts of the United States and Belgium . It peaked at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and number six on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . In the Flanders region of Belgium , it peaked at number 10 . Rihanna performed the song at Radio One Big Weekend in 2007 and it was included on the set list of her Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) , and was subsequently included on the accompanying DVD release , entitled Good Girl Gone Bad Live . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Break It Off " was recorded at 2 Hard Studios in Kingston , Jamaica . It was written by Donovan Bennett , Sean Paul Henriques ( better known as Sean Paul ) , K. Ford and Rihanna , who is credited as Robyn Fenty . Production of the song was handled by Don Corleon . It was engineered by Jeremy Harding and Bennett , who also mixed the song . All instrumentation was provided by Bennett . Paul explained how he and Rihanna met in a 2011 interview with Rap @-@ Up . During her visit to Jamaica , Rihanna was taken on a tour around the island by Paul , where he took her to some of the beaches and experienced the nightlife . He continued to explain that they spent a few days together and that he took her to the Bob Marley Museum , which was something she had " always wanted to do . " Reminiscing on " Break It Off " and Rihanna , Paul stated that working with the singer and creating the song was " his most memorable collaboration . " 
 " Break It Off " was released as the fourth and final single from Rihanna 's second studio album , A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . It was released to US Contemporary hit radio station playlists on November 13 , 2006 , by Def Jam Recordings . It was also made available to download digitally via iTunes in various countries around the world on February 27 , 2007 , including Australia , Austria , Belgium and Spain . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Break It Off " is a futuristic " pop @-@ dancehall " song , which is layered over an electro @-@ reggae beat . It received a comparison by Ruth Jamieson for The Guardian to Rihanna 's debut single " Pon de Replay " from her first studio album , Music of the Sun . According to Dan Charnas for The Washington Post , " Break It Off " showcases Rihanna 's Caribbean roots . " We Ride " is written in the key of D major and is set in common time with a moderate dance groove with 130 beats per minute ( BPM ) . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans one octave from the lower note of A3 to the higher note of A4 . The song includes piano keys and guitar strings as part of its instrumental composition . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Break It Off " garnered a positive response from music critics . David Jeffries for AllMusic was complimentary of " Break It Off " , writing that it is " totally juiced " and that she provides good competition for Paul . Kelefa Sanneh for The New York Times praised the song , and described it as Rihanna 's " triumphant return to her old formula . " Quentin B. Huff for PopMatters lauded Sean Paul for his contribution to the song while praising Rihanna 's hook , writing that " [ Rihanna 's ] hook is so infectious that hers is the voice you ultimately remember . That 's another dancehall @-@ flavored song and another winner . " Bill Lamb for About.com called " Break It Off " , along with " Kisses Don 't Lie " , " candidates for widespread pop radio airplay " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Break It Off " debuted at number 40 on the US Pop Songs chart in the issue dated November 18 , 2006 . The following week , it ascended to number 35 , and again to number 32 in its third week on the chart . " Break It Off " climbed into the top 30 at number 28 in its fourth week on December 9 , 2006 , and to number 25 in its fifth week . On December 23 , 2006 , the song climbed again to number 21 , and reached its 2006 peak of number 16 on December 30 , 2006 . In the first chart issue of Billboard in January 2007 , " Break It Off " charted at number 14 . It broke into the top 10 on February 3 , 2007 , and ascended to number seven the following week . " Break It Off " peaked at number six on February 24 , 2007 . The song remained on the Pop Songs chart for a total of 22 weeks . On December 9 , 2006 , " Break It Off " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 95 . The song climbed to number 52 on March 3 , 2007 , and surged 42 chart positions to number 10 the following week . In its fourteenth week on the chart , the song peaked at number nine , and was awarded with the Digital Gainer honor . On March 24 , 2007 , the song debuted and peaked at number 10 in the Flanders region of Belgium . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Rihanna performed the song as part of a set list at Radio One Big Weekend in 2007 . The set consisted of " Pon de Replay " , " Break It Off " , " SOS " , " Breakin ' Dishes " , " Unfaithful " , " Shut Up and Drive " and " Umbrella " . " Break It Off " was also included on the set list of Rihanna 's Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) , and was later included on the DVD release , entitled Good Girl Gone Bad Live . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Break It Off " – 3 : 33 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at 2 Hard Studios , Kingston , Jamaica . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Donovan Bennett , Sean Paul Henriques , K. Ford , Robyn Fenty 
 Production – Don Corleon 
 Engineer – Jeremy Harding and Donovan Bennett 
 Mixing – Donovan Bennett 
 Instruments – Donovan Bennett 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of A Girl Like Me , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio adds and release history = = 
 = Ethanol fuel in Brazil = 
 Brazil is the world 's second largest producer of ethanol fuel . Brazil and the United States led the industrial production of ethanol fuel in 2014 , together accounting for 83 @.@ 4 percent of the world 's production . In 2014 Brazil produced 23 @.@ 4 billion liters ( 6 @.@ 19 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) , representing 25 @.@ 2 percent of the world 's total ethanol used as fuel . 
 Brazil is considered to have the world 's first sustainable biofuels economy and the biofuel industry leader , a policy model for other countries ; and its sugarcane ethanol " the most successful alternative fuel to date . " However , some authors consider that the successful Brazilian ethanol model is sustainable only in Brazil due to its advanced agri @-@ industrial technology and its enormous amount of arable land available ; while according to other authors it is a solution only for some countries in the tropical zone of Latin America , the Caribbean , and Africa . 
 Brazil ’ s 40 @-@ year @-@ old ethanol fuel program is based on the most efficient agricultural technology for sugarcane cultivation in the world , uses modern equipment and cheap sugar cane as feedstock , the residual cane @-@ waste ( bagasse ) is used to produce heat and power , which results in a very competitive price and also in a high energy balance ( output energy / input energy ) , which varies from 8 @.@ 3 for average conditions to 10 @.@ 2 for best practice production . In 2010 , the U.S. EPA designated Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an advanced biofuel due to its 61 % reduction of total life cycle greenhouse gas emissions , including direct indirect land use change emissions . 
 There are no longer any light vehicles in Brazil running on pure gasoline . Since 1976 the government made it mandatory to blend anhydrous ethanol with gasoline , fluctuating between 10 % to 22 % . and requiring just a minor adjustment on regular gasoline engines . In 1993 the mandatory blend was fixed by law at 22 % anhydrous ethanol ( E22 ) by volume in the entire country , but with leeway to the Executive to set different percentages of ethanol within pre @-@ established boundaries . In 2003 these limits were set at a minimum of 20 % and a maximum of 25 % . Since July 1 , 2007 the mandatory blend is 25 % of anhydrous ethanol and 75 % gasoline or E25 blend . The lower limit was reduced to 18 % in April 2011 due to recurring ethanol supply shortages and high prices that take place between harvest seasons . By mid March 2015 the government raised temporarily the ethanol blend in regular gasoline from 25 % to 27 % . 
 The Brazilian car manufacturing industry developed flexible @-@ fuel vehicles that can run on any proportion of gasoline ( E20 @-@ E25 blend ) and hydrous ethanol ( E100 ) . Introduced in the market in 2003 , flex vehicles became a commercial success , dominating the passenger vehicle market with a 94 % market share of all new cars and light vehicles sold in 2013 . By mid @-@ 2010 there were 70 flex models available in the market , and as of December 2013 , a total of 15 car manufacturers produce flex @-@ fuel engines , dominating all light vehicle segments except sports cars , off @-@ road vehicles and minivans . The cumulative production of flex @-@ fuel cars and light commercial vehicles reached the milestone of 10 million vehicles in March 2010 , and the 20 million @-@ unit milestone was reached in June 2013 . As of June 2015 , flex @-@ fuel light @-@ duty vehicle cumulative sales totaled 25 @.@ 5 million units , and production of flex motorcycles totaled 4 million in March 2015 . 
 The success of " flex " vehicles , together with the mandatory E25 blend throughout the country , allowed ethanol fuel consumption in the country to achieve a 50 % market share of the gasoline @-@ powered fleet in February 2008 . In terms of energy equivalent , sugarcane ethanol represented 17 @.@ 6 % of the country 's total energy consumption by the transport sector in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 Sugarcane has been cultivated in Brazil since 1532 as sugar was one of the first commodities exported to Europe by the Portuguese settlers . The first use of sugarcane ethanol as a fuel in Brazil dates back to the late twenties and early thirties of the twentieth century , with the introduction of the automobile in the country . Ethanol fuel production peaked during World War II and , as German submarine attacks threatened oil supplies , the mandatory blend became as high as 50 % in 1943 . After the end of the war cheap oil caused gasoline to prevail , and ethanol blends were only used sporadically , mostly to take advantage of sugar surpluses , until the seventies , when the first oil crisis resulted in gasoline shortages and awareness of the dangers of oil dependence . As a response to this crisis , the Brazilian government began promoting bioethanol as a fuel . The National Alcohol Program -Pró @-@ Álcool- ( Portuguese : ' Programa Nacional do Álcool ' ) , launched in 1975 , was a nationwide program financed by the government to phase out automobile fuels derived from fossil fuels , such as gasoline , in favor of ethanol produced from sugar cane . 
 The first phase of the program concentrated on production of anhydrous ethanol for blending with gasoline . The Brazilian government made mandatory the blending of ethanol fuel with gasoline , fluctuating from 1976 until 1992 between 10 % to 22 % . Due to this mandatory minimum gasoline blend , pure gasoline ( E0 ) is no longer sold in the country . A federal law was passed in October 1993 establishing a mandatory blend of 22 % anhydrous ethanol ( E22 ) in the entire country . This law also authorized the Executive to set different percentages of ethanol within pre @-@ established boundaries ; and since 2003 these limits were fixed at a maximum of 25 % ( E25 ) and a minimum of 20 % ( E20 ) by volume . Since then , the government has set the percentage of the ethanol blend according to the results of the sugarcane harvest and the levels of ethanol production from sugarcane , resulting in blend variations even within the same year . 
 Since July 2007 the mandatory blend is 25 % of anhydrous ethanol and 75 % gasoline or E25 blend . However , in 2010 , and as a result of supply concerns and high ethanol fuel prices , the government mandated a temporary 90 @-@ day blend reduction from E25 to E20 beginning February 1 , 2010 . By mid March 2015 the government raised temporarily the ethanol blend in regular gasoline from 25 % to 27 % . The blend on premium gasoline was kept at 25 % upon request by <unk> , the Brazilian association of automakers , because of concerns about the effects on the higher blend on cars that were built for E25 , as opposed to flex @-@ fuel cars . The government approved the higher blend as an economic incentive for ethanol producers , due to an existing overstock of over 1 billion liters ( 264 million US gallons ) of ethanol . The implementation of <unk> is expected to allow the consumption of the overstock before the end of 2015 . 
 After testing in government fleets with several prototypes developed by the local carmakers , and compelled by the second oil crisis , the Fiat 147 , the first modern commercial neat ethanol car ( E100 only ) was launched to the market in July 1979 . The Brazilian government provided three important initial drivers for the ethanol industry : guaranteed purchases by the state @-@ owned oil company Petrobras , low @-@ interest loans for agro @-@ industrial ethanol firms , and fixed gasoline and ethanol prices where hydrous ethanol sold for 59 % of the government @-@ set gasoline price at the pump . <unk> ethanol production in this manner and setting an artificially low price established ethanol as an alternative to gasoline . 
 After reaching more than 4 million cars and light trucks running on pure ethanol by the late 1980s , representing one third of the country 's motor vehicle fleet , ethanol production and sales of ethanol @-@ only cars tumbled due to several factors . First , gasoline prices fell sharply as a result of the 1980s oil glut , but mainly because of a shortage of ethanol fuel supply in the local market left thousands of vehicles in line at gas stations or out of fuel in their garages by mid @-@ 1989 . As supply could not keep pace with the increasing demand required by the now significant ethanol @-@ only fleet , the Brazilian government began importing ethanol in 1991 . Since 1979 until December 2010 neat ethanol vehicles totaled 5 @.@ 7 million units . The number of neat ethanol vehicles still in use was estimated between 2 and 3 million vehicles by 2003 , and estimated at 1 @.@ 22 million as of December 2011 . 
 Confidence on ethanol @-@ powered vehicles was restored only with the introduction in the Brazilian market of flexible @-@ fuel vehicles . In March 2003 Volkswagen launched in the Brazilian market the Gol 1 @.@ 6 Total Flex , the first commercial flexible fuel vehicle capable of running on any blend of gasoline and ethanol . By 2010 manufacturers that build flexible fuel vehicles include Chevrolet , Fiat , Ford , Peugeot , Renault , Volkswagen , Honda , Mitsubishi , Toyota , Citroën , Nissan , and Kia Motors . In 2013 , Ford launched the first flex fuel car with direct injection : the Focus 2 @.@ 0 <unk> Direct Flex . 
 Flexible fuel cars were 22 % of the car sales in 2004 , 73 % in 2005 , 87 @.@ 6 % in July 2008 , and reached a record 94 % in August 2009 . The cumulative production of flex @-@ fuel cars and light commercial vehicles reached the milestone of 10 million vehicles in March 2010 , and 15 million in January 2012 . Registrations of flex @-@ fuel cars and light trucks represented 87 @.@ 0 % of all passenger and light duty vehicles sold in the country in 2012 . Production passed the 20 million @-@ unit mark in June 2013 . By the end of 2014 , flex @-@ fuel cars represented 54 % of the Brazilian registered stock of light @-@ duty vehicles , while gasoline only vehicles represented 34 @.@ 3 % . As of June 2015 , flex @-@ fuel light @-@ duty vehicle cumulative sales totaled 25 @.@ 5 million units . 
 The rapid adoption and commercial success of " flex " vehicles , as they are popularly known , together with the mandatory blend of alcohol with gasoline as E25 fuel , have increased ethanol consumption up to the point that by February 2008 a landmark in ethanol consumption was achieved when ethanol retail sales surpassed the 50 % market share of the gasoline @-@ powered fleet . This level of ethanol fuel consumption had not been reached since the end of the 1980s , at the peak of the Pró @-@ Álcool Program . 
 Under the auspices of the <unk> for Sustainable Transport ( BEST ) project , the first ethanol @-@ powered ( ED95 ) bus began operations in São Paulo city on December 2007 as a one @-@ year trial project . A second ED95 trial bus began operating in São Paulo city in November 2009 . Based on the satisfactory results obtained during the 3 @-@ year trial operation of the two buses , in November 2010 the municipal government of São Paulo city signed an agreement with UNICA , Cosan , Scania and <unk> Metropolitana " , the local bus operator , to introduced a fleet of 50 ethanol @-@ powered ED95 buses by May 2011 . The local government objective is for the city 's entire bus fleet , which is made of 15 @,@ 000 diesel @-@ powered buses , to use only renewable fuels by 2018 . The first ethanol @-@ powered buses were delivered in May 2011 , and the 50 ethanol @-@ powered ED95 buses are scheduled to begin regular service in São Paulo in June 2011 . 
 Another innovation of the Brazilian flexible @-@ fuel technology was the development of flex @-@ fuel motorcycles . The first flex motorcycle was launched by Honda in March 2009 . Produced by its Brazilian subsidiary Moto Honda da Amazônia , the CG 150 Titan Mix is sold for around US $ 2 @,@ 700 . In order to avoid cold start problems , the fuel tank must have at least 20 % of gasoline at temperatures below 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . In September 2009 , Honda launched a second flexible @-@ fuel motorcycle , the on @-@ off road NXR 150 Bros Mix . By December 2010 both Honda flexible @-@ fuel motorcycles had reached cumulative sales of 515 @,@ 726 units , representing an 18 @.@ 1 % market share of the Brazilian new motorcycle sales in 2010 . Two other flex @-@ fuel motorcycles manufactured by Honda were launched in October 2010 and January 2011 , the GC 150 FAN and the Honda BIZ 125 Flex . During 2011 a total of 956 @,@ 117 flex @-@ fuel motorcycles were produced , raising its market share to 56 @.@ 7 % . Production reached the 2 million mark in August 2012 . Flexible @-@ fuel motorcycle production passed the 3 million @-@ unit milestone in October 2013 , and the 4 million mark in March 2015 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Economic and production indicators = = = 
 Ethanol production in Brazil uses sugarcane as feedstock and relies on first @-@ generation technologies based on the use of the sucrose content of sugarcane . Ethanol yield has grown 3 @.@ 77 % per year since 1975 and productivity gains have been based on improvements in the agricultural and industrial phases of the production process . Further improvements on best practices are expected to allow in the short to mid @-@ term an average ethanol productivity of 9 @,@ 000 liters per hectare . 
 There were 378 ethanol plants operating in Brazil by July 2008 , 126 dedicated to ethanol production and 252 producing both sugar and ethanol . There are 15 additional plants dedicated exclusively to sugar production . These plants have an installed capacity of crushing 538 million metric tons of sugarcane per year , and there are 25 plants under construction expected to be on line by 2009 that will add an additional capacity of crushing 50 million tons of sugarcane per year . The typical plant costs approximately US $ 150 million and requires a nearby sugarcane plantation of 30 @,@ 000 hectares . 
 Ethanol production is concentrated in the Central and Southeast regions of the country , led by São Paulo state , with around 60 % of the country 's total ethanol production , followed by Paraná ( 8 % ) , Minas Gerais ( 8 % ) and Goiás ( 5 % ) . These two regions have been responsible for 90 % of Brazil 's ethanol production since 2005 and the harvest season goes from April to November . The Northeast Region is responsible for the remaining 10 % of ethanol production , led by Alagoas with 2 % of total production . The harvest season in the North @-@ Northeast region goes from September to March , and the average productivity in this region is lower than the South @-@ Central region . Due to the difference in the two main harvest seasons , Brazilian statistics for sugar and ethanol production are commonly reported on a harvest two @-@ year basis rather than on a calendar year . 
 For the 2008 / 09 harvest it is expected that about 44 % of the sugarcane will be used for sugar , 1 % for alcoholic beverages , and 55 % for ethanol production . An estimate of between 24 @.@ 9 billion litres ( 6 @.@ 58 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) to 27 @.@ 1 billion litres ( 7 @.@ 16 billion gallons ) of ethanol are expected to be produced in 2008 / 09 harvest year , with most of the production being destined for the internal market , and only 4 @.@ 2 billion liters ( 1 @.@ 1 billion gallons ) for exports , with an estimated 2 @.@ 5 billion liters ( 660 million gallons ) destined for the US market . Sugarcane cultivated area grew from 7 million to 7 @.@ 8 million hectares of land from 2007 to 2008 , mainly using abandoned pasture lands . In 2008 Brazil has 276 million hectares of arable land , 72 % use for pasture , 16 @.@ 9 % for grain crops , and 2 @.@ 8 % for sugarcane , meaning that ethanol is just requiring approximately 1 @.@ 5 % of all arable land available in the country . 
 As sugar and ethanol share the same feedstock and their industrial processing is fully integrated , formal employment statistics are usually presented together . In 2000 there were 642 @,@ 848 workers employed by these industries , and as ethanol production expanded , by 2005 there were 982 @,@ 604 workers employed in the sugarcane cultivation and industrialization , including 414 @,@ 668 workers in the sugarcane fields , 439 @,@ 573 workers in the sugar mills , and 128 @,@ 363 workers in the ethanol distilleries . While employment in the ethanol distilleries grew 88 @.@ 4 % from 2000 to 2005 , employment in the sugar fields just grew 16 @.@ 2 % as a direct result of expansion of mechanical harvest instead manual harvesting , which avoids burning the sugarcane fields before manual cutting and also increases productivity . The states with the most employment in 2005 were São Paulo ( 39 @.@ 2 % ) , Pernambuco ( 15 % ) , Alagoas ( 14 @.@ 1 % ) , Paraná ( 7 % ) , and Minas Gerais ( 5 @.@ 6 % ) . 
 = = = = 2009 – 2014 crisis = = = = 
 Since 2009 the Brazilian ethanol industry has experienced a crisis due to multiple causes . They include the economic crisis of 2008 ; poor sugarcane harvests due to unfavorable weather ; high sugar prices in the world market that made more attractive to produce sugar rather than ethanol ; a freeze imposed by the Brazilian government on the petrol and diesel prices . Brazilian ethanol fuel production in 2011 was 21 @.@ 1 billion liters ( 5 @.@ 6 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) , down from 26 @.@ 2 billion liters ( 6 @.@ 9 billion gallons ) in 2010 , while in 2012 the production of ethanol was 26 % lower than in 2008 . By 2012 a total of 41 ethanol plants out of about 400 have closed and the sugar @-@ cane crop yields dropped from 115 tonnes per hectare in 2008 to 69 tonnes per hectare in 2012 . 
 A supply shortage took place for several months during 2010 and 2011 , and prices climbed to the point that ethanol fuel was no longer attractive for owners of flex @-@ fuel vehicles ; the government reduced the minimum ethanol blend in gasoline to reduce demand and keep ethanol fuel prices from rising further ; and for the first time since the 1990s , ( corn ) ethanol fuel was imported from the United States . The imports totaled around 1 @.@ 5 billion litres in 2011 – 2012 . The ethanol share in the transport fuel market decreased from 55 % in 2008 to 35 % in 2012 . As a result of higher ethanol prices combined with government subsidies to keep gasoline price lower than the international market value , by November 2013 only 23 % flex @-@ fuel car owners were using ethanol regularly , down from 66 % in 2009 . 
 During 2014 Brazil produced 23 @.@ 4 billion liters ( 6 @.@ 19 billion U.S. liquid gallons ) of ethanol fuel , however , during that year Brazil imported ethanol from the United States , ranking as the second largest U.S. export market in 2014 after Canada , and representing about 13 % of total American exports . 
 = = = Agricultural technology = = = 
 A key aspect for the development of the ethanol industry in Brazil was the investment in agricultural research and development by both the public and private sector . The work of <unk> , the state @-@ owned company in charge for applied research on agriculture , together with research developed by state institutes and universities , especially in the State of São Paulo , have allowed Brazil to become a major innovator in the fields of biotechnology and agronomic practices , resulting in the most efficient agricultural technology for sugarcane cultivation in the world . Efforts have been concentrated in increasing the efficiency of inputs and processes to optimize output per hectare of feedstock , and the result has been a threefold increase of sugarcane yields in 29 years , as Brazilian average ethanol yields went from 2 @,@ 024 liters per ha in 1975 to 5 @,@ 917 liters per ha in 2004 ; allowing the efficiency of ethanol production to grow at a rate of 3 @.@ 77 % per year . Brazilian <unk> include the development of sugarcane varieties that have a larger sugar or energy content , one of the main drivers for high yields of ethanol per unit of planted area . The increase of the index total recoverable sugar ( TRS ) from sugarcane has been very significant , 1 @.@ 5 % per year in the period 1977 to 2004 , resulting in an increase from 95 to 140 kg / ha . Innovations in the industrial process have allowed an increase in sugar extraction in the period 1977 to 2003 . The average annual improvement was 0 @.@ 3 % ; some mills have already reached extraction efficiencies of 98 % . 
 Biotechnology research and genetic improvement have led to the development of strains that are more resistant to disease , bacteria , and pests , and also have the capacity to respond to different environments , thus allowing the expansion of sugarcane cultivation to areas previously considered inadequate for such cultures . By 2008 more than 500 sugarcane varieties are cultivated in Brazil , and 51 of them were released just during the last ten years . Four research programs , two private and two public , are devoted to further genetic improvement . Since the mid nineties , Brazilian biotechnology laboratories have developed transgenic varieties , still non <unk> . Identification of 40 @,@ 000 cane genes was completed in 2003 and there are a couple dozen research groups working on the functional genome , still on the experimental phase , but commercial results are expected within five years . 
 Also , there is ongoing research regarding sugarcane biological nitrogen fixation , with the most promising plant varieties showing yields three times the national average in soils of very low fertility , thus avoiding nitrogenous fertilization . There is also research for the development of second @-@ generation or cellulosic ethanol . In São Paulo state an increase of 12 % in sugar cane yield and 6 @.@ 4 % in sugar content is expected over the next decade . This advance combined with an expected 6 @.@ 2 % improvement in fermentation efficiency and 2 % in sugar extraction , may increase ethanol yields by 29 % , raising average ethanol productivity to 9 @,@ 000 liters / ha . Approximately US $ 50 million has recently been allocated for research and projects focused on advancing the <unk> of ethanol from sugarcane in São Paulo state . 
 = = = Production process = = = 
 Sucrose extracted from sugarcane accounts for little more than 30 % of the chemical energy stored in the harvested parts of the mature plant ; 35 % is in the leaves and stem tips , which are left in the fields during harvest , and 35 % are in the fibrous material ( bagasse ) left over from pressing . Most of the industrial processing of sugarcane in Brazil is done through a very integrated production chain , allowing sugar production , industrial ethanol processing , and electricity generation from byproducts . The typical steps for large @-@ scale production of sugar and ethanol include milling , electricity generation , fermentation , distillation of ethanol , and dehydration . 
 = = = = Milling and refining = = = = 
 Once harvested , sugarcane is usually transported to the plant by semi @-@ trailer trucks . After quality control , sugarcane is washed , chopped , and shredded by revolving knives ; the feedstock is fed to and extracted by a set of mill combinations to collect a juice , called garapa in Brazil , that contain 10 – 15 % sucrose , and bagasse , the fiber residue . The main objective of the milling process is to extract the largest possible amount of sucrose from the cane , and a secondary but important objective is the production of bagasse with a low moisture content as boiler fuel , as bagasse is burned for electricity generation ( see below ) , allowing the plant to be self @-@ sufficient in energy and to generate electricity for the local power grid . The cane juice or garapa is then filtered and treated by chemicals and pasteurized . Before evaporation , the juice is filtered once again , producing <unk> , a fluid rich in organic compounds . The syrup resulting from evaporation is then precipitated by crystallization producing a mixture of clear crystals surrounded by molasses . A centrifuge is used to separate the sugar from molasses , and the crystals are washed by addition of steam , after which the crystals are dried by an airflow . Upon cooling , sugar crystallizes out of the syrup . From this point , the sugar refining process continues to produce different grades of sugar , and the molasses continue a separate process to produce ethanol . 
 = = = = Fermentation , distillation and dehydration = = = = 
 The resulting molasses are treated to become a sterilized <unk> free of impurities , ready to be fermented . In the fermentation process sugars are transformed into ethanol by addition of yeast . Fermentation time varies from four to twelve hours resulting in an alcohol content of 7 @-@ 10 % by total volume ( ° GL ) , called fermented wine . The yeast is recovered from this wine through a centrifuge . Making use of the different boiling points the alcohol in the fermented wine is separated from the main resting solid components . The remaining product is hydrated ethanol with a concentration of 96 ° GL , the highest concentration of ethanol that can be achieved via <unk> distillation , and by national specification can contain up to 4 @.@ 9 % of water by volume . This hydrous ethanol is the fuel used by ethanol @-@ only and flex vehicles in the country . Further dehydration is normally done by addition of chemicals , up to the specified 99 @.@ 7 ° GL in order to produce anhydrous ethanol , which is used for blending with pure gasoline to obtain the country 's E25 mandatory blend . The additional processing required to convert hydrated into anhydrous ethanol increases the cost of the fuel , as in 2007 the average producer price difference between the two was around 14 % for São Paulo State . This production price difference , though small , contributes to the competitiveness of the hydrated ethanol ( E100 ) used in Brazil , not only with regard to local gasoline prices but also as compared to other countries such as the United States and Sweden , that only use anhydrous ethanol for their flex fuel fleet . 
 = = = = Electricity generation from bagasse = = = = 
 Since the early days , bagasse was burnt in the plant to provide the energy required for the industrial part of the process . Today , the Brazilian best practice uses high @-@ pressure boilers that increases energy recovery , allowing most sugar @-@ ethanol plants to be energetically self @-@ sufficient and even sell surplus electricity to utilities . By 2000 , the total amount of sugarcane bagasse produced per year was 50 million tons / dry basis out of more than 300 million tons of harvested sugarcane . Several authors estimated a potential power generation from the use of sugarcane bagasse ranging from 1 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 MW , depending on the technology used and the use of harvest trash . One utility in São Paulo is buying more than 1 % of its electricity from sugar mills , with a production capacity of 600 MW for self @-@ use and 100 MW for sale . According to analysis from Frost & Sullivan , Brazil 's sugarcane bagasse used for power generation has reached 3 @.@ 0 GW in 2007 , and it is expected to reach 12 @.@ 2 GW in 2014 . The analysis also found that sugarcane bagasse cogeneration accounts for 3 % of the total Brazilian energy matrix . The energy is especially valuable to utilities because it is produced mainly in the dry season when hydroelectric dams are running low . 
 According to a study commissioned by the Dutch government in 2006 to evaluate the sustainability of Brazilian bioethanol " ... there are also substantial gains possible in the efficiency of electricity use and generation : The electricity used for distillery operations has been estimated at 12 @.@ 9 kWh / tonne cane , with a best available technology rate of 9 @.@ 6 kWh / tonne cane . For electricity generation the efficiency could be increased from 18 kWh / tonne cane presently , to 29 @.@ 1 kWh / tonne cane maximum . The production of surplus electricity could in theory be increased from 5 @.@ 3 kWh / tonne cane to 19 kWh / tonne cane . " 
 = = = = Electric generation from ethanol = = = = 
 Brazil has several experimental programs for the production of electricity using sugar cane ethanol as fuel . A joint venture of General Electric and Petrobras is operating one commercial pilot plant in <unk> de Fora , Minas Gerais . 
 = = = = Overall energy use = = = = 
 Energy @-@ use associated with the production of sugarcane ethanol derives from three primary sources : the agricultural sector , the industrial sector , and the distribution sector . In the agricultural sector , 35 @.@ 98 GJ of energy are used to plant , maintain , and harvest one hectare ( 10 @,@ 000 m2 ) of sugarcane for usable biofuel . This includes energy from numerous inputs , including nitrogen , phosphate , potassium oxide , lime , seed , herbicides , insecticides , labor and diesel fuel . The industrial sector , which includes the milling and refining sugarcane and the production of ethanol fuel , uses 3 @.@ 63 GJ of energy and generates 155 @.@ 57 GJ of energy per hectare of sugarcane plantation . Scientists estimate that the potential power generated from the cogeneration of bagasse could range from 1 @,@ 000 to 9 @,@ 000 MW , depending on harvest and technology factors . In Brazil , this is about 3 % of the total energy needed . The burning of bagasse can generate 18 kilowatt @-@ hours , or 64 @.@ 7 MJ per Mg of sugarcane . Distillery facilities require about 45 MJ to operate , leaving a surplus energy supply of 19 @.@ 3 MJ , or 5 @.@ 4 kWh . In terms of distribution , researchers calculates sugarcane ethanol ’ s transport energy requirement to be .44 GJ per cubic @-@ meter , thus one hectare of land would require 2 @.@ 82 GJ of energy for successful transport and distribution . After taking all three sectors into account , the EROEI ( Energy Return over Energy Invested ) for sugarcane ethanol is about 8 . 
 There are several improvements to the industrial processes , such as adopting a hydrolysis process to produce ethanol instead of surplus electricity , or the use of advanced boiler and turbine technology to increase the electricity yield , or a higher use of excess bagasse and harvest trash currently left behind in the fields , that together with various other efficiency improvements in sugarcane farming and the distribution chain have the potential to allow further efficiency increases , translating into higher yields , lower production costs , and also further improvements in the energy balance and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions . 
 = = = Exports = = = 
 Brazil is the world 's largest exporter of ethanol . In 2007 it exported 933 @.@ 4 million gallons ( 3 @,@ 532 @.@ 7 million liters ) , representing almost 20 % of its production , and accounting for almost 50 % of the global exports . Since 2004 Brazilian exporters have as their main customers the United States , Netherlands , Japan , Sweden , Jamaica , El Salvador , Costa Rica , Trinidad & Tobago , Nigeria , Mexico , India , and South Korea . 
 The countries in the Caribbean Basin import relative high quantities of Brazilian ethanol , but not much is destined for domestic consumption . These countries reprocess the product , usually converting Brazilian hydrated ethanol into anhydrous ethanol , and then re @-@ export it to the United States , gaining value @-@ added and avoiding the 2 @.@ 5 % duty and the US $ 0 @.@ 54 per gallon tariff , thanks to the trade agreements and benefits granted by Caribbean Basin Initiative ( CBI ) . This process is limited by a quota , set at 7 % of U.S. ethanol consumption . Although direct U.S. exports fell in 2007 , imports from four CBI countries almost doubled , increasing from 15 @.@ 5 % in 2006 to 25 @.@ 8 % in 2007 , reflecting increasing re @-@ exports to the U.S. , thus partially compensating the loss of Brazilian direct exports to the U.S. This situation has caused some concerns in the United States , as it and Brazil are trying to build a partnership to increase ethanol production in Latin American and the Caribbean . As the U.S. is encouraging " new ethanol production in other countries , production that could directly compete with <unk> ethanol " . 
 The U.S. , potentially the largest market for Brazilian ethanol imports , currently imposes a tariff on Brazilian ethanol of US $ 0 @.@ 54 per gallon in order to encourage domestic ethanol production and protect the budding ethanol industry in the United States . Historically , this tariff was intended to offset the 45 cent per gallon blender 's federal tax credit that is applied to ethanol no matter its country of origin . Exports of Brazilian ethanol to the U.S. reached a total of US $ 1 billion in 2006 , an increase of 1 @,@ 020 % over 2005 ( US $ 98 millions ) , but fell significantly in 2007 due to sharp increases in American ethanol production from corn . As shown in the table , the United States remains the largest single importer of Brazilian ethanol exports , though collectively the European Union and the CBI countries now import a similar amount . 
 A 2010 study by Iowa State University 's Center for Agricultural and Rural Development found that removing the U.S. import tariff would result in less than 5 % of the United States ’ ethanol being imported from Brazil . Also a 2010 study by the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) found that the costs to American taxpayers of using a biofuel to reduce gasoline consumption by one gallon are $ 1 @.@ 78 for corn ethanol and $ 3 @.@ 00 for cellulosic ethanol . In a similar way , and without considering potential indirect land use effects , the costs to taxpayers of reducing greenhouse gas emissions through tax credits are about $ 750 per metric ton of CO2 @-@ equivalent for ethanol and around $ 275 per metric ton for cellulosic ethanol . 
 After being renewed several times , the tax credit is set to expire on December 31 , 2011 , and both the US $ 0 @.@ 54 per gallon tariff and US $ 0 @.@ 45 per gallon blender ’ s credit have been the subject of contentious debate in Washington , D.C. with ethanol interest groups and politicians staking positions on both sides of the issue . On June 16 , 2011 , the U.S. Congress approved an amendment to the economic development bill to repeal both the tax credit and the tariff on ethanol , and though this bill has an uncertain future , it is considered a signal that the tax credits will not be renew when they expire at the end of 2011 . The eventual elimination of the import tariff is not expect to have significant effects in the short term . That is because the Brazilian ethanol industry has been having trouble meeting its own domestic demand for ethanol during 2010 and 2011 , and actually Brazil imported some corn ethanol from the U.S. The shortage in supply is due in part to high sugar prices , which make it more profitable for Brazilian producers to sell it as sugar than convert it to ethanol fuel . Also , as a result of the credit crunch caused by the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 , the expansion of the Brazilian ethanol industry has not being able keep up pace with the accelerated growth of the flex fuel fleet . 
 As U.S. EPA 's 2010 final ruling for the Renewable Fuel Standard designated Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an advanced biofuel , Brazilian ethanol producers hope this classification will contribute to lift import tariffs both in the U.S. and the rest of the world . Also they expect to increase exports to the U.S. , as the blending mandate requires an increasing quota of advanced biofuels , which is not likely to be fulfilled with cellulosic ethanol , and then it would force blenders to import more Brazilian sugarcane @-@ based ethanol , despite the existing 54 ¢ per gallon tariff on ethanol imported directly from Brazil , or duty @-@ free from the CBI countries that convert Brazilian hydrated ethanol into anhydrous ethanol . 
 = = Prices and effect on oil consumption = = 
 Most automobiles in Brazil run either on hydrous alcohol ( E100 ) or on gasohol ( E25 blend ) , as the mixture of 25 % anhydrous ethanol with gasoline is mandatory in the entire country . Since 2003 , dual @-@ fuel ethanol flex vehicles that run on any proportion of hydrous ethanol and gasoline have been gaining popularity . These have electronic sensors that detect the type of fuel and adjust the engine combustion to match , so users can choose the cheapest available fuel . Sales of flex fuel vehicles reached 9 @.@ 3 million by December 2009 , representing 39 % of the passenger vehicle fleet . By mid @-@ 2010 there were 70 flex models available in the market and production by December 2010 reached more than 12 @.@ 5 million flex vehicles including more than 500 thousand flex fuel motorcycles . 
 Due to the lower energy content of ethanol fuel , full flex @-@ fuel vehicles get fewer miles per gallon . Ethanol price has to be between 25 @-@ 30 % cheaper per gallon to reach the break even point . As a rule of thumb , Brazilian consumers are frequently advised by the media to use more alcohol than gasoline in their mix only when ethanol prices are 30 % lower or more than gasoline , as ethanol price fluctuates heavily depending on the harvest yields and seasonal fluctuation of sugarcane harvest . 
 Since 2005 , ethanol prices have been very competitive without subsidies , even with gasoline prices kept constant in local currency since mid @-@ 2005 , at a time when oil was just approaching US $ 60 a barrel . However , Brazilian gasoline taxes are high , around 54 percent , while ethanol fuel taxes are lower and vary between 12 % to 30 % , depending of the state . As of October 2008 the average price of E25 gasoline was $ 4 @.@ 39 per gallon while the average price for ethanol was US $ 2 @.@ 69 per gallon . This differential in taxation favors ethanol fuel consumption , and by the end of July 2008 , when oil prices were close to its latest peak and the Brazilian real exchange rate to the US dollar was close to its most recent minimum , the average gasoline retail price at the pump in Brazil reached US $ 6 @.@ 00 per gallon . The price ratio between gasoline and ethanol fuel has been well above 30 percent during this period for most states , except during low sugar cane supply between harvests and for states located far away from the ethanol production centers . According to Brazilian producers , ethanol can remain competitive if the price of oil does not fall below US $ 30 a barrel . 
 By 2008 consumption of ethanol fuel by the Brazilian fleet of light vehicles , as pure ethanol and in gasohol , is replacing gasoline at the rate of about 27 @,@ 000 cubic meters per day , and by February 2008 the combined consumption of anhydrous and hydrated ethanol fuel surpassed 50 percent of the fuel that would be needed to run the light vehicle fleet on pure gasoline alone . Monthly consumption of anhydrous ethanol for the mandatory E25 blend , together with hydrous ethanol used by flex vehicles , reached 1 @.@ 432 billion liters , while pure gasoline consumption was 1 @.@ 411 billion liters . Despite this volumetric parity , when expressed in terms of energy equivalent ( toe ) , sugarcane ethanol represented 17 @.@ 6 percent of the country 's total energy consumption by the transport sector in 2008 , while gasoline represented 23 @.@ 3 percent and diesel 49 @.@ 2 percent . 
 For the first time since 2003 sales of hydrous ethanol fell in 2010 , with a decrease of 8 @.@ 5 percent as compared to 2009 . Total consumption of both hydrous and anhydrous ethanol fell by 2 @.@ 9 percent while gasoline consumption increased by 17 @.@ 5 percent . Despite the reduction in ethanol consumption , total ethanol sales reached 22 @.@ 2 billion liters while pure gasoline consumption was 22 @.@ 7 billion liters , keeping the market share for each fuel close to 50 percent . The decrease in hydrous ethanol consumption was due mainly to high sugar prices in the international markets , which reached a 30 @-@ year high in 2010 . This peak in sugar prices caused sugarcane processing plants to produce more sugar than ethanol , and as supply contracted , E100 prices increased to the point that several times during 2010 the price of hydrous ethanol was less than 30 percent cheaper than gasoline . Another factor that contributed to this shift was the increase sales of imported gasoline only vehicles that took place during 2010 . 
 = = Comparison with the United States = = 
 Brazil 's sugar cane @-@ based industry is more efficient than the U.S. corn @-@ based industry . Sugar cane ethanol has an energy balance seven times greater than ethanol produced from corn . Brazilian distillers are able to produce ethanol for 22 cents per liter , compared with the 30 cents per liter for corn @-@ based ethanol . U.S. corn @-@ derived ethanol costs 30 % more because the corn starch must first be converted to sugar before being distilled into alcohol . Despite this cost differential in production , the U.S. did not import more Brazilian ethanol because of U.S. trade barriers corresponding to a tariff of 54 @-@ cent per gallon , first imposed in 1980 , but kept to offset the 45 @-@ cent per gallon blender 's federal tax credit that is applied to ethanol no matter its country of origin . In 2011 the U.S. Congress decided not to extend the tariff and the tax credit , and as a result both ended on December 31 , 2011 . During these three decades the ethanol industry was awarded an estimated US $ 45 billion in subsidies and US $ 6 billion just in 2011 . 
 Sugarcane cultivation requires a tropical or subtropical climate , with a minimum of 600 mm ( 24 in ) of annual rainfall . Sugarcane is one of the most efficient photosynthesizers in the plant kingdom , able to convert up to 2 % of incident solar energy into biomass . Sugarcane production in the United States occurs in Florida , Louisiana , Hawaii , and Texas . The first three plants to produce sugarcane @-@ based ethanol are expected to go online in Louisiana by mid @-@ 2009 . Sugar mill plants in <unk> , St. James and <unk> were converted to sugar cane @-@ based ethanol production using Colombian technology in order to make possible a profitable ethanol production . These three plants will produce 100 million gallons ( 378 @.@ 5 million liters ) of ethanol within five years . By 2009 two other sugarcane ethanol production projects are being developed in Kauai , Hawaii and Imperial Valley , California . 
 = = Ethanol diplomacy = = 
 In March 2007 , " ethanol diplomacy " was the focus of President George W. Bush 's Latin American tour , in which he and Brazil 's president , Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva , were seeking to promote the production and use of sugar cane – based ethanol throughout Latin America and the Caribbean . The two countries also agreed to share technology and set international standards for biofuels . The Brazilian sugar cane technology transfer will permit various Central American countries , such as Honduras , Nicaragua , Costa Rica and Panama , several Caribbean countries , and various Andean Countries tariff @-@ free trade with the U.S. thanks to existing concessionary trade agreements . 
 Even though the U.S. has imposed a US $ 0 @.@ 54 tariff on every gallon of imported ethanol since 1980 , the Caribbean nations and Central American countries are exempt from such duties based on the benefits granted by the Caribbean Basin Initiative ( CBI ) . CBI provisions allow tariff @-@ free access to the US market from ethanol produced from foreign feedstock ( outside CBI countries ) up to 7 % of the previous year US consumption . Also additional quotas are allowed if the beneficiary countries produce at least 30 % of the ethanol from local feedstocks up to an additional 35 million gallons ( 132 @.@ 5 million liters ) . Thus , several countries have been importing hydrated ethanol from Brazil , processing it at local distilleries to dehydrate it , and then re @-@ exporting it as anhydrous ethanol . American farmers have complained about this loophole to legally bypass the tariff . The 2005 Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement ( CAFTA ) maintained the benefits granted by the CBI , and CAFTA provisions established country @-@ specific shares for Costa Rica and El Salvador within the overall quota . An initial annual allowance was established for each country , with gradually increasing annual levels of access to the US market . The expectation is that using Brazilian technology for refining sugar cane – based ethanol , such countries could become net exporters to the United States in the short @-@ term . In August 2007 , Brazil 's President toured Mexico and several countries in Central America and the Caribbean to promote Brazilian ethanol technology . 
 The Memorandum of Understanding ( MOU ) that the American and Brazilian presidents signed in March 2007 may bring Brazil and the United States closer on energy policy , but it is not clear whether there has been substantive progress implementing the three pillars found in that agreement . 
 Brazil has also extended its technical expertise to several African countries , including Ghana , Mozambique , Angola , and Kenya . This effort is led by <unk> , the state @-@ owned company in charge for applied research on agriculture , and responsible for most of the achievements in increasing sugarcane productivity during the last thirty years . Another 15 African countries have shown interest in receiving Brazilian technical aid to improve sugarcane productivity and to produce ethanol efficiently . Brazil also has bilateral cooperation agreements with several other countries in Europe and Asia . 
 As President Lula wrote for The Economist regarding Brazil 's global agenda : 
 " Brazil ’ s ethanol and biodiesel programmes are a benchmark for alternative and renewable fuel sources . Partnerships are being established with developing countries seeking to follow Brazil ’ s achievements — a <unk> @-@ tonne reduction of greenhouse @-@ gas emissions , a million new jobs and a drastic reduction in dependence on imported fossil fuels coming from a dangerously small number of producer countries . All of this has been accomplished without compromising food security , which , on the contrary , has benefited from rising agricultural output ... We are setting up offices in developing countries interested in benefiting from Brazilian know @-@ how in this field . " 
 = = Environmental and social impacts = = 
 = = = Environmental effects = = = 
 = = = = Benefits = = = = 
 Ethanol produced from sugarcane provides energy that is renewable and less carbon intensive than oil . <unk> reduces air pollution thanks to its cleaner emissions , and also contributes to mitigate global warming by reducing greenhouse gas emissions . 
 = = = = = Energy balance = = = = = 
 One of the main concerns about bioethanol production is the energy balance , the total amount of energy input into the process compared to the energy released by burning the resulting ethanol fuel . This balance considers the full cycle of producing the fuel , as cultivation , transportation and production require energy , including the use of oil and fertilizers . A comprehensive life cycle assessment commissioned by the State of São Paulo found that Brazilian sugarcane @-@ based ethanol has a favorable energy balance , varying from 8 @.@ 3 for average conditions to 10 @.@ 2 for best practice production . This means that for average conditions one unit of fossil @-@ fuel energy is required to create 8 @.@ 3 energy units from the resulting ethanol . These findings have been confirmed by other studies . 
 = = = = = Greenhouse gas emissions = = = = = 
 Another benefit of bioethanol is the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions as compared to gasoline , because as much carbon dioxide is taken up by the growing plants as is produced when the bioethanol is burnt , with a zero theoretical net contribution . Several studies have shown that sugarcane @-@ based ethanol reduces greenhouse gases by 86 to 90 % if there is no significant land use change , and ethanol from sugarcane is regarded the most efficient biofuel currently under commercial production in terms of GHG emission reduction . 
 However , two studies published in 2008 are critical of previous assessments of greenhouse gas emissions reduction , as the authors considered that previous studies did not take into account the effect of land use changes . Recent assessments carried out in 2009 by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) and the California Air Resources Board ( CARB ) included the impact of indirect land use changes ( ILUC ) as part of the lifecycle analysis of crop @-@ based biofuels . Brazilian sugarcane ethanol meets both the ruled California Low @-@ Carbon Fuel Standard ( LCFS ) and the proposed federal Renewable Fuel Standard ( RFS2 ) , despite the additional carbon emissions associated with ILUC . On February 3 , 2010 , EPA issued its final ruling regarding the RFS2 for 2010 and beyond , and determined that Brazilian ethanol produced from sugarcane complies with the applicable 50 % GHG reduction threshold for the advanced fuel category . EPA ’ s modelling shows that sugarcane ethanol from Brazil reduces greenhouse gas emissions as compared to gasoline by 61 % , using a 30 @-@ year payback for indirect land use change ( ILUC ) emissions . By September 2010 five Brazilian sugarcane ethanol mills have been approved by the EPA to export their ethanol in the U.S. under the advanced biofuel category . 
 A report commissioned by the United Nations , based on a detailed review of published research up to mid @-@ 2009 as well as the input of independent experts worldwide , found that ethanol from sugar cane as produced in Brazil " in some circumstances does better than just " zero emission . " If grown and processed correctly , it has negative emission , pulling CO2 out of the atmosphere , rather than adding it . " In contrast , the report found that U.S. use of maize for biofuel is less efficient , as sugarcane can lead to emissions reductions of between 70 % and well over 100 % when substituted for gasoline . A 2010 study commissioned by the European Commission found that emission reduction effects of first @-@ generation biofuels are positive , even after discounting indirect land use change effects , particularly the " more emission @-@ efficient " sugarcane ethanol from Brazil , which would have to be imported to assure the environmental viability of the EU 's biofuels mandate . 
 Another 2010 study published by the World Bank found that " Brazil 's transport sector has a lower carbon intensity compared to that of most other countries because of its widespread use of ethanol as a fuel for vehicles . " The study also concluded that despite the already low emission intensity , urban transportation is responsible for 51 % of CO2 emissions within the Brazilian transport sector in 2008 , and mainly originate in the growing use of private cars , traffic congestion and inefficient public transportation systems . Nevertheless , the study concluded that the increased use of flexible @-@ fuel vehicles and the switch from gasoline to sugarcane ethanol are expected to stabilize GHG emissions from the light vehicle fleet over the next 25 years despite an expected increase in the number of kilometers traveled . Furthermore , the study found that if bioethanol 's market share of the gasoline @-@ powered vehicle market reaches 80 % in 2030 , this switch from gasoline " could deliver more than one @-@ third of total emissions reduction targeted for the transport sector over the period " ( 2008 – 2030 ) . The study also concluded that by increasing Brazilian ethanol exports to attend the increasing international demand for low @-@ carbon fuels , its trade partners will benefit from reduced <unk> emissions . However , for this opportunity to be realized , trade barriers and subsidies in many countries will have to be reduced or eliminated . 
 A 2009 study published in Energy Policy found that the use of ethanol fuel in Brazil has allowed to avoid over 600 million tons of CO2 emissions since 1975 , when the Pró @-@ Álcool Program began . The study also concluded that the neutralization of the carbon released due to land @-@ use change was achieved in 1992 . In another estimate , UNICA , the main Brazilian ethanol industry organization , estimated that just the use of ethanol fuel in flex @-@ fuel vehicles in Brazil has avoided 83 @.@ 5 million tons of CO2 emissions between March 2003 and January 2010 . 
 = = = = = Air pollution = = = = = 
 The widespread use of ethanol brought several environmental benefits to urban centers regarding air pollution . Lead additives to gasoline were reduced through the 1980s as the amount of ethanol blended in the fuel was increased , and these additives were completely eliminated by 1991 . The addition of ethanol blends instead of lead to gasoline lowered the total carbon monoxide ( CO ) , hydrocarbons , sulfur emissions , and particulate matter significantly . The use of ethanol @-@ only vehicles has also reduced CO emissions drastically . Before the Pró @-@ Álcool Program started , when gasoline was the only fuel in use , CO emissions were higher than 50 g / km driven ; they had been reduced to less than 5 @.@ 8 g / km in 1995 . Several studies have also shown that São Paulo has benefit with significantly less air pollution thanks to ethanol 's cleaner emissions . Furthermore , Brazilian flex @-@ fuel engines are being designed with higher compression ratios , taking advantage of the higher ethanol blends and maximizing the benefits of the higher oxygen content of ethanol , resulting in lower emissions and improving fuel efficiency . 
 Even though all automotive fossil fuels emit aldehydes , one of the drawbacks of the use of hydrated ethanol in ethanol @-@ only engines is the increase in aldehyde emissions as compared with gasoline or gasohol . However , the present ambient concentrations of aldehyde , in São Paulo city are below the reference levels recommended as adequate to human health found in the literature . Other concern is that because formaldehyde and acetaldehyde emissions are significantly higher , and although both aldehydes occur naturally and are frequently found in the open environment , additional emissions may be important because of their role in smog formation . However , more research is required to establish the extent and direct consequences , if any , on health . 
 = = = = Issues = = = = 
 = = = = = Water use and fertilizers = = = = = 
 Ethanol production has also raised concerns regarding water overuse and pollution , soil erosion and possible contamination by excessive use of fertilizers . A study commissioned by the Dutch government in 2006 to evaluate the sustainability of Brazilian bioethanol concluded that there is sufficient water to supply all foreseeable long @-@ term water requirements for sugarcane and ethanol production . Also , and as a result of legislation and technological progress , the amount of water collected for ethanol production has decreased considerably during the previous years . The overuse of water resources seems a limited problem in general in São Paulo , particularly because of the relatively high rainfall , yet , some local problems may occur . Regarding water pollution due to sugarcane production , Embrapa classifies the industry as level 1 , which means " no impact " on water quality . 
 This evaluation also found that consumption of agrochemicals for sugar cane production is lower than in citric , corn , coffee and soybean cropping . Disease and pest control , including the use of agrochemicals , is a crucial element in all cane production . The study found that development of resistant sugar cane varieties is a crucial aspect of disease and pest control and is one of the primary objectives of Brazil ’ s cane genetic improvement programs . Disease control is one of the main reasons for the replacement of a commercial variety of sugar cane . 
 = = = = = Field burning = = = = = 
 Advancements in fertilizers and natural pesticides have all but eliminated the need to burn fields . Sugarcane fields are traditionally burned just before harvest to avoid harm to the workers , by removing the sharp leaves and killing snakes and other harmful animals , and also to fertilize the fields with ash . There has been less burning due to pressure from the public and health authorities , and as a result of the recent development of effective harvesting machines . In the mid 90s , it was very common to experience quite dense ash rains in cities within the sugarcane 's fields during harvest seasons . A 2001 state law banned burning in sugarcane fields in São Paulo state by 2021 , and machines will gradually replace human labor as the means of harvesting cane , except where the abrupt terrain does not allow for mechanical harvesting . However , 150 out of 170 of São Paulo 's sugar cane processing plants signed in 2007 a voluntary agreement with the state government to comply by 2014 . Independent growers signed in 2008 the voluntary agreement to comply , and the deadline was extended to 2017 for sugar cane fields located in more abrupt terrain . By the 2009 / 10 harvest season more than 50 % of the cane was collected in São Paulo with harvesting machines . Mechanization will reduce pollution from burning fields and has higher productivity than people , but also will create unemployment for these seasonal workers , many of them coming from the poorest regions of Brazil . Due to mechanization the number of temporary workers in the sugarcane plantations has already declined as each harvester machine replaces about 100 cane cutters a day and creates 30 jobs including operators and maintenance teams . 
 = = = = = Effects of land use change = = = = = 
 Two studies published in 2008 questioned the benefits estimated in previous assessments regarding the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from sugarcane @-@ based ethanol , as the authors consider that previous studies did not take into account the direct and indirect effect of land use changes . The authors found a " biofuel carbon debt " is created when Brazil and other developing countries convert land in undisturbed ecosystems , such as rainforests , savannas , or grasslands , to biofuel production , and to crop production when agricultural land is diverted to biofuel production . This land use change releases more CO2 than the annual greenhouse gas ( GHG ) reductions that these biofuels would provide by displacing fossil fuels . Among others , the study analyzed the case of Brazilian Cerrado being converted for sugarcane ethanol production . The biofuel carbon debt on converted Cerrado is estimated to be repaid in 17 years , the least amount of time of the scenarios that were analyzed , as for example , ethanol from US corn was estimated to have a 93 @-@ year payback time . The study conclusion is that the net effect of biofuel production via clearing of carbon @-@ rich habitats is to increase CO2 emissions for decades or centuries relative to fossil fuel use . 
 Regarding this concern , previous studies conducted in Brazil have shown there are 355 million ha of arable land in Brazil , of which only 72 million ha are in use . Sugarcane is only taking 2 % of arable land available , of which ethanol production represented 55 % in 2008 . Embrapa estimates that there is enough agricultural land available to increase at least 30 times the existing sugarcane plantation without endangering sensitive ecosystems or taking land destined for food crops . Most future growth is expected to take place on abandoned pasture lands , as it has been the historical trend in São Paulo state . Also , productivity is expected to improve even further based on current biotechnology research , genetic improvement , and better agronomic practices , thus contributing to reduce land demand for future sugarcane cultures . This trend is demonstrated by the increases in agricultural production that took place in São Paulo state between 1990 and 2004 , where coffee , orange , sugarcane and other food crops were grown in an almost constant area . 
 Also regarding the potential negative impacts of land use changes on carbon emissions , a study commissioned by the Dutch government concluded that " it is very difficult to determine the indirect effects of further land use for sugar cane production ( i.e. sugar cane replacing another crop like soy or citrus crops , which in turn causes additional soy plantations replacing pastures , which in turn may cause deforestation ) , and also not logical to attribute all these soil carbon losses to sugar cane . " Other authors have also questioned these indirect effects , as cattle pastures are displaced to the cheaper land near the Amazon . Studies rebutting this concern claim that land devoted to free grazing cattle is shrinking , as density of cattle on pasture land increased from 1 @.@ 28 heads of cattle / ha to 1 @.@ 41 from 2001 to 2005 , and further improvements are expected in cattle feeding practices . 
 A paper published in February 2010 by a team led by <unk> from the University of Kassel found that the planned expansion of biofuel plantations ( sugarcane and soybean ) in Brazil up to 2020 will have a small direct land @-@ use impact on carbon emissions , but indirect land @-@ use changes could offset the carbon savings from biofuels due to the expansion of the rangeland frontier into the Amazonian forests , particularly due to displacement of cattle ranching . " Sugarcane ethanol and soybean biodiesel each contribute to nearly half of the projected indirect deforestation of 121 @,@ 970 km2 by 2020 , creating a carbon debt that would take about 250 years to be repaid using these biofuels instead of fossil fuels . " The analysis also showed that intensification of cattle ranching , combined with efforts to promote high @-@ yielding oil crops are required to achieve effective carbon savings from biofuels in Brazil , " while still fulfilling all food and bioenergy demands . " 
 The main Brazilian ethanol industry organization ( UNICA ) commented that this study and other calculations of land @-@ use impacts are missing a key factor , the fact that in Brazil " cattle production and pasture has been intensifying already and is projected to do so in the future . " 
 = = = = = Deforestation = = = = = 
 Other criticism have focused on the potential for clearing rain forests and other environmentally valuable land for sugarcane production , such as the Amazonia , the Pantanal or the Cerrado . Embrapa and UNICA have rebutted this concern explaining that 99 @.@ 7 % of sugarcane plantations are located at least 2 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 200 mi ) from the Amazonia , and expansion during the last 25 years took place in the Center @-@ South region , also far away from the Amazonia , the Pantanal or the Atlantic forest . In São Paulo state growth took place in abandoned pasture lands . 
 The impact assessment regarding future changes in land use , forest protection and risks on biodiversity conducted as part of the study commissioned by the Dutch government concluded that " the direct impact of cane production on biodiversity is limited , because cane production replaces mainly pastures and / or food crop and sugar cane production takes place far from the major biomes in Brazil ( Amazon Rain Forest , Cerrado , Atlantic Forest , Caatinga , Campos <unk> and Pantanal ) . " However , " ... the indirect impacts from an increase of the area under sugar cane production are likely more severe . The most important indirect impact would be an expansion of the area agricultural land at the expense of cerrados . The cerrados are an important biodiversity reserve . These indirect impacts are difficult to quantify and there is a lack of practically applicable criteria and indicators . " 
 In order to guarantee a sustainable development of ethanol production , in September 2009 the government issued by decree a countrywide <unk> land use zoning to restrict sugarcane growth in or near environmentally sensitive areas such as the Pantanal wetlands , the Amazon Rainforest and the Upper Paraguay River Basin . The installation of new ethanol production plants will not be permitted on these locations , and only existing plants and new ones with environmental licensed already approved before September 17 , 2009 , will be allowed to remain operating in these sensitive areas . According to the new criteria , 92 @.@ 5 % of the Brazilian territory is not suitable for sugarcane plantation . The government considers that the suitable areas are more than enough to meet the future demand for ethanol and sugar in the domestic and international markets foreseen for the next decades . 
 = = = Social implications = = = 
 Sugarcane has had an important social contribution to some of the poorest people in Brazil by providing income usually above the minimum wage , and a formal job with fringe benefits . Formal employment in Brazil accounts an average 45 % across all sectors , while the sugarcane sector has a share of 72 @.@ 9 % formal jobs in 2007 , up from 53 @.@ 6 % in 1992 , and in the more developed sugarcane ethanol industry in São Paulo state formal employment reached 93 @.@ 8 % in 2005 . Average wages in sugar cane and ethanol production are above the official minimum wage , but minimum wages may be insufficient to avoid poverty . The North @-@ Northeast regions stands out for having much lower levels of education among workers and lower monthly income . The average number workers with 3 or less school years in Brazil is 58 @.@ 8 % , while in the Southeast this percentage is 46 @.@ 2 % , in the Northeast region is 76 @,@ 4 % . Therefore , earnings in the Center @-@ South are not surprisingly higher than those in the North @-@ Northeast for comparable levels of education . In 2005 sugarcane harvesting workers in the Center @-@ South region received an average wage 58 @.@ 7 % higher than the average wage in the North @-@ Northeast region . The main social problems are related to cane cutters which do most of the low @-@ paid work related to ethanol production . 
 The total number of permanent employees in the sector fell by one @-@ third between 1992 and 2003 , in part due to the increasing reliance on mechanical harvesting , especially in the richest and more mature sugarcane producers of São Paulo state . During the same period , the share of temporary or seasonal workers has fluctuated , first declining and then increasing in recent years to about one @-@ half of the total jobs in the sector , but in absolute terms the number of temporary workers has declined also . The sugarcane sector in the poorer Northeast region is more labor @-@ intensive as production in this region represents only 18 @.@ 6 % of the country 's total production but employs 44 @.@ 3 % of worker force in the sugarcane sector . 
 The manual harvesting of sugarcane has been associated with hardship and poor working conditions . In this regard , the study commissioned by the Dutch government confirmed that the main problem is indeed related to manual cane harvesting . A key problem in working conditions is the high work load . As a result of mechanization the workload per worker has increased from 4 to 6 ton per day in the eighties to 8 to 10 ton per day in the nineties , up to 12 to 15 ton per day in 2007 . If the quota is not fulfilled , workers can be fired . Producers say this problem will disappear with greater mechanization in the next decade . Also , as mechanization of the harvesting is increasing and only feasible in flat terrain , more workers are being used in areas where conditions are not suitable for mechanized harvesting equipment , such as rough areas where the crops are planted irregularly , making working conditions harder and more hazardous . 
 Also unhealthy working conditions and even cases of slavery and deaths from overwork ( cane cutting ) have been reported , but these are likely worst @-@ case examples . Even though sufficiently strict labor laws are present in Brazil , enforcement is weak . Displacement and seasonal labor also implies physical and cultural disruption of multifunctional family farms and traditional communities . 
 Regarding social responsibility the ethanol production sector maintains more than 600 schools , 200 nursery centers and 300 day care units , as legislation requires that 1 % of the net sugar cane price and 2 % of the net ethanol price must be devoted to medical , dental , pharmaceutical , sanitary , and educational services for sugar cane workers . In practice more than 90 % of the mills provide health and dental care , transportation and collective life insurance , and over 80 % provide meals and pharmaceutical care . However , for the temporary low wage workers in cane cutting these services may not be available . 
 = = = Effect on food prices = = = 
 Some environmentalists , such as George Monbiot , have expressed fears that the marketplace will convert crops to fuel for the rich , while the poor starve and biofuels cause environmental problems . Environmental groups have raised concerns about this trade @-@ off for several years . The food vs fuel debate reached a global scale in 2008 as a result of the international community 's concerns regarding the steep increase in food prices . On April 2008 , Jean Ziegler , back then United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food , called biofuels a " crime against humanity " , a claim he had previously made in October 2007 , when he called for a 5 @-@ year ban for the conversion of land for the production of biofuels . Also on April 2008 , the World Bank 's President , Robert Zoellick , stated that " While many worry about filling their gas tanks , many others around the world are struggling to fill their stomachs . And it 's getting more and more difficult every day . " 
 Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva gave a strong rebuttal , calling these claims " fallacies resulting from commercial interests , " and putting the blame instead on U.S. and European agricultural subsidies , and a problem restricted to U.S. ethanol produced from maize . The Brazilian President has also claimed on several occasions that his country 's sugar cane – based ethanol industry has not contributed to the food price crises . 
 A report released by Oxfam in June 2008 criticized biofuel policies of rich countries as neither a solution to the climate crisis nor the oil crisis , while contributing to the food price crisis . The report concluded that from all biofuels available in the market , Brazilian sugarcane ethanol is " far from perfect " but it is the most favorable biofuel in the world in term of cost and greenhouse gas balance . The report discusses some existing problems and potential risks , and asks the Brazilian government for caution to avoid jeopardizing its environmental and social sustainability . The report also says that : " Rich countries spent up to $ 15 billion last year supporting biofuels while blocking cheaper Brazilian ethanol , which is far less damaging for global food security . " 
 A World Bank research report published on July 2008 found that from June 2002 to June 2008 " biofuels and the related consequences of low grain stocks , large land use shifts , speculative activity and export bans " accounted for 70 @-@ 75 % of total price rises . The study found that higher oil prices and a weak dollar explain 25 @-@ 30 % of total price rise . The study said that " ... large increases in biofuels production in the United States and Europe are the main reason behind the steep rise in global food prices " and also stated that " Brazil 's sugar @-@ based ethanol did not push food prices appreciably higher . " The report argues that increased production of biofuels in these developed regions were supported by subsidies and tariffs on imports , and considers that without such policies , price increases worldwide would have been smaller . This research paper also concluded that Brazil 's sugar cane – based ethanol has not raised sugar prices significantly , and recommends removing tariffs on ethanol imports by both the U.S. and EU , to allow more efficient producers such as Brazil and other developing countries , including many African countries , to produce ethanol profitably for export to meet the mandates in the EU and U.S. 
 An economic assessment report also published in July 2008 by the OECD agrees with the World Bank report regarding the negative effects of subsidies and trade restrictions , but found that the impact of biofuels on food prices are much smaller . The OECD study is also critical of the limited reduction of GHG emissions achieved from biofuels produced in Europe and North America , concluding that the current biofuel support policies would reduce greenhouse gas emissions from transport fuel by no more than 0 @.@ 8 % by 2015 , while Brazilian ethanol from sugar cane reduces greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80 % compared to fossil fuels . The assessment calls on governments for more open markets in biofuels and feedstocks in order to improve efficiency and lower costs . 
 A study by the Brazilian research unit of the Fundação Getúlio Vargas regarding the effects of biofuels on grain <unk> concluded that the major driver behind the 2007 – 2008 rise in food prices was speculative activity on futures markets under conditions of increased demand in a market with low grain stocks . The study also concluded that expansion of biofuel production was not a relevant factor and also that there is no correlation between Brazilian sugarcane cultivated area and average grain prices , as on the contrary , the spread of sugarcane was accompanied by rapid growth of grain crops in the country . 
 = Nick Robinson = 
 Nicholas Anthony " Nick " Robinson ( born 5 October 1963 ) is a British journalist , former political editor for the BBC and a presenter on BBC 's Today BBC Radio 4 . Robinson was interested in politics from a young age , and went on to study a Philosophy , Politics , and Economics degree at Oxford University , where he was also President of the Oxford University Conservative Association . Starting out in broadcasting at Piccadilly Radio , after a year as President of the Conservative Party youth group , he worked his way up as a producer eventually becoming deputy editor of Panorama , before becoming a political correspondent in 1996 . 
 He became the BBC 's chief political correspondent in 1999 . Between 2002 and 2005 he worked for ITV News as political editor , but then returned to the BBC assuming the same role . 
 Noted for his confrontational and provocative approach , Robinson has on several occasions caused a stir with his style of questioning , particularly of national leaders such as George W. Bush . He has presented a variety of programmes , including Westminster Live , Weekend Breakfast and Late Night Live on BBC Radio 5 Live , and Newsnight . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robinson was born in Macclesfield , Cheshire , in 1963 , to a translator mother and a sales director father . His mother was born in Shanghai , where her German Jewish parents fled during the 1930s . His father was of English background . His parents first met at Geneva University in Switzerland and married three months later . 
 Robinson was interested in political journalism from the age of eight . He was educated at Cheadle Hulme School and University College , Oxford , where he read Philosophy , Politics , and Economics . 
 In 1982 , while travelling in Europe , he survived a car crash in Lille , France , in which the car , a two @-@ door Beetle , exploded and his friends James Nelson and Will Redhead ( son of Brian Redhead , a journalist and co @-@ presenter of Today on BBC Radio 4 ) were killed . Robinson was " severely burned " , spent five weeks in hospital and had to defer his university place . Brian Redhead became Robinson 's mentor , and later encouraged his career in political journalism , giving him a copy of Tony Benn 's Arguments for Socialism for his birthday . However , Robinson 's early political affiliations were to the right . 
 = = Political activism = = 
 Robinson was a founder member of Macclesfield Young Conservatives and rose through the ranks , becoming Cheshire Young Conservative Chairman ( 1982 – 84 ) and became a key activist in the moderate controlled North West Area organisation . National YC Chairman , Phil Pedley co @-@ opted Robinson onto the Young Conservative National Advisory Committee in 1983 and appointed him National Campaign Director of Youth for Multilateral Disarmament . Robinson was elected National Vice Chairman in 1985 – 87 and succeeded fellow moderate , Richard Fuller , when he was elected Chairman of the National Young Conservatives on the moderate ticket against strong right @-@ wing opposition ( 1987 – 88 ) . 
 At university he was President of the Oxford University Conservative Association in 1985 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career : 1986 – 1996 = = = 
 Robinson 's first position in broadcasting was at Piccadilly Radio in Manchester , which he took up while recovering from his injuries . He joined the BBC in 1986 as a production trainee , and later worked extensively as a television and radio producer for a variety of shows including Newsround and Crimewatch . He then became an assistant producer for On the Record , and in 1993 was promoted to Deputy Editor of Panorama , a position he held for three years . In 1995 , while Robinson was at Panorama he wrote an internal BBC memorandum questioning how an interview with Prime Minister John Major could be defended in the run @-@ up to the Scottish local elections . When leaked it gained attention from the Labour Party , who perceived it as the legitimised denial of equal time in the run up to local elections . 
 = = = Political correspondent : 1996 – 2002 = = = 
 In 1996 he became a political correspondent , presenting Weekend Breakfast and Late Night Live on BBC Radio 5 Live , and in 1997 he covered the general election for BBC Radio . In October 1999 he became BBC News 24 's chief political correspondent , and also presented Westminster Live . In the run @-@ up to the 2001 general election , Robinson started keeping a daily diary of the campaign . Entitled The Campaign Today , it later became <unk> , and continued to be updated until Robinson left the BBC . When he returned in 2005 he began a new blog with the same name . 
 = = = ITN political editor : 2002 – 2005 = = = 
 In 2002 , Robinson left the BBC for Independent Television News ( ITN ) as ITV News ' political editor . Tom <unk> , who later succeeded him , described the appointment as " bold , imaginative and instantly successful " . Robinson stayed with ITN for three years , and caused a major stir early in the 2005 election campaign at the unveiling of a Labour Party poster . The poster claimed the Conservative Party would initiate cuts of £ 35 billion to public services if elected ; Robinson challenged Prime Minister Tony Blair , claiming the poster was misleading , which forced Blair to admit the £ 35 billion figure was " disingenuous " . 
 Later on in the election campaign , Labour announced that Tony Blair would be making " the most important speech of the campaign " on immigration , with a specially invited audience . Robinson asked Blair why there were only white people in the audience , and Blair pointed out a single Asian man to disprove Robinson . Later , Robinson stated : " We know that the big two parties carefully select audiences to give a particular appearance . Is it a great controversy to point this out ? That 's informing the audience . " On election night , Robinson joined presenters Jonathan Dimbleby and Alastair Stewart to reveal the results with political analysis . 
 = = = Return to the BBC : 2005 – present = = = 
 Robinson left ITN and was appointed as the BBC political editor in preference to fellow journalist Martha Kearney in August 2005 , replacing Andrew Marr . 
 Robinson continued his provocative approach to journalism , and on more than one occasion had run @-@ ins with powerful politicians . During Tony Blair 's visit to Israel in 2006 to discuss the Lebanon War , journalists were asked not to bring up the ongoing rift with Gordon Brown . <unk> , then the ITV political editor , asked a question on the subject but was told it was " disrespectful " . Robinson then followed on the same topic , asking a difficult question on the feud between the Chancellor and Prime Minister . He was criticised for distracting from the main issue of the conference , but he argued that " I 'm paid to ask questions ... particularly at a time when there are incredibly serious allegations ... I react very badly to organised attempts to stop journalists asking questions . " Robinson later criticised Blair 's announcement of his intention to stand down . He explained how he considered the setup " stage management " , and how no journalists were allowed to ask questions . 
 In December 2006 George W. Bush showed dissatisfaction when he was asked if he was in denial about the situation in Iraq ( since the most Bush had said about the situation was that the increase in attacks was " unsettling " ) . Bush replied " It 's bad in Iraq . Does that help ? " . He had another run @-@ in with Bush at a press conference at Camp David , when Bush asked him " you still hanging around ? " . He then suggested to Robinson , with reference to the heat , that " next time you should cover your bald head " . As Bush walked away Robinson replied " I didn 't know you cared " , to which Bush responded " I don 't " . Robinson described his quip as a " fatal error " on his blog . In a final encounter in 2008 , Bush joked with Robinson about still not wearing his hat . 
 Robinson continues to keep a political blog on the BBC website . On 5 May 2006 he said that when hearing of Charles Clarke 's sacking in the 2006 Cabinet reshuffle , he was " naked in bed . " He later apologised , saying he was " merely trying to add authenticity . That 's the naked truth . " Another post , dated 25 February 2008 , criticised MPs defending Michael Martin against allegations of expenses misuse , which caused controversy in parliament . 
 As political editor , Robinson worked across the BBC 's politics @-@ related programmes , such as The Daily Politics , Newsnight and Today on BBC Radio 4 . He has been a key member of BBC election night coverage . 
 He has also appeared as a guest in other television programmes , including Children in Need , Have I Got News for You , and Top Gear . 
 Robinson has made several documentaries . In May 2011 he presented The Street That Cut Everything , where residents of a street in Preston , Lancashire had their council services withdrawn for six weeks as an experiment . In 2014 he presented The Truth About Immigration for BBC Two . 
 For radio , he made The Prime Ministers – a 16 @-@ part biographical series for BBC Radio Four . Ahead of the 2015 general election , he made a three part documentary called Can Democracy Work . 
 It was announced on 9 July 2015 that Robinson would become a presenter on the early morning BBC Radio 4 programme Today from Autumn 2015 , taking over from James Naughtie . 
 In October 2015 he interviewed Sir Alex Ferguson . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Robinson has been criticised for allegedly reporting with a pro @-@ Conservative bias . Alastair Campbell brought up his history of Conservative affiliations during an interview . Bias was claimed particularly in the 2010 United Kingdom general election coverage ; a Facebook group entitled " Nick Robinson should not be the BBC 's political editor " was set up in August 2010 . In a 2005 interview with David Rowan , the UK editor of Wired News , he insisted " that his involvement [ with the Conservatives ] ceased twenty years ago " . 
 On 20 October 2010 , following a live BBC News at Six report outside Parliament for the 2010 Spending Review , Robinson silently took the anti @-@ war , anti @-@ cuts placard that had been waved directly behind him throughout , broke it in two and stamped on it . Afterwards , another protester , who had climbed the steps of the gantry where the BBC were broadcasting to film the protest on a mobile phone , said : " You should be ashamed of yourself , mate . Shame on you ! " Robinson replied " I 'm not remotely ashamed of myself . Why should I be ashamed of myself ? " . He wrote in his blog afterwards : " I lost my temper and I regret that . However , as I explained afterwards to the protesters who disrupted my broadcast , there are many opportunities to debate whether the troops should be out of Afghanistan without the need to stick a sign on a long pole and wave it in front of a camera . " Some days later , Robinson read out a <unk> ambiguous " letter of apology " on Have I Got News For You ? , broadcast on 4 November 2010 . 
 On 22 May 2013 edition of the BBC News at Six Robinson relayed the news that the fatal stabbing of an off @-@ duty British soldier in London that afternoon was being treated by the government as a terrorist incident , but attracted criticism after quoting a source describing the perpetrators as being " of Muslim appearance " . The BBC received 43 complaints about Robinson 's use of the term , and he issued an apology on his BBC blog the following day . 
 On 11 September 2014 , as part of the coverage of the Scottish independence referendum , Nick Robinson had a dispute with Scottish National Party leader Alex Salmond . The previous day Robinson had reported that Lloyds Bank and RBS would be moving their registered offices from Scotland to London in the event of a " Yes " vote . In the exchange Robinson asked Salmond two questions : the first about the economic impact of RBS moving its headquarters , the second more general about why to trust a politician when CEO 's of certain companies advised against independence . Salmond gave answers to the two questions , stating in answer the first that there was not a huge significance economically about where the registered head office of a company was and to the second he claimed that the media were recycling news from many months ago , he then claimed that an investigation into the BBC 's actions would be sought given that rules regarding the release of market @-@ sensitive data had been broken . After the 4 minute 30 second answer , Robinson continued , now off @-@ mic , to ask further questions and so was accused of heckling by Salmond . Salmond gave another 2 minute answer to the off @-@ mic questions . The entire exchange lasted for 7 minutes 40 seconds . A report was shown on all BBC evening news programmes later that day , edited to show only the second part of Robinson 's original two @-@ part question before cutting to his narration in which he claimed Salmond had not answered his question but had instead chosen to lay accusations against the BBC even though the accusations represented a very small portion of the overall exchange . The BBC received complaints from viewers for the implication that Salmond had not answered a question put to him , and there was protest in Glasgow , in which thousands of licence payers called for him to be sacked . The BBC responded : " The BBC considers that the questions were valid and the overall report balanced and impartial , in line with our editorial guidelines . 
 In November 2014 , Robinson was covering the count for the Rochester and Strood by @-@ election . He was seen smiling whilst posing for a photograph with Britain First candidate and deputy leader <unk> Fransen . The far right @-@ wing party promotes preserving " ancestral ethnic and cultural heritage " within the UK whilst being opposed to Scottish independence , non @-@ Christian religious interests and [ social ] Liberalism . Due to the fact that Robinson had been accused of bias on these issues before , he was now accused , by some , on Twitter , of being sympathetic to the party 's values and friendly with the leadership . Responding , he denied direct affiliated with the party leadership . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Robinson met his wife Pippa , a relationship counsellor , at university and they married in 1991 . He has three children : Harry , Will and Alice . He lives in North London , close to Arsenal 's Emirates Stadium . He is a lifelong Manchester United fan , and enjoys sailing and the theatre . Robinson is a fan of the rock band Queen ; his ringtone of one of their songs interrupted a discussion during Daily Politics in 2014 . 
 In early 2015 Robinson underwent surgery to remove a bronchial carcinoid tumour ; returning to work at the BBC on 13 April 2015 as part of their coverage of the 2015 General Election and beyond . The operation was reported to have been a “ complete success ” . 
 = Marina Mohnen = 
 Marina Mohnen ( born 31 October 1978 ) is a 4 @.@ 5 point wheelchair basketball player , who plays for RSC Köln in Germany , and previously played for S. Stefano Sport in Italy . She also played with the German national team that won the European title in 2005 , 2007 , 2009 and 2011 and was runner @-@ up in 2013 . It was also runner @-@ up at the IWBF World Championship in Birmingham in 2010 . She won a silver medal at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , and a gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . The team was voted 2008 Team of the Year in disabled sports , and President Horst Köhler presented it with Germany 's highest sports award , the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) . President Joachim Gauck awarded the team a second Silver Leaf after it won the gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Marina Mohnen was born in Bitburg on 31 October 1978 . Mohnen majored in economics and works for the <unk> für <unk> Verwaltung ( Federal Academy of Public Administration ) , a sports funding body , in Brühl . " Wenn das <unk> ruft , " she says , " <unk> ich <unk> . " ( " When the national team calls , I am available . " ) 
 Mohnen began playing basketball when she was eleven , but in 1999 she suffered a severe anterior cruciate ligament injury . She took up wheelchair basketball as a 4 @.@ 5 point player , initially playing for her home town team in Bitburg , but she subsequently moved to Koblenz , then to Bonn , and then to Cologne , where she now lives again after a stint in Italy . As part of RSC Köln from 2004 to 2009 , she played an important role in the rise of the team . She then moved to the Italian club S. Stefano Sport in Santo Stefano , playing in Italy from 2009 to 2011 , after which she returned to RBC Köln . 
 Mohnen joined the German national team in 2005 . They went on to win European Championships in 2005 , 2007 , 2009 and 2011 . They were bronze medallists at the World Championships in Amsterdam in 2006 , and silver medallists at the World Championships in Birmingham in 2010 . 
 In September 2008 , Mohnen participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , her first , but the German team was beaten in the gold medal game by the United States , and took home Paralympic silver medals . After the Paralympics , the team 's performance was considered impressive enough for it to be named the national " Team of the Year " , and it received the Silver Laurel Leaf , Germany 's highest sporting honour , from German President Horst Koehler . Mohnen beat Olympic gold medallists Britta Heidemann , Marion <unk> and Oksana <unk> , and long @-@ distance runner Sabrina <unk> , to take the title of Cologne 's Sportswoman of the Year for 2008 . 
 Mohnen was part of the team that won the European Championship for the sixth time in a row in Nazareth in 2011 , thereby qualifying for the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London . As part of the team 's preparation , they toured the United States and Australia . Mohnen was captain of the team in London . In the gold medal match in London , the team faced the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , who had defeated them 48 – 46 in Sydney just a few months earlier , in front of a capacity crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 at the North Greenwich Arena , that included Mohnen 's mother Kati and sister Sonja . The German team had been undefeated up to that point , but had started slowly in its games against the United States and China , winning both games by six @-@ point margins , and seemed to play their best basketball only in the final minutes of a game . They defeated the Australians 44 – 58 to win the gold medal , the first that Germany had won in women 's wheelchair basketball since 1984 , a 28 @-@ year period . Mohnen contributed eleven points . 
 They were awarded the Silver Laurel Leaf by President Joachim Gauck in November 2012 , and were named Team of the Year for 2012 . Bitburg honoured Mohnen by entering her name into the Golden Book of the City . 
 In July 2013 the team lost the European Championship to the Netherlands before a home crowd of 2 @,@ 300 in Frankfurt by a point , 56 @-@ 57 . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 2005 : Gold at European Championships ( Villeneuve d 'Ascq , France ) 
 2006 : Bronze at World Championships ( Amsterdam , Netherlands ) 
 2007 : Gold at European Championships ( Wetzlar , Germany ) 
 2008 : Silver at Paralympics ( Beijing , China ) 
 2009 : Gold at European Championships ( Stoke Mandeville , England ) 
 2010 : Silver at World Championships ( Birmingham , Great Britain ) 
 2011 : Gold at European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Gold at Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 2013 : Silver at European Championships ( Frankfurt , Germany ) 
 2014 : Silver at the World Championships ( Toronto , Canada ) 
 2015 : Gold at the European Championships ( Worcester , England ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2008 : Team of the Year 
 2008 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2008 : Cologne 's Sportswoman of the Year 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2012 : Golden Book of the City of Bitburg . 
 2015 : Gold at the European Championships ( Worcester , England ) 
 = Business routes of U.S. Route 10 in Michigan = 
 There are three business routes of US Highway 10 in the state of Michigan . They serve as connections from the main highway into Reed City , Clare and Midland . Additionally , there were another two business routes that connected US Highway 10 ( US 10 ) to the downtowns of Flint and Pontiac . All of these business routes are , or were , former sections of US 10 that were marked Business US Highway 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) after the main highway was realigned to bypass the downtowns of the cities . 
 The Reed City Bus . US 10 was created by 1960 to follow Chestnut and Church streets into the community 's central business district and through adjacent residential areas . In 1975 when US 10 was rerouted to follow the freeways around Clare , the former routing through downtown on McEwan and Fifth streets was redesignated as a business loop ; it was also signed to provide connections between US 10 and what is now US 127 because of an incomplete interchange between those two freeways . The Midland business loop dates back to 1961 and follows Eastman Avenue and two sets of one @-@ way streets before completing its routing as a freeway . The two business loops created for Flint and Pontiac were designated in 1941 and 1961 , respectively . They followed streets that were once part of US 10 , but after additional changes to US 10 's routing in Michigan , they were renumbered as business loops of other highways in 1962 and 1986 , respectively . Near Flint , part of US 10 was replaced by M @-@ 54 when the US Highway was moved to a freeway , and near Pontiac it was replaced by US 24 after US 10 was truncated in the state . 
 = = Reed City = = 
 Business US Highway 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) is a business loop running for about 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) in Reed City . Running eastbound , the business loop starts at the corner of US 10 and Chestnut Street and runs southward along the latter into downtown . Chestnut Street is old US 131 and passes through some residential neighborhoods . It also crosses the Hersey River and the Pere Marquette State Trail while running parallel to the White Pine Trail along its western half . At the intersection with Church Street near Reed City High School , Bus . US 10 turns eastward . The business loop continues easterly out of downtown and angles northeasterly before crossing the Hersey River and the Pere Marquette State Trail again . Immediately to the northeast of the river crossing , Bus . US 10 intersects its parent highway and terminates . The entire route of the highway follows two @-@ lane streets through town . According to the Michigan Department of Transportation , the agency which maintains the roadway , between 1 @,@ 949 and 5 @,@ 499 vehicles per day used the business loop on average daily in 2013 . 
 In 1919 when the state highway system was first numbered , the east – west highway running through Reed City was numbered M @-@ 20 , and it was renumbered to US 10 seven years later when the United States Numbered Highway System was created . The business loop was created after US 10 was moved to bypass downtown Reed City in the late 1950s . This realignment was completed , and the business loop commissioned , by 1960 . Until 1986 , the western half of the loop along Chestnut Street ran concurrently with US 131 until that highway was moved to its current freeway routing . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Reed City , Osceola County . 
 = = Clare = = 
 Business US Highway 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) is a business loop in Clare that is just over 5 @.@ 0 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) long . From its western end , it branches off its parent highway , US 10 and runs southward into the city of Clare . Because US 10 runs concurrently with US 127 on the northern and eastern sides of Clare , Bus . US 10 is also concurrent with Bus . US 127 on its western leg . Bus . US 10 / Bus . US 127 follows McEwan Street southward over the South Branch of the Tobacco River and through a residential area on the north side of the city . Several blocks further south , the highway enters the downtown district and turns onto 5th Streets , separating from Bus . US 127 . 
 Fifth Street continues eastward and then southeasterly out of downtown and through residential areas . At <unk> Road , the business loop crosses from Clare County into Isabella County before passing under the US 127 freeway without an interchange . Bus . US 10 runs parallel to the Pere Marquette Rail @-@ Trail on Saginaw Road in a rural section of Isabella County before terminating at an interchange that connects it to eastbound US 10 in Wise Township . Through the city , the business loop has four lanes for traffic , but the rural segment in Isabella County has two . According to the Michigan Department of Transportation , the agency which maintains the roadway , between 4 @,@ 035 and 6 @,@ 540 vehicles per day used the business loop on average daily in 2013 . 
 In 1919 when the state highway system was first numbered , the east – west highway running through Clare was numbered M @-@ 20 , and it was renumbered to US 10 seven years later when the United States Numbered Highway System was created . In late 1961 , the US 10 freeway east of the city to Midland was finished , but the route through downtown remained part of US 10 . A freeway bypass north of Clare and Farwell opened in 1975 , and US 10 was rerouted along the then @-@ US 27 freeway to connect from the new bypass to the existing freeway east of the city , bypassing both cities . The section of US 10 in downtown Clare was designated Bus . US 10 at this time , running along then @-@ Bus . US 27 to connect to US 27 / US 10 north of downtown . The section of former US 10 between Farwell and Clare became an extended M @-@ 115 in 1989 . In 2002 , US 27 in Michigan was renumbered to US 127 , and the business loops were renumbered accordingly . 
 Major intersections 
 = = Midland = = 
 Business US Highway 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) is a business loop running for 7 @.@ 2 miles ( 11 @.@ 6 km ) in Midland in Midland County . The highway starts at exit 122 on US 10 north of downtown near the Midland Mall . The business loop runs southward along the four lanes of Eastman Avenue through residential neighborhoods and past the Midland Country Club and the Midland Center for the Arts . Further south , the business loop splits to follow the one @-@ way pairing of <unk> Street ( eastbound ) and Indian Street ( westbound ) ; these two streets run northwest @-@ to @-@ southeast parallel to the Tittabawassee River . At Jerome Street , M @-@ 20 merges onto the business loop . The two highways run concurrently from this point eastward . On the eastern edge of downtown , Bus . US 10 / M @-@ 20 passes Dow Diamond , home of the Great Lakes Loons , a minor @-@ league baseball team , and then the highway turns northeasterly . East of Jefferson Avenue , Bus . US 10 / M @-@ 20 turns east – west along the one @-@ way pairing of Lyon Road ( eastbound ) and Patrick Road ( westbound ) . 
 East of Washington Street and Saginaw Road , the highway transitions from one @-@ way streets to a freeway ; the transition between the eastbound freeway and Patrick Road passes through a roundabout in the Saginaw Road interchange . As the freeway continues eastward , there is a partial interchange for Waldo Road , and then the highway crosses into the section of Midland that is located in Bay County . Immediately east of the county line , Bus . US 10 and M @-@ 20 jointly terminate at a directional interchange with US 10 ; traffic on the eastbound business loop defaults onto eastbound US 10 , and traffic on the westbound business loop originates on westbound US 10 . According to the Michigan Department of Transportation , the agency which maintains the roadway , between 7 @,@ 317 and 23 @,@ 733 vehicles per day used the business loop on average daily in 2013 . The section of Bus . US 10 that runs concurrently with M @-@ 20 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 In 1919 when the state highway system was first numbered , the east – west highways connecting at Midland were numbered M @-@ 20 and M @-@ 24 . M @-@ 20 to the northwest of the city along with M @-@ 24 to the southeast ( along what is today M @-@ 47 ) were renumbered to US 10 seven years later when the United States Numbered Highway System was created . Afterward , M @-@ 24 west of Midland became part of M @-@ 20 . By the middle of the 1930s , US 10 was shifted to bypass downtown Midland , and the former route on the west side of town was numbered US 10A . At the end of the 1950s , M @-@ 20 east of Midland to Bay City was converted to a freeway , By the middle of 1961 , the freeway bypass of Midland was completed , and the business loop was designated along the former US 10A and part of M @-@ 20 ; at the same time , US 10 was rerouted to replace M @-@ 20 east of Midland to Bay City 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Midland . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = = Flint = = 
 Business US Highway 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) was a business loop in the Flint area . It ran for about 14 @.@ 8 miles ( 23 @.@ 8 km ) along Saginaw Road , which was also called Saginaw Street in the city of Flint . The highway connected to its parent in Mount Morris Township and ran southerly along Saginaw Road through Mount Morris . From there the business loop paralleled what is now I @-@ 475 into the city of Flint on Saginaw Street . In downtown , the loop crossed the Flint River . There were intersections with both directions of M @-@ 21 ; eastbound M @-@ 21 was routed on 5th Street while westbound traffic followed Court Street one block north . South of downtown , Bus . US 10 turned southeasterly to run through suburban Burton before terminating at an intersection with US 10 ( Dort Highway ) near Grand Blanc in Grand Blanc Township . Saginaw Road was a multi @-@ lane undivided street for its length at the time it was Bus . US 10 
 Originally , Saginaw Road in the Flint area was a part of the Saginaw Trail , a Native American foot path in the area . When the state signed its highway system in 1919 , Saginaw Road was part of M @-@ 10 . Later it was used as a section of US 10 in 1926 . By 1930 , the main highway was moved eastward to follow Dort Highway , and the route through the city was designated M @-@ 10 . It was renumbered to Bus . US 10 in 1941 . Later , in 1962 , US 10 was moved again to follow the recently completed I @-@ 75 freeway ; the former route of US 10 was redesignated M @-@ 54 and its business loop was renumbered to match . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway was in Genesee County . 
 = = Pontiac = = 
 Business US Highway 10 ( Bus . US 10 ) was an approximately 6 @.@ 9 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 11 @.@ 1 km ) business loop running in Pontiac . It was redesignated in 1986 as a business route of US 24 after US 10 was truncated to Bay City . The roadways it used were at four lanes where they carried two @-@ way traffic , and two or three lanes where they carried one @-@ way traffic through the area . 
 Bus . US 10 started northwest of downtown at the intersection of Telegraph Road and Dixie Highway in Waterford Township before crossing into the City of Pontiac . From there , the highway followed Dixie Highway southeasterly bordered by residential neighborhoods to the north and rail yards to the south of the four @-@ lane street . From the intersection with <unk> Street southward , the eastbound direction branched off to follow Cass Avenue two blocks to the south of Oakland Avenue . At the northern end of downtown , Bus . US 10 merged onto a loop formed by Wide Track Drive around the downtown core southward to Woodward Avenue . The loop is shaped like an upside @-@ down tear drop that is about four blocks wide at the northern end tapering to a single intersection at the south . Wide Track Drive also carried the two directions of Business Loop Interstate 75 ( BL I @-@ 75 ) around downtown Pontiac between Woodward Avenue and Perry Street . The two directions of BL I @-@ 75 / Bus . US 10 intersected M @-@ 59 on opposite sides of the central business district at Huron Street . The business loop continued southward along Wide Track Drive to the intersection that marked the northern end of Woodward Avenue . From there , BL I @-@ 75 / Bus . US 10 followed Woodward south past the hospital and out of the City of Pontiac . South of the city limits , the roadway was bordered by residential subdivisions . At Square Lake Road , Bus US 10 turned westward , BL I @-@ 75 turned eastward and M @-@ 1 continued south on Woodward Avenue . Bus . US 10 followed Square Lake Road for about 1 @.@ 3 miles ( 2 @.@ 1 km ) before terminating at an intersection with US 10 ( Telegraph Road ) . 
 In 1919 when the state highway system was first numbered , the north – south highway through Pontiac was numbered M @-@ 10 , and it was renumbered to US 10 seven years later when the United States Numbered Highway System was created . A number of highway designation and routing changes in the Pontiac were made when US 10 was shifted out of downtown to replace M @-@ 58 along Telegraph Road west of downtown by the middle of 1961 . Before the change , US 10 followed Dixie Highway and Oakland Avenue southeast into Pontiac to Perry Street and then Perry to Woodward while M @-@ 58 was routed along Telegraph and Square Lake Roads . After the change , US 10 turned south from Dixie Highway onto Telegraph and then east onto Square Lake to connect back to Woodward . The old route through downtown was assigned the Bus . US 10 moniker and M @-@ 58 was decommissioned as a highway designation . Nine years later , US 10 was moved off Woodward Avenue between Pontiac and Detroit to follow the Lodge Freeway and Telegraph Road . Bus . US 10 was extended westward along Square Lake Road from the intersection of Woodward Avenue to the junction with Telegraph Road so that it would continue to connect with its parent highway on the southern end . In 1985 , the Michigan Department of Transportation received permission from the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials to truncate US 10 to Bay City , and when the change was made the following year , US 24 replaced US 10 on Telegraph Road north of Square Lake Road , and Bus . US 10 through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 24 . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway was in Oakland County . 
 = The Kinks = 
 The Kinks were an English rock band formed in Muswell Hill , North London , in 1963 by brothers Dave and Ray Davies . They are regarded as one of the most important and influential rock groups of the era . The band emerged in 1964 during the height of British rhythm and blues and Merseybeat , and were briefly part of the British Invasion of the US until their touring ban in 1965 . Their third single , the Ray Davies penned " You Really Got Me " , became an international hit , topping the charts in the United Kingdom and reaching the Top 10 in the United States . Between the mid @-@ 1960s and early 1970s , the group released a string of hit singles ; studio albums drew good reviews but sold less than compilations of their singles . They gained a reputation for reflecting English culture and lifestyle , fuelled by Ray Davies ' observational writing style . Albums such as Something Else ( 1967 ) , The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society ( 1968 ) , Arthur ( 1969 ) , Lola Versus Powerman ( 1970 ) , along with their accompanying singles , are considered among the most influential recordings of the period . 
 After a fallow period in the mid Seventies , the band experienced a revival during the late 1970s and early 1980s with albums Sleepwalker , Misfits , Low Budget , Give the People What They Want and State of Confusion . In addition , groups such as Van Halen , the Jam , the Knack , the Pretenders and the Fall covered their songs , helping to boost the Kinks ' record sales . In the 1990s , Britpop acts such as Blur and Oasis cited the band as a major influence . The Kinks broke up in 1996 , a result of the commercial failures of their last few albums and creative tension between the Davies brothers . 
 Their music was influenced by a wide range of genres , including rhythm and blues , British music hall , folk and country . Ray Davies ( lead vocals , rhythm guitar ) and Dave Davies ( lead guitar , vocals ) remained members throughout the group 's 32 @-@ year run . Longest @-@ serving member Mick Avory ( drums and percussion ) was replaced by Bob Henrit , formerly of Argent , in 1984 . Original bassist Pete Quaife was replaced by John Dalton in 1969 , and Dalton was in turn replaced by Jim Rodford in 1978 . Session keyboardist Nicky Hopkins accompanied the band in the studio for many of their recordings in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1960s . In 1969 keyboardist John Gosling joined the band , making them an official five @-@ piece , while Ian Gibbons replaced him in 1979 , playing in the band until its eventual demise . 
 The group had five Top 10 singles on the US Billboard chart . Nine of their albums charted in the Top 40 . In the UK , the group had seventeen Top 20 singles and five Top 10 albums . Four of their albums have been certified gold by the RIAA . Among numerous honours , they received the Ivor Novello Award for " Outstanding Service to British Music " . In 1990 , the original four members of the Kinks were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , as well as the UK Music Hall of Fame in November 2005 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1962 – 63 ) = = = 
 The Davies brothers were born in suburban North London on Huntingdon Road , East Finchley , the youngest and only boys among their family 's eight children . Their parents , Frederick and Annie Davies , moved the family to 6 Denmark Terrace , Fortis Green , in the neighbouring suburb of Muswell Hill . At home they were immersed in a world of varied musical styles , from the music hall of their parents ' generation to the jazz and early rock and roll that their older sisters enjoyed . 
 Thomas Kitts writes , " The influence of these parties on the Kinks ... is remarkable . Whether consciously or unconsciously , [ onstage ] it seemed as if Ray was trying to recreate the Saturday night parties of his family 's home — complete with chaos , beer and singalongs . " Both Ray and his brother Dave , younger by almost three years , learned to play guitar , and they played skiffle and rock and roll together . 
 The brothers attended William Grimshaw Secondary Modern School ( later merged with Tollington Grammar School to become <unk> School ) , where they formed a band , the Ray Davies Quartet , with Ray 's friend and classmate Pete Quaife and Quaife 's friend John Start . Their debut at a school dance was well received , which encouraged the group to play at local pubs and bars . The band went through a series of lead vocalists , including Rod Stewart , another student at William Grimshaw , who performed with the group at least once in early 1962 . He then formed his own group , Rod Stewart and the <unk> , which became a local rival to the Ray Davies Quartet . 
 In late 1962 , Ray Davies left home to study at Hornsey College of Art . He pursued interests in subjects such as film , sketching , theatre and music such as jazz and blues . He gained experience as a guitarist with the Soho @-@ based Dave Hunt Band , a professional group of musicians who played jazz and R & B , before abandoning college and returning to Muswell Hill , where the brothers and Quaife re @-@ formed their old group , performing under several names , including the Pete Quaife Band , the Bo @-@ Weevils , and the Ramrods , before ( temporarily ) settling on the Ravens . 
 The fledgling group hired two managers , Grenville Collins and Robert Wace , and in late 1963 former pop singer Larry Page became their third manager . American record producer Shel Talmy began working with the band , and the Beatles ' promoter , Arthur Howes , was retained to schedule the Ravens ' live shows . The group unsuccessfully auditioned for various record labels until early 1964 , when Talmy secured them a contract with Pye Records . During this period they had acquired a new drummer , Mickey Willet ; however , Willet left the band shortly before they signed to Pye . The Ravens invited Mick Avory to replace him after seeing an advertisement Avory had placed in Melody Maker . Avory had a background in jazz drumming and had played one gig with the fledgling Rolling Stones . 
 Around this period , the Ravens decided on a new , permanent name : the Kinks . Numerous explanations of the name 's genesis have been offered . In Jon Savage 's analysis , they " needed a gimmick , some edge to get them attention . Here it was : ' <unk> ' — something <unk> , naughty but just on the borderline of acceptability . In adopting the ' Kinks ' as their name at that time , they were participating in a time @-@ honoured pop ritual — fame through outrage . " Manager Robert Wace related his side of the story : " I had a friend ... He thought the group was rather fun . If my memory is correct , he came up with the name just as an idea , as a good way of getting publicity ... When we went to [ the band members ] with the name , they were ... absolutely horrified . They said , ' We 're not going to be called kinky ! ' " Ray Davies ' account conflicts with Wace 's — he recalled that the name was coined by Larry Page , and referenced their " kinky " fashion sense . Davies quoted him as saying , " The way you look , and the clothes you wear , you ought to be called the Kinks . " " I 've never really liked the name , " Ray stated . 
 = = = " You Really Got Me " and American touring ban ( 1964 – 65 ) = = = 
 The band 's first single was a cover of the Little Richard song " Long Tall Sally " . Bobby Graham , a friend of the band , was recruited to play drums on the recording . He would continue to occasionally substitute for Avory in the studio and play on several of the Kinks ' early singles , including the early hits " You Really Got Me " , " All Day and All of the Night " and " So Tired of Waiting " . " Long Tall Sally " was released in February 1964 , but despite the publicity efforts of the band 's managers , the single was almost completely ignored . When their second single , " You Still Want Me " , failed to chart , Pye Records threatened to annul the group 's contract unless their third single was successful . 
 " You Really Got Me " , a Ray Davies song , influenced by American blues and the Kingsmen 's version of " Louie Louie " , was recorded on 15 June 1964 at Pye studios with a slower and more produced feel than the final single . Ray Davies wanted to rerecord the song with a lean , raw sound , but Pye refused to fund another session ; Davies took an adamant stand , so the producer , Shel Talmy , broke the stalemate by under @-@ writing the session himself . The band used an independent studio , IBC , and went in on 15 July , getting it done in two takes . The single was released on August 1964 , and , supported by a performance on the television show Ready Steady Go ! and extensive pirate radio coverage , it entered the UK charts on August 15 , reaching number one on September 19 . Hastily imported by the American label Reprise Records , it also made the Top 10 in the United States . The loud , distorted guitar riff and solo on " You Really Got Me " was played by Dave Davies and achieved by a slice Dave Davies made in the speaker cone of his Elpico amplifier ( referred to by the band as the " little green amp " ) — helped with the song 's signature , gritty guitar sound . " You Really Got Me " has been described as " a blueprint song in the hard rock and heavy metal arsenal " , and as an influence on the approach of some American garage rock bands . After its release , the group recorded most of the tracks for their debut LP , simply titled Kinks . Consisting largely of covers and revamped traditional songs , it was released on 2 October 1964 , reaching number four on the UK chart . The group 's fourth single , " All Day and All of the Night " , another Ray Davies hard rock tune , was released three weeks later , reaching number two in the United Kingdom , and number seven in the United States . The next singles , " Set Me Free " and " Tired of Waiting for You " , were also commercially successful , the latter topping the UK singles chart . 
 The group made their first tour of Australia , New Zealand beginning in January 1965 as part of a package bill that included Manfred Mann and The <unk> . An intensive performing schedule saw them headline other package tours throughout the year with acts such as The Yardbirds and Mickey Finn . Tensions began to emerge within the band , expressed in incidents such as the on @-@ stage fight between Avory and Dave Davies at The Capitol Theatre , Cardiff , Wales on 19 May . After finishing the first song , " You Really Got Me " , Davies insulted Avory and kicked over his drum set . Avory responded by hitting Davies with his hi @-@ hat stand , rendering him unconscious , before fleeing from the scene , fearing that he had killed his bandmate . Davies was taken to Cardiff Royal Infirmary , where he received 16 stitches to his head . To placate the police , Avory later claimed that it was part of a new act in which the band members would hurl their instruments at each other . 
 Following a mid @-@ year tour of the United States , the American Federation of Musicians refused permits for the group to appear in concerts there for the next four years , effectively cutting off the Kinks from the main market for rock music at the height of the British Invasion . Although neither the Kinks nor the union gave a specific reason for the ban , at the time it was widely attributed to their rowdy on @-@ stage behaviour . 
 A stopover in Bombay , India , during the band 's Australian and Asian tour had led Davies to write the song " See My Friends " , released as a single in July 1965 . This was an early example of crossover music , and one of the first pop songs of the period to display the direct influence of traditional music from the Indian subcontinent . Davies had written " See My Friends " with a raga feel after hearing the early morning chants of local fishermen . Music historian Jonathan Bellman argues that the song was " extremely influential " on Davies ' musical peers : " And while much has been made of the Beatles ' ' Norwegian Wood ' because it was the first pop record to use a sitar , it was recorded well after the Kinks ' clearly Indian ' See My Friends ' was released . " Pete Townshend of the Who was particularly affected by the song : " ' See My Friends ' was the next time I pricked up my ears and thought , ' God , he 's done it again . He 's invented something new . ' It was a European sound rather than an Eastern sound but with a strong , legitimate Eastern influence which had its roots in European folk music . " In a widely quoted statement by Barry <unk> , 1960s celebrity and friend of the Kinks , the Beatles and the Who , he recalled that it was also an influence on The Beatles : " I remember it vividly and still think it 's a remarkable pop song . I was with the Beatles the evening that they actually sat around listening to it on a gramophone , saying ' You know this guitar thing sounds like a sitar . We must get one of those . ' " The song 's radical departure from popular music conventions proved unpopular with the band 's American following — it hit number 11 in the UK , but stalled at number 111 in the US . 
 Recording began promptly on the group 's next project , Kinda Kinks , starting the day after their return from the Asian tour . The LP — 10 of whose 12 songs were originals — was completed and released within two weeks . According to Ray Davies , the band was not completely satisfied with the final cuts , but pressure from the record company meant that no time was available to correct flaws in the mix . Davies later expressed his dissatisfaction with the production , saying , " a bit more care should have been taken with it . I think [ producer ] Shel Talmy went too far in trying to keep in the rough edges . Some of the double tracking on that is appalling . It had better songs on it than the first album , but it wasn 't executed in the right way . It was just far too rushed . " 
 A significant stylistic shift became evident in late 1965 , with the appearance of singles like " A Well Respected Man " and " Dedicated Follower of Fashion " , as well as the band 's third album , The Kink Kontroversy , on which session musician Nicky Hopkins made his first appearance with the group on keyboards . These recordings exemplified the development of Davies ' songwriting style , from hard @-@ driving rock numbers toward songs rich in social commentary , observation and idiosyncratic character study , all with a uniquely English flavour . 
 = = = The Golden Age ( 1966 – 72 ) = = = 
 The satirical single " Sunny Afternoon " was the biggest UK hit of summer 1966 , topping the charts and displacing the Beatles ' " Paperback Writer " . Before the release of The Kink Kontroversy , Ray Davies suffered a nervous and physical breakdown , caused by the pressures of touring , writing and ongoing legal squabbles . During his months of recuperation , he wrote several new songs and pondered the band 's direction . Quaife was involved in an automobile accident , and after his recovery decided to step back from the band for much of 1966 . Bassist John Dalton filled in until Quaife returned to the group at the end of the year . 
 " Sunny Afternoon " was a dry run for the band 's next album Face to Face , which displayed Davies ' growing ability to craft gentle yet cutting narrative songs about everyday life and people . Hopkins returned for the sessions to play various keyboard instruments , including piano and harpsichord . He played on the band 's next two studio albums as well , and featured on a number of their live BBC recordings before joining The Jeff Beck Group in 1968 . Face to Face was released in the UK in October 1966 , where it was well received and peaked at number eight . It was released in the US in December and was tapped as a potential " chart winner " by Billboard magazine . Despite this it managed only a meager chart peak of 135 — a sign of the band 's flagging popularity in the American market . 
 The Kinks ' next single was a social commentary piece , entitled " Dead End Street " . It was released in November 1966 and became another UK Top 10 hit , although it reached only number 73 in the United States . Melody Maker reviewer Bob <unk> praised Ray Davies ' ability to create a song with " some fabulous lyrics and a marvelous melody ... combined with a great production , " and music scholar Johnny Rogan described it as " a kitchen sink drama without the drama — a static vision of working class stoicism " . One of the group 's first promotional music videos was produced for the song . It was filmed on Little Green Street , a small 18th @-@ century lane in north London , located off Highgate Road in Kentish Town . 
 The Kinks ' next single , " Waterloo Sunset " , was released in May 1967 . The lyrics describe two lovers passing over a bridge , with a melancholic observer reflecting on the couple , the Thames and Waterloo Station . The song was rumoured to have been inspired by the romance between two British celebrities of the time , actors Terence Stamp and Julie Christie . Ray Davies denied this in his autobiography , and claimed in a 2008 interview , " It was a fantasy about my sister going off with her boyfriend to a new world and they were going to emigrate and go to another country . " Despite its complex arrangement , the sessions for " Waterloo Sunset " lasted a mere ten hours ; Dave Davies later commented on the recording : " We spent a lot of time trying to get a different guitar sound , to get a more unique feel for the record . In the end we used a tape @-@ delay echo , but it sounded new because nobody had done it since the 1950s . I remember Steve Marriott of the Small Faces came up and asked me how we 'd got that sound . We were almost trendy for a while . " The single was one of the Kinks ' biggest UK successes ( hitting number two on Melody Maker 's chart ) , and went on to become one of their most popular and best @-@ known songs . Pop music journalist Robert Christgau called it " the most beautiful song in the English language " , and Allmusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine cited it as " possibly the most beautiful song of the rock and roll era . " 
 The songs on the 1967 album , Something Else By The Kinks , developed the musical progressions of Face to Face , adding English music hall influences to the band 's sound . Dave Davies scored a major UK chart success with the album 's " Death of a Clown " . While it was co @-@ written by Ray Davies and recorded by the Kinks , it was also released as a Dave Davies solo single . Overall , however , the album 's commercial performance was disappointing , prompting the Kinks to rush out a new single , " Autumn Almanac " , in early October . Backed with " Mister Pleasant " , the single became another Top 5 success for the group . Andy Miller points out that , despite its success , the single marks a turning point in the band 's career — it would be their last entry into the UK Top Ten for three years : " In retrospect , ' Autumn Almanac ' marked the first hint of trouble for the Kinks . This glorious single , one of the greatest achievements of British 60s pop , was widely criticised at the time for being too similar to previous Davies efforts . " Nick Jones of Melody Maker asked , " Is it time that Ray stopped writing about grey suburbanites going about their fairly unemotional daily business ? ... Ray works to a formula , not a feeling , and it 's becoming rather boring . " Disc jockey Mike Ahern called the song " a load of old rubbish " . Dave 's second solo single , " Susannah 's Still Alive " , was released in the UK on 24 November . It sold a modest 59 @,@ 000 copies , but failed to reach the Top 10 . Miller states that " by the end of the year , the Kinks were rapidly sliding out of fashion . " 
 Beginning early in 1968 , the group largely retired from touring , instead focusing on work in the studio . As the band was not available to promote their material , subsequent releases met with little success . The Kinks ' next single , " Wonderboy " , released in the spring of 1968 , stalled at number 36 and became the band 's first single not to make the UK Top Twenty since their early covers . Despite this , it became a favourite of John Lennon of The Beatles . According to Ray Davies , " Someone had seen John Lennon in a club and he kept on asking the disc jockey to play ' Wonder Boy ' [ sic ] over and over again " . However , the band 's own opinion of the track was low — Pete Quaife later stated , " [ I ] hated it ... it was horrible . " In the face of the band 's declining popularity , Davies continued to pursue his deeply personal song @-@ writing style while rebelling against the heavy demands placed on him to keep producing commercial hits , and the group continued to devote time to the studio , centring on a slowly developing project of Ray 's called Village Green . In an attempt to revive the group 's commercial standing , the Kinks ' management booked them on a month @-@ long package tour for April , drawing the group away from the studio . The venues were largely cabarets and clubs ; headlining was Peter Frampton 's group The Herd . " In general , the <unk> were not there to see the boring old Kinks , who occasionally had to endure chants of " We Want The Herd ! " during their brief appearances , " commented Andy Miller . The tour proved taxing and stressful — Pete Quaife recalled , " It was a chore , very dull , boring and straightforward . ... We only did twenty minutes , but it used to drive me absolutely frantic , standing on stage and playing three notes over and over again . " At the end of June , the Kinks released the single " Days " , which provided a minor , but only momentary , comeback for the group . " I remember playing it when I was at Fortis Green the first time I had a tape of it , " Ray said . " I played it to Brian , who used to be our roadie , and his wife and two daughters . They were crying at the end of it . Really wonderful — like going to Waterloo and seeing the sunset . ... It 's like saying goodbye to somebody , then afterwards feeling the fear that you actually are alone . " " Days " reached number 12 in the United Kingdom and was a Top 20 hit in several other countries , but it did not chart in the United States . 
 Village Green eventually morphed into their next album , The Kinks Are the Village Green Preservation Society , released in late 1968 in the UK . A collection of thematic vignettes of English town and hamlet life , it was assembled from songs written and recorded over the previous two years . It was greeted with almost unanimously positive reviews from both UK and US rock critics , yet failed to sell strongly . One factor in the album 's initial commercial failure was the lack of a popular single . It did not include the moderately successful " Days " ; " Starstruck " was released in North America and continental Europe , but was unsuccessful . Though a commercial disappointment , Village Green ( the project 's original name was adopted as shorthand for the long album title ) was embraced by the new underground rock press when it came out in January 1969 in the United States , where the Kinks began to acquire a reputation as a cult band . In The Village Voice , a newly hired Robert Christgau called it " the best album of the year so far " . The underground Boston paper Fusion published a review stating , " the Kinks continue , despite the odds , the bad press and their demonstrated lot , to come across . ... Their persistence is dignified , their virtues are stoic . The Kinks are forever , only for now in modern dress . " The record did not escape criticism , however . In the student paper California Tech , one writer commented that it was " schmaltz rock ... without imagination , poorly arranged and a poor copy of The Beatles " . Although it sold only an estimated 100 @,@ 000 copies worldwide on its initial release , it has since become the Kinks ' best @-@ selling original record . The album remains popular ; in 2004 , it was re @-@ released in a 3 @-@ CD " Deluxe " edition and one of its tracks , " Picture Book " , was featured in a popular Hewlett @-@ Packard television commercial , helping to boost the album 's popularity considerably . 
 In early 1969 , Quaife told the band he was leaving . The other members did not take his statement seriously , until an article appeared in New Musical Express on 4 April featuring Quaife 's new band , Maple Oak , which he had formed without telling the rest of the Kinks . Ray Davies pleaded with him to return for the sessions for their upcoming album , but Quaife refused . Davies immediately called up John Dalton , who had filled in for Quaife in the past , as a replacement . Dalton remained with the group until 1977 , when the album Sleepwalker was released . 
 Ray Davies travelled to Los Angeles , California , in April 1969 to help negotiate an end to the American Federation of Musicians ' ban on the group , opening up an opportunity for them to return to touring in America . The group 's management quickly made plans for a North American tour , to help restore their standing in the US pop music scene . Before their return to the United States , the Kinks recorded another album , Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) . As with the previous two albums , Arthur was grounded in characteristically English lyrical and musical hooks . A modest commercial success , it was well received by American music critics . Conceived as the score for a proposed but unrealised television drama , much of the album revolved around themes from the Davies brothers ' childhood ; their sister Rosie , who had migrated to Australia in the early 1960s with her husband , Arthur Anning , the album 's namesake ; and life growing up during the Second World War . The Kinks embarked on their tour of the US in October 1969 . The tour was generally unsuccessful , as the group struggled to find cooperative promoters and interested audiences ; many of the scheduled concert dates were cancelled . The band did , however , manage to play a few major venues such as the Fillmore East and Whisky a Go Go . 
 The band added keyboardist John Gosling to their line @-@ up in early 1970 ; before this Nicky Hopkins , along with Ray , had done most of the session work on keyboards . In May 1970 Gosling debuted with the Kinks on " Lola " , an account of a confused romantic encounter with a transvestite , that became both a UK and US Top 10 hit , helping return the Kinks to the public eye . The lyrics originally contained the word " Coca @-@ Cola " , and as a result the BBC refused to broadcast the song , considering it to be in violation of their policy against product placement . Part of the song was hastily re @-@ recorded by Ray Davies , with the offending line changed to the generic " cherry cola " , although in concert , the Kinks still used " Coca @-@ Cola " . Recordings of both versions of " Lola " exist . The accompanying album Lola Versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One was released in November 1970 . It was a critical and commercial success , charting in the Top 40 in America , making it their most successful album since the mid @-@ 1960s . After the success of " Lola " , the band went on to release Percy in 1971 , a soundtrack album to a film of the same name about a penis transplant . The album , which consisted largely of instrumentals , did not receive positive reviews . The band 's US label , Reprise , declined to release it in America , precipitating a major dispute that contributed to the band 's departure from the label . Directly after the release of the album , the band 's contracts with Pye and Reprise expired . 
 Before the end of 1971 , the Kinks signed a five @-@ album deal with RCA Records and received a million @-@ dollar advance , which helped fund the construction of their own recording studio , Konk . Their debut for RCA , Muswell Hillbillies , was replete with the influence of music hall and traditional American musical styles , including country and bluegrass . It is often hailed as their last great record , though it was not as successful as its predecessors . It was named after Muswell Hill , where the Davies brothers were brought up , and contained songs focusing on working @-@ class life and , again , the Davies ' childhood . Muswell Hillbillies , despite positive reviews and high expectations , peaked at number 48 on the Record World chart and number 100 on the Billboard chart . It was followed in 1972 by a double album , Everybody 's in Show @-@ Biz , which consisted of both studio tracks and live numbers recorded during a two @-@ night stand at Carnegie Hall . The record featured the ballad " Celluloid Heroes " and the Caribbean @-@ themed " Supersonic Rocket Ship " , their last UK Top 20 hit for more than a decade . " Celluloid Heroes " is a bittersweet rumination on dead and fading Hollywood stars ( Mickey Rooney was still alive ) , in which the narrator declares that he wishes his life were like a movie , " because celluloid heroes never feel any pain ... and celluloid heroes never really die . " The album was moderately successful in the United States , peaking at number 47 in Record World and number 70 in Billboard . It marks the transition between the band 's early 1970s rock material and the theatrical incarnation in which they immersed themselves for the next four years . 
 = = = Theatrical incarnation ( 1973 – 76 ) = = = 
 In 1973 , Ray Davies dived headlong into the theatrical style , beginning with the rock opera Preservation , a sprawling chronicle of social revolution , and a more ambitious outgrowth of the earlier Village Green Preservation Society ethos . In conjunction with the Preservation project , the Kinks ' line @-@ up was expanded to include a horn section and female backup singers , essentially reconfiguring the group as a theatrical troupe . 
 Ray Davies ' marital problems during this period began to affect the band adversely , particularly after his wife , Rasa , took their children and left him in June 1973 . Davies became depressed ; during a July gig at White City Stadium he told the audience he was " fucking sick of the whole thing " , and was retiring . He subsequently collapsed after a drug overdose and was taken to hospital . 
 With Ray Davies in a seemingly critical condition , plans were discussed for Dave to continue as frontman in a worst @-@ case scenario . Ray recovered from his illness as well as his depression , but throughout the remainder of the Kinks ' theatrical incarnation the band 's output remained uneven , and their already fading popularity declined even more . John Dalton later commented that when Davies " decided to work again ... I don 't think he was totally better , and he 's been a different person ever since . " 
 Preservation Act 1 ( 1973 ) and Preservation Act 2 ( 1974 ) received generally poor reviews . The story on the albums involved an anti @-@ hero called Mr Flash , and his rival and enemy Mr Black ( played by Dave Davies during live shows ) , an ultra @-@ purist and <unk> Act 2 was the first album recorded at Konk Studio ; from this point forward , virtually every Kinks studio recording was produced by Ray Davies at Konk . The band embarked on an ambitious US tour throughout late 1974 , adapting the Preservation story for stage . Musicologist Eric Weisbard : " [ Ray ] Davies expanded the Kinks into a road troupe of perhaps a dozen costumed actors , singers and horn players . ... <unk> and tighter than on record , Preservation live proved funnier as well . " 
 Davies began another project for Granada Television , a musical called <unk> . After a broadcast with Ray Davies in the starring role and the Kinks as both back @-@ up band and ancillary characters , the project eventually morphed into the concept album The Kinks Present a Soap Opera , released in May 1975 , in which Ray Davies fantasised about what would happen if a rock star traded places with a " normal Norman " and took a 9 – 5 job . In August 1975 , the Kinks recorded their final theatrical work , Schoolboys in Disgrace , a backstory biography of Preservation 's Mr Flash . The record was a modest success , peaking at number 45 on the Billboard charts . The song " Father Christmas " has remained a popular track . Driven by session drummer Henry Spinetti 's drumming and Dave Davies ' heavy guitar the song " Father Christmas " has become a classic seasonal favorite on mainstream radio . Following the termination of their contract with RCA , the Kinks signed with Arista Records in 1976 . With the encouragement of Arista 's management they stripped back down to a five @-@ man core group and were reborn as an arena rock band . 
 = = = Return to commercial success ( 1977 – 85 ) = = = 
 John Dalton left the band before finishing the sessions for the debut Arista album . Andy Pyle was brought in to complete the sessions and to play on the subsequent tour . Sleepwalker , released in 1977 , marked a return to success for the group as it peaked at number 21 on the Billboard chart . After its release and the recording of the follow @-@ up , Misfits , Andy Pyle and keyboardist John Gosling left the group to work together on a separate project . Dalton returned to complete the tour and ex – Pretty Things keyboardist Gordon John Edwards joined the band . In May 1978 , Misfits , the Kinks ' second Arista album , was released . It included the US Top 40 hit " A Rock ' n ' Roll Fantasy " , which helped make the record another success for the band . Dalton left the band permanently at the end of their UK tour , and Gordon John Edwards followed . Ex @-@ Argent bassist Jim Rodford joined the band before the recording of Low Budget , on which Ray Davies played the keyboard sections . Keyboardist Ian Gibbons was recruited for the subsequent tour , and became a permanent member of the group . Despite the personnel changes , the popularity of the band 's records and live shows continued to grow . 
 Beginning in the late 1970s , bands such as the Jam ( " David Watts " ) , the Pretenders ( " Stop Your Sobbing " , " I Go to Sleep " ) and the Knack ( " The Hard Way " ) recorded covers of Kinks songs , which helped bring attention to the group 's new releases . In 1978 , Van Halen covered " You Really Got Me " for their debut single , a Top 40 US hit , helping boost the band 's commercial resurgence ( the band later covered " Where Have All the Good Times Gone " , another early Kinks song ) . The hard rock sound of Low Budget , released in 1979 , helped make it the Kinks ' second gold album and highest charting original album in America , where it peaked at number 11 . In 1980 , the group 's third live album , One for the Road , was produced , along with a video of the same title , bringing the group 's concert @-@ drawing power to a peak that would last into 1983 . Dave Davies also took advantage of the group 's improved commercial standing to fulfill his decade @-@ long ambitions to release albums of his solo work . The first was the eponymous Dave Davies in 1980 . It was also known by its catalogue number " <unk> @-@ <unk> " because of its cover art , which depicted Dave Davies as a leather @-@ jacketed piece of price @-@ scanning barcode . He produced another , less successful , solo album in 1981 , Glamour . 
 The next Kinks album , Give the People What They Want , was released in late 1981 and reached number 15 in the US . The record attained gold status and featured the UK hit single " Better Things " as well as " Destroyer " , a major Mainstream Rock hit for the group . To promote the album , the Kinks spent the end of 1981 and most of 1982 touring relentlessly , and played multiple sell @-@ out concerts throughout Australia , Japan , England and America . The tour culminated with a performance at the US Festival in San Bernardino , California , for a crowd of 205 @,@ 000 . In spring 1983 , the song " Come Dancing " became their biggest American hit since " Tired of Waiting for You " , peaking at number six . It also became the group 's first Top 20 hit in the UK since 1972 , peaking at number 12 in the charts . The accompanying album , State of Confusion , was another commercial success , reaching number 12 in the US , but , like all of the group 's albums since 1967 , it failed to chart in the UK . Another single released from the record , " Don 't Forget to Dance " , became a US top 30 hit and minor UK chart entry . 
 The Kinks ' second wave of popularity remained at a peak with State of Confusion , but that success began to fade , a trend that also affected their British rock contemporaries The Rolling Stones and The Who at the time . During the second half of 1983 , Ray Davies started work on an ambitious solo film project , Return to Waterloo , about a London commuter who daydreams that he is a serial murderer . The film gave actor Tim Roth a significant early role . Davies ' commitment to writing , directing and scoring the new work caused tension in his relationship with his brother . Another problem was the stormy end of the relationship between Ray Davies and Chrissie Hynde . The old feud between Dave Davies and drummer Mick Avory also re @-@ ignited . Davies eventually refused to work with Avory , and called for him to be replaced by Bob Henrit , former drummer of Argent ( of which Jim Rodford had also been a member ) . Avory left the band , and Henrit was brought in to take his place . Ray Davies , who was still on amiable terms with Avory , invited him to manage Konk Studios . Avory accepted , and continued to serve as a producer and occasional contributor on later Kinks albums . 
 Between the completion of Return to Waterloo and Avory 's departure , the band had begun work on Word of Mouth , their final Arista album , released in November 1984 . As a result it features Avory on three tracks , with Henrit and a drum machine on the rest . Many of the songs also appeared as solo recordings on Ray Davies ' Return to Waterloo soundtrack album . Word of Mouth 's lead track , " Do It Again " , was released as a single in April 1985 . It reached number 41 in the US , the band 's last entry into the Billboard Hot 100 . Coinciding with the album 's release , the first three books on the Kinks were published : The Kinks : The Official Biography , by Jon Savage ; The Kinks <unk> , by rock critic John Mendelsohn , who had overseen the 1972 The Kink <unk> compilation album ; and The Kinks — The Sound And The Fury ( The Kinks — A Mental Institution in the US ) , by Johnny Rogan . 
 = = = Decline in popularity and split ( 1986 – 96 ) = = = 
 In early 1986 , the group signed with MCA Records in the United States and London Records in the UK . Their first album for the new labels , Think Visual , released later that year , was a moderate success , peaking at number 81 on the Billboard albums chart . Songs like the ballad " Lost and Found " and " Working at the Factory " concerned blue @-@ collar life on an assembly line , while the title track was an attack on the very MTV video culture from which the band had profited earlier in the decade . The Kinks followed Think Visual in 1987 with another live album , The Road , which was a mediocre commercial and critical performer . In 1989 , the Kinks released UK Jive , a commercial failure , making only a momentary entry into the album charts at number 122 . MCA Records ultimately dropped them , leaving the Kinks without a label deal for the first time in over a quarter of a century . Longtime keyboardist Ian Gibbons left the group and was replaced by Mark Haley . 
 In 1990 , their first year of eligibility , the Kinks were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . Mick Avory and Pete Quaife were present for the award . The induction , however , did not revive the Kinks ' stalled career . A compilation from the MCA Records period was produced in 1991 , titled Lost & Found ( 1986 @-@ 1989 ) . It was primarily released to fulfill contractual obligations , and marked the official end of the group 's relationship with MCA . The band then signed with Columbia Records and released the five @-@ song EP Did Ya in 1991 which , despite being coupled with a new studio re @-@ recording of the band 's 1968 British hit " Days " , failed to chart . 
 The Kinks reverted to a four @-@ piece band for the recording of their first Columbia album , Phobia , in 1993 . Following Mark Haley 's departure after the band 's sellout performance at the Royal Albert Hall , London , Gibbons rejoined the Kinks for a US tour . Phobia managed only one week in the US Billboard chart at number 166 ; as had by then become usual for the band , it made no impression in the UK . One single , " Only a Dream " , narrowly failed to reach the British chart . " Scattered " , the album 's final candidate for release as a single , was announced , followed by TV and radio promotion , but the record was unavailable in stores — several months later a small number appeared on the collector market . The group was dropped by Columbia in 1994 . In the same year , the band released the first version of the album To the Bone on their own Konk label in the UK . This live acoustic album was partly recorded on the highly successful UK tours of 1993 and 1994 and partly in the Konk studio , before a small , invited audience . Two years later the band released a new , improved , live double CD set in the USA , which retained the same name and contained two new studio tracks , " Animal " and " To The Bone " . The CD set also featured new treatments of many old Kinks hits . The record drew respectable press but failed to chart in either the US or the UK . 
 The band 's profile rose considerably in the mid @-@ 1990s , primarily as a result of the " Britpop " boom . Several of the most prominent bands of the decade cited the Kinks as a major influence . Blur frontman Damon Albarn and Oasis chief songwriter Noel Gallagher both described the Kinks as having a major impact on their songwriting as well as their overall development as musical artists . Gallagher declared the Kinks the fifth best band of all time . Despite such accolades , the group 's commercial viability continued to decline . They gradually became less active , leading Ray and Dave Davies to pursue their own interests . Each released an autobiography ; Ray 's X @-@ Ray was published in early 1995 , and Dave responded with his memoir Kink , published a year later . The Kinks gave their last public performance in mid @-@ 1996 , and the group assembled for what would turn out to be their last time together at a party for Dave 's 50th birthday . Kinks chronicler and historian Doug Hinman stated , " The symbolism of the event was impossible to overlook . The party was held at the site of the brothers ' very first musical endeavour , the Clissold Arms pub , across the street from their childhood home on Fortis Green in North London . " 
 = = = Solo work and reunion ( 1997 – present ) = = = 
 The band members subsequently focused on solo projects , and Ray and Dave released their own studio albums . Talk of a Kinks reunion circulated ( including an aborted studio reunion of the original band members in 1999 ) , but neither Ray nor Dave Davies showed much interest in playing together again . Meanwhile , former members John Gosling , John Dalton and Mick Avory had regrouped in 1994 and started performing on the oldies circuit along with guitar @-@ player / singer Dave Clarke as The <unk> Off Kinks . Gosling and Dalton retired in 2008 and were replaced in the band by former Kinks members Jim Rodford and Ian Gibbons . Ray Davies , Pete Quaife and Bob Henrit have occasionally made guest appearances with the group at Kinks fan club conventions . 
 Ray Davies came out with the solo album Storyteller , a companion piece to X @-@ Ray , in 1998 . Originally written two years earlier as a cabaret @-@ style show , it celebrated his old band and his estranged brother . Seeing the programming possibilities in his music / dialogue / reminiscence format , the American music television network VH1 launched a series of similar projects featuring established rock artists titled VH1 Storytellers . Dave Davies spoke favourably of a Kinks reunion in early 2003 , and as the 40th anniversary of the group 's breakthrough neared , both of the Davies brothers expressed interest in working together again . However , hopes for a reunion were dashed when in June 2004 Dave suffered a stroke while exiting an elevator , temporarily impairing his ability to speak and play guitar . Following Dave 's recovery , the Kinks were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in November 2005 , with all four of the original band members in attendance . The award was presented by The Who 's guitarist and songwriter Pete Townshend , a longtime Kinks fan and friend of Ray Davies . The induction helped fuel sales for the group ; in August 2007 , a re @-@ entry of The Ultimate Collection , a compilation of material spanning the band 's career , reached number 32 on the UK Top 100 album chart and number one on the UK Indie album chart . 
 In December 2007 , Record Collector published an interview with Ray Davies in which he said , " I spoke to Quaife about a month ago and he dearly wants to make another record with me . I think Dave 's getting better and Mick 's still playing . It would be great to get back together just to see what musical ideas we had , and what would happen . " The Daily Mail subsequently interpreted his comments as a declaration that a reunion of the band 's original line @-@ up was imminent . Dave Davies swiftly rejected the idea of a reunion . He told a reporter that " it would be like a bad remake of Night of the Living Dead " and added , " Ray has been doing Karaoke Kinks shows since 1996 . " 
 In a September 2008 interview with BBC Radio 4 , Ray Davies said of a possible reunion , " There is a desire to do it " , but that he wouldn 't participate if it were a nostalgia act : " The thing that would make me decide ' yes ' or ' no ' would be whether or not we could do new songs " . He added that the main barrier to the band getting back together was his brother 's condition following his stroke . Two months later , he told the BBC that the band was beginning to write new material for a possible reunion , but failed to detail which members were involved . In an interview aired that December on the Biography Channel , Quaife rejected any possibility that he would take part in a reunion . That same month , Ray Davies spoke again about the possibility of performing with his brother : " I suggested he do some low @-@ key shows to see how well he can play . If we 're going to play together again , we can 't hit the road straight away with a big @-@ time announcement . ... But , if Dave feels good about it and there 's good new material that we can write , it 'll happen . " 
 In June 2009 , Ray Davies told The Independent that while a full @-@ fledged reunion was unlikely , " I will continue to play with ex @-@ band members like Mick Avory from time to time . With Dave , a lot of it is psychological . I ’ ll guide him in , and coerce and nurture him , and when the time is right I suppose I ’ ll even shout at him again . " When asked about a possible reunion in an interview that year , Avory stated , " A reunion would not be possible with the originals , for a start due to ill health . But it would be possible with the <unk> Off Kinks plus Ray . In any event Ray would record new material . We have some old tracks from the 80s as well . " In March 2010 , Avory reported that the band were planning on releasing an album of unreleased and new material . He stated that they had " eight tracks " ready for the album , but that the Davies brothers had to settle their differences before the project could progress . It remains unclear who has been involved in the recordings besides Avory and Ray Davies . 
 Quaife , who had been receiving kidney dialysis for more than ten years , died on 23 June 2010 , aged 66 . Two days after the bassist 's death , Dave Davies posted a statement on his message board expressing deep sorrow over the passing of his former band mate and stating that Quaife " was never really given the credit he deserved for his contribution and involvement [ sic ] [ with The Kinks ] " . Ray Davies dedicated his 27 June performance at the Glastonbury Festival to Quaife and performed several Quaife @-@ era Kinks songs in tribute to him . Davies told the crowd , " I wouldn 't be here today if it wasn 't for him . " 
 In separate interviews early in 2011 both Davies brothers spoke positively about a potential reunion . Dave Davies explained , " There 's nothing in the pipeline yet , but ... we 'll see . It 's possible . " Each has said that any reunion would be dependent on the other . According to Ray Davies , the brothers were to meet in April to discuss future plans . In October that year , Dave Davies quashed rumours of a reunion , stating in an interview that although he loves his brother , " I just can ’ t stand to be with him . About an hour with Ray ’ s my limit , so it would be a very short reunion . " In November of that year Ray Davies reported that he had recently recorded with Avory " just to sort of try to do what we call demos ... we might do it in fits and starts and bring Dave in at a later date . I 'll never say never with my brother , because he 's totally unpredictable . " In a 2013 Skype interview Dave Davies expressed interest in doing reunions shows . 
 On 13 December 2013 , it was officially confirmed that a musical named Sunny Afternoon , based on the early life of Ray Davies and the formation of the Kinks , would receive its world premiere at the Hampstead Theatre in April 2014 . The musical 's name came from the band 's 1966 hit single " Sunny Afternoon " and features songs from the band 's back catalogue . 
 On 18 December 2015 , Ray Davies joined Dave Davies onstage at the Islington Assembly Hall in London to perform ' You Really Got Me ' . Among other musicians they were backed up by Dennis <unk> of the Smithereens on drums ( he had played drums for a Kinks show in Boston in the early 80s ) and Debi Doss , one of the backing vocalists from Preservation Hall and Schoolboys in Disgrace . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The first live performance of the Ray Davies Quartet , the band that would become the Kinks , was at a dance for their school , William Grimshaw , in 1962 . The band performed under several names between 1962 and 1963 — " The Pete Quaife Band " , " The Bo @-@ Weevils " , " The Ramrods " , and " The Ravens " — before settling on " The Kinks " in early 1964 . 
 The Kinks made their first tour of Australia and New Zealand in January 1965 as part of a " package " bill that included Manfred Mann and The <unk> . They performed and toured relentlessly , headlining package tours throughout 1965 with performers such as The Yardbirds and Mickey Finn . Tensions began to emerge within the band , expressed in incidents such as the on @-@ stage fight between drummer Mick Avory and Dave Davies at The Capitol Theatre , Cardiff , Wales on 19 May . After finishing the first song , " You Really Got Me " , Davies insulted Avory and kicked over his drum set . Avory responded by hitting Davies with his hi @-@ hat stand , rendering him unconscious , before fleeing from the scene , fearing that he had killed his bandmate . Davies was taken to Cardiff Royal Infirmary , where he received 16 stitches to his head . To placate police , Avory later claimed that it was part of a new act in which the band members would hurl their instruments at each other . Following their summer 1965 American tour , the American Federation of Musicians refused permits for the group to appear in concerts in the United States for the next four years , possibly due to their rowdy on @-@ stage behaviour . 
 In April 1969 Davies helped negotiate an end to the American Federation of Musician ban on the group , which allowed plans for a North American tour . Davies went into a state of depression , culminating in his onstage announcement that he was " sick of it all " at a gig in White City Stadium . A review of the concert published in Melody Maker stated : " Davies swore on stage . He stood at The White City and swore that he was ' F ...... [ sic ] sick of the whole thing ' ... He was ' Sick up to here with it ' ... and those that heard shook their heads . Mick just ventured a disbelieving smile , and drummer [ sic ] on through ' Waterloo Sunset . ' " Davies proceeded to try to announce that the Kinks were breaking up , but this attempt was foiled by the group 's publicity management , who pulled the plug on the microphone system . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Kinks are regarded as one of the most important and influential rock acts of the 1960s and early 1970s . Stephen Thomas Erlewine called the Kinks " one of the most influential bands of the British Invasion " . They were ranked 65th on Rolling Stone magazine 's " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " list . 
 Artists influenced by the Kinks include punk rock groups such as the Ramones , The Clash , and The Jam , new wave and heavy metal acts like Van Halen and Britpop groups such as Oasis , Blur and Pulp . Craig Nicholls , singer and guitarist of The Vines has also named the Kinks as a key influence on his own songwriting , stating in one interview , " They ’ re such great songwriters , so underrated , and they did so much great stuff later on . I ’ m obsessed with the Kinks . " Pete Townshend , guitarist with the Kinks ' contemporaries the Who , was particularly influenced by the group 's sound : " the Kinks were ... quintessentially English . I always think that Ray Davies should one day be poet laureate . He invented a new kind of poetry and a new kind of language for pop writing that influenced me from the very , very , very beginning . " Jon Savage wrote that the Kinks were an influence on late @-@ 1960s American psychedelic groups , " like the Doors , Love and Jefferson Airplane " . 
 Musicologist Joe Harrington has described the Kinks ' influence on the development of hard rock and heavy metal : " ' You Really Got Me ' , ' All Day and All of the Night ' and ' I Need You ' were predecessors of the whole three @-@ chord genre ... the Kinks did a lot to help turn rock ' n ' roll ( Jerry Lee Lewis ) into rock ( Led Zeppelin , Black Sabbath , the Stooges ) . " 
 = = Charts , sales certifications and recognition = = 
 The Kinks had five Top 10 singles on the US Billboard chart . Nine of their albums charted in the Top 40 . In the UK , the group had seventeen Top 20 singles along with five Top 10 albums . The RIAA has certified four of the Kinks ' albums as gold records . Greatest Hits ! , released in 1965 , was certified gold for sales of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 on 28 November 1968 — six days after the release of The Kinks Are The Village Green Preservation Society , which failed to chart worldwide . The group would not receive another gold record award until 1979 's Low Budget . The 1980 live album One For The Road was certified gold on 8 December 1980 . Give The People What They Want , released in 1981 , received its certification on 25 January 1982 , for sales of 500 @,@ 000 copies . ASCAP , the performing @-@ rights group , presented the Kinks with an award for " One of the Most Played Songs Of 1983 " for the hit single " Come Dancing " . 
 The group received the Ivor Novello Award for " Outstanding Service to British Music " , and in 1990 the original four members of the Kinks were inducted into the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame . The Kinks were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame in November 2005 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The Kinks started out playing the then popular R & B and blues styles , then , under the influence of The Kingsmen 's " Louie Louie " recording , developed louder rock and hard rock sounds — due to their pioneering contribution to the field , they have often been labelled as " the original punks " . Dave Davies became bored with the traditional " clean " guitar style of the period ; in search of a louder , more biting sound , he famously split the speaker cone of his Elpico amplifier ( nicknamed " the little green amp " ) : " I started to get really frustrated [ with the amp 's sound ] , and I said , ' I know ! I 'll fix you ! ' I got a single @-@ sided Gillette <unk> and cut ... [ from the centre to the edge of the ] cone ... so it was all shredded but still on there , still intact . I played and I thought it was amazing . " The jagged sound of the amplifier was replicated in the studio ; the Elpico was plugged into a larger Vox AC30 , and the resulting effect became a mainstay in the Kinks ' early recordings — most notably on " You Really Got Me " and " All Day and All of the Night " . 
 From 1966 onwards , the Kinks came to be known for their adherence to traditions of English music and culture , during a period when many other British groups dismissed their heritage in favour of American blues , R & B and pop styles . Ray Davies recalled that at a distinct moment in 1965 he decided to break away from the American scene , and write more introspective and intelligent songs . " I decided I was going to use words more , and say things . I wrote ' Well Respected Man ' . That was the first real word @-@ oriented song I wrote . ... [ I also ] abandoned any attempt to Americanise my accent . " The Kinks ' allegiance to English styles was strengthened by the ban placed on them by the American Federation of Musicians . The ban cut them off from the American record buying public , the world 's largest musical market , forcing them to focus on Britain and mainland Europe . The Kinks expanded on their English sound throughout the remainder of the 1960s , fusing music hall and folk , and creating some of the most influential and important music of the period . 
 Beginning with Everybody 's In Show @-@ biz ( 1972 ) , Ray Davies began exploring theatrical concepts on the group 's albums ; these themes became manifest on the 1973 album Preservation Act 1 and continued through Schoolboys In Disgrace ( 1976 ) . The Kinks found little success with these conceptual works , and reverted to a traditional rock format throughout the remainder of the 1970s . Sleepwalker ( 1977 ) , which heralded their return to commercial success , featured a mainstream , relatively slick production style that would become their norm . The band returned to hard rock for Low Budget ( 1979 ) , and continued to record within the genre throughout the remainder of their career . 
 = = Documentation , unreleased material and out @-@ takes = = 
 The recording histories of contemporary acts were well @-@ documented but little survived from studio archives of the Kinks ' 1960s recording history . Ray Davies kept a diary , but he had , by 2004 , not published it . Unlike larger record companies like EMI , Pye Records , kept few of the Kinks ' session tapes , wiping or recording over most acetates and out @-@ takes — by the mid @-@ 1980s . From 1971 – and the move to RCA – both documentation and tapes were preserved because , at their own Konk Studios , the Kinks kept creative licence – but " until and unless there is some access to the vaults of Konk Studios , this aspect of the Kinks ' recording legacy will remain far from definitive " , Doug Hinman wrote in 2004 . Later compilation releases , such as Picture Book , increasingly included previously @-@ unreleased material and commentary . 
 = = Members = = 
 Ray Davies – lead vocals , rhythm guitar , harmonica , keyboards ( 1964 – 1996 ) 
 Dave Davies – lead guitar , backing and lead vocals ( 1964 – 1996 ) 
 Mick Avory – drums , percussion ( 1964 – 1984 ) 
 Bob Henrit – drums , percussion ( 1984 – 1996 ) 
 Pete Quaife – bass , backing vocals ( 1964 – 1969 ) ( died 2010 ) 
 John Dalton – bass , backing vocals ( June – 1966 , 1969 – 1976 , 1978 ) 
 Andy Pyle – bass , backing vocals ( 1976 – 1978 ) 
 Jim Rodford – bass , backing vocals ( 1978 – 1996 ) 
 John Gosling – keyboards , piano , 1970 – 1978 ) 
