 = = Changing sensibilities = = 
 The Oxford English Dictionary defines the word cunt as " The female external genital organs " and notes " Its currency is restricted in the manner of other taboo @-@ words : see the small @-@ type note <unk> FUCK v. " During the Middle Ages the word may often have been considered merely vulgar , having been in common use in its anatomical sense since at least the 13th century . In The Miller 's Tale , Geoffrey Chaucer writes " And <unk> he <unk> hire by the <unk> " ( and intimately he caught her by her crotch ) , and <unk> ( 1603 ) mentions " put doun thy hand and <unk> hir cunt . " Gradually though the word became used more as the obscenity it is generally considered to be today . In John Garfield 's <unk> Whore II ( 1660 ) the word is applied to a woman , specifically a whore — " this is none of your <unk> <unk> and <unk> that will offer a sturdy C — but eighteen pence or two shillings , and repent of the business afterwards " . Francis Grose 's A Classical Dictionary of The Vulgar Tongue ( 1785 ) lists the word as " C * * t . The <unk> of the Greek , and the <unk> of the Latin dictionaries ; a nasty name for a nasty thing : un con <unk> . " 
 Although some medieval street names such as <unk> Street ( stinking urine , or other liquid filth ; mire ) and Fetter Lane ( once <unk> , meaning " idle and disorderly person " ) have survived , others have been changed in deference to contemporary attitudes . Sherborne Lane in London was in 1272 – 73 known as <unk> , later Shite @-@ burn lane and Shite @-@ <unk> ( possibly due to nearby cesspits ) . Pissing Alley , one of several identically named streets whose names survived the Great Fire of London , was called Little Friday Street in 1848 , before being absorbed into Cannon Street in 1853 – 54 . Petticoat Lane , the meaning of which is sometimes misinterpreted as related to prostitution , was in 1830 renamed as Middlesex Street , following complaints about the street being named after an item of underwear . More recently , <unk> Place , where John Christie murdered his victims , was renamed Ruston Close . Selous Street in London was renamed as a mark of respect for Nelson Mandela , as it may have been perceived to have been named in honour of the colonialist Frederick Selous , although it was actually named after the artist Henry Courtney Selous . 
 As the most ubiquitous and explicit example of such street names , with the exception of Shrewsbury and possibly Newcastle ( where a <unk> was mentioned in 1588 ) the use of Gropecunt seems to have fallen out of favour by the 14th century . Its steady disappearance from the English vernacular may have been the result of a gradual cleaning @-@ up of the name ; <unk> in 13th @-@ century Wells became Grope Lane , and then in the 19th century , Grove Lane . The ruling Protestant conservative elite 's growing hostility to prostitution during the 16th century resulted in the closure of the Southwark stews in 1546 , replacing earlier attempts at regulation . 
 = = Locations = = 
 London had several streets named Gropecunt Lane including one in the parishes of St Pancras , Soper Lane and St Mary <unk> , between <unk> ( bordello ) and <unk> Lane ( poke skirt ) near present @-@ day Cheapside . First recorded in 1279 as <unk> and <unk> , it was part of a collection of streets which appears to have survived as a small island of prostitution outside Southwark , where such activities were normally confined during the medieval period . 
 The name was also used in other large medieval towns across England , including Bristol , York , Shrewsbury , Newcastle upon Tyne , Worcester , Hereford , and Oxford . Norwich 's <unk> ( now Opie Street ) was recorded in Latin as turpis vicus , the shameful street . In 1230 Oxford 's Magpie Lane was known as Gropecunt Lane , renamed Grope or Grape Lane in the 13th century , and then Magpie Lane in the mid @-@ 17th century . It was again renamed in 1850 as Grove Street , before once again assuming the name Magpie Lane in the 20th century . Newcastle and Worcester each had a Grope Lane close to their public quays . In their 2001 study of medieval prostitution , using the Historic Towns Atlas as a source , historian Richard Holt and archaeologist Nigel Baker of the University of Birmingham studied sexually suggestive street names around England . They concluded that there was a close association between a street with the name Gropecunt Lane , which was almost always in the centre of town , and that town 's principal market @-@ place or high street . This correlation suggests that these streets not only provided for the sexual gratification of local men , but also for visiting stall @-@ holders . 
 Such trade may explain the relative uniformity of the name across the country . Streets named Gropecunt Lane are recorded in several smaller market towns such as Banbury , Glastonbury and Wells , where a street of that name existed in 1300 , regularly mentioned in legal documents of the time . Parsons Street in Banbury was first recorded as Gropecunt Lane in 1333 , and may have been an important thoroughfare , but by 1410 its name had been changed to Parsons Lane . Grape Lane in Whitby may once have been Grope Lane , or <unk> Lane . <unk> Lane in Glastonbury , later known as Grope lane , now St <unk> Court , was recorded in 1290 and 1425 A street called Grope <unk> existed in Shrewsbury as recently as 1561 , connecting the town 's two principal marketplaces . At some date unrecorded the street was renamed Grope Lane , a name it has retained . In Thomas Phillips ' History and Antiquities of Shrewsbury ( 1799 ) the author is explicit in his understanding of the origin of the name as a place of " scandalous lewdness and venery " , but Archdeacon Hugh Owen 's Some account of the ancient and present state of Shrewsbury ( 1808 ) describes it as " called Grope , or the Dark Lane " . As a result of these differing accounts , some local tour guides attribute the name to " feeling one 's way along a dark and narrow thoroughfare " . 
 = JC 's Girls = 
 JC 's Girls ( short for Jesus Christ 's Girls , also called the JC 's Girls Girls Girls Ministry ) is an Evangelical Christian women 's organization in the United States whose members evangelize to female workers in the sex industry . The organization supports women wishing to leave the industry , but does not try to persuade them to do so . The group does not focus upon conversion but rather on communicating its message that Christians exist who are not judging female sex workers and are willing to accept them . The organization also helps both women and men seeking to overcome pornography addiction . 
 The organization was founded by Heather Veitch , who worked as a stripper for four years before becoming a Christian and leaving the sex industry in 1999 . She founded JC 's Girls on Good Friday in March 2005 ; it was based at Sandals Church in Riverside , California , with the support of the California Southern Baptist Convention . In January 2006 , JC 's Girls went to Las Vegas to operate a booth at the AVN Adult Entertainment Expo that received much traffic and news coverage . By 2008 , Veitch had moved to Las Vegas and based the organization at Central Christian Church in nearby Henderson , Nevada . Former stripper and call girl Theresa Scher and social worker Sheri Brown founded the San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls at The Rock Church in 2007 . Veitch , Scher , and Brown resigned from JC 's Girls in 2011 , 2012 , and 2014 respectively , leaving the leadership of the organization to Laura Bonde . As of 2014 , the sole chapter of JC 's Girls is in San Diego . 
 Terry Barone , spokesman of the California Southern Baptist Convention , said that JC 's Girls members " are doing what Jesus did ... He ministered to prostitutes and tax collectors . " JC 's Girls members have been criticized for dressing like sex workers , a look that Veitch said is intended to help women in the sex industry identify with the group . A Baptist minister from San Bernardino , California criticized JC 's Girls for not explicitly encouraging women in the sex industry to quit , and quoted Matthew 6 : 24 , a Bible verse that states that a person cannot serve two masters . In response to the idea that strippers should quit their jobs before attending a church , Veitch said , " Do we ask gluttons to stop eating too much before they come to church ? " Philip Sherwell of the Calgary Herald called the evangelism of JC 's Girls " America 's most unusual Christian outreach operation " . 
 = = Ideology = = 
 JC 's Girls , also called the JC 's Girls Girls Girls Ministry , is an Evangelical organization that calls itself " a biblically @-@ based Christian ministry " . JC 's Girls is less focused on seeking conversions than on communicating the message to women in the sex industry that Christians exist who are willing to non @-@ <unk> accept them . Initially , the organization focused on evangelizing to strippers and erotic dancers , but later began to engage with women in other areas of the sex industry , such as softcore pornographic models and call girls . The organization also diversified to support people with pornography addiction . Members of the organization evangelize at adult entertainment conventions and strip clubs . 
 Out of a belief that many women in the sex industry have been spiritually abused by Christians trying to frighten them out of the sex industry with warnings of damnation , JC 's Girls focuses on telling these women that God loves them . JC 's Girls volunteers tell the women about the gospel but do not try to persuade them to leave the sex industry ; the organization recognizes that is often not financially viable for women in the sex industry to immediately sacrifice their employment . JC 's Girls connects female sex workers with churches the organization believes to be non @-@ judgmental , hoping that the women will experience the love of Christ through these churches and that they will thereby eventually have the support and strength they need to leave the industry . Prior to referring a woman to a church , JC 's Girls puts the church through a formal approval process to ensure that the church will not be judgmental . If women express a desire to leave the sex industry , JC 's Girls attempts to support them in doing so . 
 JC 's Girls aims to convey to women in the sex industry that Jesus loves them , that they are beautiful , and that they have dignity . Its volunteers often style themselves with eyelash extensions , stiletto heels , skinny jeans , skin @-@ tight T @-@ shirts , and backcombed hair to convey the message that such things are , in their view , not sinful . Founder Heather Veitch said , " Our desire is for people to see that Christianity is anything but boring and restrictive . In Christ , we are free to experience adventure , pleasure , forgiveness , hope and peace . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Veitch worked as a stripper for four years in the Las Vegas area and California . After she had appeared in four pornographic films in the softcore and fetish genres — trample fetish specifically — public discussion about the Year 2000 problem and the end of the world caused her to think that she might experience divine judgment for her lifestyle . She then became a Christian , married her boyfriend Jon , started and completed a course in cosmetology , left the sex industry , and became a hairdresser all by September 1999 . In 2003 , Veitch discovered that a friend of hers who was working as a stripper had died as a result of alcoholism . Veitch began to evangelize to strippers because she wished she had told her friend about the gospel before she died . 
 By 2005 , Veitch was working as a hairdresser in Riverside , California . One of her clients was Lori Albee , a housewife with two children and no experience with the sex industry . Veitch told Albee about her friend who had died and to whom she wished she had evangelized . Albee suggested that they start telling other strippers about Jesus . Matt Brown , Veitch 's pastor at Sandals Church , arrived for a haircut and Veitch asked him for help to start an organization to minister to sex workers . He was interested . Veitch and Brown started Matthew 's House , an organization they founded as " a ministry to help people working in or addicted to the sex industry " . They chose the name " Matthew 's House " in reference to the Calling of Matthew , a gospel episode in which Jesus eats with sinners at the home of Matthew the Apostle . 
 By 2011 , JC 's Girls chapters were based in Las Vegas , Nevada ; Riverside , California ; San Diego , California ; Austin , Texas ; and Sioux Falls , South Dakota . As of 2014 , the San Diego chapter is the sole chapter that remains . 
 = = = Riverside chapter = = = 
 On Good Friday in March 2005 , Veitch , Albee and six other women went to a strip club in Riverside and paid for lap dances . Instead of accepting the dances , they talked with the strippers , telling them that they were loved and accepted by God , that churches were composed entirely of sinners , and that they would be welcome there . One of the lap dancers cried and told Albee she had often wanted to go to a church but had never done so because she had thought that she would be rejected . The woman accepted a prayer from Albee and hugged her . Albee would later say that talking with women at the strip club that first day changed her life . Because the volunteers received more positive responses than they had expected , they decided to continue to evangelize at strip clubs . To organize these activities , Veitch and Albee founded JC 's Girls , with " JC " standing for Jesus Christ . They made Matthew 's House the parent organization , but decided to operate primarily under the name " JC 's Girls " because Veitch believed that strippers would not understand the meaning of the name " Matthew 's House " . 
 Veitch became the head of JC 's Girls and the 17 @,@ 000 @-@ member Sandals Church became the organization 's base of operations . The church is part of the California Southern Baptist Convention , which supports JC 's Girls . The church gave JC 's Girls a $ 10 @,@ 000 budget in its first year . The organization 's members continued visiting strip clubs across California , paying for private dances and then evangelizing the strippers . Within six months of its founding , the organization 's members had persuaded several strippers to start attending a church and were only once asked to stop . One of these women was fired from a strip club because she started attending Sandals Church , but she continued attending the church , saying that Brown 's preaching helped her get through the week . 
 By December 2005 , Veitch , Albee , and teacher Tanya Huerter had become the organization 's leaders . Two months later , Huerter , who also had no experience with the sex industry , said , " I have a heart for these girls . I believe God created sex for marriage . But God will meet these girls where they are . " Veitch , Albee , and Huerter invited Christian women from other churches in the area to volunteer with JC 's Girls and approximately 90 churches responded with interest . JC 's Girls received public attention in December 2005 , when UK newspaper The Daily Telegraph published an article about the organization 's activities . The article prompted additional media coverage from other newspapers , television programs , and radio stations both across the United States and internationally , including news outlets as far away as France and India . Veitch began dividing her time between managing JC 's Girls , appearing in the media , and serving as a caregiver for her terminally @-@ ill husband , who had brain cancer . 
 In January 2006 , JC 's Girls went to Las Vegas to operate a booth at the AVN Adult Entertainment Expo — the largest trade fair for pornography in the United States . The booth was decorated in the style of the booths advertising strip clubs ; the women wore sleeveless shirts with the organization 's name in sequins . When men attending the convention visited the booth thinking that JC 's Girls was a strip club , the women asked them to guess what " JC " meant and gave attendees a sticker reading : " I 've been booby @-@ trapped by JC 's Girls . " JC 's Girls told thousands of male attendees about the gospel , distributed more than 200 Bibles wrapped in T @-@ shirts reading " Holy Hottie " , and gave out DVDs of a sermon by Brown about pornography addiction . Jesse Jane was one of the women who accepted a Bible . Many convention attendees wished to take pictures with the JC 's Girls volunteers . Veitch was interviewed for a variety of media , including a CNN news broadcast and a documentary film by Bill Day , who had previously made the film Missionary Positions about XXXchurch.com , another Christian organization that was operating a booth at the trade fair . 
 Also in January 2006 , Brown approved a $ 50 @,@ 000 budget for JC 's Girls for the year . By April , seven strippers had attended Sandals Church because of JC 's Girls and strippers from across the United States had contacted the organization looking for local churches . In an attempt to dispel accusations that the JC 's Girls message might be motivated by jealousy , Veitch lost weight and became more physically fit . She said that she wanted strippers " to know that if I wanted to , I could be a stripper again , but I choose to live my life for the Lord . " 
 = = = Original website = = = 
 Within the first few months of founding JC 's Girls , Veitch and Albee launched the organization 's first official website , which initially received little traffic . Three months later , it had received 40 @,@ 000 hits . By December 2005 , the organization had received messages through its website from pornographic film actors and men with pornography addiction who said that JC 's Girls had changed their lives . A slogan on the main page of the website read , " If you are a CHRISTIAN ... See us in ACTION ... " . Without asking for payment , Veitch 's friend , pornographic film director James DiGiorgio , took glamour photographs of Veitch , Albee , and Huerter for the JC 's Girls website . DiGiorgio was not a Christian , but said that he was helping these organizations in order to support their freedom of speech ; he said that the sex industry is " always trying to preach freedom of speech [ so ] anyone in this industry who has a problem with [ JC 's Girls ' ] message is a fucking hypocrite . You can 't have it both ways . " Within a year of the organization 's founding , Veitch , Albee , and Huerter were maintaining Myspace pages that they used to offer support , counsel , and advice . By 2008 , the JC 's Girls website , which included a blog , was receiving around 15 @,@ 000 hits per day . 
 = = = Las Vegas chapter = = = 
 In 2008 , Veitch told Brown that she believed that the JC 's Girls ministry needed to move to Las Vegas , and he responded supportively . By 2008 , Veitch had moved to Las Vegas and based the new chapter of JC 's Girls at Central Christian Church in nearby Henderson , Nevada , leaving the leadership of the Riverside chapter to Albee . That year , Veitch collaborated with Annie Lobert , a former call girl working with Hookers for Jesus , an organization similar to JC 's Girls . The organizations were both represented at that year 's AVN Adult Entertainment Expo . The <unk> Preacher , a documentary film about Veitch 's experiences starting JC 's Girls , was released that February . The following month , pornographic film actor Sophia Lynn left the sex industry after becoming a Christian ; she underwent more than a year of counselling with Veitch through JC 's Girls . Veitch had flown to Sioux Falls , South Dakota , to spend a weekend educating Celebrate Community Church about the sex industry . The church soon gave Lynn a job in its office , a scholarship to go to college , and a place to live . Lynn said , " I hope I don 't have to wake up from this . I feel like my life has been saved . " 
 = = = San Diego chapter = = = 
 In San Diego , Theresa Scher , a stripper and call girl , was looking for a way out of the sex industry when she watched a CNN interview with Albee about her work with JC 's Girls in Riverside . Scher contacted Albee , who allowed Scher to establish a new chapter of JC 's Girls in San Diego . Scher founded the chapter in 2007 with Sheri Brown , a former social worker . Brown had previously hated strippers , but , once she had accepted a job helping teenage mothers finish high school and the first four teens she worked with were strippers , she said that she developed " an overwhelming passion to reach out to these precious women in love and without condemnation . " She has described being sexually abused as a child and later being a teenage mother ; Brown found that both of these experiences helped her to relate to strippers , as many of the strippers she encountered also had those experiences . 
 The San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls is based at The Rock Church , a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ member church with a majority of members under the age of 30 . In the first year , several strippers left the sex industry and began volunteering with the chapter . Many of the chapter 's members do not personally visit strip clubs but help in other ways . Scher said the former strippers were the most effective JC 's Girls volunteers because they understand from personal experience the situations of the women they are trying to help . By 2011 , members of the San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls were visiting strip clubs twice each month . They pray before , during , and after each visit and a team of other members pray for them from another location . 
 Carrie Prejean started volunteering with the San Diego chapter of JC 's Girls in 2008 and became Miss California USA the following year . At the Miss USA 2009 competition , Prejean became the subject of a controversy because of her response to a question about same @-@ sex marriage . Scher said that the controversy would not affect Prejean 's involvement with the organization and that the issue of same @-@ sex marriage was not relevant to the group 's activities . Prejean said that in volunteering with JC 's Girls , she encountered pornographic models who , through exploitation and abuse , had developed very low self @-@ esteem but who had regained a sense of their own dignity because of their interaction with JC 's Girls volunteers . 
 By 2009 , approximately 40 women were on the chapter 's active evangelism team , and they had given pink Bibles to most of the strippers in San Diego County . They paired these Bibles with other gifts including lip gloss , necklaces , and lotions in order to pique the strippers ' interest . In August 2010 , Brown went to Warsaw , Ohio , to briefly join forces with Anny Donewald , a former stripper and founder of Eve 's Angels , an organization similar to JC 's Girls . Together , Brown and Donewald negotiated a peace accord between women working at a strip club and members of a local church who had been picketing the club for four years . The strippers had been counter @-@ protesting by dancing in bikinis in front of the church during Sunday services while Tommy George , the club 's owner , played music from his car . Brown and Donewald spoke at the church , urging them to stop protesting at the strip club and saying , " It 's not our job to tell these women that it 's time to get out of there ... Just love them . Let the Holy Spirit draw them out . " Brown and Donewald also visited the strip club and spoke with the strippers , two of whom became Christians while continuing to work at the club . The peace accord received much publicity , but the church 's members , led by their pastor Bill Dunfee , resumed picketing once Brown had returned to San Diego . George and his club 's strippers returned to their counter @-@ protesting . 
 By 2011 , several of the strippers JC 's Girls members had spoken with in San Diego had begun attending a Bible study hosted by the organization and the chapter had helped one stripper leave the sex industry and gain unrelated employment . In March 2011 , the chapter sent a delegation to <unk> at the Los Angeles Convention Center , where Scher and Brown spoke with conference attendees and offered them prayer . That July , Veitch resigned from JC 's Girls so she could spend more time with her family , handing the leadership of the organization to Scher and Brown . In June 2012 , Scher gave up her co @-@ leadership of the organization to focus on her family , leaving the leadership to Brown . By 2013 , the organization had established guidelines regulating the transition of women from the sex industry into participation in the evangelistic activities of JC 's Girls . The woman must consistently attend a Bible study for four months , read Francine Rivers ' book Redeeming Love , and be interviewed by the chapter 's leaders , who then decide whether the woman should join the organization 's outreach team . These guidelines were established because some women who had quickly gone from working in the sex industry to evangelizing with JC 's Girls soon left the organization and returned to the sex industry . Brown left JC 's Girls in April 2014 and Laura Bonde took over leadership of the organization . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When JC 's Girls first started receiving funds from Sandals Church in 2005 , some of the church 's members were displeased that their tithes and offerings were being given to strip clubs . In 2006 , Brown said that funding the activities of JC 's Girls was worthwhile because the sex industry " has been largely ignored by the evangelical church " and the budget allotted to JC 's Girls is small compared to the money made by the sex industry . Sandals Church members were also concerned that ministering to strippers would be ineffective . Brown responded by referring to Veitch 's conversion , suggesting that other strippers could have similar experiences . Terry Barone of the California Southern Baptist Convention asserted that JC 's Girls members " are doing what Jesus did ... He ministered to prostitutes and tax collectors . " 
 Brown said that the most common complaint that he received about JC 's Girls was " the way Heather Veitch looks ... her breasts are too big and she looks too much like a stripper " , a complaint to which he responded that " God can use any individual to change the world " . Veitch said in 2008 that Christians commonly say that JC 's Girls dress like sex workers , but she said that the look is intended to help women in the sex industry identify with the group . Annie Lobert of Hookers for Jesus , a similar group that collaborates with JC 's Girls , said around the same time that Christians make the same kind of comments about her and her ministry — " They say my T @-@ shirt is too tight " , said Lobert , " but , hey , when in Vegas , do as Vegas does " . 
 Controversy regarding his involvement with JC 's Girls threatened to lose Brown his church facility on the California Baptist University campus , but the church united in support of JC 's Girls and remained in the same location . Barone said that Baptists might find viewing the JC 's Girls website awkward , but that it was not intended for them . Stephen Clark of the Los Angeles Times called it " an edgy website [ with ] provocative appeals . " Sarah Sumner , author of Men and Women in the Church , said in Bill Day 's 2008 documentary film The Pussycat Preacher that some Christians might oppose the female @-@ led JC 's Girls because of 1 Timothy 2 : 12 , a Bible verse that can be interpreted as restricting positions of authority in church to men . Brown said elsewhere in the film that it made more sense for women to lead JC 's Girls " because a woman would be the most welcome in the industry " . 
 In its first year , JC 's Girls was criticized for allowing DiGiorgio to take glamour photographs of Veitch , Albee , and Huerter for their website . Veitch responded to this criticism with the assertion that " it is not a sin to be attractive or dress cute , " and that the photographs were intended to persuade women in the sex industry to dismiss the idea that Christianity is about " being locked up in a house with a Bible . " DiGiorgio said that JC 's Girls is correct in believing that many women in the sex industry need to be rescued from self @-@ destructive behavior , but he did not think that encouraging the women to become Christians would necessarily help them . 
 The Family Research Council , an American Christian lobbying organization , has endorsed JC 's Girls . Documentary filmmaker Bill Daly said that members of JC 's Girls are " fighting false glamour with real spiritual beauty . " In his 2013 book Evangelicals and the Arts in Fiction , writer John Weaver writes that science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein wrote about Evangelicals as being sexually repressed and eventually undergoing a sexual revolution . Weaver offers JC 's Girls and XXXchurch.com as evidence that Heinlein 's fiction is becoming a reality . By 2007 , adherents of UFO religion Raëlism had responded to JC 's Girls by forming " Raël 's Girls " , an organization with a similar outreach program but a very different message , encouraging sex workers to try to maximise their own sexual pleasure while serving clients . 
 In 2006 , a Baptist minister from San Bernardino , California criticized JC 's Girls for not explicitly encouraging women in the sex industry to quit . He commended Veitch " for her zeal and desire to reach the lost for Christ " , but asked , " How can you stay in the industry and have a relationship with God ? " , and quoted Matthew 6 : 24 , a Bible verse that states that a person cannot serve two masters . In response to the idea that strippers should quit their jobs before attending a church , Veitch said , " Do we ask gluttons to stop eating too much before they come to church ? " At the 2006 AVN Adult Entertainment Expo , photographer Michael Grecco photographed Veitch , Albee , and Huerter and included the image in his 2007 book Naked Ambition : An R Rated Look at an X Rated Industry . In the image caption , he called the trio a " devout Christian trinity " . Philip Sherwell of the Calgary Herald called the organization 's evangelism " America 's most unusual Christian outreach operation " . A journalist for UK newspaper The Observer compared JC 's Girls to XXXchurch.com , writing in 2006 that both of " these ministries are in some way reforming the church as well as their would @-@ be followers . " 
 = Ion Heliade Rădulescu = 
 Ion Heliade Rădulescu or Ion Heliade ( also known as Eliad or Eliade Rădulescu ; Romanian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; January 6 , 1802 – April 27 , 1872 ) was a Wallachian @-@ born Romanian academic , Romantic and Classicist poet , essayist , memoirist , short story writer , newspaper editor and politician . A prolific translator of foreign literature into Romanian , he was also the author of books on linguistics and history . For much of his life , Heliade Rădulescu was a teacher at Saint Sava College in Bucharest , which he helped reopen . He was a founding member and first president of the Romanian Academy . 
 Heliade Rădulescu is considered one of the foremost champions of Romanian culture from the first half of the 19th century , having first risen to prominence through his association with Gheorghe Lazăr and his support of Lazăr 's drive for discontinuing education in Greek . Over the following decades , he had a major role in shaping the modern Romanian language , but caused controversy when he advocated the massive introduction of Italian neologisms into the Romanian lexis . A Romantic nationalist landowner siding with moderate liberals , Heliade was among the leaders of the 1848 Wallachian revolution , after which he was forced to spend several years in exile . Adopting an original form of conservatism , which emphasized the role of the aristocratic boyars in Romanian history , he was rewarded for supporting the Ottoman Empire and clashed with the radical wing of the 1848 revolutionaries . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Heliade Rădulescu was born in Târgovişte , the son of Ilie Rădulescu , a wealthy proprietor who served as the leader of a patrol unit during the 1810s , and <unk> Danielopol , who had been educated in Greek . Three of his siblings died of bubonic plague before 1829 . Throughout his early youth , Ion was the focus of his parents ' affectionate supervision : early on , Ilie Rădulescu purchased a house once owned by the scholar Gheorghe Lazăr on the outskirts of Bucharest ( near Obor ) , as a gift for his son . At the time , the <unk> were owners of a large garden in the Bucharest area , nearby <unk> , as well as of estates in the vicinity of Făgăraş and <unk> . 
 After basic education in Greek with a tutor known as <unk> , Ion Heliade Rădulescu taught himself reading in Romanian Cyrillic ( reportedly by studying the Alexander Romance with the help of his father 's Oltenian servants ) . He subsequently became an avid reader of popular novels , especially during his 1813 sojourn in <unk> ( where he had been sent after other areas of the country came to be ravaged by <unk> 's plague ) . After 1813 , the teenaged Rădulescu was a pupil of the Orthodox monk Naum <unk> ; in 1815 , he moved on to the Greek school at <unk> <unk> , in Bucharest , and , in 1818 , to the Saint Sava School , where he studied under Gheorghe Lazăr 's supervision . 
 Between his 1820 graduation and 1821 , when effects of the Wallachian uprising led to the School ceasing its activities , he was kept as Lazăr 's assistant teacher , tutoring in arithmetics and geometry . It was during those years that he adopted the surname Heliade ( also rendered <unk> , Eliad or Eliade ) , which , he later explained , was a Greek version of his patronymic , in turn stemming from the Romanian version of Elijah . 
 = = = Under Grigore Ghica = = = 
 In 1822 , after Gheorghe Lazăr had fallen ill , Heliade reopened Saint Sava and served as its main teacher ( initially , without any form of remuneration ) . He was later joined in this effort by other intellectuals of the day , such as <unk> Poteca , and , eventually , also opened an art class overseen by the Croat Carol <unk> . This re @-@ establishment came as a result of ordinances issued by Prince Grigore IV Ghica , who had just been assigned by the Ottoman Empire to the throne of Wallachia upon the disestablishment of Phanariote rule , encouraging the marginalization of ethnic Greeks who had assumed public office in previous decades . Thus , Prince Ghica had endorsed education in Romanian and , in one of his official firmans , defined teaching in Greek as " the foundation of evils " ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 During the late 1820s , Heliade became involved in cultural policies . In 1827 , he and <unk> Golescu founded Soţietatea <unk> <unk> ( the Romanian Literary Society ) , which , through its program ( mapped out by Heliade himself ) , proposed Saint Sava 's transformation into a college , the opening of another such institution in Craiova , and the creation of schools in virtually all Wallachian localities . In addition , Soţietatea attempted to encourage the establishment of Romanian @-@ language newspapers , calling for an end to the state monopoly on printing presses . The grouping , headquartered on central Bucharest 's Podul <unk> , benefited from Golescu 's experience abroad , and was soon joined by two future Princes , Gheorghe Bibescu and Barbu Dimitrie <unk> . Its character was based on Freemasonry ; around that time , Heliade is known to have become a Freemason , as did a large section of his generation . 
 In 1828 , Heliade published his first work , an essay on Romanian grammar , in the Transylvanian city of Hermannstadt ( which was part of the Austrian Empire at the time ) , and , on April 20 , 1829 , began printing the Bucharest @-@ based paper Curierul Românesc . This was the most successful of several attempts to create a local newspaper , something Golescu first attempted in 1828 . Publishing articles in both Romanian and French , Curierul Românesc had , starting in 1836 , its own literary supplement , under the title of <unk> de <unk> <unk> ; in print until 1847 , it notably published one of Heliade 's most famous poems , Zburătorul . Curierul Românesc was edited as a weekly , and later as a bimonthly , until 1839 , when it began to be issued three or four times a week . Its best @-@ known contributors were Heliade himself , Grigore Alexandrescu , Costache Negruzzi , Dimitrie Bolintineanu , Ioan <unk> , Vasile <unk> , and Iancu Văcărescu . 
 In 1823 , Heliade met Maria Alexandrescu , with whom he fell passionately in love , and whom he later married . By 1830 , the <unk> ' two children , a son named <unk> and a daughter named <unk> , died in infancy ; subsequently , their marriage entered a long period of crisis , marked by Maria 's frequent outbursts of jealousy . Ion Heliade probably had a number of extramarital affairs : a Wallachian Militia officer named <unk> , who became known during the 1840s , is thought by some , including the literary critic George Călinescu , to have been the writer 's illegitimate son . Before the death of her first child , Maria Heliade welcomed into her house Grigore Alexandrescu , himself a celebrated writer , whom Ion suspected had become her lover . Consequently , the two authors became bitter rivals : Ion Heliade referred to Alexandrescu as " that ingrate " , and , in an 1838 letter to George <unk> , downplayed his poetry and character ( believing that , in one of his fables , Alexandrescu had depicted himself as a nightingale , he commented that , in reality , he was " a piteous rook dressed in foreign feathers " ) . Despite these household conflicts , Maria Heliade gave birth to five other children , four daughters and one son ( Ion , born 1846 ) . 
 = = = Printer and court poet = = = 
 In October 1830 , together with his uncle Nicolae Rădulescu , he opened the first privately owned printing press in his country , operating on his property at <unk> Mavrogheni , in Obor ( the land went by the name of Câmpul lui Eliad — " Eliad 's Field " , and housed several other large buildings ) . Among the first works he published was a collection of poems by Alphonse de Lamartine , translated by Heliade from French , and grouped together with some of his own poems . Later , he translated a textbook on meter and Louis @-@ Benjamin Francoeur 's standard manual of <unk> , as well as works by Enlightenment authors — Voltaire 's Mahomet , ou le <unk> , and stories by Jean @-@ François Marmontel . They were followed , in 1839 , by a version of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's Julie , or the New Heloise . 
 Heliade began a career as a civil servant after the <unk> commissioned him to print the Official Bulletin , and later climbed through the official hierarchy , eventually serving as <unk> . This rise coincided with the establishment of the Regulamentul Organic regime , inaugurated , upon the end of the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1828 – 1829 , by an Imperial Russian administration under Pavel Kiselyov . When Kiselyov placed an order with Heliade for the printing of official documents , including the Regulament , the writer and his family were made prosperous by the sales . Nevertheless , Heliade maintained contacts with the faction of reformist boyars : in 1833 , together with Ion Câmpineanu , Iancu Văcărescu , Ioan Voinescu II , Constantin Aristia , Ştefan and Nicolae Golescu , as well as others , he founded the short @-@ lived Soţietatea Filarmonică ( the Philharmonic Society ) , which advanced a cultural agenda ( and was especially active in raising funds for the National Theater of Wallachia ) . Aside from its stated cultural goals , Soţietatea Filarmonică continued a covert political activity . 
 In 1834 , when Prince Alexandru II Ghica came to the throne , Heliade became one of his close collaborators , styling himself " court poet " . Several of the poems and discourses he authored during the period are written as panegyrics , and dedicated to Ghica , whom Heliade depicted as an ideal prototype of a monarch . As young reformists came into conflict with the prince , he kept his neutrality , arguing that all sides involved represented a privileged minority , and that the disturbances were equivalent to " the quarrel of wolves and the noise made by those in higher positions over the torn @-@ apart animal that is the peasant " . He was notably critical of the radical Mitică Filipescu , whom he satirized in the poem <unk> <unk> ( " The Demons ' Fall " ) , and later defined his own position with the words " I hate tyrants . I fear anarchy " . 
 It was also in 1834 that Heliade began teaching at the Soţietatea Filarmonică 's school ( alongside Aristia and the musician Ioan Andrei Wachmann ) , and published his first translations from Lord Byron ( in 1847 , he completed the translation of Byron 's Don Juan ) . The next year , he began printing Gazeta <unk> <unk> ( official voice of the National Theater , published until 1836 ) , and translated Molière 's Amphitryon into Romanian . In 1839 , Heliade also translated Miguel de Cervantes ' Don Quixote from a French source . The first collection of his own prose and poetry works saw print in 1836 . Interested in the development of local art , he contributed a brochure on drawing and architecture in 1837 , and , during the same year , opened the first permanent exhibit in Wallachia ( featuring copies of Western paintings , portraits , and gypsum casts of various known sculptures ) . 
 By the early 1840s , Heliade began expanding on his notion that modern Romanian needed to emphasize its connections with other Romance languages through neologisms from Italian , and , to this goal , he published <unk> între <unk> <unk> şi <unk> ( " Parallelism between the Romanian language and Italian " , 1840 ) and <unk> între <unk> <unk> şi <unk> <unk> forma ori <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Parallelism between the Romanian and Italian Dialects or the Form or Grammar of These Two Dialects " , 1841 ) . The two books were followed by a compendium , <unk> de <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " Summary of the Grammar of the Romanian @-@ Italian Language " ) , and , in 1847 , by a comprehensive list of Romanian words that had originated in Slavic , Greek , Ottoman Turkish , Hungarian , and German ( see Romanian lexis ) . By 1846 , he was planning to begin work on a " universal library " , which was to include , among other books , the major the philosophical writings of , among others , Plato , Aristotle , Roger Bacon , René Descartes , Baruch Spinoza , John Locke , Gottfried Leibniz , David Hume , Immanuel Kant , Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel . 
 = = = 1848 Revolution = = = 
 Before Alexandru Ghica was replaced with Gheorghe Bibescu , his relations with Heliade had soured . In contrast with his earlier call for moderation , the writer decided to side with the liberal current in its conspiratorial opposition to Bibescu . The so @-@ called " Trandafiloff affair " of early 1844 was essential in this process — it was provoked by Bibescu 's decision to lease all Wallachian mines to a Russian engineer named Alexander Trandafiloff , a measure considered illegal by the Assembly and ultimately ending in Bibescu 's decision to dissolve his legislative . These events made Heliade publish a pamphlet titled <unk> ( " The <unk> " ) , which was heavily critical of Russian influence and reportedly sold over 30 @,@ 000 copies . It was centered on the pun alluding to Trandafiloff 's name — <unk> cu of în <unk> ( lit . " a rose ending in <unk> " , but also " a rose with grief for a stem " ) . Making additional covert reference to Trandafiloff as " the eglantine " , it featured the lyrics : 
 In spring 1848 , when the first European revolutions had erupted , Heliade was attracted into cooperation with <unk> , a secret society founded by Nicolae Bălcescu , Ion Ghica , Christian Tell , and Alexandru G. Golescu , and sat on its leadership committee . He also collaborated with the reform @-@ minded French teacher Jean Alexandre Vaillant , who was ultimately expelled after his activities were brought to the attention of authorities . On April 19 , 1848 , following financial setbacks , Curierul Românesc ceased printing ( this prompted Heliade to write <unk> <unk> , " The Bear 's Song " , a piece ridiculing his political enemies ) . 
 Heliade progressively distanced himself from the more radical groups , especially after discussions began on the issue of land reform and the disestablishment of the boyar class . Initially , he accepted the reforms , and , after the matter was debated within <unk> just before rebellion broke out , he issued a resolution acknowledging this ( the document was probably inspired by Nicolae Bălcescu ) . The compromise also set other goals , including national independence , responsible government , civil rights and equality , universal taxation , a larger Assembly , five @-@ year terms of office for Princes ( and their election by the National Assembly ) , freedom of the press , and decentralization . On June 21 , 1848 , present in Islaz alongside Tell and the Orthodox priest known as Popa <unk> , he read out these goals to a cheering crowd , in what was to be the effective start of the uprising ( see Proclamation of Islaz ) . Four days after the Islaz events , the revolution succeeded in toppling Bibescu , whom it replaced with a Provisional Government which immediately attracted Russian hostility . Presided over by Metropolitan Neofit , it included Heliade , who was also Minister of Education , as well as Tell , Ştefan Golescu , Gheorghe Magheru , and , for a short while , the Bucharest merchant Gheorghe <unk> . 
 Disputes regarding the shape of land reform continued , and in late July , the Government created <unk> <unk> ( the Commission on Property ) , representing both peasants and landlords and overseen by Alexandru <unk> and Ion Ionescu de la Brad . It too failed to reach a compromise over the amount of land to be allocated to peasants , and it was ultimately recalled by Heliade , who indicated that the matter was to be deliberated once a new Assembly had been voted into office . In time , the writer adopted a conservative outlook in respect to boyar tradition , developing a singular view of Romanian history from a consideration of property and rank in Wallachia . In the words of historian Nicolae Iorga : " Eliad had wanted to lead , as dictator , this movement that added liberal institutions to the old society that had been almost completely maintained in place " . 
 Like most other revolutionaries , Heliade favored maintaining good relations with the Ottoman Empire , Wallachia 's suzerain power , hoping that this policy could help counter Russian pressures . As Sultan Abdülmecid I was assessing the situation , Süleyman Paşa was dispatched to Bucharest , where he advised the revolutionaries to carry on with their diplomatic efforts , and ordered the Provisional Government to be replaced by <unk> <unk> , a triumvirate of regents comprising Heliade , Tell , and Nicolae Golescu . Nonetheless , the Ottomans were pressured by Russia into joining a clampdown on revolutionary forces , which resulted , during September , in the reestablishment of Regulamentul Organic and its system of government . Together with Tell , Heliade sought refuge at the British consulate in Bucharest , where they were hosted by Robert Gilmour Colquhoun in exchange for a deposit of Austrian florins . 
 = = = Exile = = = 
 Leaving his family behind , he was allowed to pass into the Austrian @-@ ruled Banat , before moving into self @-@ exile in France while his wife and children were sent to Ottoman lands . In 1850 – 1851 , several of his memoirs of the revolution , written in both Romanian and French , were published in Paris , the city where he had taken residence . He shared his exile with Tell and Magheru , as well as with Nicolae Rusu <unk> . 
 It was during his time in Paris that he met with Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon , the anarchist philosopher who had come to advance a moderate small @-@ scale property project ( to counter both economic liberalism and socialism ) . Heliade used this opportunity to make the Romanian cause known to the staff of Proudhon 's La Voix de Peuple . Major French publications to which he contributed included La Presse , La Semaine , and Le Siècle , where he also helped publicize political issues pertaining to his native land . Heliade was credited with having exercised influence over historian <unk> Regnault ; Nicolae Iorga argued that Regnault 's discarded his own arguments in favor of a unified Romanian state to include Transylvania ( a concept which Heliade had come to resent ) , as well amending his earlier account of the 1848 events , after being exposed to " Eliad 's propaganda " . 
 While claiming to represent the entire body of Wallachian émigrés , Heliade had by then grown disappointed with the political developments , and , in his private correspondence , commented that Romanians in general were " idle " , " womanizing " , as well as having " the petty and base envies of women " , and argued that they required " supervision [ and ] leadership " . His fortune was declining , especially after pressures began for him to pay his many debts , and he often lacked the funds for basic necessities . At the time , he continuously clashed with other former revolutionaries , including Bălcescu , C. A. Rosetti , and the <unk> , who resented his ambiguous stance in respect to reforms , and especially his willingness to accept Regulamentul Organic as an instrument of power ; Heliade issued the first in a series of pamphlets condemning young radicals , contributing to factionalism inside the émigré camp . His friendship with Tell also soured , after Heliade began speculating that the revolutionary general was committing adultery with Maria . 
 In 1851 , Heliade reunited with his family on the island of Chios , where they stayed until 1854 . Following the evacuation of Russian troops from the Danubian Principalities during the Crimean War , Heliade was appointed by the Porte to represent the Romanian nation in Shumen , as part of Omar Pasha 's staff . Again expressing sympathy for the Ottoman cause , he was rewarded with the title of Bey . According to Iorga , Heliade 's attitudes reflected his hope of " recovering the power lost " in 1848 ; the historian also stressed that Omar never actually made use of Heliade 's services . 
 Later in the same year , he decided to return to Bucharest , but his stay was cut short when the Austrian authorities , who , under the leadership of Johann <unk> @-@ <unk> , had taken over administration of the country as a neutral force , asked for him to be expelled . Returning to Paris , Heliade continued to publish works on political and cultural issues , including an analysis of the European situation after the Peace Treaty of 1856 and an 1858 essay on the Bible . In 1859 , he published his own translation of the Septuagint , under the name Biblia <unk> ce <unk> Noul şi <unk> Testament ( " The Holy Bible , Comprising the New and Old Testament " ) . 
 As former revolutionaries , grouped in the Partida <unk> faction , advanced the idea of union between Wallachia and Moldavia in election for the ad hoc Divan , Heliade opted not to endorse any particular candidate , while rejecting outright the candidature of former prince Alexandru II Ghica ( in a private letter , he stated : " let them elect whomever [ of the candidates for the throne ] , for he would still have the heart of a man and some principles of a Romanian ; only don 't let that creature [ Ghica ] be elected , for he is capable of going to the dogs with this country " ) . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Later in 1859 , Heliade returned to Bucharest , which had become the capital of the United Principalities after the common election of Alexandru Ioan Cuza and later that of an internationally recognized Principality of Romania . It was during that period that he again added Rădulescu to his surname . Until his death , he published influential volumes on a variety of issues , while concentrating on contributions to history and literary criticism , and editing a new collection of his own poems . In 1863 , Domnitor Cuza awarded him an annual pension of 2 @,@ 000 lei . 
 One year after the creation of the Romanian Academy ( under the name of " Academic Society " ) , he was elected its first President ( 1867 ) , serving until his death . In 1869 , Heliade and Alexandru <unk> @-@ <unk> successfully proposed the Italian diplomat and philologist <unk> <unk> <unk> as honorary member of the Academy . By then , like most other 1848 Romantics , he had become the target of criticism from the younger generation of intellectuals , represented by the Iaşi @-@ based literary society Junimea ; in 1865 , during one of its early public sessions , Junimea explicitly rejected works by Heliade and Iancu Văcărescu . 
 During the elections of 1866 , Heliade Rădulescu won a seat in the Chamber as a deputy for the city of Târgovişte . As Cuza had been ousted from power by a coalition of political groupings , he was the only Wallachian deputy to join Nicolae Ionescu and other disciples of Simion <unk> in opposing the appointment of Carol of Hohenzollern as Domnitor and a proclamation stressing the perpetuity of the Moldo @-@ Wallachian union . Speaking in Parliament , he likened the adoption of foreign rule to the Phanariote period . The opposition was nevertheless weak , and the resolution was passed with a large majority . 
 Among Ion Heliade Rădulescu 's last printed works were a textbook on poetics ( 1868 ) and a volume on Romanian orthography . By that time , he had come to consider himself a prophet @-@ like figure , and the redeemer of his motherland , notably blessing his friends with the words " Christ and Magdalene be with you ! " His mental health declining , he died at his Bucharest residence on <unk> Street , nr . 20 . Heliade Rădulescu 's grandiose funeral ceremony attracted a large number of his admirers ; the coffin was buried in the courtyard of the Mavrogheni Church . 
 = = Heliade and the Romanian language = = 
 = = = Early proposals = = = 
 Heliade 's most influential contributions are related to his interest in developing the modern Romanian language , in which he synthesized Enlightenment tenets and Romantic nationalist ideals of the 1848 generation . At a time when Romanian was being discarded by the educated in favor of French or Greek , he and his supporters argued in favor of adapting Romanian to the requirements of modernization ; he wrote : " Young people , preoccupy yourselves with the national language , speak and write in it ; prepare yourselves for its study , for its cultivation , — and cultivating a language means to write in it about all sciences and arts , about all eras and peoples . The language alone unites , strengthens and defines a nation ; preoccupy yourselves with it first and foremost , as , through this , you shall be carrying out the most fundamental of policies , you shall be laying the foundation of nationality " . 
 Heliade inaugurated his series of proposals for reforming the language in 1828 , when his work on Romanian grammar called for the Cyrillic script to be reduced to 27 letters , reflecting phonetic spelling ( for this rule , Heliade cited the example of the Latin alphabet as used in Ancient Rome ) . Soon after , he began a campaign in favor of introducing Romance neologisms , which he wanted to adapt to Romanian spelling . By that time , Romanians in various regions had grown aware of the need to unify the varieties of Romanian and create a standard Romanian lexis : this notion was first supported by the Transylvanians Gheorghe <unk> and Petru Maior , whose proposal was to unite Romanians around the issue of the choice of liturgical language , both Orthodox and Greek @-@ Catholic ( see Transylvanian School ) . Heliade , who first proposed a language regulator ( an idea which was to be employed in creating the Romanian Academy ) , expanded on this legacy , while stressing that the dialect spoken in Muntenia , which had formed the basis of religious texts published by the 16th century printer <unk> , serve as the standard language . 
 In addition , he advocated <unk> guidelines in respect to the standard shape of Romanian , stressing three basic principles in selecting words : " proper wording " , which called for vernacular words of Latin origin to be prioritized ; " harmony " , which meant that words of Latin origin were to be used in their most popular form , even in cases where euphony had been altered by prolonged usage ; and " energy " , through which Heliade favored the primacy of the shortest and most expressive of synonyms used throughout Romanian @-@ speaking areas . In parallel , Heliade frowned upon purist policies of removing widely used neologisms of foreign origin — arguing that these were " a fatality " , he indicated that the gains of such a process would have been shadowed by the losses . 
 These early theories exercised a lasting influence , and , when the work of unifying Romanian was accomplished in the late 19th century , they were used as a source of inspiration : Romania 's major poet of the period , Mihai Eminescu , himself celebrated for having created the modern literary language , gave praise to Heliade for " writing just as [ the language ] is spoken " . This assessment was shared by Ovid Densusianu , who wrote : " Thinking of how people wrote back then , in thick , <unk> , sleepy phrases , Heliade thus shows himself superior to all his contemporaries , and ... we can consider him the first prose writer who brings in the note of modernity " . 
 = = = Italian influence = = = 
 A second period in Heliade 's linguistic researches , inaugurated when he adopted Étienne Condillac 's theory that a language could be developed from conventions , eventually brought about the rejection of his own earlier views . By the early 1840s , he postulated that Romanian and Italian were not distinct languages , but rather dialects of Latin , which prompted him to declare the necessity of replacing Romanian words with " superior " Italian ones . One of his stanzas , using his version of the Romanian Latin alphabet , read : 
 Primi <unk> @-@ vor quel <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> primi <unk> @-@ vor <unk> din <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> que <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> , şi <unk> <unk> d <unk> <unk> <unk> . 
 <unk> into modern Romanian and English , this is : 
 The target of criticism and ridicule , these principles were dismissed by Eminescu as " errors " and " a priori systems of orthography " . During their existence , they competed with both August Treboniu Laurian 's adoption of strong Latin mannerisms and the inconsistent Francized system developed in Moldavia by Gheorghe Asachi , which , according to the 20th century literary critic Garabet Ibrăileanu , constituted " the boyar language of his time " . Ibrăileanu also noted that Asachi had come to admire Heliade 's attempts , and had praised them as an attempt to revive the language " spoken by Trajan 's men " — in reference to Roman Dacia . 
 While defending the role Moldavian politicians in the 1840s had in shaping modern Romanian culture , Ibrăileanu argued that practices such as those of Heliade and Laurian carried the risk of " suppressing the Romanian language " , and credited Alecu Russo , more than his successors at Junimea , with providing a passionate defense of spoken Romanian . He notably cited Russo 's verdict : " The modern political hatred aimed at [ Russia ] has thrown us into <unk> , into <unk> , and into other <unk> , that were not and are not <unk> , but the political perils , in respect to the enslavement of the Romanian soul , have since passed ; true <unk> ought to hold its head up high " . The literary critic George Călinescu also connected Heliade 's experimentation to his Russophobia , in turn reflecting his experiences as a revolutionary : " Hating Slavism and the Russians , who had striven to underline [ Slavic influences in Romanian ] , he said to himself that he was to serve his motherland by discarding all Slavic vestiges " . Călinescu notably attributed Heliade 's inconsistency to his " <unk> " , which , he contended , was responsible for " [ his ] casual implication in all issues , the unexpected move from common sense ideas to the most insane theories " . 
 Overall , Heliade 's experiments had marginal appeal , and their critics ( Eminescu included ) contrasted them with Heliade 's own tenets . Late in his life , Heliade seems to have acknowledged this , notably writing : " This language , as it is written today by people who can speak Romanian , is my work " . One of the few authors to be influenced by the theory was the Symbolist poet Alexandru Macedonski , who , during his youth , wrote several pieces in Heliade 's Italian @-@ sounding Romanian . Despite Heliade 's thesis being largely rejected , some of its practical effects on everyday language were very enduring , especially in cases where Italian words were borrowed as a means to illustrate nuances and concepts for which Romanian had no equivalent . These include <unk> ( " affable " ) , <unk> ( " adorable " ) , <unk> ( " colossal " ) , <unk> ( " implacable " ) , <unk> ( " ineffable " ) , inert ( " inert " ) , <unk> ( " mystical " ) , <unk> ( " perverse " or " pervert " ) , <unk> ( " suave " ) , and <unk> ( " venerable " ) . 
 = = Literature = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Celebrated as the founder of Wallachian Romanticism , Heliade was equally influenced by Classicism and the Age of Enlightenment . His work , written in a special cultural context ( where <unk> and Romanticism coexisted ) , took the middle path between two opposing camps : the Romantics ( Alecu Russo , Mihail Kogălniceanu and others ) and the Classicists ( Gheorghe Asachi , Grigore Alexandrescu , George <unk> etc . ) . George Călinescu defined Heliade as " a <unk> of books " , noting that his favorites , who all played a part in shaping his style and were many times the subject of his translations , included : Alphonse de Lamartine , Dante <unk> , Ludovico Ariosto , Torquato Tasso , Voltaire , Jean @-@ François Marmontel , Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , and François @-@ René de Chateaubriand . 
 His poetic style , influenced from early on by Lamartine , was infused with Classicism during his middle age , before he again adopted Romantic tenets . Initially making use of guidelines set by Nicolas Boileau @-@ <unk> in respect to poetry , he came to oppose them after reading Victor Hugo 's Romantic preface to Cromwell ( without ever discarding them altogether ) . 
 Like the Classicists , Heliade favored a literature highlighting " types " of characters , as the union of universal traits and particular characteristics , but , like the Romantics , he encouraged writers to write from a subjective viewpoint , which he believed to be indicative of their mission as " prophets , ... men who criticize , who point out their society 's plagues and who look on to a happier future , waiting for a savior " . Through the latter ideal of moral regeneration , Heliade also complimented the Romantic stress on " national specificity " , which he adopted in his later years . At the same time , he centered much of his own literary work on non @-@ original material , either by compiling it from various translations or by translating from a single source — having his focus on creating the basis for further development by introducing samples of untapped literary genres and styles to Romanian literature . 
 While several of Heliade 's contributions to literature have been considered to be of low importance , many others , above all his Romantic poem Zburătorul , are hailed as major accomplishments . Zburătorul , borrowing from Romanian mythology its main character ( the eponymous incubus @-@ like being who visits nubile girls at night ) also serves to depict the atmosphere of a Wallachian village from that period . According to George Călinescu , the poem 's value partly relies on its depiction of lust through the girls ' eyes : " lacking the rages of Sappho and Phaedra . The puberty crisis is explained through mythology and cured through magic " . 
 An 1837 essay of his , centered on a debate regarding the translation of Homer 's works into Romanian , featured a series of counsels to younger writers : " This is not the time for criticism , children , it is the time for writing , so write as much and as good as you can , but without meanness ; create , do not ruin ; for the nation receives and blesses the maker and curses the destroyer . Write with a clear conscience " . <unk> as " Write anything , boys , as long as you go on writing ! " ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> ! ) , this quote became the topic of derision in later decades , and was hailed as an example of Heliade 's failure to distinguish between quality and quantity . The latter verdict was considered unfair by the literary historian Şerban Cioculescu and others , who argued that Ion Heliade Rădulescu 's main goal was to encourage the rapid development of local literature to a European level . Although he recognized , among other things , Heliade 's merits of having removed pretentious boyar discourse from poetry and having favored regular rhyme , Paul Zarifopol accused him and Gheorghe Asachi of " tastelessness " and " literary insecurity " . He elaborated : " Rădulescu was arguably afflicted with this sin more than Asachi , given his unfortunate ambitions of fabricating a literary language " . 
 Heliade 's name is closely connected with the establishment of Romanian @-@ language theater , mirroring the activities of Asachi in Moldavia . Ever since he partook in creating Soţietatea Filarmonică and the Bucharest Theater , to the moment of his death , he was involved in virtually all major developments in local dramatic and operatic art . In August 1834 , he was one of the intellectuals who organized the first show hosted by Soţietatea Filarmonică , which featured , alongside a cavatina from Vincenzo Bellini 's Il <unk> , Heliade 's translation of Voltaire 's Mahomet . In subsequent years , members of the association carried out the translation of French theater and other foreign pieces , while encouraging Romanian @-@ language dramatists , an effort which was to become successful during and after the 1840s ( when Constantin Aristia and Costache Caragiale entered their most creative periods ) . Heliade himself advocated didacticism in drama ( defining it as " the preservation of social health " ) , and supported professionalism in acting . 
 = = = Historical and religious subjects = = = 
 Ion Heliade Rădulescu made extensive use of the Romantic nationalist focus on history , which he initially applied to his poetry . In this instance as well , the goal was to educate his public ; he wrote : " Nothing is worthy of derision as much as someone taking pride in his parents and ancestors and nothing more worthy of praise than when the ancestors ' great deeds serve as a model and an impulse for competition among descendants " . The main historical figure in his poetry is the late 16th century Wallachian Prince Michael the Brave , the first one to rally Wallachia , Moldavia and Transylvania under a single rule : celebrated in Heliade 's poem O noapte pe <unk> <unk> ( " A Night on the Ruins of Târgovişte " ) , he was to be the main character of a lengthy epic poem , <unk> , of which only two sections , written in very different styles , were ever completed ( in 1845 and 1859 respectively ) . Other historical poems also expanded on the ideal of a single Romanian state , while presenting the 1848 generation as a model for future Romanian politicians . 
 Throughout the 1860s , one of Heliade 's main interests was an investigation into the issues involving Romanian history during the origin of the Romanians and the early medieval history of the Danubian Principalities . At a time when , in Moldavia , the newly surfaced Chronicle of <unk> traced a political lineage of the country to the Roman Empire through the means of a narrative which was later proven to be entirely fictional , Heliade made use of its theses to draw similar conclusions regarding Wallachia . His conservative views were thus expanded to the level of historiographic thesis : according to Heliade , boyars had been an egalitarian and permeable class , which , from as early as the times of Radu Negru , had adopted humane laws that announced and welcomed those of the French Revolution ( he notably claimed that the county @-@ based administration was a democratic one , and that it had been copied from the Israelite model as depicted in the Bible ) . 
 The ideal he expressed in a work of the period , <unk> între <unk> ( " A Balance between <unk> " ) was moderate progressivism , with the preservation of social peace . In Tudor Vianu 's view , partly based on earlier assessments by other critics , <unk> , with its stress on making political needs coincide with social ones through the means of counterweights , evidenced strong influences from Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon 's thought , as well as vaguer ones from that of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel . Nonetheless , his system parted with Hegelianism in that , instead of seeking a balance between the Geist and existence , it considered the three states of human progress ( Thesis , antithesis , synthesis ) the reflection of a mystical number favored throughout history . 
 In parallel , Heliade worked on a vast synthesis of his own philosophy of history , based on his interpretation of Biblical theology . His 1858 work , <unk> ( " Biblical Writings " ) , was supposed to form the first of four sections in a Christian history of the world . Referring to this project , Călinescu defined Heliade 's ideas as " interesting , no matter how naïve at times , in general Voltairian and Freemason [ in shape ] " . <unk> partly evidenced Heliade 's interests in the Talmud and Zohar @-@ like <unk> — with emphasis placed on the numbers 3 , 7 , and 10 — , as well as ample references to the <unk> . One of his original thoughts on the matter was a reference to " deltas " ( triangles ) of deities — Elohim @-@ Spirit @-@ Matter and Spirit @-@ Matter @-@ the Universe . A portion of Heliade Rădulescu 's poems also draw on religious themes and discourse . According to George Călinescu , the poet had attempted to create a parallel to both The Divine Comedy and the Bible , from Genesis to Revelation , with a style influenced by Lamartine and Victor Hugo . 
 = = = Satire and polemics = = = 
 Heliade was aware of the often negative response to his work : in a poem dedicated to the memory of Friedrich Schiller , he expanded on the contrast between creation and social setting ( in reference to mankind , it stressed Te <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> mort — " They forgive the evil committed against them , but never the good " ) . A noted author of satire , he used it as a vehicle to criticize social customs of his day , as well as to publicize personal conflicts and resentments . As a maverick , he attacked political figures on both sides : conservatives who mimicked liberalism were the subject of his <unk> <unk> ( " The Areopagus of the Beasts " ) , while many other of his post @-@ 1848 prose and poetry pieces mocked people on the left wing of liberalism , most notably C. A. Rosetti and his supporters . During and after his exile , his conflicts with Cezar Bolliac and Ion Ghica also made the latter two the target of irony , most likely based on Heliade 's belief that they intended to downplay his contributions to the Wallachian Revolution of 1848 . 
 His autobiographical pieces , marked by acid comments on Greek @-@ language education , and , in this respect , similar to the writings of his friend Costache Negruzzi , also display a dose of self @-@ irony . The enduring polemic with Grigore Alexandrescu , as well as his quarrel with Bolliac , formed the basis of his pamphlet <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Mr. Old Nick , the Author " ) , an attack on what Heliade viewed as writers whose <unk> contrasted with their actual mediocrity . In other short prose works , Ion Heliade Rădulescu commented on the caricature @-@ like nature of parvenu Bucharesters ( the male prototype , <unk> <unk> , was " an ennobled hoodlum " , while the female one , <unk> <unk> , always wished to be the first in line for the unction ) . 
 In various of his articles , he showed himself a critic of social trends . During the 1830s , he reacted against misogyny , arguing in favor of women 's rights : " Who has made man create himself unfair laws and customs , in order for him to cultivate his spirit and forsake [ women ] into ignorance ... ? " . In 1859 , after the Jewish community in Galaţi fell victim to a pogrom , he spoke out against Antisemitic blood libel accusations : " Jews do not eat children in England , nor do they in France , nor do they in Germany , nor do they do so wherever humans have become humans . Where else are they accused of such an inhumane deed ? Wherever peoples are still Barbaric or semi @-@ Barbaric " . 
 A large portion of Heliade 's satirical works rely on mockery of speech patterns and physical traits : notable portraits resulting from this style include mimicking the manner of Transylvanian educators ( with their strict adherence to Latin etymologies ) , and his critique of the <unk> Rosetti ( with eyes " more bulged than those of a giant frog " ) . Without sharing Heliade 's views on literature , the younger Titu Maiorescu drew comparisons with his predecessor for launching into similar attacks , and usually in respect to the same rivals . 
 = = In cultural reference = = 
 A monument to Ion Heliade Rădulescu , sculpted by the Italian artist Ettore Ferrari , stands in front of the University building in central Bucharest . In addition to naming a lecture room after him , the Romanian Academy has instituted the Ion Heliade Rădulescu Award — in 1880 , it was awarded to Bogdan <unk> Hasdeu , for his <unk> den <unk> , and worth 5 @,@ 000 gold lei . Ten years after , the prize was the center of a scandal , involving on one side the dramatist Ion Luca Caragiale and , on the other , the cultural establishment formed around members of the National Liberal Party , including Hasdeu and Dimitrie Sturdza . The latter disapproved of Caragiale 's anti @-@ Liberal stance and his association with Junimea , as well as to his anti @-@ nationalism , dislike of didacticism , and alleged cosmopolitanism . They thus refused to grant him the prize . 
 A high school in his native Târgovişte bears the name Ion Heliade Rădulescu , as does a village in the commune of <unk> , Buzău County . The grave of Take Ionescu , an influential political figure and one @-@ time Prime Minister of Romania who was Heliade 's descendant , is situated in Sinaia Monastery , in the immediate vicinity of a fir tree planted by Heliade and his fellow 1848 revolutionaries . 
 In his 1870 poem <unk> ( " The <unk> " ) , Mihai Eminescu paid tribute to early Romanian @-@ language writers and their contributions to literature . An entire stanza is dedicated to Heliade : 
 During the early 1880s , Alexandru Macedonski and his Literatorul attempted to preserve Heliade 's status and his theories when these were faced with criticism from Junimea ; by 1885 , this rivalry ended in defeat for Macedonski , and contributed to the disestablishment of Literatorul . 
 Although a Junimist for a large part of his life , Ion Luca Caragiale himself saw a precursor in Heliade , and even expressed some sympathy for his political ideals . During the 1890s , he republished a piece by Heliade in the Conservative Party 's main journal , Epoca . One of Caragiale 's most significant characters , the Transylvanian schoolteacher Marius <unk> <unk> , shares many traits with his counterparts in Heliade 's stories . Developing his own theory , he claimed that there was a clear difference between , on one hand , the generation of Heliade Rădulescu , Ion Câmpineanu , and Nicolae Bălcescu , and , on the other , the National Liberal establishment formed around <unk> Ghica , Nicolae <unk> and Mihail <unk> — he identified the latter grouping with hypocrisy , demagogy , and political corruption , while arguing that the former could have found itself best represented by the Conservatives . 
 Comments about Heliade and his Bucharest statue feature prominently in Macedonski 's short story Nicu <unk> , whose main character , a daydreaming Bohemian , idolizes the Wallachian writer . Sburătorul , a modernist literary magazine of the interwar period , edited by Eugen Lovinescu , owed its name to Zburătorul , making use of an antiquated variant of the name ( a form favored by Heliade ) . During the same years , Camil Petrescu made reference to Heliade in his novel Un om între <unk> , which depicts events from Nicolae Bălcescu 's lifetime . 
 In his Autobiography , the Romanian philosopher Mircea Eliade indicated that it was likely that his ancestors , whose original surname was Ieremia , had adopted the new name as a tribute to Heliade Rădulescu , whom they probably admired . 
 = New Multitudes = 
 New Multitudes is a Woody Guthrie tribute album performed by Jay Farrar , Will Johnson , Anders Parker , and Jim James to commemorate the 100th anniversary of Guthrie 's birth , released through Rounder Records on February 28 , 2012 . The project was initiated by Woody 's daughter Nora Guthrie to have Farrar add music to her father 's lyrics — specifically , his earliest songwriting years in Los Angeles . Over the course of several years , he invited the others to collaborate and recorded at a variety of locations across the United States . Each artist wrote music to lyrics that inspired him and presented it to the collaborators for recording . The result is an album with diverse musical genres that has garnered positive reviews from critics for its varied styles and instrumentation . The quartet promoted the album with a small promotional tour that took them to record stores , radio programs , theaters , and folk festivals . The group has plans for releasing a second volume . 
 = = Development and recording = = 
 New Multitudes is one of several tribute albums for American folk singer @-@ songwriter Woody Guthrie . Guthrie died in 1967 after an extended battle with Huntington 's disease , but his relatively brief career [ how does a 26 year career count as brief ] helped to inspire innumerable musicians during his lifetime as well as in the 1960s folk revival movement . Initially , this project was announced as a Farrar solo album with Johnson as a contributor . It was intended to follow previous efforts to elaborate on the archives of the Foundation by Billy Bragg and Wilco with the albums Mermaid Avenue ( 1998 ) and Mermaid Avenue Vol . II ( 2000 ) , <unk> 's Woody Guthrie Singles ( 2003 ) , Jonatha Brooke 's The Works ( 2008 ) , and the various artists compilation Note of Hope : A Celebration of Woody Guthrie ( 2011 ) . Farrar was initially invited to collaborate with Bragg on the Mermaid Avenue sessions in 1995 , but felt uncomfortable working on the material with someone else . Warner Bros. Records wanted all of Son Volt to collaborate with Bragg , but after Farrar declined , he kept the idea in mind . In 2006 , he approached Nora Guthrie about returning to her father 's lyrics and she agreed . 
 To write his own batch of songs , Farrar looked through several of the over 3 @,@ 000 handwritten lyrics that Guthrie 's estate has preserved before incidentally focusing on his California period . The connection to Guthrie 's Los Angeles years was accidental — Farrar simply chose lyrics that he found compelling and Nora pointed out that they came from a relatively brief period of her father 's life when he lived in Los Angeles . He also made a conscious decision to write instrumentation in a style more similar to Guthrie 's than other tribute projects , such as The <unk> ' klezmer @-@ based Woody Guthrie 's Happy Joyous Hanukkah and Wonder Wheel . Farrar had never listened to the Bragg and Wilco material to ensure that his songwriting would not be influenced by it . 
 Immediately before going to the Archives in autumn 2006 , Farrar invited his Gob Iron collaborator Anders Parker to come with him and look over potential material and the two returned several times over a period of months gathering lyrics for composition before recording together starting on July 14 , 2007 . As they found lyrics that interested them , they had reproductions mailed to their homes from the Archives to work on the material at their leisure . The duo finished recording several songs throughout the year but did not have enough material to complete the album . The recordings were also made without a budget or record contract for release . 
 Nora Guthrie played some of the 2009 recordings for Yames and Farrar invited him to join the duo after discovering that he had visited the Archives as well . Yames wrote the tune for " Hoping Machine " and suggested that fellow Monsters of Folk collaborator Johnson accompany them . Farrar mailed Johnson some lyrics and he composed " Chorine My Sheba Queen " that afternoon , while Yames was attracted to the lyrics of " Empty Bed Blues " while recovering from an injury . Once the entire quartet had composed songs , they entered studios in Brooklyn and East St. Louis throughout 2009 and 2010 , recording songs with live vocals in one or two takes , crowding around a single microphone . The group attempted to have the recordings ready for a 2011 release , but had to finish the album too late in the year . 
 Farrar has characterized the songwriting process for this album as easier than his typical work composing new lyrics as it allowed him to be less self @-@ conscious . 
 = = Tour = = 
 The quartet toured the United States to support the album , playing all of the groups ' Guthrie compositions as well as some solo work . Bobby Bare , Jr. and Sarah Jaffe opened for them . Early in the tour , the group discussed reconvening for further dates , but decided to cap their initial outing with the Newport Folk Festival . 
 The performers also released a four @-@ track 10 " single " Let 's Multiply " exclusive for Record Store Day . 
 = = = Line @-@ up = = = 
 Jay Farrar – lead guitar , vocals 
 Will Johnson – drums , rhythm guitar , vocals 
 Anders Parker – drums , rhythm guitar , vocals 
 Yim Yames – bass guitar , vocals 
 = = = Dates = = = 
 Additionally , Parker performed some of the New Multitudes material at the initial benefit concert <unk> hosted by <unk> International in <unk> , North Carolina on April 20 . 
 = = = Response = = = 
 The tour was well @-@ received , with The New York Times critic Nate Chinen describing their Webster Hall performance as familiar , but with a unique confluence of styles from each lyricist , from Yames ' " hazy magnetism " to Parker 's " straightforward folk @-@ rock earnestness . " The Philadelphia Inquirer 's review by Sam Adams praised the performers by concluding that " all four musicians are worthy of following in Guthrie 's footsteps , each in his own distinctive way . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album has received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 81 , based on 13 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . MusicOMH 's Max Raymond has praised the album as being " engrossing " due to the emotional depth of the lyrics as well as the warm and relaxed sound of the studio recording . Will Hermes of Rolling Stone gave the album a mixed review , praising the vocal harmonies . The diversity in sound was highlighted by AbsolutePunk 's Gregory Robson , Jason Schneider of Exclaim ! and the A.V. Club 's Chris Martins , ranging from electric blues to psychedelia as well as the atypical lyrics from Guthrie — focusing on the city of Los Angeles rather than his communist @-@ leaning politics and <unk> tragedy narratives . American Songwriter 's Evan <unk> noted the same apolitical tone of the lyrics , but qualified that with Yames ' delivery on " My Revolutionary Mind " . He praised the album 's diversity as a strength , allowing each vocalist an opportunity to display his unique talents . Writing for Los Angeles Times , Randy Lewis agrees that the songwriting diversity is a strength , comparing individual tracks with R.E.M. , The Velvet Underground , Richard Thompson , and John Mellencamp . Graham Reid of The New Zealand Herald also notes similarities to R.E.M. , fellow Guthrie admirer Bob Dylan , The Byrds , and Eagles . The PopMatters review by Jeff <unk> points out the blues influences in the album , adding to its emotional depth . About.com 's Kim Ruehl has criticized the diversity and complexity of the album as contrary to the simplicity of Guthrie 's actual recordings , concluding that " If this weren 't presented so staunchly as being at least part ' Woody Guthrie album , ' it might be a little easier to swallow . " Doug Collette of All About Jazz also reviewed the deluxe edition bonus disc , comparing it favorably to the proper album as well as the previous Farrar – Parker collaboration Gob Iron . The album topped American publication Billboard 's Heatseekers . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Woody Guthrie , all lead vocals by co @-@ writer 
 " Hoping Machine " ( Farrar ) – 4 : 52 
 " Fly High " ( Parker ) – 3 : 45 
 " My Revolutionary Mind " ( Yames ) – 4 : 43 
 " VD City " ( Johnson ) – 4 : 05 
 " Old L.A. " ( Parker ) – 3 : 03 
 " Talking Empty Bed Blues " ( Yames ) – 4 : 09 
 " Chorine My Sheba Queen " ( Johnson ) – 4 : 50 
 " Careless Reckless Love " ( Farrar ) – 5 : 01 
 " Angel 's Blues " ( Parker ) – 4 : 38 
 " No Fear " ( Johnson ) – 3 : 36 
 " Changing World " ( Yames ) – 3 : 48 
 " New Multitudes " ( Farrar ) – 2 : 47 
 Limited edition bonus disc 
 All music written and performed by Farrar and Parker . 
 " Around New York " – 0 : 51 
 " Jake Walk Blues " – 1 : 59 
 " Whereabouts Can I Hide " – 2 : 51 
 " Old <unk> " – 3 : 04 
 " I Was a Goner " – 3 : 42 
 " San Antone Meat House " – 3 : 59 
 " <unk> Robber " – 4 : 41 
 " World 's On Fire " – 3 : 12 
 " When I Get Home " – 3 : 51 
 " Atom Dance " – 2 : 34 
 " Your Smile Cured Me " – 2 : 41 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Woody Guthrie – artwork , lyrics 
 Jay Farrar – vocals , guitar , composition , production 
 Will Johnson – vocals , guitar , saw on " Chorine My Sheba Queen " , composition , production 
 Anders Parker – vocals , guitar , composition , production 
 Yim Yames – vocals , guitar , bass guitar , composition , production 
 Technical personnel 
 John Agnello – mixing 
 Larissa Collins – art direction , package design 
 Mike Martin – engineering 
 Matt Pence – mixing 
 Kevin Ratterman – mixing 
 Brad Sarno – mastering 
 Mark Spencer – mixing 
 Anna Webber – photography 
 Additional musicians 
 Buck Carter 
 Jimmy Griffin 
 Creston Lea 
 Konrad Meissner 
 = Chetham 's School of Music = 
 Chetham 's School of Music ( / <unk> / or occasionally / <unk> / ) familiarly known as " <unk> " , is a specialist independent co @-@ educational music school in Manchester city centre in North West England . It was established in 1969 , incorporating Chetham 's Hospital School , founded as a charity school by Humphrey Chetham in 1653 . After becoming a boys ' grammar school in 1952 , the school turned to music as its speciality , and became an independent school . There are approximately 290 pupils on roll , making it the largest music school in the United Kingdom . The oldest parts of the school date to the 1420s , when the building was constructed as a residence for priests of the church ( now Manchester Cathedral ) ; these parts are listed buildings , along with other parts of the complex . The site houses Chetham 's Library , the oldest free public reference library in the United Kingdom . A new building to replace the Victorian Palatine building and allow easier access for visitors was completed in 2012 , and a 480 @-@ seat concert hall , The Stoller Hall , will open within the new school building in April 2017 as a home for both school and professional music and other genres of performance . The school is a registered charity under English law . 
 Chetham 's educates students between the ages of 8 and 18 . 90 % of students receive full or partial funding for their education and boarding through the UK Government 's Music and Dance scheme , ensuring that admission is based solely on musical potential and not on ability to pay . The school regularly obtains good exam results in both music and academic subjects . It maintains links to Manchester Cathedral by educating its choristers and holding regular concerts , and many Chetham 's students have become professional musicians . Its ensembles , such as the Big Band and Symphony Orchestra , and many students have won awards for their music and progressed to highly successful careers , both in music and in other sectors . 
 In February 2013 , the school 's former Director of Music Michael Brewer was convicted of having indecently assaulted a pupil , Frances Andrade , who committed suicide during his trial . Investigations began into allegations against others associated with the school in the past , and in May 2013 the Greater Manchester Police reported that over 30 women had reported incidents of abuse relating to the school . An Independent Schools Inspectorate report published in 2014 praised the school 's current leadership , including its safeguarding provisions . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 The school is built on the site of Manchester Castle , a fortified manor house owned by the Grelleys after the Norman Conquest , at the confluence of the River Irwell and the River Irk . Medieval Manchester grew around the manor house and the parish church , which eventually became Manchester Cathedral . 
 In the early 14th century , the de la Warre family acquired the land through marriage . Thomas de la Warre refounded the church as a collegiate church in 1421 . De la Warre gave the site of his manor house for the construction of a college , where eight priests , four clerks and six lay choristers lived in the care of a warden . It is likely that building began between 1424 and 1429 , and the main hall and cloister rooms finished by 1458 . It remains the most complete building of its kind in the country , and at the time of its construction , was the second largest building in Manchester , surpassed only by the church . 
 The college was dissolved during the English Reformation in 1547 , and purchased by Edward Stanley , 3rd Earl of Derby . It was re @-@ founded by Queen Mary , before Elizabeth I refounded it as " Christ 's College " in 1578 . This arrangement lasted until the foundation of Manchester Cathedral in 1847 . The college buildings remained the property of the Stanleys , and wardens ( including the Elizabethan astronomer and mathematician John Dee ) lived on the premises with their families and servants . During the English Civil War , the college was used as a gunpowder factory and a prison . Lord James Stanley , a Royalist , was executed in 1651 , and Parliament confiscated his property , including the college . 
 = = = Humphrey Chetham = = = 
 Humphrey Chetham ( 1580 – 1653 ) was an unmarried and childless financier , philanthropist and cloth merchant from Manchester . In the 1640s , he provided money for the maintenance and education of fourteen poor boys from Manchester , six from Salford , and two from Droylsden . In March 1649 he wrote to the Earl of Derby about his intention to establish a school . He attempted unsuccessfully to acquire the buildings of the Manchester College , which were " <unk> and ruin 'd and become like a dunghill " , to provide a hospital , school and library . In his will , Chetham left over £ 8 @,@ 000 from his estate ( which was worth about £ 14 @,@ 000 in total ) to establish a hospital school for 40 poor local boys , between the ages of six and ten from " honest " families , who should be taught and cared for until they were 14 . His executors obtained the lease of the college where Chetham wished to house the school and library in 1654 . 
 = = = Charity school = = = 
 After repairs to the college were completed in mid @-@ 1656 , the first admissions were made . The first headmaster , Richard Dutton , was appointed in 1655 , and in 1665 the institution became an incorporated charity . The number of pupils grew , with admissions rising to 100 by the 1870s . Boys were admitted based on the parish they lived in , and on need , health and background of the family . Illegitimate boys were not admitted , and all boys had to be able to read to a certain standard that meant they were not hard to teach . In 1878 , a new schoolroom designed by architect Alfred Waterhouse ( who designed Manchester Town Hall ) was built in a Tudor style . The number of boys admitted was reduced to 75 in 1908 to save money , though three years later admissions increased to 99 . In 1916 , no boys were admitted due to lack of funding caused by World War I , and in 1918 the number was limited to 70 . Successful public appeals resulted in the numbers rising to 97 in 1929 . In 1926 a scheme was set up which allowed boys to apply for scholarships to join a grammar school , which meant that while they lived at Chetham 's , they were educated elsewhere during the day . Further , they would stay at grammar school until at least the age of 16 and sometimes 18 . 
 = = = World War II and aftermath : 1939 to 1952 = = = 
 During World War II , the boys were evacuated to the seaside town of Cleveleys , Lancashire , where they shared accommodation with a primary school . Chetham 's was damaged by an explosion in December 1940 , when most of the windows were shattered and the roof was set alight . The boys relocated to Chapel @-@ en @-@ le @-@ Frith , Derbyshire , in 1943 where all 41 boys were together . Thirteen boys attending grammar school moved to Buxton College . By 1944 the governors believed that it would not be appropriate for the school to return to Manchester , and it was proposed the site become a religious education centre . However , after years of discussion , it was decided to return the school to Manchester . The Education Act 1944 , which stipulated that schools should be classified as primary or secondary , complicated matters , since Chetham 's went across the middle . It was decided in 1950 that Chetham 's should become a grammar school , and this change took place two years later . In 1950 , Chetham 's amalgamated with Nicholls ' Hospital School , a similar school based in Ardwick which had been established in 1863 . While it could take up to 100 boys , by the end of the war there were only 22 and it was considered beneficial for the schools to merge . 
 = = = Later history : since 1952 = = = 
 After the change in organisation , Chetham 's could no longer afford to provide education based on scholarships and other allowances , and charged fees . In 1952 , the school buildings were considered insufficient so a new block was built , which opened in 1955 . Numbers of boys admitted increased significantly while the number of boarders remained about the same , day pupils increasing the number on roll in 1960 to 230 , 64 of which were boarders . 
 Before becoming a specialist school , Chetham 's had a good reputation for music , and on this basis the decision was made to become a co @-@ educational music school in 1969 . The former Palatine Hotel , which housed offices and shops , was converted into extra teaching space and practice rooms . In 1969 , 50 students were admitted based on musical potential and by 1972 this had risen to 150 , more than half of the entire school . In 1977 the school changed to its present name . In 1978 the Long Millgate building , the original home of Manchester Grammar School , was purchased to provide additional space . 
 A new school building adjacent to the existing site was opened in 2012 by the Earl of Wessex ( Patron of the school ) . This includes space for a 400 @-@ seat concert hall although this remains to be completed . Old classrooms will be converted to other uses , and the Palatine building will be demolished to reveal the currently hidden medieval buildings and allow easier access to the library . 
 = = = 2013 sex abuse scandal = = = 
 In February 2013 , Michael Brewer , Director of Music from the late 1970s to the early 1990s , and his ex @-@ wife , were convicted of indecently assaulting a pupil , Frances Andrade , between 1978 and 1982 . She committed suicide after giving evidence at their trial . Prosecutors claimed Brewer was forced to resign in the 1990s after an inappropriate relationship with a 16 @-@ year @-@ old girl . The school 's statement said the current staff were " shocked ... to the core " by the revelations of " the most appalling acts which took place during his time at the school ... " . In March 2013 Brewer was found guilty of indecent assault , and was sentenced to six years imprisonment . 
 It was reported that allegations of assault were made against another teacher in the 1980s . On 12 February , Professor Malcolm Layfield , Head of Strings at the Royal Northern College of Music resigned from the RNCM Board after claims of his previous sexual misconduct were brought up during the Brewer hearing . Before he was appointed Head of Strings , Layfield had admitted to having relationships with six Chetham 's pupils aged between 16 and 18 whilst he taught there , leading two RNCM teachers to resign in protest at his appointment in 2002 , including Professor Martin Roscoe , Head of Keyboard Studies . In October 2013 he was arrested on suspicion of raping and indecently assaulting an 18 @-@ year @-@ old woman between 1988 and 1999 . 
 On 14 February , Professor Wen Zhou Li , a violin teacher at the Royal Northern College of Music and former teacher at Chetham 's , was arrested on charges of rape that allegedly occurred whilst he taught at the school . This case was dropped in 2016 before coming to trial , and Wen Zhou Li told that he left court " without a stain on his character . " Allegations of sexual abuse were also made against the pianist Ryszard Bakst , who died in 1999 , and former violin teacher Christopher Ling . Ling , who had moved to Los Angeles in the 1990s , shot himself at his home when US marshals arrived in September 2015 with a provisional arrest warrant . 
 On 8 May 2013 , the Greater Manchester Police reported that over 30 women had reported incidents of abuse , relating to the school . Their investigation was known as Operation Kiso . Allegations against 39 individuals in total had been assessed ; of those , ten cases were proactively investigated . The police said that those cases " have or have had connections with either Chetham 's and / or Royal Northern College of Music and / or have taught music privately . " The school issued a statement that they were assisting the police with their inquiries , and that they had instigated an action plan to review their safeguarding processes and procedures . An Independent Schools Inspectorate report published in 2014 praised the school 's current leadership , including its safeguarding provisions . The lawyer representing some of the claimants , Liz Dux , said that she had been told that abuse had been " rife " at the school , and that teachers had allegedly been involved in " rape and habitual indecent assault " . 
 = = Academics and pastoral care = = 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 Students are admitted to the school on musical ability and talent . The application process involves an audition , and advance ' advice auditions ' are offered to help potential applicants to prepare . In addition to competency in playing an instrument , qualities such as aural awareness , creativity and ability to sight @-@ read are sought . Grades and exam results are not required ( with the exception of Grade 5 theory for sixth form ) ; as musical potential is considered most important . Students between the ages of 8 and 18 can apply for a place studying any western instrument . Funding for up to 100 % of study and boarding fees is available to most students through the UK Government 's Music and Dance Scheme . Open Days are held twice each year . 
 = = = Curriculum = = = 
 As a specialist music school , Chetham 's requires all students to study a curriculum that concentrates on music and other subjects in accordance with the National Curriculum . Students taking GCSEs and A @-@ levels study music . All students study at least two instruments and choir practice is compulsory . Voice is available as an area of study only in the sixth form . Despite entry being solely through musical audition , the school regularly obtains good exam results , in comparison to other local schools and nationally . 
 Chetham 's educates choristers from the cathedral who follow a similar curriculum to other students and study an instrument . However , they do not apply in an audition . When a chorister reaches Year 8 ( age 12 or 13 ) , or their voice breaks , they can apply to join Chetham 's via the usual audition process . 
 Ensembles form an important part of the musical curriculum , with all students taking part in at least one . The ensembles include Chetham 's Symphony Orchestra , which has performed all over the world , including Germany , Spain and the United States , and on BBC Radio 3 . The award @-@ winning Big Band played an integral part in the creation of a Jazz Studies programme , and has won many prizes , including The Daily Telegraph Young Jazz Competition , and the junior section of the BBC Radio 2 Big Band of the Year Competition three times . The Chamber Choir has performed on Songs of Praise and the BBC Proms and the Symphonic Wind Band and Orchestra have won prizes at the Boosey and Hawkes National Concert Festival . 
 = = = School life = = = 
 Chetham 's admits boarding and day students to one of three houses : Victoria House , a mixed @-@ gender house for students aged 8 – 12 ; Boys ' House , for boys over the age of 12 ; and Girls ' House for girls over the age of 12 . In senior houses , boarding students share rooms for four people , and in the sixth form students either have single rooms or share with one other person . Students have a personal tutor to discuss their progress , and boarding students have a house parent who communicates with parents at home . 
 The school offers extra @-@ curricular activities during free time . It has a swimming pool , and offers trampolining , aerobics and fencing , as well as computer games , board games and Scalextric . Weekend trips are sometimes organised for climbing and mountain biking , or to the cinema or theatre . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Chetham 's is situated in Manchester City Centre , close to Manchester Victoria railway station , The National Football Museum and Manchester Cathedral . There are several buildings on the site , many of which are listed . They surround a large open space , the north part is a car park and courtyard , and the south part is a playground . 
 = = = College House = = = 
 College House , the original 15th @-@ century college , is a Grade I listed building built of sandstone in the shape of a lowercase ' b ' with a slate roof . It is accessed by the original gatehouse ; which was constructed on a plinth and contains the original timbers . The upper storey is accessed by an external staircase . Baronial Hall , once the Great Hall , contains many of its original features , such as its timber roof , dais and canopy . There is a large fireplace dating from the 19th century , and three windows likely to date from the 16th century . The Audit Room , originally a common room , contains a panelled ceiling with decorations suggesting it was installed by the Stanley family . The upper room , originally the warden 's chamber , is now the library reading room , and contains a large bay window within an elaborate Tudor arch , as well as original 17th @-@ century doors . The west part of the building surrounding the cloister courtyard contained accommodation known as sets , for people who lived in college . There were two rooms in each set on two floors , the lower floor being used as a study . Historian Clare Hartwell , describes the cobbled courtyard which has a restored well as " one of the most atmospheric spaces in the building " . It is surrounded by many windows , which were probably originally unglazed . Inside there are several corridors and passages containing open beams and original stonework . To the east is the kitchen and associated rooms , and further east are rooms used for administration offices , most of which have been substantially altered . 
 = = = New building = = = 
 A new building opposite Victoria Station was opened in 2012 . This contains most academic teaching rooms and all music teaching rooms , as well as two performance spaces . The Carole Nash Recital Room is used regularly for recitals and masterclasses , including free Lunchtime Concerts which take place three times each week during the school term . A second concert hall is currently under construction and will house larger scale performances for audiences of up to 500 . In September 2015 it was announced that this would be named The Stoller Hall , after its chief benefactor Sir Norman Stoller , and would open in April 2017 . Meanwhile , the old Palatine Building will be demolished to open up the medieval site and create a new access to Chetham 's Library . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 Millgate Building , the former Manchester Grammar School , is a Grade II listed building designed by Alfred Waterhouse in the 1870s . Attached to it is Nicholl 's building . They contain the school hall , gym , swimming pool , dining room , art department , kitchen , and Boys ' House . The old classrooms inside them are being refurbished into boarding facilities . <unk> Arts Centre , which was designed by Alfred Waterhouse in 1878 and contains a performance space , is Grade II listed . Waterhouse was responsible for much of the alterations made to College House in the 19th century . The Nicholls Building contains Victoria House , and New College House contains Girls ' House , with the sixth form common room attached . There is also a small chapel which houses the drama department . 
 = = Notable former pupils = = 
 Chetham 's , as a music school , has produced dozens of notable alumni . Many of its students become professional musicians , as well as conductors , teachers and actors . This is a partial list of alumni : 
 Max Beesley – actor 
 <unk> Chen - violinist 
 Jon Christos – singer 
 Gary Cooper – harpsichordist , <unk> , and conductor 
 Peter Donohoe – pianist 
 Daniel Harding – conductor 
 David Hill – choral director 
 Tim Horton - pianist , chamber musician . Ensemble 360 
 Stephen Hough – pianist 
 Guy Johnston – cellist 
 Paul Lewis – pianist 
 Mike <unk> – rock musician ( Level 42 ) 
 Grant Llewellyn – conductor 
 Leon McCawley – pianist 
 Kevin Mallon conductor and violinist 
 Murray McLachlan – pianist 
 Wayne Marshall – pianist , organist and conductor 
 Jennifer Pike – violinist 
 Dominic <unk> – double bassist 
 Gwilym Simcock – jazz pianist , composer 
 David Thornton – euphonium player 
 Adam Walker – flautist 
 Andrew Wilde – pianist 
 = Eorpwald of East Anglia = 
 Eorpwald ; also <unk> or <unk> , ( reigned from c . 624 , assassinated c . 627 or 632 ) , succeeded his father Rædwald as ruler of the independent Kingdom of the East Angles . Eorpwald was a member of the East Anglian dynasty known as the Wuffingas , named after the semi @-@ historical king Wuffa . 
 Little is known of Eorpwald 's life or of his short reign , as little documentary evidence about the East Anglian kingdom has survived . The primary source for Eorpwald is the Ecclesiastical History of the English People , written by Bede in the 8th century . Soon after becoming king , Eorpwald received Christian teaching and was baptised in 627 or 632 . Soon after his conversion he was killed by Ricberht , a pagan noble , who may have succeeded him and ruled for three years . The motive for Eorpwald 's assassination was probably political as well as religious . He was the first early English king to suffer death as a consequence of his Christian faith and was subsequently venerated by the Church as a saint and martyr . 
 In 1939 , a magnificent ship @-@ burial was discovered under a large mound at Sutton Hoo , in Suffolk . Although Rædwald is usually considered to have been buried with the ship ( or commemorated by it ) , another possibility is Eorpwald . Alternatively , he might also have had his own ship @-@ burial nearby . 
 = = Background and family = = 
 By the beginning of the 7th century , southern England was almost entirely under the control of the Anglo @-@ Saxons . These peoples , who are known to have included Angles , Saxons , Jutes and Frisians , began to arrive in Britain in the 5th century . By 600 , a number of kingdoms had begun to form in the conquered territories , including the Kingdom of the East Angles , an Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdom which today includes the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . Almost no documentary sources exist about the history of the kingdom before the reign of Rædwald , who reigned until about 624 . Sources of information include the names of a few of the early Wuffing kings , mentioned in a short passage in Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People , written in the 730s . 
 In 616 , Rædwald defeated and killed Æthelfrith of Northumbria in the Battle of the River Idle and then installed Edwin as the new Deiran king . Whilst Edwin had been an exile at Rædwald 's court , he had had a dream where he was told that if he converted to Christianity , he would become greater than any that had ruled before him . Steven Plunkett relates that , according to the version of events as told in the Whitby Life of St Gregory , it was Paulinus who visited Edwin and obtained his promise to convert to Christianity in return for regal power . After Edwin emerged as the ruler of Deira , with its centre at York , he became accepted as king of the northern Northumbrian province of Bernicia . Following his victory over the Northumbrians , Rædwald was not only king of the East Angles , but also the most powerful king amongst the rulers of the various English kingdoms , occupying the role which was later described by the term Bretwalda . He is thought by many to have been buried in the sumptuous ship burial at Sutton Hoo . 
 Eorpwald was the son of Rædwald by a wife whose name is not recorded . He had at least one brother , Rægenhere , and another sibling , Sigeberht , may also have been his brother . Rædwald used the letters R and E when naming two of his own sons , ( as did his own father when he and his younger brother Eni were named ) , which suggests that Eorpwald was the younger sibling and would only have become Rædwald 's heir after his elder brother Rægenhere was slain in battle in 616 . It is unclear whether , as Bede understood , Sigebert and Eorpwald were brothers , or whether they shared the same mother but not the same father , as was stated by the 12th century chronicler William of Malmesbury . According to the historian Barbara Yorke , Sigebert may have been a member of a different line of <unk> who as his rival was forced into exile , in order to ensure that Eorpwald became king . 
 = = Accession and conversion to Christianity = = 
 Eorpwald was still a pagan when he became king of the East Angles , following the death of Rædwald in around 624 . D. P. Kirby maintains that Sigeberht fled from East Anglia to Gaul during the internal strife that followed Eorpwald 's accession and that the new king 's paganism created tension between Christian and pagan factions within the kingdom , which resulted in a reduction in his influence . In 627 , Edwin undertook the conversion of the peoples of Northumbria , Lindsey and East Anglia and at his prompting Eorpwald was , according to Bede , " persuaded to accept the Christian faith and sacraments " . It can be calculated that this event occurred in 627 , taking in account the years that Felix of Burgundy was known to have held the East Anglian bishopric . In contrast , the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recorded that Eorpwald 's baptism took place during 632 : " Her wæs Eorpwald <unk> " , ( " Here Eorpwald was baptized " ) . 
 It is not known whether Eorpwald was baptised in East Anglia , Northumbria or Kent , but it is very likely that Edwin , now the senior ruler , was present as his sponsor . Higham suggests that because of the lack of proper facilities in East Anglia , it is likely that he was baptised by Paulinus at Edwin 's centre of authority in Northumbria . The manner of Eorpwald 's conversion indicated that he was a subordinate king and that Edwin was his overlord . 
 Following his baptism , Edwin 's Northumbrian priests were in a position to be able to suppress pagan practices in Eorpwald 's kingdom and convert the East Anglians . The conversion had the general political benefit of bringing the entire eastern seaboard from Northumbria to Kent , with the exception of Essex , under the dominion of Edwin and his Christian allies . 
 = = Death and sainthood = = 
 The conversion of Eorpwald 's kingdom did not result in the establishment of any ecclesiastical infrastructure , such as the establishment of a see within the kingdom . Bede reported that soon after his conversion , Eorpwald was slain ( <unk> ) by a heathen ( <unk> <unk> ) named Ricberht and that after he was killed , the kingdom reverted to heathen rule ( in <unk> <unk> est ) for three years . 
 Eorpwald was the first English king to be killed because of his Christian faith . The circumstances are not recorded , so that it is not known whether Ricberht was representative of an internal East Anglian opposition to Christian rule , or if he was an emissary from abroad wishing to diminish Edwin of Northumbria 's influence over the East Angles . The return of East Anglia to pagan rule does not necessarily mean that there was an overt struggle between the worship of the Anglo @-@ Saxon gods and the worship of Christ , but could express a reaction away from Christianity amongst the East Angles , prompted by Edwin 's rise to power and his subsequent dominance over their king . The ancestry of Ricberht is unknown and it is unclear as to whether he ever ruled after he killed Eorpwald , but in 630 or 631 , three years after Eorpwald 's assassination , Sigeberht returned from exile in Gaul and became king of the East Angles . 
 At Sutton Hoo ( near Woodbridge , in Suffolk ) is the site of two 6th @-@ 7th century Anglo @-@ Saxon cemeteries , where it is believed that members of the Eorpwald 's dynasty were entombed under large earth mounds . Several East Anglian kings , including Eorpwald , have been suggested as possible candidates for the occupant of the burial site under Mound 1 , discovered in 1939 . Martin Carver has speculated that historians could use regal lists and other sources of information to identify the occupants , whilst acknowledging that no material evidence exists to support the theory that Eorpwald or other members of his family are buried there . He has used Eorpwald 's relationship as the son of Rædwald to place him in either Mound 1 or 2 . 
 According to Fleming 's Complete History of the British Martyrs , published in 1904 , King Eorpwald was venerated as a saint and a martyr by the English Church . His feast day is not known . 
 = McDonald Ranch House = 
 The McDonald Ranch House , also known as Trinity Site , in the <unk> Mountains of Socorro County , New Mexico , was the location of assembly of the world 's first nuclear weapon . The active components of the Trinity test " gadget " , a plutonium Fat Man @-@ type bomb similar to that later dropped on Nagasaki , Japan , were assembled there on July 13 , 1945 . The completed bomb was winched up the test tower the following day and detonated on July 16 , 1945 as the Trinity nuclear test . 
 The McDonald Ranch House was built in 1913 by Franz Schmidt , a German immigrant , and acquired by the McDonald family in the 1930s . The ranch was vacated by the McDonald family under protest in 1942 , when the United States Army took over the land as part of the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range to use in training bomber crews during World War II . 
 The family hoped that the ranch would be returned after the war , but it was not , and in 1970 , the Army announced that it would be kept permanently . The McDonald Ranch House was empty and deteriorating until 1982 , when it was stabilized by the Army . In 1984 it was restored by the National Park Service to appear as it did on July 12 , 1945 . The site is now open to visitors once a year , on the first Saturday in April . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The George McDonald Ranch House sits within an 85 @-@ by @-@ 85 @-@ foot ( 26 by 26 m ) low stone wall . The house was built in 1913 by Franz Schmidt , a German immigrant , whose old house a mile away burned down in 1912 . An addition was constructed on the north side by the McDonald family , who had moved into area in the late 1870s or early 1880s , and acquired the ranch house in the 1930s . 
 The ranch house is a one @-@ story , 1 @,@ 750 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 163 m2 ) building . It is built of adobe , which was plastered and painted . An ice house is located on the west side , along with an underground cistern which stored rain water running off the roof . At one time , the north addition contained a toilet and bathtub , which drained into a septic tank northwest of the house . There is a large , divided water storage tank and a Chicago <unk> windmill east of the house . The scientists and support people used the north tank as a swimming pool during the summer of 1945 . South of the windmill are the remains of a bunkhouse and a barn which was part garage . Further to the east are corrals and holding pens . The buildings and fixtures east of the house have been stabilized to prevent further deterioration . 
 The ranch was vacated by the McDonald family under protest in 1942 , when the Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range took over the land to use in training bomber crews during World War II . Area lands were condemned and ranchers simply told to leave . The occupants were given the option of going to court or accepting a settlement , but had to leave in either case . The McDonalds chose to go to court , and were awarded about $ 60 @,@ 000 for their patented land . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 The house stood empty until the Manhattan Project support personnel arrived in early 1945 . The northeast room ( the master bedroom ) was designated the assembly room . <unk> and tables were installed . To keep dust and sand out of instruments and tools , the windows were covered with plastic . Tape was used to fasten the edges of the plastic and to seal doors and cracks in the walls . 
 The plutonium hemispheres for the pit of the Trinity nuclear test " gadget " ( bomb ) were delivered to the McDonald Ranch House on July 11 , 1945 . Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , the Deputy Director of the Manhattan Project , signed for them , and handed them over to Louis Slotin , the head of the Pit Assembly Team . The active components of the bomb were assembled in the assembly room on July 13 , 1945 , The bomb was winched up the test tower the following day . The Trinity test occurred on July 16 , 1945 . A plutonium Fat Man @-@ type bomb was detonated , similar to the bomb later dropped on Nagasaki . 
 The explosion only 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away blew most of the home 's windows out but did not significantly damage the structure ; years of rain water intrusion through the roof were responsible for decades of subsequent deterioration . The barn roof was bowed inward by the blast and some of its roofing was blown away ; it collapsed some time thereafter . 
 = = 1960s – 1980s = = 
 On December 21 , 1965 , the Trinity Site was declared a National Historic Landmark district , and , on October 15 , 1966 , the McDonald House was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 The McDonalds had expected that the ranch would be returned after the war , but this did not occur . In the 1970s it was announced that the land would not be returned . Dave McDonald and his niece , Mary McDonald , staged an armed reoccupation of the ranch in protest in 1982 . 
 The house stood empty and deteriorating until 1982 . White Sands Missile Range commander United States Army Major General Niles J. Fulwyler , who had directed the restoration of the White Sands V @-@ 2 Launching Site , ordered the structure stabilized to prevent any further damage . Shortly after , Fulwyler acquired funding from the Department of Energy and the Army for the National Park Service to completely restore the house to the way it appeared on July 12 , 1945 . Work was completed in 1984 . 
 Fulwyler buried a 25 @-@ year time capsule describing the restoration . It was opened during an open house on October 3 , 2009 . Its artifacts are now in display inside the home . On the back of a photograph of himself Fulwyler wrote : 
 Greetings to you of 2009 . When I came to White Sands Missile Range in 1982 I took as my command project the restoration of the MacDonald Ranch House . It was my great privilege to be the catalyst for this restoration , ably assisted by Mr. Al Johnson , who died shortly after its dedication . This is a most historic structure , in a most historic area . I hope you and succeeding generations appreciate what we have done . Take care of it . It is part of our heritage . 
 = = Access = = 
 For many years the site was open on the first Saturday in April and October . Admission is free . There is a display on the Schmidt family in the house during each open house . In 2014 , the White Sands Missile Range announced that due to budgetary constraints , the site would only be open once a year , on the first Saturday in April . In 2015 , this decision was reversed , and two events were scheduled , in April and October . 
 = Tim Duncan = 
 Timothy Theodore " Tim " Duncan ( born April 25 , 1976 ) is an American retired professional basketball player who played his entire 19 @-@ year career with the San Antonio Spurs of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . Widely considered to be the greatest power forward of all time , he is a five @-@ time NBA champion , two @-@ time NBA MVP , three @-@ time NBA Finals MVP , and NBA Rookie of the Year . He is also a 15 @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star and the only player ever to be selected to both the All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defensive Teams in every one of his first 13 seasons . 
 Duncan started out as a swimmer and only began playing basketball in ninth grade after Hurricane Hugo destroyed the only Olympic @-@ sized pool on his home of Saint Croix , U.S. Virgin Islands . He soon became a standout for St. Dunstan 's Episcopal High School , and had an illustrious college career with the Wake Forest University Demon Deacons , winning the Naismith College Player of the Year , USBWA College Player of the Year and John Wooden awards in his final year . Duncan graduated from college before entering the 1997 NBA draft as the number one pick . 
 Off the court , Duncan is known for his quiet and unassuming ways , as well as his active philanthropy . He holds a degree in psychology and created the Tim Duncan Foundation to raise general health awareness and fund education and youth sports in various parts of the United States . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Duncan is the only son of Ione Duncan , a midwife , and William Duncan , a mason , and has two older sisters , Cheryl and Tricia . He was born and raised in Christiansted , a town on Saint Croix , one of the main islands composing the United States Virgin Islands . In school , Duncan was a bright pupil and dreamt of becoming an Olympic @-@ level swimmer like his sister Tricia . His parents were very supportive and Duncan excelled at swimming , becoming a teenage standout in the 50 , 100 and 400 meters freestyle and aiming to make the 1992 Olympic Games as a member of the United States Team . 
 When Hurricane Hugo destroyed the island 's only Olympic @-@ sized swimming pool in 1989 , Duncan was forced to swim in the ocean and he quickly lost his enthusiasm for swimming because of his fear of sharks . Duncan was dealt another emotional blow when his mother was diagnosed with breast cancer and died one day before his 14th birthday . In her last days , she made Duncan and his sisters promise to finish college with a degree , which would later explain Duncan 's refusal to leave college early . Duncan never swam competitively again , but was inspired by his brother @-@ in @-@ law to turn to basketball . 
 Duncan initially had difficulties adapting to the game he thought would help relieve his pain and frustration . Nancy Pomroy , the athletic director of the St. Croix Country Day School was quoted : " [ Duncan ] was so huge . So big and tall , but he was awfully awkward at the time . " He overcame this to become a standout for the St. Dunstan 's Episcopal High School , averaging 25 points per game as a senior . His play attracted the attention of several universities , despite having only picked up the game in ninth grade . Wake Forest University basketball coach Dave Odom in particular grew interested in Duncan after the 16 @-@ year @-@ old allegedly played NBA star Alonzo Mourning to a draw in a 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 pick @-@ up game . Odom was searching for a tall , physical player to play near the basket . Given the weak level of basketball in the Virgin Islands , Odom was wary about Duncan at first , especially after first meeting him and thinking him to be inattentive ; Duncan stared blankly at Odom for most of the conversation . However , after the first talk , Odom understood that this was just Duncan 's way of paying attention , and discovered that he was not only athletically talented , but also a quick learner . Eventually , despite scholarship offers by the University of Hartford , the University of Delaware and Providence College , Duncan joined Odom 's Wake Forest Demon Deacons . 
 = = = Wake Forest University ( 1993 – 1997 ) = = = 
 In the year before Duncan 's arrival at Wake Forest University , the Demon Deacons reached the Sweet 16 , but then lost main scorer Rodney Rogers , who entered the 1993 NBA draft . In the 1993 – 94 NCAA season , Coach Dave Odom was considering redshirting Duncan , but was forced to play him after fellow freshman big man <unk> N 'Diaye was ruled out due to NCAA rules violations and eventually transferred to Michigan . Duncan struggled with early transition problems and was even held scoreless in his first college game , but as the year progressed , he and teammate Randolph Childress led the Deacons to a 20 – 11 win @-@ loss record . Duncan 's style of play was simple but effective , combining an array of low @-@ post moves , mid @-@ range bank shots and tough defense . He was chosen to represent the U.S. in the 1994 Goodwill Games . Meanwhile , Duncan worked towards a degree in psychology and also took classes in anthropology and Chinese literature . Despite focusing heavily on basketball , Wake Forest psychology department chairperson Deborah Best was quoted : " Tim [ ... ] was one of my more intellectual students . [ ... ] Other than his height , I couldn 't tell him from any other student at Wake Forest . " Duncan also established his reputation as a stoic player , to the extent that opposing fans taunted him as " Mr. Spock " , the prototypical logical , detached character from Star Trek . 
 In the 1994 – 95 NCAA season , the sophomore was soon called one of the best eligible NBA prospects , along with his peers Joe Smith , Rasheed Wallace and Jerry Stackhouse . Los Angeles Lakers general manager Jerry West suggested that Duncan might become the top pick in the 1995 NBA draft if he went early , but Duncan assured everyone he had no intention of going pro until he graduated , even though the NBA was planning to add a rookie salary cap in 1996 . He was giving up a lot of money , but was determined to stay in school . In that season , he led the Demon Deacons into the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) championship game against a Rasheed Wallace @-@ led North Carolina Tar Heels . During that game , Duncan neutralized the threat of Wallace , while Childress sealed the win with a jump shot with four seconds left in overtime . In the NCAA Tournament , the Demon Deacons reached the Sweet 16 , and playing against Oklahoma State , Duncan scored 12 points to go with 22 rebounds and eight blocks , outplaying Bryant Reeves , but his team lost 71 – 66 . Still , Duncan ended the year averaging 16 @.@ 8 points and 12 @.@ 5 rebounds per game , was named Defensive Player of the Year and became the third @-@ best shot @-@ blocker in NCAA history with 3 @.@ 98 blocks per game . He was also voted All @-@ ACC First Team , a feat he would repeat in each of his two remaining years at Wake Forest . 
 In the following 1995 – 96 NCAA season , Wake Forest had to deal with the loss of Childress , who graduated the previous season and entered the NBA . This provided an opportunity for Duncan to show his leadership qualities , and his inexperienced team lost only four games in the entire ACC season . The Demon Deacons won the ACC Finals again , but in the Sweet 16 , Duncan came down with the flu , and his team missed the Final Four by one win . He completed another remarkable season with averages of 19 @.@ 1 points and 12 @.@ 3 rebounds per game , and was again voted ACC Defensive Player of the Year and won his first ACC Player of the Year award . At the season 's end the Wake Forest star was rumored to enter the 1996 NBA draft , but in the end , he stayed in college . 
 In the 1996 – 97 NCAA season , Duncan was helped by the addition of future NBA player Loren Woods , a 7 ' 1 " player who eased the pressure on Duncan close to the basket . The Demon Deacons won their first 13 games , but then got into a slump and failed to win a third ACC title . The NCAA campaign was just as frustrating , as Stanford University , led by future NBA point guard Brevin Knight , eliminated Duncan 's team with a 72 – 66 win . Duncan finished with an individually impressive season though , averaging 20 @.@ 8 points , 14 @.@ 7 rebounds and 3 @.@ 2 assists per game while shooting <unk> from the field and winning the Defensive Player of the Year for a third straight season . He earned first @-@ team All @-@ America honors for the second time , and was a unanimous pick for both USBWA and Naismith College Player of the Year . Duncan led the 1996 – 97 NCAA Division I in rebounding , was 10th in blocked shots ( 3 @.@ 3 bpg ) and 28th in scoring ( 20 @.@ 8 ppg ) . He was voted ACC Player of the Year again and won the 1997 John Wooden Award as the NCAA 's best overall male player based on the votes of sportscasters and <unk> . 
 In contrast to contemporary prep @-@ to @-@ pro players like Kevin Garnett , Jermaine O 'Neal , Tracy McGrady or Kobe Bryant , Duncan stayed at college for a full four years . During that period , he was a two @-@ time ACC Player of the Year , and a three @-@ time NABC Defensive Player of the Year . The center also made the All @-@ ACC Tournament between 1995 and 1997 , the All @-@ ACC First Team between 1995 and 1997 , and was named Most Valuable Player of the 1996 ACC Tournament . Further , 1996 was the year where he led the conference in scoring , rebounding , field goal percentage and blocked shots , becoming the first player in conference history to lead all four of those categories . Overall , Duncan led his team to a 97 – 31 win – loss record and finished his college career as the all @-@ time leading rebounder in NCAA history in the post @-@ 1973 era ( later surpassed by Kenneth <unk> ) . He remains one of only ten players with more than 2 @,@ 000 career points and 1 @,@ 500 career rebounds . He was also the first player in NCAA history to reach 1 @,@ 500 points , 1 @,@ 000 rebounds , 400 blocked shots and 200 assists . He left college as the all @-@ time leading shot @-@ blocker in ACC history with 481 blocks — at the time second in NCAA annals behind Colgate 's <unk> Foyle and third on the ACC career rebounding list with 1 @,@ 570 rebounds . After earning his college degree , Duncan became automatically eligible for the 1997 NBA draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = " Twin Towers " ( 1997 – 2003 ) = = = 
 In the 1997 NBA draft , the San Antonio Spurs drafted Duncan with the first draft pick . The Spurs were coming off an injury @-@ riddled 1996 – 97 season ; their best player , David Robinson — himself a number one draft pick in 1987 — was sidelined for most of the year , and they had finished with a 20 – 62 win – loss record . However , as the 1997 – 98 season approached , the Spurs were considered a notable threat in the NBA . With an experienced center in Robinson and the number one pick in Duncan , the Spurs featured one of the best <unk> in the league . Duncan and Robinson became known as the " Twin Towers " , having earned a reputation for their exceptional defense close to the basket , forcing opponents to take lower percentage shots from outside . From the beginning , Duncan established himself as a quality player : in his second @-@ ever road game , he grabbed 22 rebounds against opposing Chicago Bulls Hall of Fame power forward Dennis Rodman , a multiple rebounding champion and NBA Defensive Player of the Year . Duncan was voted to the 1998 NBA All @-@ Star Game by coaches . Later , when Duncan played against opposing Houston Rockets Hall of Fame power forward Charles Barkley , Barkley was so impressed he said : " I have seen the future and he wears number 21 . " In his rookie season , Duncan lived up to expectations of being the number one draft pick , starting in all 82 regular @-@ season games , averaging 21 @.@ 1 points , 11 @.@ 9 rebounds , 2 @.@ 7 assists and 2 @.@ 5 blocks per game , and earning All @-@ NBA First Team honors . His defensive contributions ensured that he was elected to the All @-@ Defensive Second Team and was also named NBA Rookie of the Year , having won the NBA Rookie of the Month award every single month that season . Spurs coach Gregg Popovich lauded Duncan 's mental toughness , stating his rookie 's " demeanor was singularly remarkable " , Duncan always " put things into perspective " and never got " too upbeat or too depressed . " Center Robinson was equally impressed with Duncan : " He 's the real thing . I 'm proud of his attitude and effort . He gives all the extra effort and work and wants to become a better player . " 
 The Spurs qualified for the 1998 NBA Playoffs as the fifth seed , but Duncan had a bad first half in his first playoff game against the Phoenix Suns , causing Suns coach Danny Ainge to play Duncan with less defensive pressure . The rookie capitalized on this by finishing Game 1 with 32 points and 10 rebounds and replicating the performance in Game 2 , contributing to a 3 – 1 victory over the Suns . However , the Spurs lost in the second round to the eventual Western Conference Champions Utah Jazz . In this series , Duncan was pitted against Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame power forward Karl Malone . Duncan outscored Malone in the first two games which the Spurs lost , but as the series progressed , the more experienced Malone shut Duncan down on defense and dominated on offense , outscoring the young power forward in Games 3 to 5 18 – 10 , 34 – 22 and 24 – 14 respectively . 
 During the lockout @-@ shortened 1998 – 99 season , the Spurs started with a lackluster 6 – 8 record and Popovich came under fire from the press . However , Duncan and Robinson stood behind their coach , and finished the season with a 31 – 5 run . The sophomore averaged 21 @.@ 7 points , 11 @.@ 4 rebounds , 2 @.@ 4 assists and 2 @.@ 5 blocks in the regular season , making both the All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defense First Teams . In the 1999 NBA Playoffs , the Spurs defeated the Minnesota Timberwolves 3 – 1 , swept the Los Angeles Lakers and the Portland Trail Blazers 4 – 0 , and defeated the Cinderella story New York Knicks 4 – 1 in the Finals . In this series , a large contingent of Virgin Islanders flew over to support their local hero , and were not disappointed . In the first two games , the " Twin Towers " outscored their Knicks counterparts Chris Dudley / Larry Johnson with 41 points , 26 rebounds and nine blocks versus five points , 12 rebounds and zero blocks . After a Game 3 loss in which Duncan was held scoreless in the third quarter and committed three turnovers in the last quarter , Duncan bounced back with 28 points and 18 rebounds in a Game 4 win , and in Game 5 , the Spurs protected a 78 – 77 lead seconds from the end with the ball in the Knicks ' possession . Double teamed by Duncan and Robinson , Knicks swingman Latrell Sprewell missed a last @-@ second desperation shot , and after closing out the series with a strong 31 @-@ point and 9 @-@ rebound showing in Game 5 , Duncan was named Finals MVP , bringing San Antonio their first @-@ ever NBA championship . The accolades for the Spurs soon arrived , with Sports Illustrated reporting that the San Antonio " monkey has been shed " , and that the Spurs were no longer known as the " San Antonio <unk> " . The magazine praised Finals MVP Duncan , who was later quoted : " This is incredible . We kept our focus and we pulled it out . " Sports Illustrated journalist and retired NBA player Alex English added : " Duncan came up big each time they went to him with that sweet turnaround jumper off the glass . He was the man tonight [ in Game 5 ] . " And Popovich later said to losing coach Jeff Van Gundy : " I 've got Tim [ Duncan ] and you don 't . That 's the difference . " 
 In the 1999 – 2000 season , Duncan further cemented his reputation . He averaged 23 @.@ 2 points , 12 @.@ 4 rebounds , 3 @.@ 2 assists and 2 @.@ 2 blocks per game , earned another pair of All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defense First Team call @-@ ups , and was co @-@ MVP with Shaquille O 'Neal of the NBA All @-@ Star Game . However , the Spurs had a disappointing post @-@ season . Duncan injured his meniscus shortly before the end of the regular season and was unable to play in even one post @-@ season game . Consequently , the Spurs were eliminated in the first round of the 2000 NBA Playoffs , losing 3 – 1 to the Phoenix Suns . Nonetheless , Duncan rebounded in the next season , and with strong regular @-@ season averages of 22 @.@ 2 points , 12 @.@ 2 rebounds , 3 @.@ 0 assists and 2 @.@ 3 blocks , earned himself yet another pair of All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defensive First Team call @-@ ups . In the 2001 NBA Playoffs , the Spurs eliminated the Timberwolves 3 – 1 , defeated the Dallas Mavericks 4 – 1 , but then bowed out against the Lakers led by superstars Shaquille O 'Neal and Kobe Bryant , losing in four straight games . Sports Illustrated described the series as a " [ m ] <unk> mismatch " , and Duncan was criticized as " silent when the Spurs need him most " . 
 On the back of two consecutive playoff disappointments , Duncan improved statistically in the 2001 – 02 season . He averaged career highs in scoring ( 25 @.@ 5 points per game , including a league @-@ leading 764 field goals and 560 attempted free throws ) and rebounding ( 12 @.@ 7 boards per game , and his accumulated 1042 boards again led the league ) , and also averaged 3 @.@ 7 assists and 2 @.@ 5 blocks per game , both career highs . Coupled with another pair of All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defensive First Team call @-@ ups , he was named the league 's Most Valuable Player , joining teammate David Robinson as the only Spurs members to earn the honor . On the other hand , Duncan 's team struggled with the fact that the aging Robinson was no longer able to sustain his level of performance , and backup center @-@ forward Malik Rose had to step in more often . In the 2002 NBA Playoffs , the Spurs were again outmatched by the Lakers . Up against star center O 'Neal once more , the Spurs were defeated 4 – 1 by the eventual champions . Duncan , who managed 34 points and a franchise @-@ high 25 rebounds in Game 5 , stated his frustration : " I thought we really had a chance at this series . The Lakers proved to be more than we could handle . Again , we had a ( heck ) of a run at it . We had opportunities to win games and make it a different series , but that 's just the way the ball rolls sometimes . " Nevertheless , NBA.com praised Duncan as " phenomenal " and criticized his supporting cast , stating Duncan " made 11 @-@ of @-@ 23 shots and 12 @-@ of @-@ 14 free throws , adding four assists and two blocks [ a ] nd once again , he did not have enough help . " Also , Robinson said " Tim [ Duncan ] was like Superman out there " , and conceded that the Lakers were simply better , just like in the last playoffs campaign . 
 The 2002 – 03 season saw Duncan enjoy another standout season in which he averaged 23 @.@ 3 points , a career @-@ high 12 @.@ 9 rebounds , 3 @.@ 9 assists and 2 @.@ 9 blocks per game , and yet another dual All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defense First Team call @-@ up , resulting in his second NBA Most Valuable Player Award . At age 37 , Robinson announced that year as his last season , and his playing time was cut by coach Popovich to save his energy for the playoffs . The Spurs qualified easily for the playoffs , concluding the regular season as the Conference number one seed with a 60 – 22 record . Although San Antonio now had new offensive threats in Tony Parker and Manu Ginóbili , during the playoffs , it was Duncan 's performance in the semi @-@ finals against the Los Angeles Lakers which was singled out for praise by Popovich , who stated : " I thought in Game 5 and Game 6 , he [ Duncan ] was astounding in his focus . He pulled everyone along these last two games . " In the series , Duncan was matched up against forward Robert Horry , and was able to dominate him the entire series and closed out the series in style ; Duncan finished Game 6 with 37 points and 16 rebounds , allowing Spurs coach Popovich to call timeout with 2 : 26 left to instruct his team not to celebrate excessively . The Spurs made it to the finals , and defeated the New Jersey Nets 88 – 77 in Game 6 to win another NBA championship . Helped by an inspired Robinson , Duncan almost recorded a quadruple double in the final game , and was named the NBA Finals MVP . Duncan said of the victory : " We were all confident that something would happen , that we would turn the game to our favor , and it did " , but felt sad that Robinson retired after winning his second championship ring . Following this successful Spurs campaign , Robinson and Duncan were named Sports Illustrated 's 2003 " Sportsmen of the Year " . 
 = = = Leader of the Spurs ( 2003 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Before the 2003 – 04 season began , the Spurs lost their perennial captain David Robinson to retirement . Embracing the lone team leader role , Duncan led a reformed Spurs team which included Slovenian center Rasho Nesterovič , defensive stalwart Bruce Bowen , Argentinian shooting guard Ginóbili and young French point guard Parker . Coming off the bench were clutch shooting power forward Robert Horry , versatile Hedo Türkoğlu and veterans Malik Rose and Kevin Willis . In retrospect , Robinson commented that at first , Duncan was reluctant to step into the void , still needing some time to truly develop his leadership skills . Statistically though , Duncan remained strong ; after another convincing season with averages of 22 @.@ 3 points , 12 @.@ 4 rebounds , 3 @.@ 1 assists and 2 @.@ 7 blocks , he led the Spurs into the Western Conference Semifinals . There , they met the Los Angeles Lakers again , split the series 2 – 2 , and in Game 5 , Duncan made a <unk> defended jump shot which put the Spurs ahead by one point with 0 @.@ 4 seconds left to play . Despite the little time remaining , Lakers point guard Derek Fisher hit a buzzer beater for an upset Lakers win . In the end , the Spurs lost the series 4 – 2 , and Duncan attributed the strong Lakers defense as one of the reasons for the loss . 
 Duncan and his Spurs looked to re @-@ assert themselves in the next 2004 – 05 season . Despite their new captain 's slight statistical slump ( 20 @.@ 3 points , 11 @.@ 1 rebounds , 2 @.@ 7 assists , 2 @.@ 6 blocks per game ) , the Spurs won the second seed for the 2005 NBA Playoffs by winning 59 games . In the first round , the Spurs eliminated the Denver Nuggets four games to one , and met the Seattle SuperSonics in the semi @-@ finals . After splitting the first four games , Duncan led his team to two decisive victories , setting up a meeting with the Phoenix Suns , known for their up @-@ tempo basketball . The Spurs managed to beat the Suns at their own game , defeating them 4 – 1 and earning a spot in the 2005 NBA Finals against the Detroit Pistons . In the Finals , Duncan was pitted against Detroit 's defensively strong frontcourt anchored by multiple NBA Defensive Player of the Year Ben Wallace . After two convincing Game 1 and 2 wins for the Spurs , the Pistons double teamed Duncan and forced him to play further from the basket . Detroit won the next two games and the series was eventually tied at 3 – 3 , but Duncan was instrumental in Game 7 , recording 25 points and 11 rebounds as the Spurs defeated the Pistons . NBA.com reported that " with his unique multidimensional talent , Duncan depleted and dissected the Pistons ... He was the fulcrum of virtually every key play down the stretch " , and coach Popovich added : " [ Duncan 's ] complete game is so sound , so fundamental , so unnoticed at times , because if he didn 't score , people think , ' Well , he didn 't do anything ' . But he was incredible and he was the force that got it done for us . " Pistons center Ben Wallace remarked : " He put his team on his shoulders and carried them to a championship [ ... t ] hat 's what the great players do . " Duncan won his third NBA Finals MVP Award , joining Michael Jordan , Shaquille O 'Neal , and Magic Johnson as the only players in NBA history to win it three times . 
 During the 2005 – 06 season , Duncan suffered from plantar fasciitis for most of the season , which was at least partly responsible for his sinking output ( 18 @.@ 6 points , 11 @.@ 0 rebounds , 3 @.@ 2 assists and 2 @.@ 0 blocks per game ) , and also for his failure to make the All @-@ NBA First Team after eight consecutive appearances . The big man came back strong in the 2006 NBA Playoffs against the Dallas Mavericks , where he outscored rival power forward Dirk Nowitzki 32 @.@ 2 to 27 @.@ 1 points , with neither Nowitzki nor Mavericks center Erick Dampier able to stop Duncan with their man @-@ to @-@ man defense . But after splitting the first six games , Duncan became the tragic hero of his team in Game 7 . Despite scoring 39 points in regulation time and fouling out both Dampier and Keith Van Horn , Duncan only made one of seven field goal attempts in overtime against Mavericks reserve center <unk> Diop , and the Spurs lost Game 7 . 
 The following season , however , was another championship year for Duncan and the Spurs . Duncan averaged 20 @.@ 0 points , 10 @.@ 6 rebounds , 3 @.@ 4 assists and 2 @.@ 4 blocks per game in the regular season , and was selected as a Western Conference starter for the 2007 NBA All @-@ Star Game , his ninth appearance in the event . In the playoffs , he led the Spurs to a 4 – 1 series win over the Denver Nuggets in the opening round of the 2007 NBA Playoffs , a 4 – 2 win over the Phoenix Suns in the second round , and a 4 – 1 win against the Utah Jazz in the Western Conference Finals , setting up a meeting with the Cleveland Cavaliers in the Finals . There , the Spurs swept the Cavaliers 4 – 0 , earning Duncan his and San Antonio 's fourth ever championship . Duncan proclaimed that that championship was " the best " of his four championships ; however , he also acknowledged he played " sub @-@ par " and thus received only one vote for NBA Finals MVP from a panel of ten . His colleagues were more appreciative of Duncan ; among others , ex @-@ teammate David Robinson referred to the Spurs titles as the " Tim Duncan era " , and lauded his leadership . Coach Popovich also praised Duncan : " Tim is the common denominator . He 's [ had ] a different cast around him [ in ] ' 99 , ' 03 and ' 05 . He 's welcomed them all . [ ... ] But he is that easy to play with , and his skills are so fundamentally sound that other people can fit in . " Then @-@ NBA commissioner David Stern added : " [ Duncan ] is a player for the ages . I 'm a tennis fan , and Pete Sampras is one of the greats . OK , he wasn 't Andre Agassi or John McEnroe . He just happens to be one of the greatest players of all time . You take great players as you find them . " 
 = = = Playoff consistency ( 2007 – 2013 ) = = = 
 With Duncan being healthy for 78 games and posting typical 20 / 10 numbers , San Antonio concluded the 2007 – 08 regular season with a 56 – 26 record , finishing behind the Lakers and New Orleans Hornets in the Western Conference and setting up themselves for a first @-@ round contest against the Suns . The Suns — defeated by the Spurs in three of the past four seasons of playoffs — were out for revenge and featured a new player in four @-@ time NBA champion Shaquille O 'Neal . In Game 1 , Duncan set the tone with a 40 @-@ point game and a rare three @-@ pointer that sent the game into double overtime . The trio of Duncan , Ginóbili and Parker continued playing to form for the remainder of the series , and the Spurs eliminated the Suns in five games . In the first game of the next round against the Chris Paul @-@ led Hornets , San Antonio was badly defeated 101 – 82 as Duncan played one of the worst playoff games in his career , recording only 5 points and 3 rebounds . The Spurs dropped the next game as well , but recovered in Games 3 and 4 , with Duncan putting up a team @-@ high 22 point / 15 rebound / 4 block performance in the game that tied the series . Duncan then recorded 20 points and 15 rebounds in Game 6 , and the Spurs relied on their experience to seal the series in Game 7 . However , arch @-@ rivals Los Angeles Lakers defeated San Antonio in five games in the Conference Finals , and the Spurs once again failed to capture back @-@ to @-@ back NBA championships . 
 Duncan started the 2008 – 09 season with strong showings in points and rebounds per game . However , by mid @-@ season , his performance declined and he was subsequently diagnosed with chronic knee <unk> . Despite Duncan having problems with his knee and the team losing the services of shooting guard Ginóbili for most of the season , San Antonio qualified for the playoffs as the third seed with a 54 – 28 record . Coupled with an aging supporting cast ( Bowen , Michael Finley and Kurt Thomas were all in their late 30s ) , however , the Spurs were only considered fringe contenders for the championship . As it turned out , Duncan and Parker were not enough to help the Spurs avoid a 4 – 1 defeat by Dallas , and the Spurs were eliminated in the first round of the playoffs for the first time since 2000 . 
 With the Spurs looking to provide a more solid supporting cast in the 2009 – 10 season , they acquired Richard Jefferson , Theo Ratliff , Antonio McDyess , <unk> Blair , and Keith <unk> . The team got off to a 5 – 6 start , but a series of double double performances by Duncan gave them a 9 – 6 record by the end of November . Duncan was subsequently named the Western Conference Player of the Week for the last week of November . Even at 34 years of age , he remained a constant 20 – 10 threat , being only one of three players in the league at the mid @-@ season to average at least 20 points and 10 rebounds a game . On January 21 , 2010 , Duncan was named as the starting forward for the West for the 2010 NBA All @-@ Star Game . After securing yet another 50 @-@ win season , the Spurs qualified for the playoffs as the seventh seed , and defeated Dallas 4 – 2 in the first round , only to lose 4 – 0 to Phoenix in the next round . 
 Eleven games into the 2010 – 11 season , Duncan became the Spurs ' all @-@ time leader in points scored and games played . Along the way , the Spurs compiled a 12 @-@ game winning streak to go 13 – 2 after 15 games . On November 30 , 2010 , Duncan recorded his third career triple @-@ double against the Golden State Warriors . 12 days later , in a game against the Portland Trail Blazers , Duncan became the 94th player in NBA history to play 1 @,@ 000 games . Through his 1,000th game , the Spurs have been 707 – 293 ; only Scottie Pippen ( 715 – 285 ) had a better record with his team through his first 1 @,@ 000 games . The Spurs were 29 – 4 after 33 games — one of the ten best starts in NBA history – and led the league at 35 – 6 halfway through the season . Although Duncan produced career @-@ lows in points and rebounds per game , the Spurs ended the regular season as the first seed in the West for the 2011 NBA Playoffs , and were second in the league ( to Chicago ) . Despite finishing with a 61 – 21 record , however , the Spurs could not avoid being upset in the first round , 4 – 2 , by the eighth @-@ seeded Memphis Grizzlies . 
 The Spurs again finished the 2011 – 12 season as the number one seed in the West — it was a lockout @-@ shortened 66 @-@ game season — tying with the Chicago Bulls for a league @-@ best 50 – 16 record . Prior to a game against the Philadelphia 76ers on March 24 , 2012 , head coach Gregg Popovich decided to give Duncan a night off by listing him on the official scorecard as " DNP @-@ OLD " , poking fun at his 36 @-@ year @-@ old body . Overall , Duncan 's numbers remained at par with the previous season . The triumvirate of Duncan @-@ Parker @-@ Ginóbili entered the 2012 NBA Playoffs well @-@ rested and healthy , and the Spurs swept the Utah Jazz and the Los Angeles Clippers 4 – 0 in the first two rounds . On May 31 , 2012 , in the third game of the Western Conference Finals against the Oklahoma City Thunder , Duncan set the record for most career blocks in playoffs history , surpassing Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar . The Spurs ' playoff run came to an end when the Thunder defeated them 4 – 2 . 
 On July 11 , 2012 , Duncan agreed to re @-@ sign with the Spurs . Helped by a supporting cast comprising Danny Green , Tiago <unk> , Gary Neal and Kawhi Leonard that had been maturing steadily over the last two seasons , Duncan and the Spurs would again make the playoffs with a 58 – 24 regular season record . Duncan also returned to the All @-@ Star line @-@ up and was named to the All @-@ NBA First Team . He finished the regular season with 23 @,@ 785 career points , which broke George Gervin 's record for most points in a Spurs uniform ( 23 @,@ 602 ) . In the playoffs , the Spurs swept the Los Angeles Lakers , beat Golden State in six games and defeated the Memphis Grizzlies in the Western Conference Finals in a 4 – 0 sweep to reach the NBA Finals . In game 2 of the Western Conference Finals , Duncan recorded his 500th playoff block , becoming the first player in NBA history to reach that milestone , although the NBA did not track blocks prior to the 1973 – 74 season . The Spurs met defending NBA champions Miami Heat in the NBA Finals in a tightly contested series . Miami had home court advantage , but San Antonio took the first game and headed into game 6 with a 3 – 2 lead . In that game , Duncan scored 25 points in the first half , his biggest haul in a half of an NBA Finals game . However , the Spurs lost the game in overtime , and then lost the deciding seventh game . 
 = = = Fifth championship ( 2013 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On December 2 , 2013 , Duncan became the oldest player to record a 20 – 20 game in NBA history , finishing with 23 points and 21 rebounds and the game @-@ winning jump shot against the Atlanta Hawks . The Spurs went on to conclude the 2013 – 14 regular season with a league @-@ best 62 wins . The Spurs defeated Dallas in seven games in the First Round of the playoffs , Portland in five games in the conference Semifinals , and Oklahoma City in six games , where game 6 went into overtime , as the Spurs won 112 – 107 . They setup a Finals rematch against the Miami Heat , which they won 4 – 1 , setting a record margin for a win in the NBA Finals , for games 3 and 4 . Along the way , the Duncan @-@ Ginóbili @-@ Parker trio broke the record for most wins in NBA Playoffs history . After winning the Finals in five games , Duncan joined John Salley as the only players to win a championship in three different decades . 
 = = = Final years ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 On June 23 , 2014 , Duncan exercised his $ 10 @.@ 3 million player option for the 2014 – 15 season . On November 14 , 2014 , Duncan scored his <unk> point in the first half of the Spurs ' 93 – 80 win over the Los Angeles Lakers , becoming the 19th player in NBA history to reach the milestone . On February 19 , 2015 , he passed Alex English to move into 16th place on the NBA 's all @-@ time scoring list with 30 points against the Los Angeles Clippers . On March 4 , he recorded six rebounds against the Sacramento Kings , breaking his tie with Nate Thurmond for ninth in career rebounding . Two days later , he recorded three blocks against the Denver Nuggets to surpass Patrick Ewing for sixth overall in career blocks . On April 12 , he played his <unk> career game against the Phoenix Suns , which passed Moses Malone for 11th all @-@ time . He also scored 22 points and passed Kevin Garnett to move into 14th place on the NBA 's all @-@ time scoring list . The Spurs finished sixth in the Western Conference after 82 games and faced the Los Angeles Clippers in the first round of the playoffs . Their quest for back @-@ to @-@ back championships was ended May 2 as they lost to the Clippers in seven games . Duncan was later named to the All @-@ Defensive second team on May 20 for the seventh time in his career . 
 On July 9 , 2015 , Duncan re @-@ signed with the Spurs to a two @-@ year deal . On November 2 , 2015 , in a win over the New York Knicks , Duncan recorded 16 points , 10 rebounds and six assists in his NBA @-@ record <unk> victory with one team , surpassing John Stockton 's 953 wins with the Utah Jazz . On November 11 , he pulled down rebound number 14 @,@ 716 for his career against the Portland Trail Blazers to pass Robert Parish for seventh place on the NBA 's all @-@ time rebounding list . On November 14 , in a win over the Philadelphia 76ers , Duncan had five blocked shots to become the Spurs ' franchise leader with 2 @,@ 955 blocks , surpassing former teammate David Robinson 's career total of 2 @,@ 954 . Duncan also moved info fifth all @-@ time on the NBA 's blocks list . After missing the Spurs ' last three games of December due to rest and right knee soreness , Duncan returned to action on January 2 , 2016 against the Houston Rockets . In his return game , Duncan was held scoreless for the first time in his 19 @-@ year career ; giving him the most consecutive games with at least one point , at 1 @,@ 359 . Four days later , Duncan scored a then season @-@ high 18 points in a 123 – 98 win over the Utah Jazz , helping the Spurs extend its franchise @-@ record home winning streak to 30 straight regular @-@ season games dating to 2014 – 15 . On February 10 , he returned to the starting lineup after missing eight games with a sore knee . On February 27 , in a win over the Houston Rockets , he became the fifth player in NBA history to reach 3 @,@ 000 blocks . In addition , with six rebounds in the game , Duncan reached 14 @,@ 971 for his career , passing Karl Malone ( 14 @,@ 968 ) for sixth place in league history . On March 10 , Duncan became the sixth player in league history with 15 @,@ 000 rebounds , completing the feat midway through the first quarter of the Spurs ' 109 – 101 win over the Chicago Bulls . On March 19 , he came off the bench for only the third time in his career to counter the smaller lineup of the Golden State Warriors . With a win over the Warriors , the Spurs recorded their 35th straight home win of the season and their 44th straight at home dating to 2014 – 15 , tied for the second @-@ longest streak in NBA history with the 1995 – 96 Chicago Bulls . On April 5 , in a win over the Utah Jazz , he became the third player with 1 @,@ 000 victories in the regular season , following Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar and Robert Parish . Duncan extended his mark as the NBA 's career leader in victories with one team . On April 8 , he scored a season @-@ high 21 points in a losing effort to the Denver Nuggets . Having already locked up second seed in the West with a franchise best record ( 65 – 13 prior to Nuggets game ) , all four of Duncan 's starting teammates were rested . The Spurs went on to lose to the Oklahoma City Thunder in the second round of the playoffs . 
 On June 28 , 2016 , Duncan opted into his $ 5 @.@ 6 million contract for the 2016 – 17 season . However , on July 11 , 2016 , he announced his retirement from the NBA after 19 seasons with San Antonio . The Spurs in turn has waived Duncan , in a move to pay out the rest of his current contract worth $ 6 @.@ 4 million . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = United States national team = = 
 In 1998 , Duncan was selected as one of the last two players for the United States national team for the World Basketball Championship . However , this team was later replaced with CBA and college players because of the NBA lockout . Duncan 's first chance at playing for the national team came in 1999 when he was called up to the Olympic Qualifying Team . He averaged 12 @.@ 7 ppg , 9 @.@ 1 rpg and 2 @.@ 4 bpg and led the team to a 10 – 0 finish en route to a qualifying berth for the 2000 Sydney Olympics , but a knee injury forced him to stay out of the Olympic Games themselves . 
 In 2003 , Duncan was also a member of the USA team that recorded ten wins and qualified for the 2004 Summer Olympics . He started all the games he played in and averaged team bests of 15 @.@ 6 ppg , 8 @.@ 0 rpg , 1 @.@ 56 bpg , while shooting 60 @.@ 7 percent from the field . At the Olympics itself , the team lost three games on its way to a bronze medal . The record represented more losses in a single year than in the 68 previous years combined . It was also the first time since NBA professionals became eligible that the U.S. men 's basketball team returned home without gold medals at the Olympics . After the tournament , Duncan commented , " I am about 95 percent sure my FIBA career is over . I 'll try not to share my experiences with anyone . " In total , Duncan was a member of five USA Basketball teams and played in 40 games . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Standing at 6 feet 11 inches tall ( 2 @.@ 11 m ) and weighing 250 pounds ( 113 kg ) , Duncan was a power forward who could also play center . With a double @-@ double career average in points and rebounds , he was considered one of the most consistent players in the NBA throughout his career . Regarded as one of the league 's best interior defenders , Duncan also ranked consistently as one of the top scorers , rebounders and shot @-@ blockers in the league . At the end of his final season in 2015 – 16 , he was ranked first in regular season point @-@ rebound double @-@ doubles among active players , while he led the charts in post @-@ season point @-@ rebound double @-@ doubles ( 158 as of 2013 – 14 ) . His main weakness for much of his career was his free throw shooting , with a career average of less than 70 % . 
 Apart from his impressive statistics , Duncan has gained a reputation as a good clutch player , as evidenced by his three NBA Finals MVP awards and his playoff career averages being higher than his regular season statistics . Eleven @-@ time NBA champion Bill Russell further compliments Duncan on his passing ability , and rates him as one of the most efficient players of his generation , a view shared by 19 @-@ time NBA All @-@ Star Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar . Because of his versatility and success , basketball experts have spoken of Duncan as one of the greatest power forwards in NBA history , while coach Popovich and teammates Parker and Ginóbili have also credited much of San Antonio 's success to him . Duncan 's detractors , however , label him as " boring " because of his simple but effective style of play ( thus earning him the nickname " The Big Fundamental " ) . Following his first championship ring in 1999 , Sports Illustrated described him as a " quiet , boring MVP " , a characterization which persists today . 
 Duncan himself commented on his " boring " image , stating : " If you show excitement , then you also may show disappointment or frustration . If your opponent picks up on this frustration , you are at a disadvantage . " Sports journalist Kevin Kernan commented on his ability to relax and stay focused , stating that having a degree in psychology , Duncan often not only <unk> , but out @-@ <unk> his opponents . Duncan has also stated that he especially likes his bank shot , saying : " It is just easy for me . It just feels good . " Additionally , Duncan 's close and longstanding relationship with Spurs coach Gregg Popovich has been described as " the greatest love story in sports " . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 In his basketball career , Duncan collected a number of individual and team honors , including being a two @-@ time MVP ( 2002 , 2003 ) , five @-@ time NBA champion ( 1999 , 2003 , 2005 , 2007 , 2014 ) and three @-@ time NBA Finals MVP ( 1999 , 2003 , 2005 ) . As a college player , he was honored by the House of Representatives , named the ACC Male Athlete of the Year , won the John R. Wooden Award and Adolph Rupp Trophy , and was selected as the Naismith College Player of the Year in addition to player of the year honors from the United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) , National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) and Sporting News ( all 1997 ) . In 2002 , Duncan was named to the ACC 50th Anniversary men 's basketball team honoring the 50 greatest players in ACC history . In his debut year in the NBA ( 1998 ) , he was voted Rookie of the Year and elected into the All @-@ Rookie Team . He has been named to 15 NBA All @-@ Star Teams ( 1997 – 98 ; 1999 – 2000 to 2010 – 11 ; 2012 – 13 and 2014 – 15 ) , 15 All @-@ NBA Teams ( 1997 – 98 to 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2014 – 15 ; ten First Team nominations ) , and 15 All @-@ Defensive Teams ( 1997 – 98 to 2009 – 10 ; 2012 – 13 , 2014 – 15 ; eight First Team nominations ) . With these impressive performances , Duncan is one of only four players to receive All @-@ NBA First Team honors in each of his first eight seasons ( 1998 – 2005 ) , along with Hall of Famers Bob Pettit ( ten seasons ) , Larry Bird ( nine seasons ) , and Oscar Robertson ( nine seasons ) , and is the only player in NBA history to receive All @-@ NBA and All @-@ Defensive honors in his first 13 seasons ( 1997 – 98 to 2009 – 10 ) . 
 Duncan was also named by the Association for Professional Basketball Research as one of " 100 Greatest Professional Basketball Players of The 20th Century " , the youngest player on that list . In the 2001 – 02 season , he won the IBM Player Award and The Sporting News ( TSN ) MVP Award , becoming the third player to ever win the NBA MVP , IBM Player and TSN Player Awards in the same season . On February 18 , 2006 , he was named one of the Next 10 Greatest Players on the tenth anniversary of the release of the NBA 's 50th Anniversary All @-@ Time Team by the TNT broadcasting crew . In 2009 , Duncan was ranked 8th by Slam Magazine in their list of the Top 50 NBA players of All Time , while Sports Illustrated named him its NBA Player of the Decade . 
 = = Off the court = = 
 Tim Duncan has two older sisters , Cheryl and Tricia . Like their younger brother , they were talented athletes : Cheryl was a champion swimmer before she became a nurse , and Tricia swam for the U.S. Virgin Islands at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul . 
 In college , Duncan co @-@ authored a chapter in the social psychology book Aversive Interpersonal Behaviors . 
 Duncan married Amy Sherrill in July 2001 and the couple had their first child , daughter Sydney , in the summer of 2005 . They had a second child , son <unk> , during the summer of 2007 . It was reported that the Duncans were divorcing in May 2013 , but the divorce was not finalized until November 23 , 2013 . 
 The Tim Duncan Foundation was established to serve the areas of health awareness / research , education , and youth sports / recreation in San Antonio , Winston @-@ Salem , and the United States Virgin Islands . The foundation 's major events have included the Tim Duncan Bowling for Dollar $ Charity Bowl @-@ A @-@ Thon and the Slam Duncan Charity Golf Classic . Between 2001 and 2002 , the foundation raised more than $ 350 @,@ 000 for breast and prostate cancer research . In those two years , Duncan was named by Sporting News as one of the " Good Guys " in sports . The Spurs captain also supports the Children 's Bereavement Center , the Children 's Center of San Antonio and the Cancer Therapy and Research Center . 
 Duncan cites his late mother Ione as his main inspiration . Among other things , she taught him and his sisters the nursery rhyme " Good , Better , Best . Never let it rest / Until your Good is Better , and your Better is your Best , " which he adopted as his personal motto . On and off the court , he believes that the three most important values are dedication , teamwork and camaraderie . The Spurs captain has also stated that he chose # 21 for his jersey because that was his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's college number , since he was Duncan 's main basketball inspiration , and cites Hall @-@ of @-@ Fame Los Angeles Lakers point guard Magic Johnson as his childhood idol . 
 For his mixture of success and low @-@ key personality , Duncan was honored with the Virgin Islands Medal of Honor , the highest award bestowed by the Virgin Islands territorial government , and has been celebrated in several " Tim Duncan Day " ceremonies . In 2000 , Legislature of the Virgin Islands President <unk> Richards of St. Croix said : " He is a quiet giant . His laid @-@ back attitude is the embodiment of the people of St. Croix , doing things without fanfare and hoopla . " 
 Regarding his own personality , Duncan compares himself to Will Hunting of the movie Good Will Hunting , which centers on the genial and antagonistic character of Will Hunting , portrayed by Matt Damon . He stated : " I 'm just a taller , slightly less hyperactive version of the Damon character in the movie . I really enjoyed how he probed people and found out their weaknesses just by asking questions and stating outlandish remarks . " He also admitted shunning the limelight because " [ fame ] is not me . " Off the court , he has stated that his best friend is former Spurs colleague Antonio Daniels , who describes Duncan as a cheerful , funny person off the hardwood . 
 Duncan loves Renaissance fairs and the fantasy role playing game Dungeons & Dragons . An avid video game player , he acknowledges a certain joy of playing " himself " on basketball video games . Duncan states if he had the chance , he would challenge NBA legends Wilt Chamberlain and Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar to a one @-@ on @-@ one game . 
 The satirical fake newspaper The Onion has featured many articles poking fun at Duncan 's straight @-@ laced , studious image , such as : " Citing Battle of Agincourt , Tim Duncan Urges Lakers Not To Get Too Discouraged By Game 1 Loss " , and " Tim Duncan Around If Any Spurs Have Questions About <unk> " . 
 = Norman , Oklahoma = 
 Norman / <unk> / is a city in the U.S. state of Oklahoma 20 miles ( 30 km ) south of downtown Oklahoma City in its metropolitan area . The population was 110 @,@ 925 at the 2010 census . Norman 's estimated population of 118 @,@ 040 in 2014 makes it the third @-@ largest city in Oklahoma , and the city serves as the county seat of Cleveland County . 
 Norman was settled during the Land Run of 1889 , which opened the former Unassigned Lands of Indian Territory to American pioneer settlement . The city was named in honor of Abner Norman , the area 's initial land surveyor , and was formally incorporated on May 13 , 1891 . Economically the city has prominent higher education and related research industries , as it is the home to the University of Oklahoma , the largest university in the state , with approximately 30 @,@ 000 students enrolled . The university is well known for its sporting events by teams under the banner of the nickname " Sooners , " with over 80 @,@ 000 people routinely attending football games . The university is home to several museums , including the Fred Jones Jr . Museum of Art , which contains the largest collection of French Impressionist art ever given to an American university , as well as the Oklahoma Museum of Natural History . 
 The National Weather Center , located in Norman , houses a unique collection of university , state , federal , and private sector organizations that work together to improve the understanding of events related to the Earth 's atmosphere . Norman lies within Tornado Alley , a geographic region where tornadic activity is particularly frequent and intense . The Oklahoma City metropolitan area , including Norman , is the most tornado @-@ prone area in the world . The Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) , a branch of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) is located at the NWC . SPC forecasts severe storm and tornado outbreaks nationwide . Additionally , research is conducted at the co @-@ located National Severe Storms Laboratory ( <unk> ) , which includes field research and operates various experimental weather radars . 
 In 2008 CNN 's Money Magazine ranked Norman as the sixth best small city within the United States in which to live . 
 = = History = = 
 The Oklahoma region became part of the United States with the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 . Prior to the American Civil War the United States government began relocating the Five Civilized Tribes – the five Native American tribes that the United States officially recognized via treaty – to Oklahoma . Treaties of 1832 and 1833 assigned the area known today as Norman to the Creek Nation . 
 Following the Civil War , the Creeks were accused of aiding the Confederacy and as a result they ceded the region back to the United States in 1866 . In the early 1870s , the federal government undertook a survey of these unassigned lands . Abner Ernest Norman , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old surveyor from Kentucky , was hired to oversee part of this project . Norman 's work crew set up camp near what is today the corner of Classen and Lindsey streets ; it was there that the men , perhaps jokingly , carved a sign on an elm tree that read " Norman 's Camp , " in honor of their young boss . In 1887 , the Atchison , Topeka and Santa Fe Railway began service to the area , which was later opened to settlement as part of the Land Run of 1889 ; early settlers decided to keep the name " Norman " . 
 On April 22 , 1889 , the Land Run saw the founding of Norman , with at least 150 residents spending the night in makeshift campsites ; by the next morning a downtown was already being constructed . Almost immediately two prominent Norman businessmen , former Purcell railroad freight agent Delbert Larsh and railroad station chief cashier Thomas Waggoner , began lobbying for the territorial government to locate its first university in Norman . The two were interested in growing the city and had reasoned that , rather than try to influence legislatures to locate the heavily contested territory capital in Norman , it made sense to attempt to secure the state 's first university instead ( a move that would be far less controversial ) . On December 19 , 1890 , Larsh and Waggoner were successful with the passage of Council Bill 114 , establishing the University of Oklahoma in Norman approximately 18 years before Oklahoma statehood . 
 The City of Norman was formally incorporated on May 13 , 1891 . The city has continued to grow throughout the decades . By 1902 the downtown district contained two banks , two hotels , a flour mill , and other businesses ; by 1913 there were over 3 @,@ 700 residents living in Norman when the Oklahoma Railway Company decided to extend its interurban streetcar running from Oklahoma City to Moore into Norman , spurring additional population growth . The rail lines eventually transitioned to freight during the 1940s as the United States Numbered Highway system developed . The city population reached 11 @,@ 429 in 1940 . 
 In 1941 , the University of Oklahoma and Norman city officials established Max Westheimer Field , a university airstrip , and then leased it to the U.S. Navy as a Naval Flight Training Center in 1942 . The training center was used for training combat pilots during World War II . A second training center , known as Naval Air Technical Training Center , and a naval hospital were later established to the south . In the years following World War II the airstrip was transferred back to the university 's control . Today the airstrip is called the University of Oklahoma Westheimer Airport . Following the war the remaining military presence and post @-@ war veterans who came to Norman to get an education again grew the city 's population , which was 27 @,@ 006 by 1950 . The Navy again utilized the bases in a lesser capacity from 1952 to 1959 in support of the Korean War effort . 
 With the completion of Interstate 35 in June 1959 , Norman found its role as a bedroom community to Oklahoma City increasing rapidly ; in 1960 Norman 's population was 33 @,@ 412 but by the end of the decade had grown to 52 @,@ 117 . Throughout the 1960s Norman 's land mass increased by 174 square miles ( 450 km2 ) by annexing surrounding areas . The city 's growth trends have continued early in the 21st century , with the population reaching 95 @,@ 694 in 2000 and 110 @,@ 925 in 2010 . 
 = = Law and government = = 
 A council @-@ manager government has been in place in Norman since the adoption of its city charter on June 28 , 1919 . A councilor from each of the city 's eight council wards is elected to office every two years , each serving a term of two years . Councilors are elected from their own respective wards based on a plurality voting system ; a councilor from each ward serves on the Norman City Council . A mayor is elected by the entire voting population of Norman and serves as an at @-@ large councilor ; the mayor serves for a term of three years . As a whole , the council acts as the legislative body of city government ; it aims to pass laws , approve the city budget , and manage efficiency in the government . The City Council appoints a professional City Manager who is responsible for the day @-@ to @-@ day administrative activities of the city . The City of Norman has approximately 650 employees working in eleven departments and 31 boards and commissions that help oversee and implement the policies and services of the city . The City Council meets bi @-@ weekly in City Hall located at 201 W. Gray Street in downtown Norman ; various boards and commissions meet in accordance with their own schedules . The present mayor of Norman is Lynne Miller ( elected in 2016 ) , and the city manager is Steve Lewis ( appointed in 2007 ) . In accordance with the charter of the city of Norman , all city elected positions are nonpartisan . 
 Municipal and state laws are enforced by the Norman Police Department . In 2010 , Norman 's crime index was 33 % less than the national average . There were two murders , 47 rapes , 36 robberies , 53 assaults , and 811 burglaries in 2010 . 
 The city serves as the county seat of Cleveland County . 
 = = = Twin towns – Sister cities = = = 
 In accordance with Sister Cities International , an organization that began under President Dwight Eisenhower in 1956 , Norman has been given four international sister cities in an attempt to foster cross @-@ cultural understanding : 
 Arezzo , Italy 
 Clermont @-@ Ferrand , France 
 Colima , Col. , Mexico 
 Seika , Japan 
 = = Geography = = 
 The U.S. Census Bureau reported Norman 's geographical coordinates as 35 @.@ <unk> ° N 97 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ( 35 ° 14 ' 26 " N 97 ° 20 ' 43 " W ) . This appears to be the geographical center of the city limits , which include all of Lake Thunderbird . Virtually all of Norman 's development is well to the west of this point . 
 In the Geographic Names Information System of the United States Geological Survey , the city 's geographical coordinates are shown as 35 @.@ <unk> ° N 97 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 35 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ( 35 ° 13 ' 21 " N 97 ° 26 ' 22 " W ) . This is a location in downtown Norman . 
 As of 2010 , the city has a total area of 189 @.@ 42 square miles ( 490 @.@ 6 km2 ) , of which 178 @.@ 77 square miles ( 463 @.@ 0 km2 ) is land and 10 @.@ 65 square miles ( 27 @.@ 6 km2 ) is water . 
 The center of this large incorporated area is 20 miles ( 30 km ) from the center of Oklahoma City and , separated primarily by Moore , is in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area . 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Norman and the surrounding areas are mostly flat with an elevation near 1 @,@ 171 feet ( 357 m ) . The terrain in the western section of Norman is prairie , while the eastern section , including the area surrounding Lake Thunderbird , consists of some 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 24 km2 ) of lakes and Cross Timbers forest . The lowest point within city limits is approximately 970 feet ( 296 m ) above sea level ( located at <unk> , <unk> ) . The highest point is approximately 1 @,@ 245 feet ( 379 m ) above sea level ( located at <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Norman falls within a temperate , humid subtropical climate region that is identified as " Cfa " class on the Köppen climate classification . On average Norman receives about 38 inches ( 970 mm ) of precipitation per year ; May and June are the wettest months . Temperatures average 61 ° F ( 16 ° C ) for the year . Average daytime highs range from 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) in January to nearly 93 ° F ( 34 ° C ) in August ; average lows range from 28 ° F ( − 2 ° C ) in January to 71 ° F ( 22 ° C ) in July and August . Summers can be extremely hot , as was evident in the historically @-@ hot summer of 1980 , and again in 2011 , when temperatures climbed above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) over most days from mid @-@ June through early September ( see http : / / <unk> / climate / <unk> ? <unk> = <unk> , look up June , July and August 2011 data ) . Consistent winds , averaging near 10 mph ( 16 km / h ) and usually from the south to southeast , help to temper hotter weather during the summer and intensify cold periods during the winter . 
 Norman averages a growing season of 209 days , but plants that can withstand short periods of colder temperatures may have an additional three to six weeks . Winter months tend to be cloudier than summer months , with the percentage of possible sunshine ranging from an average of about 55 % in winter to nearly 80 % in summer . 
 Norman lies within Tornado Alley , the region of the United States where tornadic activity is most frequent . The city has a tornado season lasting from March through June with over 80 % of all reported tornadoes occurring during these months . The Oklahoma City metropolitan area , including Norman , is the most tornado @-@ prone area in the United States . As recently as May 10 , 2010 , a tornado outbreak occurred in southeastern Norman that resulted in the loss of multiple homes and businesses . Again on Friday April 13 , 2012 Norman was struck by a weak tornado . On Wednesday May 6 , 2015 , the northwestern part of Norman was hit by a weak tornado . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 110 @,@ 925 people , 44 @,@ 661 households , and 24 @,@ 913 families residing within the city . By population , Norman was the third @-@ largest city in Oklahoma and the 225th @-@ largest city in the United States . The population density was 616 people per square mile ( 208 @.@ 7 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 84 @.@ 7 % White , 4 @.@ 3 % African American , 4 @.@ 7 % Native American , 3 @.@ 8 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 1 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 5 @.@ 5 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6 @.@ 4 % of the population . 
 Of the 44 @,@ 661 households , 25 @.@ 0 % had children under the age of 18 , 41 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 10 @.@ 1 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 44 @.@ 2 % were non @-@ families . Individuals living alone made up 30 @.@ 7 % of all households ; 7 @.@ 3 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 33 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 94 . 
 The age distribution was 5 @.@ 8 % under the age of 5 , 5 @.@ 7 % from 5 to 9 , 5 @.@ 2 % from 10 to 14 , 8 @.@ 9 % from 15 to 19 , 16 @.@ 0 % from 20 to 24 , 9 @.@ 0 % from 25 to 29 , 6 @.@ 6 % from 30 to 34 , 5 @.@ 6 % from 35 to 39 , 5 @.@ 3 % from 40 to 44 , 5 @.@ 9 % from 45 to 49 , 5 @.@ 9 % from 50 to 54 , 5 @.@ 4 % from 55 to 59 , 4 @.@ 6 % from 60 to 64 , 3 @.@ 2 % from 65 to 69 , 2 @.@ 3 % from 70 to 74 , 1 @.@ 8 % from 75 to 79 , 1 @.@ 4 % from 80 to 84 , and 1 @.@ 3 % over 85 years of age . The median age was 29 @.@ 6 years . Males made up 49 @.@ 7 % of the population while females made up 50 @.@ 3 % . 
 The median household income in the city was $ 44 @,@ 396 , and the median income for a family was $ 62 @,@ 826 . Males had a median income of $ 41 @,@ 859 versus $ 35 @,@ 777 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 24 @,@ 586 . About 11 @.@ 8 % of families and 19 @.@ 2 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 18 @.@ 9 % of those under age 18 and 8 @.@ 9 % of those age 65 or over . 
 Although religious information is not collected by the U.S. census , according to a 2000 survey by Dale E. Jones of the Association of Statisticians of American Religious Bodies , 50 @.@ 2 % of the population in Norman is affiliated with a religious institution . Of those 43 @.@ 6 % were Southern Baptist , 15 @.@ 0 % Catholic Church , 13 @.@ 0 % United Methodist , 3 @.@ 3 % Assembly of God , 2 @.@ 8 % Churches of Christ , 2 @.@ 1 % Latter @-@ day Saint ( Mormon ) , 2 @.@ 1 % Christian Churches and Churches of Christ , 1 @.@ 9 % Disciples of Christ , 1 @.@ 7 % Presbyterian Church , and 14 @.@ 6 % other Christian denominations or religions . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The University of Oklahoma employs over 10 @,@ 700 personnel across three campuses , making it a significant driver of Norman 's economy . The campus is a center for scientific and technological research , having contributed over $ 277 million to such programs in 2009 . 
 Norman is also home of the National Weather Center , a cooperative research effort between the University of Oklahoma and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that houses a number of <unk> and climate @-@ related organizations ; the city is also the proposed location of a future National Weather Museum . As a result of this on @-@ going academic and public weather research , several private meteorological businesses are present in the city , including <unk> Americas , Inc . , Vieux and Associates , Inc . , Weather Decision Technologies , <unk> , Inc . , and Computational Geosciences , Inc . 
 In addition to weather Norman is a center for other scientific ventures – public and private . The Oklahoma Geological Survey , which conducts geological research , and the Oklahoma Renewable Energy Council , which is a public @-@ private alliance that fosters renewable energy technology with the aim of establishing more viable applications , make the city their home . SouthWest <unk> is a producer of single @-@ walled carbon nanotubes . Bergey <unk> is a supplier of small wind turbines . 
 Other major employers in the city include Norman Regional Health System , Norman Public Schools , Johnson Controls , Griffin Memorial Hospital , Hitachi , <unk> Pharma Technologies , <unk> Engineering , <unk> Technology , <unk> , Office Max National Sales Center , <unk> , the United States Postal Service National Center for Employee Development , Sysco Corporation , and AT & T. 
 University North Park , a lifestyle center with planned development on over 12 million square feet ( 1 @.@ 1 km2 ) of land , is on 24th Ave NW along the I @-@ 35 corridor between Robinson Street and Tecumseh Road . Begun in 2006 , the project will feature 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of parks , offices , and high @-@ end retail once completed . 
 In 2008 , CNN 's Money Magazine ranked Norman as the sixth best small city within the United States to live in , the highest ranking of any city in Oklahoma . 
 = = = Fair trade = = = 
 In 2010 , Norman became the 17th city in the United States to adopt a council resolution giving it status as a Fair Trade Town . The resolution states that the city of Norman supports the purchasing of goods from the local community ; when goods cannot be purchased locally the city will support buying from producers abroad who meet Fair Trade standards . These standards include supporting quality of life in developing countries and planning for environmental sustainability . 
 = = Neighborhoods = = 
 Norman has a wide variety of neighborhoods . Downtown Norman is an area of approximately 2 square miles ( 5 km2 ) surrounded by University Blvd . , Symmes St. , Porter Ave . , and Daws St. ; primary streets include Main St. and Gray Ave . The area consists of restaurants , art galleries , and other businesses ; it is home to some of the oldest buildings in Oklahoma . 
 Hall Park is an area northeast of downtown Norman that was originally an independent township ; in 2005 it was annexed into Norman , becoming one of its neighborhoods . The area is home to many middle @-@ class suburban homes and is historically important in that it was advertised as the United States ' first " all @-@ electric town . " President Ronald Reagan , then an executive with General Electric , attended Hall Park 's grand opening ceremonies in 1962 where he was named the town 's honorary first mayor . 
 The University of Oklahoma and the area surrounding it are home to many historically significant neighborhoods . The university itself has a unique Gothic @-@ inspired architecture known as " Cherokee Gothic , " so named by architect Frank Lloyd Wright . Churches and houses in the surrounding neighborhoods can be described as neo @-@ Gothic or Queen Anne in style . Norman has two city @-@ designated historic preservation districts in the area : the Miller Historic District , bounded by Symmes St. , Classen Ave . , and Miller Ave . ; and the Chautauqua Historic District , bounded by Symmes St. , Brooks St. , Chautauqua Ave . , and Lahoma Ave . Both of these residential neighborhoods contain houses designed from a mixture of architectural styles dating from 1903 to 1935 , with the majority of the Miller neighborhood being of the Bungalow or American Craftsman style homes . Any external changes or repairs to homes in these areas must be approved by the Norman Historic Preservation Commission . 
 The area immediately north of the university is known as Campus Corner and contains a mixture of businesses , bars , and restaurants . The neighborhoods to the east of the campus are home to many students , both in residential housing and high @-@ rise condos / apartments . 
 Norman enjoys many tree @-@ lined landscapes , participating in the <unk> Norman and Tree City USA programs . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Higher education = = = 
 = = = = Colleges and universities = = = = 
 The University of Oklahoma is the largest university in the state of Oklahoma , with approximately 30 @,@ 000 students enrolled . The university was founded in 1890 , prior to Oklahoma statehood . The university includes both Norman and Oklahoma City campuses with the main campus located in Norman . In 2007 , The Princeton Review named the University of Oklahoma one of its " Best Value " colleges . The school is ranked first per capita among public universities in enrollment of National Merit Scholars and has seen 28 Rhodes Scholars graduate since the program 's inception in 1902 . PC Magazine and the Princeton Review rated it one of the " 20 Most Wired Colleges " in both 2006 and 2008 , while the Carnegie Foundation classifies it as a research university with " high research activity . " 
 The school is well known for its athletic programs , having won many awards including seven NCAA Division I National Football Championships . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The city of Norman is served by the Moore Norman Technology Center . The school was established in 1972 and has been awarded the Oklahoma Association of Technology Center 's Gold Star School Award on multiple occasions . The Franklin Road Campus consists of six buildings totaling 323 @,@ 500 square feet ( 30 @,@ 100 m2 ) of classroom , meeting , and office space . The school has a full @-@ time staff of 207 . 
 = = = Primary and secondary schools = = = 
 = = = = Public schools = = = = 
 Public school districts in Oklahoma are independent of other local governments . Several districts overlap the municipal boundaries of the City of Norman . 
 Norman Public Schools is the largest district serving Norman ; there are 15 elementary schools , four middle schools , and two high schools in the district . More than 17 @,@ 000 students are enrolled in the district , making it one of the largest in the state . 
 Noble Public Schools is a school district that serves southeastern portions of Norman , the adjoining cities of Noble and <unk> , and parts of Cleveland County . It consists of two elementary schools , an intermediate school , a middle school , and a high school . 
 Little Axe Public Schools serves the eastern area of Norman . It consists of an elementary , junior , and high school . 
 Other school districts with territory within the city are the Robin Hill Public School District and the Moore Public School District . 
 = = = = Private schools = = = = 
 Several private schools also serve the area : 
 All Saints Catholic School – pre @-@ kindergarten through 8th grade 
 Blue Eagle Christian Academy – kindergarten through 10th grade 
 Community Christian School – kindergarten through 12th grade 
 Norman Christian Academy – pre @-@ kindergarten through 7th grade 
 Robinson Street Academy – kindergarten through 12th grade 
 Rose Rock School – pre @-@ kindergarten through kindergarten 
 Terra Verde Discovery School – kindergarten through 2nd grade 
 Trinity Lutheran School – pre @-@ kindergarten through 6th grade 
 Veritas Classical Christian Academy – pre @-@ kindergarten through 12th grade 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 Norman is served by the Norman Public Library , which is part of the Pioneer Library System spanning many of the southern suburbs of Oklahoma City . The library has an inter @-@ library agreement with the Metropolitan Library System of Oklahoma City . This allows patrons of the Norman Public Library to check out books from any library in the Pioneer Library System or in the Metropolitan Library System . Books can be reserved and shipped to a local library free of charge . In addition to books , the library maintains a collection of periodicals , videos , audio books , and research materials . 
 The Bizzell Memorial Library at the University of Oklahoma is the largest library in the state of Oklahoma , containing more than five million volumes . In addition to books , the library maintains over 17 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m ) in length of manuscripts and archives , 1 @.@ 6 million photographs , and more than 1 @.@ 5 million maps . The library also houses more than 50 books printed before the year 1500 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Museums and theater = = = 
 Norman enjoys many cultural attractions that are funded by the university . The Fred Jones Jr . Museum of Art made national and international news in 2000 when it was given the <unk> Collection , the largest collection of French Impressionist art ever given to an American university . The collection includes works by Mary Cassatt , Claude Monet , Vincent van Gogh , Paul Gauguin , Pierre @-@ Auguste Renoir , and Camille Pissarro . 
 The Sam Noble Oklahoma Museum of Natural History is a museum containing over 50 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 000 m2 ) of exhibits ranging from archaeology , paleontology , ethnology , herpetology , ornithology , and Native American studies . Its exhibits are intended to immerse visitors in the state 's long history . The museum features many complete collections of dinosaur fossils and is also noted for its Paleozoic collection , considered to be one of the largest and most important in existence . 
 The Moore @-@ Lindsay House is a Queen Anne @-@ style home built prior to 1900 by prominent Norman home builder William Moore ; it was purchased by the city of Norman in 1973 and today serves as the city and Cleveland County 's historical museum . Located at 508 N. Peters , the Moore @-@ Lindsay House 's architecture is representative of Norman during the Victorian era . The Cleveland County Historical Society maintains a collection of over 5 @,@ 000 rare books , documents , and other artifacts in its archives located inside the house . 
 Catlett Music Center at the University of Oklahoma features many orchestral and jazz performances and the <unk> Family College of Fine Arts ' Schools of Dance , Drama , and Musical Theatre offer many student programs throughout the year . 
 The city is also home to many privately funded galleries and performance sites . 
 = = = Parks and recreation = = = 
 Norman 's Parks and Recreation Department facilitates 55 neighborhood and community parks , three recreation centers , a golf course and driving range , three disc golf courses , a complete swim complex with <unk> , a wading pool , 32 tennis courts , and three special services centers ( that offer cultural arts and senior citizen activities ) . Griffin Community Park Sports Complex includes 16 soccer fields , 14 baseball / softball fields , and four football fields . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 The Norman Transcript is the most widely circulated Norman @-@ based newspaper in the city . It is a daily newspaper covering events in Cleveland and McClain counties . It is the oldest continuous business in Norman and was founded shortly after the Land Run of April 1889 on July 13 , 1889 . 
 The Oklahoma Daily is a student @-@ run newspaper at the University of Oklahoma . It was first published in 1897 , several years after the university 's founding . The paper has received numerous awards for journalism excellence including the Associated Collegiate Press ' Pacemaker Award . 
 <unk> is a full @-@ service public radio station licensed to the University of Oklahoma . The station serves Norman and the greater Oklahoma City metropolitan area with a news / talk / jazz format , using programs from National Public Radio , Public Radio International , and others . 
 Norman TV is a government @-@ access television station airing on Cox Communications cable television channel 20 . It broadcasts programming provided by the City of Norman , including video from city council meetings . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The University of Oklahoma sponsors many collegiate sporting events in Norman . The school is well known for its football program , having won seven NCAA Division I National Football Championships . In addition , it has the best winning percentage of any Division I FBS team since the introduction of the AP Poll in 1936 and has played in four BCS National Championship Games since 1998 . 
 During football season , the Oklahoma Sooners football program contributes significantly to Norman 's economy . During game day weekends , Norman sees an influx out of town traffic from all over the country with over 80 @,@ 000 people routinely attending football games . Norman 's local businesses , especially areas around campus and Campus Corner , benefit greatly from the game day traffic alone . The program ranks in the top 10 of ESPN 's top college football money @-@ makers with home games generating revenues at approximately $ 59 million and game day operating expenses at about $ 6 @.@ 1 million . 
 In 1951 and 1994 its baseball team won the NCAA national championship , and the women 's softball team won the national championship in 2000 . The gymnastics teams have won four national championships since 2001 . 
 Other university men 's sports include : basketball , cross country , golf , gymnastics , football , Ultimate Frisbee , tennis , track and field , and wrestling . Women 's sports include : basketball , cross country , golf , gymnastics , football , Ultimate Frisbee , rowing , soccer , softball , tennis , track and field , and volleyball . 
 The Golf Coaches Association of America ( <unk> ) , a non @-@ profit professional association of men 's collegiate golf coaches , is located in Norman . 
 = = = Community events = = = 
 Norman hosts many free festivals and community events that occur throughout the year . 
 The Norman Medieval Fair is a celebration of medieval @-@ themed games , art , and culture , with highlights of jousting , human <unk> combats & other combat shows , and several musical & dance acts . The event is typically held during the last weekend of March or first weekend of April in Reaves Park , near the University . It has been held annually in Norman since 1976 and was originally a forum for the English Department at the University of Oklahoma . It is the largest weekend event held in the state of Oklahoma , with over 325 @,@ 000 people in attendance in 2006 and growing yearly . Events Media Network has named Medieval Fair one of the top 100 events in the United States . 
 Norman Music Festival is an annual weekend music festival held in April in downtown Norman . Established in 2008 , the event had over 26 @,@ 000 people in attendance during the 2009 festival . Originally a one @-@ day event , the festival has quickly grown so large that it is now an all @-@ weekend concert series . The festival highlights both local musicians and internationally acclaimed artists and features many forms and styles of music . 
 <unk> is a music festival hosted annually at Andrews Park . On the last Sunday in September , the music festival is held to help raise awareness about human rights . The event was established in 1986 by the University of Oklahoma chapter of Amnesty International . 
 The Chocolate Festival , the only fundraiser of the year for the city 's Firehouse Arts Center , was ranked # 3 for food festivals across America by the Food Network . This festival offers various chocolate tasting sessions , chocolate art competitions and exhibits , chocolate dessert competitions and more . It has been an annual tradition since 1983 . 
 Jazz in June is a music festival held the last full weekend in June at various venues across Norman . The festival features both jazz and blues musical performances as well as jazz educational clinics taught by professional musicians appearing in the festival and post @-@ concert jam sessions at local venues which bring headliners and local artists together . Jazz in June , one of the major cultural events in the state as well as the City of Norman , attracts a combined concert audience of 50 @,@ 000 drawn from throughout the state , region and nation . Another 100 @,@ 000 or more enjoy these same performances through post @-@ festival broadcasts on <unk> Public Radio as well as other public radio stations throughout the state , region and nation . 
 May Fair is an arts festival held every year during the first weekend in May at Andrews Park . It features top area performers , fine art , crafts , and food . 
 Summer Breeze Concert Series is a series of concerts held from Spring to Fall at various park venues across Norman . The series is sponsored by the Performing Arts Studio . 
 Midsummer Nights ' Fair is a nighttime arts festival held during two evenings in June . The fair features art , music , and food and is held outside the Firehouse Art Center located in Lions Park . 
 The Norman Mardi Gras parade is a celebration of Mardi Gras occurring on the Saturday closest to Fat Tuesday . The parade is held in downtown Norman and features themed costumes and floats . 
 The Main Street Christmas Holiday Parade is a celebration of Christmas and the holiday season held every December in downtown Norman . The parade features holiday @-@ themed costumes and floats . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Health systems = = = 
 Norman Regional Health System is a multi @-@ campus system that provides medical services in Norman and throughout south central Oklahoma . Its Porter Avenue campus , located north of downtown Norman , is a 337 @-@ bed general hospital providing a wide range of services including acute care . In October 2009 , the Norman Regional <unk> campus opened in west Norman . It provides a 152 @-@ bed state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art facility specializing in cardiology , cardiovascular services , as well as women 's and children 's services . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 = = = = Airports = = = = 
 Scheduled air transport , major commercial air transportation is available at Will Rogers World Airport in Oklahoma City , located approximately 20 miles ( 30 km ) northwest of Norman . The airport serves more than 3 @.@ 78 million passengers per year . 
 Norman is served locally by Max Westheimer Airport , a general aviation airport run by the University of Oklahoma . The airport is one of only two airports in the Oklahoma City metropolitan area designated as a reliever airport to Will Rogers World Airport . Max Westheimer Airport is capable of handling aircraft up through and including executive class jet aircraft . 
 = = = = Buses = = = = 
 The Cleveland Area Rapid Transit , operated by the University of Oklahoma , provides bus service throughout the 191 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 490 km2 ) Norman area . CART also provides service to the Social Security Administration offices in Moore , OK , as well as to Oklahoma City 's Metro Transit hub in downtown Oklahoma City . Metro Transit maintains a fleet of buses and trolleys serving the greater Oklahoma City area , including Will Rogers World Airport . 
 In 2008 , CART became the 39th public transportation system in the United States to be featured on Google Transit , a website that allows transportation users to electronically plan their travel routes . In 2010 , CART buses were modified to include a GPS tracking system that allows riders to see the location of buses and their predicted arrival times via the CART and Google websites . CART buses transport more than 1 @.@ 3 million travelers annually . 
 = = = = Rail = = = = 
 Inter @-@ city passenger train service is available via Amtrak at Norman Depot . Amtrak 's Heartland Flyer provides daily round trip service to downtown Oklahoma City and Fort Worth , Texas . 
 Although Norman currently has no light rail or commuter rail service , there is growing interest in incorporating such services into the city 's future transportation plans as part of the Oklahoma City metro area 's regional transit system . 
 = = = = Roads and highways = = = = 
 The predominant form of transportation in Norman is roads and highways with 80 @.@ 0 % of all residents driving alone to work , 9 @.@ 0 % carpooling , and just 1 @.@ 3 % taking public transportation . As of 2007 , Interstate 35 alone was handling over 99 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . Other major highways include State Highway 9 , a portion of which serves 28 @,@ 000 vehicles per day , and U.S. Highway 77 , which serves more than 25 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . The busiest roads in Norman are Berry Road ( 29 @,@ 700 vehicles per day ) , 12th Avenue Northwest ( 28 @,@ 000 vehicles per day ) , and Alameda Street ( 26 @,@ 400 vehicles per day ) . 
 Norman is served by two major federal highways : 
 Interstate 35 
 U.S. Highway 77 
 Norman is served by two major Oklahoma state highways : 
 State Highway 9 
 State Highway <unk> 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Electric utility companies servicing Norman include Oklahoma Gas & Electric , which is headquartered in Oklahoma City , and Oklahoma Electric Cooperative ( a utility cooperative ) . Natural gas is provided by Oklahoma Natural Gas . The city 's Utility Department offers water , wastewater , and recycling services to parts of the city as well as solid waste pickup citywide . 
 Telephone networks , broadband internet , and cable television service are available from several companies including Cox Communications and AT & T. 
 = = = = Drinking water controversy = = = = 
 In a study published in 2007 , the National Institutes of Health deemed hexavalent chromium VI ( chromium @-@ 6 ) to be a likely carcinogen in lab animals when consumed in large quantities in drinking water . Prior to the NIH study , a World Health Organization study found that chromium @-@ 6 was a likely cause of lung cancer when inhaled by humans . In 2010 , test results released from a California non @-@ profit group known as the Environmental Working Group showed that Norman 's tap water has a chromium @-@ 6 concentration level of 12 @.@ 90 parts per billion ( ppb ) , which was the highest level detected among 35 U.S. cities sampled in the study . The group is studying chromium @-@ 6 levels in water supplies in an attempt to prove a causal link between the element 's ingestion and cancer in humans , and as a result improve the country 's water standards . 
 The United States Environmental Protection Agency does not currently require testing for or set limits on chromium @-@ 6 levels in American cities ' water supplies ( but it does require total chromium @-@ 3 and chromium @-@ 6 levels not exceed 100 ppb ) . The EPA has recently completed studies of the element on lab animals and was expected to make a determination on chromium @-@ 6 maximum allowed levels in June 2012 ; however , the current status of assessment milestones and completion dates is now listed as " TBD " on the EPA website . The official total chromium @-@ 3 / chromium @-@ 6 level present in Norman 's drinking water has ranged from 20 to 80 ppb . It has been proposed that the source of the chromium @-@ 6 is the Garber @-@ Wellington Aquifer , which is known to have elevated levels of heavy metals . 
 The issue of chromium @-@ 6 levels gained national attention with the 2000 film release of Erin Brockovich , which detailed a California woman 's legal fight against Pacific Gas and Electric Company for allegedly contaminating her hometown with excessive levels of the element . 
 In the past the Norman water supply has also been criticized for the presence of excessive levels of arsenic . The city is attempting to combat this problem by building new wells and removing older ones . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = International Phonetic Alphabet = 
 The International Phonetic Alphabet ( unofficially — though commonly — abbreviated IPA ) is an alphabetic system of phonetic notation based primarily on the Latin alphabet . It was devised by the International Phonetic Association as a standardized representation of the sounds of oral language . The IPA is used by lexicographers , foreign language students and teachers , linguists , speech @-@ language pathologists , singers , actors , constructed language creators , and translators . 
 The IPA is designed to represent only those qualities of speech that are part of oral language : phones , phonemes , intonation , and the separation of words and syllables . To represent additional qualities of speech , such as tooth gnashing , lisping , and sounds made with a cleft palate , an extended set of symbols called the Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet may be used . 
 IPA symbols are composed of one or more elements of two basic types , letters and diacritics . For example , the sound of the English letter 〈 t 〉 may be transcribed in IPA with a single letter , [ t ] , or with a letter plus diacritics , [ t ̺ ʰ ] , depending on how precise one wishes to be . Often , slashes are used to signal broad or phonemic transcription ; thus , / t / is less specific than , and could refer to , either [ t ̺ ʰ ] or [ t ] , depending on the context and language . 
 Occasionally letters or diacritics are added , removed , or modified by the International Phonetic Association . As of the most recent change in 2005 , there are 107 letters , 52 diacritics , and four prosodic marks in the IPA . These are shown in the current IPA chart , posted below in this article and at the website of the IPA . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1886 , a group of French and British language teachers , led by the French linguist Paul Passy , formed what would come to be known from 1897 onwards as the International Phonetic Association ( in French , l ’ Association <unk> internationale ) . Their original alphabet was based on a spelling reform for English known as the <unk> alphabet , but in order to make it usable for other languages , the values of the symbols were allowed to vary from language to language . For example , the sound [ ʃ ] ( the sh in shoe ) was originally represented with the letter 〈 c 〉 in English , but with the <unk> 〈 ch 〉 in French . However , in 1888 , the alphabet was revised so as to be uniform across languages , thus providing the base for all future revisions . The idea of making the IPA was first suggested by Otto Jespersen in a letter to Paul Passy . It was developed by A.J. Ellis , Henry Sweet , Daniel Jones , and Passy . 
 Since its creation , the IPA has undergone a number of revisions . After major revisions and expansions in 1900 and 1932 , the IPA remained unchanged until the IPA Kiel Convention in 1989 . A minor revision took place in 1993 with the addition of four letters for mid @-@ central vowels and the removal of letters for voiceless implosives . The alphabet was last revised in May 2005 with the addition of a letter for a labiodental flap . Apart from the addition and removal of symbols , changes to the IPA have consisted largely in renaming symbols and categories and in modifying typefaces . 
 Extensions to the IPA for speech pathology were created in 1990 and officially adopted by the International Clinical <unk> and Linguistics Association in 1994 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The general principle of the IPA is to provide one letter for each distinctive sound ( speech segment ) , although this practice is not followed if the sound itself is complex . This means that : 
 It does not normally use combinations of letters to represent single sounds , the way English does with 〈 sh 〉 , 〈 th 〉 and 〈 ng 〉 , or single letters to represent multiple sounds the way 〈 x 〉 represents / ks / or / <unk> / in English . 
 There are no letters that have context @-@ dependent sound values , as do " hard " and " soft " 〈 c 〉 or 〈 g 〉 in several European languages . 
 Finally , the IPA does not usually have separate letters for two sounds if no known language makes a distinction between them , a property known as " <unk> " . 
 Among the symbols of the IPA , 107 letters represent consonants and vowels , 31 diacritics are used to modify these , and 19 additional signs indicate suprasegmental qualities such as length , tone , stress , and intonation . These are organized into a chart ; the chart displayed here is the official chart as posted at the website of the IPA . 
 = = = Letter forms = = = 
 The letters chosen for the IPA are meant to harmonize with the Latin alphabet . For this reason , most letters are either Latin or Greek , or modifications thereof . Some letters are neither : for example , the letter denoting the glottal stop , 〈 ʔ 〉 , has the form of a <unk> question mark , and derives originally from an apostrophe . A few letters , such as that of the voiced pharyngeal fricative , 〈 ʕ 〉 , were inspired by other writing systems ( in this case , the Arabic letter <unk> ‘ ain ) . 
 Despite its preference for harmonizing with the Latin script , the International Phonetic Association has occasionally admitted other letters . For example , before 1989 , the IPA letters for click consonants were 〈 ʘ 〉 , 〈 ʇ 〉 , 〈 <unk> 〉 , and 〈 <unk> 〉 , all of which were derived either from existing IPA letters , or from Latin and Greek letters . However , except for 〈 ʘ 〉 , none of these letters were widely used among <unk> or <unk> , and as a result they were replaced by the more widespread symbols 〈 ʘ 〉 , 〈 <unk> 〉 , 〈 <unk> 〉 , 〈 ǂ 〉 , and 〈 <unk> 〉 at the IPA Kiel Convention in 1989 . 
 Although the IPA diacritics are fully <unk> , there is little <unk> in the letter forms . A retroflex articulation is consistently indicated with a right @-@ swinging tail , as in 〈 ɖ ʂ <unk> 〉 , and implosion by a top hook , 〈 ɓ ɗ <unk> 〉 , but other pseudo @-@ <unk> elements are due to haphazard derivation and coincidence . For example , all nasal consonants but uvular 〈 ɴ 〉 are based on the form 〈 n 〉 : 〈 m <unk> n ɲ <unk> ŋ 〉 . However , the similarity between 〈 m 〉 and 〈 n 〉 is a historical accident , 〈 ɲ 〉 and 〈 ŋ 〉 are derived from ligatures of <unk> and ng , and 〈 <unk> 〉 is an ad hoc imitation of 〈 ŋ 〉 . 
 Some of the new letters were ordinary Latin letters turned 180 degrees , such as ɐ ɔ ə ɟ <unk> ɯ <unk> ʇ ʌ ʍ ʎ ( turned a c e f h m r t v w y ) . This was easily done in the era of mechanical typesetting , and had the advantage of not requiring the casting of special type for IPA symbols . 
 = = = = Capital letters ( wildcards , <unk> and voice quality symbols ) = = = = 
 Full capital letters are not used as IPA symbols . They are , however , often used for <unk> and for natural classes of phonemes ( that is , as wildcards ) . Such usage is not part of the IPA or even standardized , and may be ambiguous between authors , but it is commonly used in conjunction with the IPA . ( The extIPA chart , for example , uses one or two wildcards in its illustrations . ) Capital letters are also basic to the Voice Quality Symbols sometimes used in conjunction with the IPA . 
 As wildcards , C for { consonant } and V for { vowel } are ubiquitous . Other common capital @-@ letter symbols are T for { tone } , N for { nasal } , F for { fricative } ( also S for { voiceless fricative } and Z for { voiced fricative } ) , G for { glide } or for { semivowel / liquid } , P for { plosive } ( stop ) ( also T for { voiceless stop } and D for { voiced stop } ) , S for { sibilant } , L for { liquid } ( or R for { rhotic } and L for { lateral } ) , # or <unk> for { click } , A for { low vowel } , U for { rounded vowel } and B , D , J or <unk> , K , Q , Φ , H for { labial } , { alveolar } , { post @-@ alveolar } or { palatal } , { velar } , { uvular } , { pharyngeal } and { glottal } , respectively , and X for anything . For example , the possible syllable shapes of Mandarin can be abstracted as ranging from V ( atonic vowel ) to <unk> ( consonant @-@ vowel @-@ nasal syllable with tone ) . The letters can be modified with IPA diacritics , for e.g. <unk> for { ejective } , <unk> for { implosive } , N ͡ C or <unk> for { prenasalized consonant } , <unk> for { nasal vowel } , S <unk> for { voiced sibilant } , N ̥ for { voiceless nasal } , P ͡ F or PF for { affricate } and D ̪ for { dental consonant } . In speech pathology , they may represent indeterminate sounds , and <unk> when weakly articulated : <unk> a weak indeterminate alveolar , <unk> a weak indeterminate velar , etc . 
 Typical examples of <unk> use of capital letters are I for the Turkish harmonic vowel set { i y ɯ u } and D for the conflated flapped middle consonant of American English writer and rider . 
 V , F and C have different meanings as Voice Quality Symbols , where they stand for ' voice ' , ' falsetto ' and ' creak ' . They may take diacritics that indicate what kind of voice quality an utterance has , and may be used to extract a suprasegmental feature that occurs on all susceptible segments in a stretch of IPA . For instance , the transcription of Scots Gaelic [ <unk> ̪ <unk> ̟ <unk> ] ' cat ' and [ <unk> ͜ <unk> ] ' cats ' ( Islay dialect ) can be made more economical by extracting the suprasegmental labialization of the words : <unk> [ <unk> ̪ s ̟ ] and <unk> [ <unk> ͜ ʃ ] . 
 = = = Typography and iconicity = = = 
 The International Phonetic Alphabet is based on the Latin alphabet , using as few non @-@ Latin forms as possible . The Association created the IPA so that the sound values of most consonant letters taken from the Latin alphabet would correspond to " international usage " . Hence , the letters 〈 b 〉 , 〈 d 〉 , 〈 f 〉 , ( hard ) 〈 ɡ 〉 , ( non @-@ silent ) 〈 h 〉 , ( unaspirated ) 〈 k 〉 , 〈 l 〉 , 〈 m 〉 , 〈 n 〉 , ( unaspirated ) 〈 p 〉 , ( voiceless ) 〈 s 〉 , ( unaspirated ) 〈 t 〉 , 〈 v 〉 , 〈 w 〉 , and 〈 z 〉 have the values used in English ; and the vowel letters from the Latin alphabet ( 〈 a 〉 , 〈 e 〉 , 〈 i 〉 , 〈 o 〉 , 〈 u 〉 ) correspond to the ( long ) sound values of Latin : [ i ] is like the vowel in machine , [ u ] is as in rule , etc . Other letters may differ from English , but are used with these values in other European languages , such as 〈 j 〉 , 〈 r 〉 , and 〈 y 〉 . 
 This inventory was extended by using small @-@ capital and cursive forms , diacritics and rotation . There are also several symbols derived or taken from the Greek alphabet , though the sound values may differ . For example , 〈 ʋ 〉 is a vowel in Greek , but an only indirectly related consonant in the IPA . For most of these , subtly different glyph shapes have been devised for the IPA , namely 〈 ɑ 〉 , 〈 <unk> 〉 , 〈 ɣ 〉 , 〈 ɛ 〉 , 〈 ɸ 〉 , 〈 <unk> 〉 , and 〈 ʋ 〉 , which are encoded in Unicode separately from their parent Greek letters , though one of them – 〈 θ 〉 – is not , while Greek 〈 β 〉 and 〈 χ 〉 are generally used for 〈 <unk> 〉 and 〈 <unk> 〉 . 
 The sound values of modified Latin letters can often be derived from those of the original letters . For example , letters with a rightward @-@ facing hook at the bottom represent retroflex consonants ; and small capital letters usually represent uvular consonants . Apart from the fact that certain kinds of modification to the shape of a letter generally correspond to certain kinds of modification to the sound represented , there is no way to deduce the sound represented by a symbol from its shape ( as for example in Visible Speech ) nor even any systematic relation between signs and the sounds they represent ( as in Hangul ) . 
 Beyond the letters themselves , there are a variety of secondary symbols which aid in transcription . <unk> marks can be combined with IPA letters to transcribe modified phonetic values or secondary articulations . There are also special symbols for suprasegmental features such as stress and tone that are often employed . 
 = = = Types of transcription = = = 
 There are two principal types of brackets used to set off IPA transcriptions : 
 [ square brackets ] are used with phonetic notations , possibly including details of the pronunciation that may not be used for distinguishing words in the language being transcribed , but which the author nonetheless wishes to document . 
 / slashes / are used for phonemic notations , which note only features that are distinctive in the language , without any extraneous detail . 
 For example , while the / p / sounds of pin and spin are pronounced slightly differently in English ( and this difference would be meaningful in some languages ) , the difference is not meaningful in English . Thus phonemically the words are / <unk> / and / spɪn / , with the same / p / phoneme . However , to capture the difference between them ( the allophones of / p / ) , they can be transcribed phonetically as [ pʰɪn ] and [ spɪn ] . 
 Other conventions are less commonly seen : 
 Double slashes / / ... / / , pipes | ... | , double pipes | | ... | | , or braces { ... } may be used around a word to denote its underlying structure , more abstract even than that of phonemes . See <unk> for examples . 
 Double square brackets ⟦ ... ⟧ are used for extra @-@ precise transcription . They indicate that a letter has its cardinal IPA value . For example , ⟦ a ⟧ is a low front vowel , rather than the perhaps slightly different value ( such as low central ) that " [ a ] " may be used to transcribe in a particular language . Thus two vowels transcribed for easy legibility as 〈 [ e ] 〉 and 〈 [ ɛ ] 〉 may be clarified as actually being ⟦ e ̝ ⟧ and ⟦ e ⟧ ; 〈 [ ð ] 〉 may be more precisely ⟦ ð ̠ ̞ ˠ ⟧ . 
 Angle brackets are used to clarify that the letters represent the original orthography of the language , or sometimes an exact transliteration of a non @-@ Latin script , not the IPA ; or , within the IPA , that the letters themselves are indicated , not the sound values that they carry . For example , 〈 pin 〉 and 〈 spin 〉 would be seen for those words , which do not contain the ee sound [ i ] of the IPA letter 〈 i 〉 . Italics are perhaps more commonly used for this purpose when full words are being written ( as pin , spin above ) , but may not be sufficiently clear for individual letters and digraphs . 
 { <unk> } are used for prosodic notation . See Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet for examples in that system . 
 ( <unk> ) are used for indistinguishable utterances . They are also seen for silent articulation ( mouthing ) , where the expected phonetic transcription is derived from lip @-@ reading , and with periods to indicate silent pauses , for example ( ... ) . 
 Double parentheses indicate obscured or unintelligible sound , as in ( ( 2 <unk> . ) ) or <unk> 2 <unk> . <unk> , two audible but unidentifiable syllables . 
 = = = Handwritten forms = = = 
 IPA letters have handwritten forms designed for use in manuscripts and when taking field notes ; they are occasionally seen in publications when the printer did not have fonts that supported IPA , and the IPA was therefore filled in by hand . 
 = = Modifying the IPA chart = = 
 The International Phonetic Alphabet is occasionally modified by the Association . After each modification , the Association provides an updated simplified presentation of the alphabet in the form of a chart . ( See History of the IPA . ) Not all aspects of the alphabet can be accommodated in a chart of the size published by the IPA . The alveolo @-@ palatal and <unk> consonants , for example , are not included in the consonant chart for reasons of space rather than of theory ( two additional columns would be required , one between the retroflex and palatal columns and the other between the pharyngeal and glottal columns ) , and the lateral flap would require an additional row for that single consonant , so they are listed instead under the catchall block of " other symbols " . The indefinitely large number of tone letters would make a full accounting impractical even on a larger page , and only a few examples are shown . 
 The procedure for modifying the alphabet or the chart is to propose the change in the Journal of the IPA . ( See , for example , August 2008 on a low central vowel and August 2011 on central approximants . ) Reactions to the proposal may be published in the same or subsequent issues of the Journal ( as in August 2009 on the low central vowel ) . A formal proposal is then put to the Council of the IPA – which is elected by the membership – for further discussion and a formal vote . 
 Only changes to the alphabet or chart that have been approved by the Council can be considered part of the official IPA . Nonetheless , many users of the alphabet , including the leadership of the Association itself , make personal changes or additions in their own practice , either for convenience in working on a particular language ( see " Illustrations of the IPA " for individual languages in the Handbook , which for example may use 〈 c 〉 for [ tʃ ] ) , or because they object to some aspect of the official version . 
 = = Usage = = 
 Although the IPA offers over 160 symbols for transcribing speech , only a relatively small subset of these will be used to transcribe any one language . It is possible to transcribe speech with various levels of precision . A precise phonetic transcription , in which sounds are described in a great deal of detail , is known as a narrow transcription . A coarser transcription which ignores some of this detail is called a broad transcription . Both are relative terms , and both are generally enclosed in square brackets . Broad phonetic transcriptions may restrict themselves to easily heard details , or only to details that are relevant to the discussion at hand , and may differ little if at all from phonemic transcriptions , but they make no theoretical claim that all the distinctions transcribed are necessarily meaningful in the language . 
 For example , the English word little may be transcribed broadly using the IPA as [ <unk> ] , and this broad ( imprecise ) transcription is a more or less accurate description of many pronunciations . A narrower transcription may focus on individual or dialectical details : [ <unk> ] in General American , [ <unk> ] in Cockney , or [ <unk> ] in Southern US English . 
 It is customary to use simpler letters , without many diacritics , in phonemic transcriptions . The choice of IPA letters may reflect the theoretical claims of the author , or merely be a convenience for typesetting . For instance , in English , either the vowel of pick or the vowel of peak may be transcribed as / i / ( for the pairs / <unk> , <unk> / or / <unk> , <unk> / ) , and neither is identical to the vowel of the French word pique which is also generally transcribed / i / . That is , letters between slashes do not have absolute values , something true of broader phonetic approximations as well . A narrow transcription may , however , be used to distinguish them : [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] . 
 = = = Linguists = = = 
 Although IPA is popular for transcription by linguists , American linguists often alternate use of the IPA with Americanist phonetic notation or use the IPA together with some nonstandard symbols , for reasons including reducing the error rate on reading handwritten transcriptions or avoiding perceived awkwardness of IPA in some situations . The exact practice may vary somewhat between languages and even individual researchers , so authors are generally encouraged to include a chart or other explanation of their choices . 
 = = = Language study = = = 
 Some language study programs use the IPA to teach pronunciation . For example , in Russia ( and earlier in the Soviet Union ) and mainland China , textbooks for children and adults for studying English and French consistently use the IPA . English teachers and textbooks in Taiwan tend to use the Kenyon and Knott system , a slight typographical variant of the IPA . 
 = = = Dictionaries = = = 
 = = = = English = = = = 
 Many British dictionaries , including the Oxford English Dictionary and some learner 's dictionaries such as the Oxford Advanced Learner 's Dictionary and the Cambridge Advanced Learner 's Dictionary , now use the International Phonetic Alphabet to represent the pronunciation of words . However , most American ( and some British ) volumes use one of a variety of pronunciation respelling systems , intended to be more comfortable for readers of English . For example , the respelling systems in many American dictionaries ( such as Merriam @-@ Webster ) use 〈 y 〉 for IPA [ j ] and 〈 sh 〉 for IPA [ ʃ ] , reflecting common representations of those sounds in written English , using only letters of the English Roman alphabet and variations of them . ( In IPA , [ y ] represents the sound of the French 〈 u 〉 ( as in tu ) , and [ sh ] represents the pair of sounds in grasshopper . ) 
 = = = = Other languages = = = = 
 The IPA is also not universal among dictionaries in languages other than English . Monolingual dictionaries of languages with generally phonemic orthographies generally do not bother with indicating the pronunciation of most words , and tend to use respelling systems for words with unexpected pronunciations . Dictionaries produced in Israel use the IPA rarely and sometimes use the Hebrew script for transcription of foreign words . Monolingual Hebrew dictionaries use pronunciation respelling for words with unusual spelling ; for example , the Even @-@ <unk> Dictionary <unk> <unk> as <unk> because this word uses <unk> <unk> . Bilingual dictionaries that translate from foreign languages into Russian usually employ the IPA , but monolingual Russian dictionaries occasionally use pronunciation respelling for foreign words ; for example , <unk> 's dictionary adds <unk> ́ in brackets for the French word <unk> ( pince @-@ nez ) to indicate that the е does not <unk> the н . 
 The IPA is more common in bilingual dictionaries , but there are exceptions here too . Mass @-@ market bilingual Czech dictionaries , for instance , tend to use the IPA only for sounds not found in the Czech language . 
 = = = Standard orthographies and case variants = = = 
 IPA letters have been incorporated into the alphabets of various languages , notably via the Africa Alphabet in many sub @-@ Saharan languages such as Hausa , Fula , Akan , <unk> languages , <unk> languages , <unk> , etc . This has created the need for capital variants . For example , <unk> of northern Togo has <unk> ɖ , <unk> ŋ , <unk> ɣ , <unk> ɔ , <unk> ɛ , <unk> ʋ . These , and others , are supported by Unicode , but appear in Latin ranges other than the IPA extensions . 
 In the IPA itself , however , only lower @-@ case letters are used . The 1949 edition of the IPA handbook indicated that an asterisk 〈 * 〉 may be prefixed to indicate that a word is a proper name , but this convention has not been included in recent editions . 
 = = = Classical singing = = = 
 IPA has widespread use among classical singers for preparation , especially among English @-@ speaking singers who are expected to sing in a variety of foreign languages . Opera librettos are authoritatively transcribed in IPA , such as Nico Castel 's volumes and Timothy Cheek 's book Singing in Czech . Opera singers ' ability to read IPA was used by the site Visual Thesaurus , which employed several opera singers " to make recordings for the 150 @,@ 000 words and phrases in VT 's lexical database . ... for their vocal stamina , attention to the details of enunciation , and most of all , knowledge of IPA . " 
 = = Letters = = 
 The International Phonetic Association organizes the letters of the IPA into three categories : pulmonic consonants , non @-@ pulmonic consonants , and vowels . 
 Pulmonic consonant letters are arranged singly or in pairs of voiceless ( tenuis ) and voiced sounds , with these then grouped in columns from front ( labial ) sounds on the left to back ( glottal ) sounds on the right . In official publications by the IPA , two columns are omitted to save space , with the letters listed among ' other symbols ' , and with the remaining consonants arranged in rows from full closure ( occlusives : stops and nasals ) , to brief closure ( <unk> : trills and taps ) , to partial closure ( fricatives ) and minimal closure ( approximants ) , again with a row left out to save space . In the table below , a slightly different arrangement is made : All pulmonic consonants are included in the pulmonic @-@ consonant table , and the <unk> and laterals are separated out so that the rows reflect the common lenition pathway of stop → fricative → approximant , as well as the fact that several letters pull double duty as both fricative and approximant ; affricates may be created by joining stops and fricatives from adjacent cells . Shaded cells are judged to be implausible . 
 Vowel letters are also grouped in pairs — of unrounded and rounded vowel sounds — with these pairs also arranged from front on the left to back on the right , and from maximal closure at top to minimal closure at bottom . No vowel letters are omitted from the chart , though in the past some of the mid central vowels were listed among the ' other symbols ' . 
 Each character is assigned a number , to prevent confusion between similar letters ( such as ɵ and θ , <unk> and ɣ , or ʃ and <unk> ) in such situations as the printing of manuscripts . The categories of sounds are assigned different ranges of numbers . 
 = = = Consonants = = = 
 = = = = Pulmonic consonants = = = = 
 A pulmonic consonant is a consonant made by obstructing the glottis ( the space between the vocal cords ) or oral cavity ( the mouth ) and either simultaneously or subsequently letting out air from the lungs . Pulmonic consonants make up the majority of consonants in the IPA , as well as in human language . All consonants in the English language fall into this category . 
 The pulmonic consonant table , which includes most consonants , is arranged in rows that designate manner of articulation , meaning how the consonant is produced , and columns that designate place of articulation , meaning where in the vocal tract the consonant is produced . The main chart includes only consonants with a single place of articulation . 
 Notes 
 In rows where some letters appear in pairs ( the obstruents ) , the letter to the right represents a voiced consonant ( except breathy @-@ voiced [ ɦ ] ) . However , [ ʔ ] cannot be voiced , and the voicing of [ <unk> ] is ambiguous . In the other rows ( the sonorants ) , the single letter represents a voiced consonant . 
 Although there is a single letter for the coronal places of articulation for all consonants but fricatives , when dealing with a particular language , the letters may be treated as specifically dental , alveolar , or post @-@ alveolar , as appropriate for that language , without diacritics . 
 Shaded areas indicate articulations judged to be impossible . 
 The letters [ ʁ , ʕ , <unk> ] represent either voiced fricatives or approximants . 
 In many languages , such as English , [ h ] and [ ɦ ] are not actually glottal , fricatives , or approximants . Rather , they are bare phonation . 
 It is primarily the shape of the tongue rather than its position that distinguishes the fricatives [ ʃ ʒ ] , [ ɕ <unk> ] , and [ ʂ <unk> ] . 
 Some listed phones are not known to exist as phonemes in any language . 
 = = = = Affricates and co @-@ articulated consonants = = = = 
 Co @-@ articulated consonants are sounds that involve two simultaneous places of articulation ( are pronounced using two parts of the vocal tract ) . In English , the [ w ] in " went " is a <unk> consonant , being pronounced by rounding the lips and raising the back of the tongue . Similar sounds are [ ʍ ] and [ <unk> ] . 
 Affricates and doubly articulated stops are represented by two letters joined by a tie bar , either above or below the letters . The six most common affricates are optionally represented by ligatures , though this is no longer official IPA usage , because a great number of ligatures would be required to represent all affricates this way . Alternatively , a superscript notation for a consonant release is sometimes used to transcribe affricates , for example <unk> for t ͡ s , paralleling <unk> ~ k ͡ x . The letters for the palatal plosives c and ɟ , are often used as a convenience for t ͡ ʃ and d ͡ ʒ or similar affricates , even in official IPA publications , so they must be interpreted with care . 
 Note 
 On browsers that use <unk> Unicode MS to display IPA characters , the following incorrectly formed sequences may look better due to a bug in that font : ts ͡ , tʃ ͡ , <unk> ͡ , dz ͡ , dʒ ͡ , <unk> ͡ , tɬ ͡ , <unk> ͡ , <unk> ͡ , <unk> ͡ . 
 [ ɧ ] is described as a " simultaneous [ ʃ ] and [ x ] " . However , this analysis is disputed . ( See voiceless palatal @-@ velar fricative for discussion . ) 
 Multiple tie bars can be used : 〈 a ͡ b ͡ c 〉 or 〈 a ͜ b ͜ c 〉 . For instance , if a prenasalized stop is transcribed 〈 m ͡ b 〉 , and a doubly articulated stop 〈 ɡ ͡ b 〉 , then a prenasalized doubly articulated stop would be 〈 ŋ ͡ m ͡ ɡ ͡ b 〉 
 = = = = Non @-@ pulmonic consonants = = = = 
 Non @-@ pulmonic consonants are sounds whose airflow is not dependent on the lungs . These include clicks ( found in the Khoisan languages of Africa ) , implosives ( found in languages such as Sindhi , Saraiki , Swahili and Vietnamese ) , and ejectives ( found in many Amerindian and Caucasian languages ) . 
 Notes 
 Clicks have traditionally been described as double articulation of a forward ' release ' and a rear ' accompaniment ' , with the click letters representing only the release . Therefore , all clicks require two letters for proper notation : 〈 k ͡ ǂ , ɡ ͡ ǂ , ŋ ͡ ǂ , q ͡ ǂ , ɢ ͡ ǂ , ɴ ͡ ǂ 〉 etc . , or 〈 ǂ ͡ k , ǂ ͡ ɡ , ǂ ͡ ŋ , ǂ ͡ q , ǂ ͡ ɢ , ǂ ͡ ɴ 〉 . When the dorsal articulation is omitted , a [ k ] may usually be assumed . However , recent research disputes the concept of ' accompaniment ' and the idea that clicks are doubly articulated , with the rear occlusion instead simply being part of the airstream <unk> . In these approaches , the click letter represents both articulations , with the different letters representing different click ' types ' , there is no velar @-@ uvular distinction , and the accompanying letter represents the manner , phonation , or airstream contour of the click : 〈 ǂ , <unk> , <unk> 〉 etc . 
 Letters for the voiceless implosives 〈 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> 〉 are no longer supported by the IPA , though they remain in Unicode . Instead , the IPA typically uses the voiced equivalent with a voiceless diacritic : 〈 ɓ ̥ , <unk> ̥ 〉 , etc .. 
 Although not confirmed as contrastive in any language , and therefore not explicitly recognized by the IPA , a letter for the retroflex implosive , 〈 <unk> 〉 , has been assigned an IPA number . 
 The ejective diacritic often stands in for a superscript glottal stop in glottalized but pulmonic sonorants , such as [ mˀ ] , [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] , [ <unk> ] . These may also be transcribed as creaky [ m ̰ ] , [ l ̰ ] , [ w ̰ ] , [ a ̰ ] . 
 = = = Vowels = = = 
 The IPA defines a vowel as a sound which occurs at a syllable center . Below is a chart depicting the vowels of the IPA . The IPA maps the vowels according to the position of the tongue . 
 The vertical axis of the chart is mapped by vowel height . Vowels pronounced with the tongue lowered are at the bottom , and vowels pronounced with the tongue raised are at the top . For example , [ ɑ ] ( the first vowel in father ) is at the bottom because the tongue is lowered in this position . However , [ i ] ( the vowel in " meet " ) is at the top because the sound is said with the tongue raised to the roof of the mouth . 
 In a similar fashion , the horizontal axis of the chart is determined by vowel backness . Vowels with the tongue moved towards the front of the mouth ( such as [ ɛ ] , the vowel in " met " ) are to the left in the chart , while those in which it is moved to the back ( such as [ ʌ ] , the vowel in " but " ) are placed to the right in the chart . 
 In places where vowels are paired , the right represents a rounded vowel ( in which the lips are rounded ) while the left is its unrounded counterpart . 
 = = = = Diphthongs = = = = 
 Diphthongs are typically specified with a non @-@ syllabic diacritic , as in 〈 <unk> ̯ 〉 or 〈 u ̯ ɪ 〉 , or with a superscript for the on- or off @-@ glide , as in 〈 <unk> 〉 or 〈 <unk> 〉 . Sometimes a tie bar is used , especially if it is difficult to tell if the diphthong is characterized by an on @-@ glide , an off @-@ glide or is variable : 〈 u ͡ ɪ 〉 . 
 Notes 
 〈 a 〉 officially represents a front vowel , but there is little distinction between front and central open vowels , and 〈 a 〉 is frequently used for an open central vowel . However , if disambiguation is required , the retraction diacritic or the centralized diacritic may be added to indicate an open central vowel , as in 〈 a ̠ 〉 or 〈 ä 〉 . 
 = = Diacritics and prosodic notation = = 
 Diacritics are used for phonetic detail . They are added to IPA letters to indicate a modification or specification of that letter 's normal pronunciation . 
 By being made superscript , any IPA letter may function as a diacritic , conferring elements of its articulation to the base letter . ( See secondary articulation for a list of superscript IPA letters supported by Unicode . ) Those superscript letters listed below are specifically provided for by the IPA ; others include 〈 <unk> 〉 ( [ t ] with fricative release ) , 〈 <unk> 〉 ( [ s ] with affricate onset ) , 〈 <unk> 〉 ( prenasalized [ d ] ) , 〈 <unk> 〉 ( [ b ] with breathy voice ) , 〈 mˀ 〉 ( glottalized [ m ] ) , 〈 <unk> 〉 ( [ s ] with a flavor of [ ʃ ] ) , 〈 <unk> 〉 ( [ o ] with diphthongization ) , 〈 <unk> 〉 ( compressed [ ɯ ] ) . Superscript diacritics placed after a letter are ambiguous between simultaneous modification of the sound and phonetic detail at the end of the sound . For example , labialized 〈 kʷ 〉 may mean either simultaneous [ k ] and [ w ] or else [ k ] with a labialized release . Superscript diacritics placed before a letter , on the other hand , normally indicate a modification of the onset of the sound ( 〈 mˀ 〉 glottalized [ m ] , 〈 <unk> 〉 [ m ] with a glottal onset ) . 
 Notes 
 ^ a With aspirated voiced consonants , the aspiration is usually also voiced ( voiced aspirated – but see aspirated voiced ) . Many linguists prefer one of the diacritics dedicated to breathy voice over simple aspiration , such as 〈 b ̤ 〉 . Some linguists restrict this diacritic to sonorants , and transcribe obstruents as 〈 <unk> 〉 . 
 ^ b The overstruck <unk> is not recommended where it would be typographically unclear . It is also deprecated in Unicode , with <unk> letters preferred . ( See pharyngealization for available combinations . ) 
 <unk> ( diacritics normally placed below a letter ) may be moved above a letter to avoid conflict with a descender , as in voiceless 〈 ŋ ̊ 〉 . The raising and lowering diacritics have optional forms 〈 ˔ 〉 , 〈 <unk> 〉 that avoid descenders . 
 The state of the glottis can be finely transcribed with diacritics . A series of alveolar plosives ranging from an open to a closed glottis phonation are : 
 Additional diacritics are provided by the Extensions to the IPA for speech pathology . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 These symbols describe the features of a language above the level of individual consonants and vowels , such as prosody , tone , length , and stress , which often operate on syllables , words , or phrases : that is , elements such as the intensity , pitch , and gemination of the sounds of a language , as well as the rhythm and intonation of speech . Although most of these symbols indicate distinctions that are phonemic at the word level , symbols also exist for intonation on a level greater than that of the word . Various ligatures of tone letters are used in the IPA Handbook despite not being found on the simplified official IPA chart . 
 Finer distinctions of tone may be indicated by combining the tone diacritics and tone letters shown above , though not all IPA fonts support this . The four additional rising and falling tones supported by diacritics are high / mid rising ɔ <unk> , ɔ ˧ ˥ , low rising ɔ <unk> , ɔ ˩ ˧ , high falling ɔ <unk> , ɔ ˥ ˧ , and low / mid falling ɔ <unk> , ɔ ˧ ˩ . That is , tone diacritics only support contour tones across three levels ( high , mid , low ) , despite supporting five levels for register tones . For other contour tones , tone letters must be used : ɔ ˨ ˦ , ɔ ˥ ˦ , etc . For more complex ( peaking and dipping ) tones , though it is theoretically possible to combine the three tone diacritics in any permutation , in practice only generic peaking ɔ <unk> and dipping ɔ ᷉ combinations are used . For finer detail , tone letters are again required ( ɔ ˧ ˥ ˧ , ɔ ˩ ˨ ˩ , ɔ ˦ ˩ ˧ , ɔ ˨ ˩ ˦ , etc . ) The correspondence between tone diacritics and tone letters is therefore only approximate . 
 A work @-@ around for diacritics sometimes seen when a language has more than one rising or falling tone , and the author wishes to avoid the poorly legible diacritics ɔ <unk> , ɔ <unk> , ɔ <unk> , ɔ <unk> but does not wish to completely abandon the IPA , is to restrict generic rising ɔ ̌ and falling ɔ ̂ to the higher @-@ pitched of the rising and falling tones , say ɔ ˥ ˧ and ɔ ˧ ˥ , and to use the old ( retired ) IPA subscript diacritics ɔ <unk> and ɔ <unk> for the lower @-@ pitched rising and falling tones , say ɔ ˩ ˧ and ɔ ˧ ˩ . When a language has four or six level tones , the two mid tones are sometimes transcribed as high @-@ mid ɔ ̍ ( non @-@ standard ) and low @-@ mid ɔ ̄ . 
 A stress mark typically appears before the stressed syllable , and thus marks the syllable break as well as stress . Where the syllable onset is a geminate consonant , e.g. in Italian , the consonant is commonly split by the stress mark , which means that the length sign is not used for gemination . ( Thus 〈 <unk> 〉 not * 〈 <unk> 〉 , * 〈 <unk> 〉 , or * 〈 <unk> 〉 . ) However , occasionally the stress mark is placed immediately before the stressed vowel , after any syllable onset ( 〈 <unk> 〉 or 〈 <unk> 〉 ) . In such transcriptions , the stress mark does not function as a mark of the syllable boundary . 
 Tone letters generally appear after each syllable , for a language with syllable tone ( 〈 a ˧ <unk> ˥ ˩ 〉 ) , or after the phonological word , for a language with word tone ( 〈 <unk> ˧ ˥ ˩ 〉 ) . However , in older versions of the IPA , ad hoc tone marks were placed before the syllable , the same position as used to mark stress , and this convention is still sometimes seen ( 〈 ˧ a ˥ ˩ <unk> 〉 , 〈 ˧ ˥ ˩ <unk> 〉 ) . 
 = = = Comparative degree = = = 
 IPA diacritics may be doubled to indicate an extra degree of the feature indicated . This is a productive process , but apart from extra @-@ high and extra @-@ low tones 〈 ə <unk> , ə <unk> 〉 being marked by doubled high- and low @-@ tone diacritics , and the major prosodic break 〈 <unk> 〉 being marked as a double minor break 〈 | 〉 , it is not specifically regulated by the IPA . ( Note that transcription marks are similar : double slashes indicate extra ( morpho ) <unk> , double square brackets especially precise , and double parentheses especially unintelligible . ) 
 For example , the stress mark may be doubled to indicate an extra degree of stress such prosodic stress in English . An example in French , with a single stress mark for normal prosodic stress at the end of each prosodic unit ( marked as a minor prosodic break ) , and a double stress mark for contrastive / emphatic stress : [ <unk> ̃ <unk> | <unk> | | <unk> <unk> | | ] Entrez monsieur , <unk> madame . Similarly , a doubled secondary stress mark 〈 <unk> 〉 is commonly used for tertiary stress . 
 Length is commonly extended by repeating the length mark , as in English <unk> ! [ <unk> ] , or for " overlong " segments in Estonian : 
 <unk> / <unk> / ' blood [ <unk> ] ' , <unk> / <unk> / ' edge [ <unk> ] ' , <unk> / <unk> / ' roll [ imp . 2nd sg . ] ' 
 <unk> / <unk> / ' sheet ' , <unk> / <unk> / ' town [ gen. sg . ] ' , <unk> / <unk> / ' town [ <unk> sg . ] ' 
 ( Normally additional degrees of length are handled by the extra @-@ short or half @-@ long diacritics , but in the Estonian examples , the first two cases are analyzed as simply short and long . ) 
 Occasionally other diacritics are doubled : 
 <unk> in Badaga / be / " mouth " , / be ˞ / " bangle " , and / be ˞ ˞ / " crop " . 
 Aspiration , for example contrasting Korean mild aspiration [ kʰ ] with strong aspiration [ <unk> ] . 
 <unk> , as in <unk> <unk> / <unk> / vs / e <unk> / . 
 Weak vs strong ejectives , [ <unk> ] , [ k ” ] 
 Especially lowered , e.g. [ t ̞ ̞ ] for / t / as a weak fricative in some pronunciations of register . 
 Especially retracted ( at least on a vowel ) , e.g. [ ø ̠ ̠ ] , though , depending on the font , on a consonant this could be confused with alveolar or <unk> notation from the extIPA . 
 The transcription of strident and harsh voice as extra @-@ creaky / a <unk> / may be motivated by the similarities of these <unk> . 
 = = Obsolete and nonstandard symbols = = 
 The IPA once had parallel symbols from alternative proposals , but in most cases eventually settled on one for each sound . The rejected symbols are now considered obsolete . An example is the vowel letter 〈 <unk> 〉 , rejected in favor of 〈 ʊ 〉 . Letters for affricates and sounds with inherent secondary articulation have also been mostly rejected , with the idea that such features should be indicated with tie bars or diacritics : 〈 <unk> 〉 for [ <unk> ] is one . In addition , the rare voiceless implosives , 〈 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 〉 , have been dropped and are now usually written 〈 ɓ ̥ ɗ ̥ <unk> ̊ <unk> ̊ <unk> ̥ 〉 . A retired set of click letters , 〈 ʇ , <unk> , <unk> 〉 , is still sometimes seen , as the official pipe letters 〈 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> 〉 may cause problems with legibility , especially when used with brackets ( [ ] or / / ) , the letter 〈 l 〉 , or the prosodic marks 〈 | , <unk> 〉 ( for this reason , some publications which use the current IPA pipe letters disallow IPA brackets ) . 
 Individual non @-@ IPA letters may find their way into publications that otherwise use the standard IPA . This is especially common with : 
 Affricates , such as the Americanist barred lambda 〈 <unk> 〉 for [ t ͜ ɬ ] or 〈 č 〉 for [ t ͡ ʃ ] . Some authors find the tie bars displeasing but the lack of tie bars confusing ( i.e. 〈 č 〉 for / t ͡ ʃ / as distinct from / tʃ / ) , while others simply prefer to have one letter for each segmental phoneme in a language . 
 <unk> for tonal phonemes that have conventional numbers in a local tradition , such as the four tones of Chinese . This may be more convenient for comparison between languages and dialects than a phonetic transcription because tones often vary more than segmental phonemes do . 
 <unk> for tone levels , though the lack of standardization can cause confusion ( with e.g. " 1 " for high tone in some languages but for low tone in others ) . 
 Iconic extensions of standard IPA letters that can be readily understood , such as retroflex 〈 <unk> 〉 and 〈 <unk> 〉 . 
 In addition , there are typewriter substitutions for when IPA support is not available , such as capital 〈 I , E , U , O , A 〉 for [ ɪ , ɛ , ʊ , ɔ , ɑ ] . 
 = = IPA extensions = = 
 The " Extensions to the IPA " , often abbreviated as " extIPA " and sometimes called " Extended IPA " , are symbols whose original purpose was to accurately transcribe disordered speech . At the IPA Kiel Convention in 1989 , a group of linguists drew up the initial extensions , which were based on the previous work of the <unk> ( Phonetic Representation of <unk> Speech ) Group in the early 1980s . The extensions were first published in 1990 , then modified , and published again in 1994 in the Journal of the International Phonetic Association , when they were officially adopted by the <unk> . While the original purpose was to transcribe disordered speech , linguists have used the extensions to designate a number of unique sounds within standard communication , such as hushing , gnashing teeth , and smacking lips . The extensions have also been used to record certain peculiarities in an individual 's voice , such as nasalized voicing . 
 The Extensions to the IPA do not include symbols used for voice quality ( <unk> ) , such as whispering . 
 = = Segments without letters = = 
 The remaining blank cells on the IPA chart can be filled without too much difficulty if the need arises . Some ad hoc letters have appeared in the literature for the retroflex lateral flap , the voiceless lateral fricatives , the <unk> trill , and the labiodental plosives . ( See the grey letters in the PDF chart . ) Diacritics can supply much of the remainder . If a sound cannot be transcribed , an asterisk 〈 * 〉 may be used , either as a letter or as a diacritic ( as in 〈 k * 〉 sometimes seen for the Korean ' fortis ' velar ) . 
 = = = Consonants = = = 
 Representations of consonant sounds outside of the core set are created by adding diacritics to letters with similar sound values . The Spanish bilabial and dental approximants are commonly written as lowered fricatives , [ β ̞ ] and [ ð ̞ ] respectively . Similarly , voiced lateral fricatives would be written as raised lateral approximants , [ <unk> ˔ ʎ ̝ ʟ ̝ ] . A few languages such as Banda have a bilabial flap as the preferred allophone of what is elsewhere a labiodental flap . It has been suggested that this be written with the labiodental flap letter and the advanced diacritic , [ <unk> ̟ ] . 
 Similarly , a labiodental trill would be written [ <unk> ̪ ] ( bilabial trill and the dental sign ) , and labiodental stops [ p ̪ b ̪ ] rather than with the ad hoc letters sometimes found in the literature . Other taps can be written as extra @-@ short plosives or laterals , e.g. [ ɟ ̆ ɢ ̆ / ʀ ̆ ʟ ̆ ] , though in some cases the diacritic would need to be written below the letter . A retroflex trill can be written as a retracted [ r ̠ ] , just as retroflex fricatives sometimes are . The remaining consonants , the uvular laterals ( ʟ ̠ etc . ) and the palatal trill , while not strictly impossible , are very difficult to pronounce and are unlikely to occur even as allophones in the world 's languages . 
 = = = Vowels = = = 
 The vowels are similarly manageable by using diacritics for raising , lowering , fronting , backing , centering , and mid @-@ centering . For example , the unrounded equivalent of [ ʊ ] can be transcribed as mid @-@ centered [ ɯ ̽ ] , and the rounded equivalent of [ æ ] as raised [ <unk> ̝ ] or lowered [ <unk> ̞ ] . True mid vowels are lowered [ e ̞ ø ̞ <unk> ̞ ɵ ̞ <unk> ̞ o ̞ ] or raised [ ɛ ̝ <unk> ̝ <unk> ̝ <unk> ̝ ʌ ̝ ɔ ̝ ] , while centered [ ɪ ̈ ʊ ̈ ] and [ ä ] ( or , less commonly , [ ɑ ̈ ] ) are near @-@ close and open central vowels , respectively . The only known vowels that cannot be represented in this scheme are vowels with unexpected roundedness , which would require a dedicated diacritic , such as 〈 <unk> 〉 and 〈 <unk> 〉 ( or 〈 <unk> 〉 and 〈 <unk> 〉 ) . 
 = = Symbol names = = 
 An IPA symbol is often distinguished from the sound it is intended to represent , since there is not necessarily a one @-@ to @-@ one correspondence between letter and sound in broad transcription , making articulatory descriptions such as ' mid front rounded vowel ' or ' voiced velar stop ' unreliable . While the Handbook of the International Phonetic Association states that no official names exist for its symbols , it admits the presence of one or two common names for each . The symbols also have nonce names in the Unicode standard . In some cases , the Unicode names and the IPA names do not agree . For example , IPA calls ɛ " epsilon " , but Unicode calls it " small letter open E " . 
 The traditional names of the Latin and Greek letters are usually used for unmodified letters . Letters which are not directly derived from these alphabets , such as [ ʕ ] , may have a variety of names , sometimes based on the appearance of the symbol or on the sound that it represents . In Unicode , some of the letters of Greek origin have Latin forms for use in IPA ; the others use the letters from the Greek section . 
 For diacritics , there are two methods of naming . For traditional diacritics , the IPA notes the name in a well known language ; for example , é is acute , based on the name of the diacritic in English and French . Non @-@ traditional diacritics are often named after objects they resemble , so d ̪ is called bridge . 
 Pullum and <unk> list a variety of names in use for IPA symbols , both current and retired , in addition to names of many other non @-@ IPA phonetic symbols . Their collection is extensive enough that the Unicode Consortium used it in the development of Unicode . 
 = = Fonts = = 
 IPA font support is increasing , and is now included in several fonts such as the Times New Roman versions that come with various recent computer operating systems . Diacritics are not always properly rendered , however . IPA fonts that are freely available online include <unk> , several from the SIL ( such as Charis SIL , and Doulos SIL ) , DejaVu Sans , and <unk> <unk> , which are all freely available ; as well as commercial typefaces such as Brill , available from Brill Publishers , and <unk> Sans Unicode and <unk> Unicode MS , shipping with various Microsoft products . These all include several ranges of characters in addition to the IPA . Modern Web browsers generally do not need any configuration to display these symbols , provided that a font capable of doing so is available to the operating system . 
 = = ASCII and keyboard transliterations = = 
 Several systems have been developed that map the IPA symbols to ASCII characters . Notable systems include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and X @-@ <unk> . The usage of mapping systems in on @-@ line text has to some extent been adopted in the context input methods , allowing convenient keying of IPA characters that would be otherwise unavailable on standard keyboard layouts . 
 = Linda November = 
 Linda Ellen November ( born October 16 , 1944 ) is an American singer who has sung tens of thousands of commercial jingles . She was the voice of the singing cat in the Meow Mix commercials , sang the jingle " Galaxy Glue " in the 1981 film The Incredible Shrinking Woman , the " Coke and a Smile " jingle in the classic Mean Joe Greene Super Bowl commercial , and has won many Clio Awards for her work on television and radio . Her voice can also be heard on many pop songs , as she was a regular backup singer for artists such as Frankie Valli , Burt Bacharach , Engelbert Humperdinck , and Neil Diamond . In the 1970s , she was one of the main singers in the disco group Wing and a Prayer Fife and Drum Corps , which charted with the Top 40 hit " Baby Face " in 1976 . In the 1980s and 1990s she was a regular performer in Atlantic City at The Grand and Harrah 's , with her husband , composer and arranger Artie Schroeck . As of 2011 , she works as a piano accompanist in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1940s – 1960s ) = = = 
 November was born in Brooklyn , the older of two children to <unk> and Julius November . Her father was an attorney to clients such as boxer Floyd Patterson , and her younger brother Philip became an attorney as well . She started her career in music as a concert pianist , playing piano from the age of five . However , she lost interest in the piano as a teenager and turned to singing instead , helped by the fact that she learned she had perfect pitch . She attended Thomas Jefferson High School , then The High School of Music & Art , and then from the age of 15 began studying voice with Beverly Johnson at Juilliard . She developed a strong soprano voice , described by The Dallas Morning News as " high , strong , and <unk> pure " . 
 At the age of 16 , she got a lucky break because of a visit to a podiatrist . The doctor had an office at Broadway and 42nd Street , in what had been a fashionable Knickerbocker Hotel suite in the early 1900s , the New York residence of opera singer Enrico Caruso ( 1873 – 1921 ) . So the doctor would often entertain visitors who were there to see the Caruso memorabilia . While she herself was at the office , November met another patient who had contacts in the music industry , and she sang an impromptu audition . The patient was impressed , and put her in touch with one of his contacts , manager Gus Schirmer ( of the Schirmer Music publishing family ) , who was looking for " pretty sopranos " for his summer musicals . Schirmer introduced her to Broadway composer Richard Rodgers , who became her mentor , and through Schirmer , November also auditioned for other producers such as Lawrence <unk> . She obtained work as a performer in the 1963 summer musical season in Dallas , Texas , but despite many auditions , could never land a job in Broadway theatre ( according to November , this was because she never had the exact look that a particular show was looking for ) . Then Schirmer got her a job singing at an industrial musical for Ford Motor Company , where she met many other successful musicians , singers , and composers such as Ray Charles . He began incorporating her into sessions with the Ray Charles Singers , a group of performers with a rotating membership that would sing in close harmonies , often on productions with singer and television personality Perry Como , or as backup singers for other recordings . This launched November 's career as a studio singer , as she worked on a contract basis for many different productions . From 1962 to 1967 November would rotate in and out as part of the Ray Charles Singers , sometimes seen on Perry Como 's Kraft Music Hall variety program . She can also be heard as a backup singer on some Frank Sinatra recordings , such as the soprano voice in the background of the 1967 song , " The World We Knew " . 
 = = = Jingle singer ( 1960s – 1990s ) = = = 
 Over the course of her 32 years as a jingle singer , November sang approximately 22 @,@ 000 jingles which were played on the television and radio . In the 1970s , it was estimated that 75 % of the jingles that could be heard on the airways were sung by no more than 30 people , and November was known as the " Jingle Queen " . In several unusual jingles , she had to sing with different voices . She once sang as a person underwater , and for Chicken of the Sea , a brand of tuna , she sang like a chicken underwater . Her most notable commercial was in an ad campaign for Meow Mix , where she was the voice ( " Meow meow meow meow ... " ) of a singing cat . The idea came from Ron Travisano at the advertising agency of Della Femina Travisano and Partners , who had the account with Ralston Purina in 1976 . Travisano put together film footage with editor Jay Gold , looping images of a cat to make it look like it was singing . Working from the film , Tom McFaul of the jingle house Lucas / McFaul composed music to fit , and Linda November sang the meowing melody . The campaign was a major success , spawned 81 other different commercials , and hundreds of thousands of dollars in residuals . Linda November was also one of the singers for Coca @-@ Cola 's " Have a Coke and a Smile " campaign , heard most famously on the 1979 Mean Joe Greene commercial , considered one of the top Super Bowl commercials of all time . 
 = = = Other projects ( 1970s – present ) = = = 
 In the 1970s , along with providing her voice for commercials , November also recorded pop songs on the radio . She , Tony Orlando , and Toni Wine sang " Candida " , in a group surreptitiously entitled " Dawn " . Tony Orlando was a recording industry executive at the time , for a competing label , April @-@ Blackwood . So to avoid a conflict , the group was entitled " Dawn " without Orlando 's name . However , the song became a major hit , along with its followup " Knock Three Times " ( also featuring backup by November and Toni Wine ) . To go on tour , Orlando then asked two other session singers , Telma Hopkins and Joyce Vincent Wilson , to become the official backup singers , in their own " Dawn " group , so they could tour as Tony Orlando and Dawn , though the voices on the songs of the original album were still of November and Toni Wine , not Hopkins and Vincent . A few years later , November was again on the charts as part of the group Wing and a Prayer Fife and Drum Corps , an assemblage of studio musicians put together by Harold Wheeler . They released two albums , with their biggest hit being a disco version of the 1926 song " Baby Face " . It reached # 14 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 in late 1976 , and # 12 in the UK . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , November could often be found singing in Atlantic City , such as at Gatsby 's at The Grand , and then starting in 1990 , at the Harrah 's Atrium Lounge , with Artie Schroeck . They had met in the 1960s while working on Frankie Valli recordings , but had both been married to other people at the time . In 1988 they became a couple , and on January 17 , 1997 , they married . Linda November then retired from her career as a jingle singer , and she and Schroeck directed a production saluting quirky band leader Spike Jones , " The New City Slickers Present a Tribute to Spike Jones " . 
 In 2001 , November and her husband moved to Las Vegas . As of 2011 , she continues to work there as a piano and keyboard accompanist , performing the occasional show with Schroeck . 
 = = Awards = = 
