 Princess Superstar — vocals , lyrics 
 April McClellan — vocals 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 One Watt Sun — songwriting , production , mixing 
 Mike <unk> — mixing 
 Nilesh " Nilz " Patel — mastering 
 Tomáš <unk> — additional mixing 
 Francois <unk> — additional mixing 
 <unk> <unk> — artwork design 
 Brent Wadden — artwork design 
 Mario Campos — artwork design 
 Michael <unk> — photography 
 = Nigel ( bishop of Ely ) = 
 Nigel ( sometimes Nigel Poor or Nigel of Ely ; c . 1100 – 1169 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman Bishop of Ely . He came from an ecclesiastical family ; his uncle Roger of Salisbury was a bishop and government minister for King Henry I , and other relatives also held offices in the English Church and government . Nigel owed his advancement to his uncle , as did Nigel 's probable brother Alexander , who like Nigel was advanced to episcopal status . Nigel was educated on the continent before becoming a royal administrator . He served as Treasurer of England under King Henry , before being appointed to the see , or bishopric , of Ely in 1133 . His tenure was marked by conflicts with the monks of his cathedral chapter , who believed that Nigel kept income for himself that should properly have gone to them . 
 Following the accession of Henry I 's successor , King Stephen , Nigel remained as treasurer only briefly before his family was ousted from political office by the new king . Nigel rebelled and deserted to Stephen 's rival Matilda , but eventually reconciled with Stephen . Although he subsequently held some minor administrative posts , he never regained high office under Stephen . On the king 's death , Nigel was returned to the treasurership by the new king , Henry II . Nigel 's second tenure as treasurer saw him return the administration to the practices of Henry I. He withdrew from much of his public work after around 1164 , following an attack of paralysis . He was succeeded as treasurer by his son , Richard fitzNeal , whom he had trained in the operations of the Exchequer , or Treasury of England . Most historians , then and now , have felt that Nigel 's administrative abilities were excellent ; he is considered to have been more talented as an administrator than as a religious figure . 
 = = Background and early life = = 
 Nigel 's date of birth is uncertain , but it is likely to have been some time around 1100 . Historians occasionally refer to him as Nigel Poor or Nigel of Ely , but before his elevation to the episcopate he was commonly known as Nigel , the bishop 's nephew , or Nigel , the treasurer . He was probably a Norman by ancestry although he was brought up in England , which in 1066 had been conquered by the Duke of Normandy , William the Conqueror . Following William 's death in 1087 his realm was divided between two of his sons . His middle son , William Rufus , inherited the Kingdom of England , and the Duchy of Normandy passed to his eldest son , Robert Curthose . The youngest son , Henry , received a grant of money , which he used to purchase a lordship in Normandy . The brothers fought amongst themselves for the next twenty years ; the initial conflict was between Rufus and Robert , but after Rufus ' death in 1100 Henry , who succeeded Rufus as King of England , also became involved . Eventually , in 1106 , Henry captured Robert , imprisoned him for life , and took control of Normandy . 
 Nigel 's uncle Roger of Salisbury , Bishop of Salisbury , saw to Nigel 's education at the school of Laon in France , where he probably studied mathematics under Anselm of Laon . It is likely that his father was Roger 's brother Humphrey . Other students at Laon included William de Corbeil , later Archbishop of Canterbury , Robert de Bethune , who became Bishop of Hereford , Geoffrey le Breton , future Archbishop of Rouen , and other men subsequently to hold bishoprics in the Anglo @-@ Norman dominions . 
 When he took vows as a cleric is unrecorded , but Nigel held a prebend , an ecclesiastical office in the cathedral , in the see of London before holding one of the offices of archdeacon in the diocese of Salisbury , although which archdeaconry he held is unclear . Most modern historians believe that Nigel was brother to Alexander of Lincoln , later Bishop of Lincoln , but this relationship is not specifically attested in the sources , which merely state that both were Roger 's nephews . William of Malmesbury , a medieval chronicler , considered both Alexander and Nigel to be well educated and diligent . Nigel attended the consecration of Bernard as Bishop of St David 's at Westminster in 1115 , and may have returned to England from Laon by 1112 . From the time of his return until around 1120 he served as a royal chaplain and attested a number of royal charters . 
 = = Under Henry I = = 
 Nigel first became Treasurer in the reign of Henry I , and seems to have held that office from around 1126 . He was already a receiver , or auditor and administrator , in the treasury of Normandy , and he served as treasurer for both realms , moving with the king and court between England and Normandy . The date of his appointment is unclear , as until he became a bishop , royal charters listed him as " nephew of the bishop " ( Roger of Salisbury ) , rather than by any office he held . In 1131 , though , he was listed in a papal letter as " Nigel , the treasurer " , which securely establishes that he held the office at that date . 
 In 1133 , Roger of Salisbury secured the bishopric of Ely for Nigel . Ely had been without a bishop since 1131 ; after the two @-@ year vacancy , King Henry made the appointment because he was settling outstanding business before leaving England to return to Normandy . At this time Henry also appointed Geoffrey Rufus to Durham , and Æthelwold to the newly created Diocese of Carlisle . Nigel was consecrated on 1 October 1133 at Lambeth by William de Corbeil — who was by then Archbishop of Canterbury — possibly with the assistance of Roger of Salisbury . Nigel continued to hold the office of treasurer until 1136 , when he was replaced by a relative , Adelelm , although the historian C. Warren Hollister placed his departure from the office in 1133 with his appointment to Ely . The Constitutio domus regis , or Establishment of the King 's Household , may have been written by Nigel , or possibly for his use , and probably was composed around 1135 . 
 Ely had until 1109 been an independent monastery , but its last abbot , Richard , had proposed to the king a plan by which the abbey would become a bishopric , presumably with the abbot himself as bishop . Richard died before the proposal could be put into operation , but in 1109 , the custodian of the vacant abbey secured permission to make the change , and became the first Bishop of Ely . However , the administrative changes needed to make the abbey into a bishopric took longer , and were still unresolved at the time of Nigel 's appointment . Regardless , Nigel was constantly at court , as shown by his appearance 31 times as a witness to charters during the last 10 years of Henry I 's reign . This left little time for administration of his diocese , and Nigel appointed a married clergyman , Ranulf of Salisbury , to administer the diocese . Ranulf seems to have <unk> the monks of the cathedral chapter , and Nigel appears to have done little to protect his monks from abuse . Later , during the early years of Stephen 's reign , Nigel claimed to have uncovered a plot led by Ranulf to assassinate Normans . The exact nature of the conspiracy is obscure , and it is unclear what prompted it . The medieval chronicler Orderic Vitalis claimed that Ranulf planned to kill all the Normans in the government and hand the country over to the Scots . After the discovery of the plot , Ranulf fled the country and Nigel made peace with the monks of his cathedral chapter . Another source of conflict with his monks was the desire of the cathedral chapter to enjoy the same " liberty " as a corporate body that the bishops did in the diocese . This liberty was a group of rights that the abbey had originally held , and had transferred to the bishop when the abbey became a bishopric . The rights included sake and soke , or the right to command dues from the land , and the right to levy tolls . They also included the right to hold courts dealing with theft . Around 1135 , Nigel conceded this point to the monks . Although he restored some of the lands that had been taken from the monks by Ranulf , the Liber Eliensis ( the house chronicle of the monks of Ely ) continued to decry his administration of the diocese and the lands of the cathedral chapter , alleging that " he kept back for himself some properties of the church which he wanted , and very good ones they were " . The chronicle contains a number of complaints that Nigel oppressed the monks or despoiled them . 
 = = Stephen 's early reign = = 
 Following King Henry 's death in 1135 , the succession was disputed between the king 's nephews — Stephen and his elder brother , Theobald II , Count of Champagne — and Henry 's surviving legitimate child Matilda , usually known as the Empress Matilda because of her first marriage to the Holy Roman Emperor , Henry V. King Henry 's only legitimate son , William , had died in 1120 . After Matilda was widowed in 1125 , she returned to her father , who married her to Geoffrey , Count of Anjou . All the magnates of England and Normandy were required to declare fealty to Matilda as Henry 's heir , but when Henry I died in 1135 , Stephen rushed to England and had himself crowned before either Theobald or Matilda could react . The Norman barons accepted Stephen as Duke of Normandy , and Theobald contented himself with his possessions in France . Matilda , though , was less sanguine , and secured the support of the Scottish king , David , who was her maternal uncle , and in 1138 also the support of her half @-@ brother , Robert , Earl of Gloucester , an illegitimate son of Henry I. 
 After Stephen 's accession , Nigel was at first retained as treasurer , but the king came to suspect him and his family of secretly supporting the Empress Matilda . The prime movers behind Stephen 's suspicions against the bishops were the Beaumont family , headed by the twin brothers Robert , Earl of Leicester , and Waleran , Count of Meulan , who wished to be the main advisors of the king . Roger , Alexander , and Nigel together held key castles , including Salisbury , Devizes , Sherborne , Malmesbury , Sleaford , and Newark . The Beaumonts alleged that Roger and his family were fortifying the castles they held in preparation for turning them over to Matilda . They urged the king to confiscate the castles before they were lost . Although the Gesta Stephani , or Deeds of King Stephen , a medieval chronicle of the events of Stephen 's reign , alleges that Roger was disloyal to Stephen , the evidence is against such action by Roger , as he had been an opponent of Matilda since 1126 , when she was first put forward as her father 's heir . Roger and his family also had been early supporters of Stephen 's seizure of the crown after Henry I 's death . The contemporary chronicler Orderic Vitalis felt that Roger 's family were going to betray the king , but William of Malmesbury believed that the allegations were based on envy from " powerful laymen " . Whatever Roger 's position , Nigel 's own position on Matilda is less clear , and it is possible that he was never as opposed to her as his uncle . No evidence survives that he was estranged from Stephen , however , as Nigel continued to witness charters throughout the first four years of Stephen 's reign . According to the historian Marjorie Chibnall , Nigel 's family may have been caught up in a dispute between Henry of Blois and the Beaumonts . 
 = = Arrest of the bishops = = 
 In 1139 , supporters of Roger and his family brawled in public with some men who supported Alan of Brittany . The brawl may have been provoked by the Beaumonts , for Alan was often associated with them . At a court held at Oxford in June 1139 , Stephen required Roger of Salisbury , Alexander of Lincoln , and Nigel to surrender their castles as a consequence of the brawl . When Roger and his family delayed , the king ordered their arrest . Nigel managed to escape arrest by fleeing to the castle of Devizes , and the king followed and began a siege . The king threatened to hang Roger in front of the castle unless it capitulated , and Nigel , under pressure from Roger 's wife , surrendered the castle after the siege had lasted three days . All three bishops then submitted and surrendered their secular offices and castles . They were , however , allowed to retain their dioceses . Nigel surrendered Newark Castle and Sleaford Castle , both of which had been constructed by Alexander . Stephen promptly gave Newark to Robert , Earl of Leicester , who was in turn excommunicated by Alexander of Lincoln . 
 Stephen 's brother , Henry of Blois , who was Bishop of Winchester and papal legate in England , called an ecclesiastical council at Winchester on 29 August 1139 , and summoned the king to answer charges that he had unlawfully arrested clergy . The king refused to attend , and sent a representative instead . After meeting for a few days , the council was dismissed on 1 September without deciding anything except to appeal to the pope in Rome . In the end , the appeal never reached Rome . Part of the problem confronting the assembled bishops was that Stephen had not expelled Roger 's family from their ecclesiastical offices , merely their secular ones . Stephen 's representatives argued that the bishops had given up their castles and money voluntarily to avoid secular charges . The defence taken by the king was not novel ; it had been used before by William I and William II against Odo of Bayeux and William de St @-@ Calais , respectively . 
 Traditionally , the arrest of the bishops has been seen as a turning point in Stephen 's reign , and the event that turned the ecclesiastical hierarchy against him . Recent historians have held a lively debate on the issue ; a few still hold to the traditional interpretation , but most have decided that reactions in the English church were more ambivalent . One modern historian , David Crouch , believes that the arrest of the bishops signalled the beginnings of the Anarchy , not because of any alienation of the church , but through court politics , where Stephen showed himself incapable of manipulating the factions of his court . The ascendency of the Beaumonts was marked by the placement of one of their protégés , Philip de Harcourt , as Chancellor . 
 Roger died in December 1139 while in the king 's custody . After the death of his uncle , Nigel , then in East Anglia , revolted . In January 1140 , he fortified the Isle of Ely , but was soon besieged and forced to flee . Even his own cathedral chapter refused to support him , and his revolt collapsed in January . Nigel took refuge at the court of Stephen 's rival , the Empress Matilda , who had landed in England in the south on 30 September 1139 in a bid to take the throne . The revolt stood little chance of succeeding , for there were no supporters of Matilda close to East Anglia , and it is likely that Nigel reacted more out of fear and anger at his uncle 's death than anything else . It appears likely that Nigel appealed to Pope Innocent II at this time , for in October 1140 Innocent issued a papal bull , or papal instruction , ordering the restoration to Nigel of the lands of his bishopric , and it appears that after the capture of Stephen , Matilda managed to restore Nigel to Ely briefly . In 1141 , Nigel , along with his brother Alexander , was one of the supporters of Matilda who , after the capture of Stephen by Matilda 's forces , reached an agreement with Henry of Blois to replace Stephen with Matilda on the throne . Ultimately , this agreement came to nothing when Matilda 's chief supporter , her half @-@ brother Robert of Gloucester , was captured and later exchanged for Stephen . Stephen 's release meant that the king was free to send Geoffrey de Mandeville against Nigel , and Nigel submitted to the king , probably in 1142 . 
 = = Stephen 's later reign = = 
 In 1143 , Nigel became involved in a quarrel with the powerful Henry of Blois . Charges of depriving a priest of a church , giving church property to laymen , and encouraging sedition were brought against Nigel , and he was forced to go to Rome to defend himself , only reaching Rome in 1144 . He did not return to his diocese until 1145 . He probably accompanied Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury , who went to Rome around this time on separate business . While he was in Rome , Pope Lucius II issued a number of rulings in Nigel 's favor , ordering his restitution to Ely . He was then finally reconciled with Stephen by paying a fine of £ 200 and offering his son Richard fitzNeal as a hostage . While Nigel was at Rome , Ely was attacked by the king 's forces . The monks sent to Geoffrey de Mandeville for aid , and Geoffrey came and occupied the Isle of Ely , while the king 's forces occupied the lands of the diocese outside the Isle . Both occupying forces did damage to the lands of the diocese and the cathedral chapter . The monks , in the Liber Eliensis , complained that Nigel had taken items from the church to finance his trip to Rome , and that they were required to help contribute to the bribe when Nigel was reconciled with Stephen . 
 By 1147 , Nigel was again witnessing Stephen 's charters , and in 1153 or 1154 he was named in a grant of lands to St Radegund 's Priory in Cambridge . He assisted with the consecration of Hilary of Chichester as Bishop of Chichester in August 1147 . He took part in shire courts in both Norfolk and Suffolk in 1150 , and continued to assist with episcopal consecrations throughout the remainder of Stephen 's reign . No records exist of him being involved with treasury affairs during this time . His witnessing of charters is sparse , and almost always in company with other bishops ; this suggests that he was only at court for councils or other similar events . Nigel was a witness to Stephen 's charter that left England to Matilda 's son , Henry of Anjou . When Henry succeeded Stephen , Nigel was present at the coronation . 
 = = Return to the Exchequer = = 
 After the accession of Henry II , Nigel was summoned to reorganize the Exchequer , or treasury , that was responsible for the production of the government 's financial records , including the Pipe Rolls . The king had to ask Nigel several times to return before the bishop agreed , and one reason for Nigel 's reluctance may have been that he would have to work with Robert , Earl of Leicester , one of the Beaumonts , who had been responsible for turning Stephen against Nigel 's family in 1139 . Another of Nigel 's colleagues in the administration was a layman , Richard de Lucy , who served as a justice until 1178 . Nigel was the only surviving minister of Henry I , and his knowledge of the Exchequer was needed to help reorganize the revenues of the king and restore administrative practices lost during Stephen 's reign . The lone pipe roll to survive from Henry I 's reign , for the year 1130 , may be Nigel 's own copy , brought with him to the Exchequer when he returned under Henry II . Nigel was able to increase the revenues compared to what had been collected under Stephen , but he was unable to quickly return them to the amounts collected under Henry I. It may have been Nigel who urged the king to attempt to recover estates that had been alienated during Stephen 's reign . 
 The pipe roll for 1155 – 1156 has several entries which declare that Nigel was making decisions about monetary affairs and issuing writs , but later pipe rolls do not contain any such entries . It appears likely that after the initial reorganization of the Exchequer , Nigel 's involvement lessened . He continued to be active , though , and obtained tax exemptions and other privileges until his death in 1169 . His son , Richard fitzNeal , who is the main source for information about Nigel 's career in the Exchequer , stated that he fulfilled Nigel 's treasury duties when Nigel was ill . Nigel continued to spar with Robert , the Earl of Leicester , and Richard fitzNeal relays a story about Nigel and Robert confronting each other at the Exchequer over traditional exemptions of the barons of the Exchequer , or judges of the Exchequer . Among the reforms carried out by Nigel were the restoration of the " <unk> farm " system , whereby a random sample of coins was assayed and any shortage was collected from the sheriff , and the restoration of collections from a swath of counties that had quit paying taxes during Stephen 's reign . The most substantial change was the return to a unified system of finances , which in turn required a reconciliation of the two different systems in use by Stephen and Matilda . Despite Nigel 's reinstatement to the Exchequer , and the nomination of his son as treasurer , Nigel did not enjoy the power that his uncle had wielded under Henry I. The exact date of Richard 's appointment as treasurer is obscure , but it was sometime between 1158 and 1160 , as he is securely attested as treasurer in 1160 . The Liber Eliensis states that Nigel paid the king £ 400 to secure the office for Richard . Some historians have seen Nigel as Henry II 's " minister of finance " . 
 Nigel also served as a royal justice under Henry II . Although his relations with the government had improved , his relations with the monks of his cathedral chapter , which had never been good , continued to be marked by quarrels . In 1156 , the English Pope Adrian IV threatened to suspend Nigel from office unless the bishop restored all the lands that had belonged to the church when Nigel became bishop . The restitution was hampered by the absence of the king from England , and the dispute dragged on until finally it was resolved by Nigel pledging in front of Theobald of Bec , Archbishop of Canterbury , to restore the lands . By 1158 , Nigel had managed to restore enough possessions that Adrian relaxed the conditions . Even this did not end the quarrels with the monks , as Nigel then named a married clerk as sacrist of Ely , an action which was condemned by Thomas Becket , the new Archbishop of Canterbury . Nigel did manage to secure a reduction in the assessment of knight 's fees due from the diocese , from the 60 fees that were due under Henry I , to 40 in 1166 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Nigel died on 30 May 1169 . In either 1164 or in 1166 , or possibly both , he had been struck by paralysis , and after this he seems to have withdrawn from active affairs . He took little part in the disputes between the king and Thomas Becket , although he did agree with his fellow bishops who opposed the king 's attempt to reduce clerical benefits . He may have been buried at Ely , where a 12th @-@ century marble slab possibly marks his tomb . 
 Nigel was a married bishop , and his son Richard fitzNeal was later Lord Treasurer and Bishop of London . Another son was William , called William the Englishman . Richard , who wrote the Dialogus de <unk> , or Dialogue concerning the Exchequer about the procedures of the Exchequer , had been taught those procedures by his father . Nigel 's uncle Roger had at least one son , Roger , who was King Stephen 's chancellor ; Adelelm , who succeeded Nigel as treasurer after his first term , was probably Roger 's son also . Another relative was William of Ely , who succeeded Richard fitzNeal as treasurer in 1196 , although the exact relationship is unclear . 
 Nigel was active in draining the Fens , the swampy land around Ely , to increase the agricultural lands around his bishopric . He also fortified the Isle of Ely with stone defences , probably starting around 1140 . The remains of one castle on Cherry Hill in Ely probably date to Nigel 's fortifications . Early in his time as bishop he was active in recovering lands of the church that had been granted to knights by his predecessors , and soon after his consecration he ordered an inquest made into the lands actually owned by the diocese and cathedral chapter . The bishop spent most of his life in debt , but in the year he died he managed to clear it with his son 's help . The monks of his cathedral chapter did not like the fact that they were required to pay for the bishop 's appeals to Rome to recover his see , or pay for regaining the king 's favour . Their dislike of their bishop is evident in the Liber Eliensis . The art historian C. R. Dodwell wrote of Nigel 's efforts : 
 When .... Nigel ... needed to raise money in order to repair his own political fortunes , he stripped down , sold , or used as security , a quite astounding number of Ely 's monastic treasures . These numbered <unk> of gold and silver from the Anglo @-@ Saxon past , and they included an alb with gold @-@ embroidered <unk> , given by St Æthelwold , and a chasuble , given by King Edgar , which was almost all of gold . A gold and bejewelled textile covering ... was sold to the Bishop of Lincoln , Alexander , who took it with him to Rome as a gift of particular splendour . It is a biting commentary on attitudes of the Anglo @-@ Norman <unk> to Anglo @-@ Saxon art , that it was left to the pope to point out that such an artistic heirloom should never have left Ely in the first place and to order its return . 
 Most historians have seen Nigel as an administrator , not a religious bishop . The historian David Knowles wrote that Nigel " had devoted all his energies and abilities to matters purely secular ; in the department of financial administration he was supreme , and more than any other man he helped to ensure the continuity and development of the excellent administrative practice initiated under Henry I " . The historian W. L. Warren said that " Stephen probably paid dearly for the dismissal of Bishop Roger of Salisbury and Bishop Nigel of Ely , for the expertise of the exchequer was lodged in their expertise . " Whatever Nigel 's administrative talent , his ecclesiastical abilities are generally held to be low ; the Gesta Stephani says of both him and Alexander that they were " men who loved display and were rash in their reckless presumption ... disregarding the holy and simple manner of life that befits a Christian priest they devoted themselves so utterly to warfare and the vanities of this world that whenever they attended court by appointment they ... aroused general astonishment on account of the extraordinary concourse of knights by which they were surrounded on every side . " 
 = Rainilaiarivony = 
 Rainilaiarivony ( 30 January 1828 – 17 July 1896 ) was the Prime Minister of Madagascar from 1864 to 1895 , succeeding his older brother Rainivoninahitriniony , who had held the post for thirteen years . His career mirrored that of his father Rainiharo , a renowned military man who became Prime Minister during the reign of Queen Ranavalona I. Despite a childhood marked by ostracism from his family , as a young man Rainilaiarivony was elevated to a position of high authority and confidence in the royal court , serving alongside his father and brother . He co @-@ led a critical military expedition with Rainivoninahitriniony at the age of 24 and was promoted to Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the army following the death of the queen in 1861 . In that position he oversaw continuing efforts to maintain royal authority in the outlying regions of Madagascar and acted as adviser to his brother , who had been promoted to Prime Minister in 1852 . He also influenced the transformation of the kingdom 's government from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional one , in which power was shared between the sovereign and the Prime Minister . Rainilaiarivony and Queen Rasoherina worked together to depose Rainivoninahitriniony for his abuses of office in 1864 . Taking his brother 's place as Prime Minister , Rainilaiarivony remained in power for the next 31 years by marrying three queens in succession : Rasoherina , Ranavalona II and Ranavalona III . 
 As Prime Minister , Rainilaiarivony actively sought to modernize the administration of the state , in order to strengthen and protect Madagascar against the political designs of the British and French colonial empires . The army was reorganized and professionalized , public schooling was made mandatory , a series of legal codes patterned on English law were enacted and three courts were established in Antananarivo . The statesman exercised care not to offend traditional norms , while gradually limiting traditional practices , such as slavery , polygamy , and unilateral repudiation of wives . He legislated the Christianization of the monarchy under Ranavalona II . His diplomatic skills and military acumen assured the defense of Madagascar during the Franco @-@ Hova Wars , successfully preserving his country 's sovereignty until a French column captured the royal palace in September 1895 . Although holding him in high esteem , the French colonial authority deposed the Prime Minister and exiled him to French Algeria , where he died less than a year later in August 1896 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rainilaiarivony was born on 30 January 1828 in the Merina village of Ilafy , one of the twelve sacred hills of Imerina , into a family of statesmen . His father , Rainiharo , was a high @-@ ranking military officer and a deeply influential conservative political adviser to the reigning monarch , Queen Ranavalona I , at the time that his wife , <unk> ( daughter of <unk> ) , gave birth to Rainilaiarivony . Five years later Rainiharo was promoted to the position of Prime Minister , a role he retained from 1833 until his death in 1852 . During his tenure as Prime Minister , Rainiharo was chosen by the queen to become her consort , but he retained <unk> as his wife according to local customs that allowed polygamy . Rainilaiarivony 's paternal grandfather , <unk> , had likewise been a privileged adviser to the great King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) . Rainilaiarivony and his relatives issued from the Andafiavaratra family clan of Ilafy who , alongside the <unk> clan of Ambohimanga , constituted the two most influential hova ( commoner ) families in the 19th @-@ century Kingdom of Imerina . The majority of political positions not assigned to andriana ( nobles ) were held by members of these two families . 
 According to oral history , Rainilaiarivony was born on a day of the week traditionally viewed as inauspicious for births . Custom in much of Madagascar dictated that such unlucky children had to be subjected to a trial by ordeal , such as prolonged exposure to the elements , since it was believed the misfortune of their day of birth would ensure a short and cursed life for the child and its family . But rather than leave the child to die , Rainilaiarivony 's father reportedly followed the advice of an ombiasy ( astrologer ) and instead amputated a joint from two fingers on his infant son 's left hand to dispel the ill omen . The infant was nonetheless kept outside the house to avert the possibility that evil might still befall the family if the child remained under their roof . Relatives took pity and adopted Rainilaiarivony to raise him within their own home . Meanwhile , Rainilaiarivony 's older brother Rainivoninahitriniony enjoyed the double privilege of his status as elder son and freedom from a predestined evil fate . Rainiharo selected and groomed his elder son to follow in his footsteps as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief and Prime Minister , while Rainilaiarivony was left to make his way in the world by his own merits . 
 At age six , Rainilaiarivony began two years of study at one of the new schools opened by the London Missionary Society ( LMS ) for the children of the noble class at the royal palace in Antananarivo . Ranavalona shut down the mission schools in 1836 , but the boy continued to study privately with an older missionary student . When Rainilaiarivony reached age 11 or 12 , the relatives who had raised him decided he was old enough to make his own way in the world . Beginning with the purchase and resale of a few bars of soap , the boy gradually grew his business and expanded into the more profitable resale of fabric . The young Rainilaiarivony 's reputation for tenacity and industriousness , as he fought against his predestined misfortunes , eventually reached the palace , where at the age of 14 the boy was invited to meet Queen Ranavalona I. She was favorably impressed , awarding him the official ranking of Sixth Honor title of Officer of the Palace . At 16 he was promoted to Seventh Honor , then promoted twice again to Eighth and Ninth Honor at age 19 , an unprecedented ascent through the ranks . 
 As a regular among the foreigners at the palace , young Rainilaiarivony was tasked by an English merchant as a courier for his confidential business correspondence . The merchant was impressed by the young man 's punctuality and integrity and would regularly refer to him as the boy who " deals fair . " With the addition of the Malagasy honorific " ra " , the expression was transformed into a sobriquet — " Radilifera " — that Rainilaiarivony adopted for himself and transmitted to a son and grandson . The arrival of a doctor from Mauritius in 1848 provided Rainilaiarivony with the opportunity to study medicine over the course of three years . With this knowledge he became indispensable at the palace , where he provided modern medical care to the Queen and other members of the aristocracy . Successfully curing the Queen of a particularly grievous illness earned him a promotion to Tenth Honor in April 1851 , thereby qualifying him for more responsible positions within the monarch 's closest circle . Rainiharo took advantage of this trust to successfully encourage friendship between his own sons and the only child and heir apparent of the queen , her son Radama II , who was one year Rainilaiarivony 's junior . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Around 1848 — the exact date of his marriage is not recorded — Rainilaiarivony , then around 20 or 21 years old and having adopted the name Radilifera , concluded a marriage with his paternal cousin Rasoanalina . She bore him sixteen children over the course of their marriage . In addition , a one @-@ year @-@ old son that Rasoanalina had conceived with another man prior to the union , <unk> ( <unk> ) , was adopted by Rainilaiarivony as his own . As a young man , <unk> was groomed by Rainilaiarivony to become his successor , but the youth fell from a balcony while intoxicated and died in his early twenties . 
 Most of Rainilaiarivony 's children failed to achieve their full potential . One son , <unk> , died young of delirium tremens , and sons <unk> and <unk> both met violent ends while still in their youth . <unk> , to whom Rainilaiarivony later ascribed the name Radilifera , was sent to France to study but returned before earning his diploma and faded into obscurity among the upper classes of Imerina . <unk> studied medicine and was on his way to becoming a successful doctor , but died of illness in his twenties . Three brothers turned to crime : Rajoelina , who violated the laws of his country to enrich himself by selling contraband gold to an English company ; <unk> , who studied in England before health issues recalled him to Madagascar , where he and his friends engaged in sexual assault and theft ; and <unk> ( <unk> ) , who organized a group of bandits to rob the houses of common citizens . One of Rainilaiarivony 's daughters died in her twenties following a self @-@ induced abortion , and the rest married and lived quiet lives out of public view . 
 = = Military career = = 
 The February 1852 death of Prime Minister Rainiharo left the queen without her consort , long @-@ time political adviser and military Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . She consequently awarded Rainilaiarivony a double promotion to Twelfth Honor ten days afterward , in preparation for an increase in military and political responsibilities . Shortly thereafter the queen expressed romantic interest in Rainilaiarivony and proposed that he assume the former role of his father as prince consort and Prime Minister . The young man refused on the double basis of their age difference , the queen being forty years his senior , as well as the perceived impropriety of becoming intimate with his father 's former lover . Ranavalona continued to harbor feelings for him throughout her lifetime but she did not express resentment over his refusal to reciprocate them and went on to take another high @-@ ranking official as consort : Rainijohary , who was jointly awarded the role of Prime Minister along with the new Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Rainivoninahitriniony . Within a year the queen had assigned the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Rainilaiarivony to his first position of responsibility within the military , and promoted him to Royal Secretary , keeper of the Royal Seal , and supervisor to the Royal Treasurer . 
 Several years prior to his death , former Prime Minister Rainiharo had led military campaigns to bring the peoples of the south under Merina control . Strong military campaigns on both sides of the conflict had concluded in a peace agreement between the Merina armies and those of the Bara people of the central southern highlands , who were accorded semi @-@ autonomous status in exchange for serving as a buffer between the Sakalava to the west and the Tanala , Antemoro , <unk> and other ethnic groups to the southeast . Upon learning of Rainiharo 's death , disgruntled southeastern factions rose up against the Merina military stationed at posts within their territory . Queen Ranavalona responded by sending Rainivoninahitriniony and Rainilaiarivony on their first military expedition to liberate the besieged Merina colonists and quell the uprising . 
 Under the brothers ' joint command were ten thousand soldiers armed with muskets and another thousand carrying swords . An additional 80 @,@ 000 porters , cooks , servants and other support staff accompanied the army throughout the massive campaign . Over 10 @,@ 000 were killed by Merina soldiers in the campaign , and according to custom numerous women and children were captured to be sold into slavery in Imerina . Rainilaiarivony took 80 slaves , while his older brother took more than 160 . However , the campaign was only partly successful in pacifying the region and the Merina hold over the outlying areas of the island remained tenuous throughout the 19th century . 
 = = = First thwarted coup attempt = = = 
 As the queen 's son Radama grew to adulthood , he became increasingly disillusioned by the high death toll of his mother 's military campaigns and traditional measures of justice , and was frustrated by her unilateral rejection of European influence . The young prince developed sympathetic relationships with the handful of Europeans permitted by Ranavalona to frequent her court , namely Jean Laborde and Joseph @-@ François Lambert , with whom he privately concluded the lucrative Lambert Charter . The charter , which would come into effect upon Radama 's accession to the throne , granted Lambert large tracts of land and exclusive rights to road construction , mineral extraction , timber harvesting and other activities on the island . In May 1857 , when Rainilaiarivony was 29 years old , Lambert consequently invited Prince Radama , Rainivoninahitriniony , Rainilaiarivony and a number of other officers to conspire with him in a plot to overthrow Ranavalona . 
 On the eve of the coup , Rainivoninahitriniony informed Lambert that he could not guarantee the support of the army and that the plot should be aborted . One of the officers believed the brothers had betrayed them and sought to exonerate himself by notifying the queen of the failed conspiracy . She reacted by expelling the foreigners from the island and subjecting all the implicated Merina officers to the tangena ordeal in which they were forced to swallow a poison to determine their guilt or innocence . Rainilaiarivony and his brother were excepted from this and remained , like her son Radama , in the queen 's confidence for the few remaining years of her life . 
 = = = Second thwarted coup attempt = = = 
 In the summer of 1861 , when Rainilaiarivony was 33 years old , Queen Ranavalona 's advanced age and acute illness produced speculation about who would succeed her . Ranavalona had repeatedly stated her intention that her progressive and pro @-@ European son , Radama II , would be her successor , much to the chagrin of the conservative faction at court . The conservatives privately rallied behind the queen 's nephew and adoptive son Ramboasalama , whom the queen had initially declared heir apparent some years prior , and who had never abandoned hope to one day reclaim the right that had briefly been accorded to him . 
 According to custom , pretenders to the throne had historically been put to death upon the naming of a new sovereign . Radama was opposed to this practice and asked the brothers to help ensure his accession to the throne with minimum bloodshed on the day of the queen 's death . Rainilaiarivony successfully maintained authority over the palace guards anxiously awaiting the command from either faction to slaughter the other . When the queen 's attendant quietly informed him that her final moments were approaching , Rainilaiarivony discreetly summoned Radama and Rainivoninahitriniony from the Prime Minister 's palace to the royal Rova compound and ordered the prince crowned before the gathered soldiers , just as the queen was pronounced dead . Ramboasalama was promptly escorted to the palace where he was obliged to publicly swear allegiance to King Radama . 
 Rainilaiarivony was made responsible for the tribunal where Ramboasalama 's supporters were tried , convicted of subversion and sentenced to banishment and other punishments . Ramboasalama was sent to live with his wife <unk> <unk> — Rainilaiarivony 's sister — in the distant highland village of <unk> , where he died in April 1862 . Rainijohary , the former Prime Minister and consort of Ranavalona , was relieved of his rank and exiled , leaving his co @-@ minister Rainivoninahitriniony as the sole Prime Minister . At the same time , Rainilaiarivony was promoted by Radama to the position of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the military . 
 = = = Creation of a limited monarchy = = = 
 As Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Rainilaiarivony maintained a distance from politics throughout the reign of the new monarch , Radama II , instead preferring to focus on his military responsibilities . Meanwhile , disputes between Prime Minister Rainivoninahitriniony and King Radama grew frequent as the young sovereign pursued radical reforms that had begun to foment displeasure among the traditional masses . The situation came to a head on 7 May 1863 , when Radama insisted on legalizing duels , despite widespread concern among the king 's advisers that the innovation would lead to anarchy . The Prime Minister initiated the arrest of the menamaso , the prince 's influential advisers , while Rainilaiarivony enacted his brother 's instructions to keep the peace in the capital city . However , the situation deteriorated in dramatic fashion and , by the morning of 12 May , King Radama II was declared dead , having been strangled on the Prime Minister 's orders . 
 Not having been involved in the coup d 'état , Rainilaiarivony provided direction for his brother and the rest of the court as they grappled with the gravity of their acts . He proposed that future monarchs would no longer have absolute power but would instead rule by the consent of the nobles . A series of terms were proposed by Rainilaiarivony that the nobles agreed to impose on Radama 's widow , Rasoherina . Under Rainilaiarivony 's new monarchy , a sovereign required the consent of the nobles to issue a death sentence or promulgate a new law , and was forbidden to disband the army . The new power sharing agreement was concluded by a political marriage between the queen and the Prime Minister . 
 Because of the new limitations placed on future Merina monarchs by Rainilaiarivony and the Hova courtiers , Radama 's strangling represented more than a simple coup d 'état . The ruling conditions imposed on Rasoherina reflected a power shift toward the oligarchs of the Hova commoner class and away from the Andriana sovereigns , who had traditionally drawn their legitimacy from the deeply held cultural belief that the royal line was imbued with hasina , a sacred authority bestowed by the ray aman @-@ <unk> ( ancestors ) . In this respect , the new political structure in Imerina embodied the erosion of certain traditional social values among the Merina elite , who had gained exposure to contemporary European political thought and assimilated a number of Western governance principles . It also signalled the expansion of a rift between the pro @-@ European , progressive elite to which Rainilaiarivony and his brother belonged , and the majority of the population in Madagascar , for whom traditional values such as hasina remained integral to determining the legitimacy of a government — a divide that would deepen in the decades to come through Rainilaiarivony 's efforts to effect a modernizing political and social transformation on a nationwide scale . 
 = = Tenure as Prime Minister = = 
 = = = Rise to power = = = 
 Rainivoninahitriniony 's tenure as sole Prime Minister was short lived . His violent tendencies , irritability and insolence toward Rasoherina , in addition to lingering popular resentment over Rainivoninahitriniony 's role in the violent end to Radama 's rule , gradually turned the opinion of the nobles against him . As Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Rainilaiarivony attempted to counsel his brother , while simultaneously overseeing diplomatic and military efforts to re @-@ pacify the agitated Sakalava and other peoples , who viewed the coup as an indication of weakening Merina control . The Prime Minister repaid these efforts by repeatedly castigating high @-@ ranking officers and even threatening Rainilaiarivony with his sword . 
 Two of Rainilaiarivony 's cousins urged him to take his elder brother 's place in order to end the shame that Rainivoninahitriniony 's behavior was bringing upon their family . After weighing the idea , Rainilaiarivony approached Rasoherina with the proposal . The queen readily consented and lent her assistance in rallying the support of the nobles at court . On 14 July 1864 , little more than a year after the coup , Rasoherina deposed and divorced Rainivoninahitriniony , then exiled the fallen minister the following year . Rainilaiarivony was promoted to Prime Minister . The arrangement was sealed when Rainilaiarivony took Rasoherina as his bride and demoted his longtime spouse Rasoanalina to the status of second wife . Rainilaiarivony confided in a friend shortly before his death that he deeply loved his first wife and came to share the same degree of feeling toward Rasoherina as well , but never developed the same affection for the subsequent queens he married . None of his royal spouses bore him any children . 
 By taking this new role , Rainilaiarivony became the first Hova to concurrently serve as both Prime Minister and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . The sociopolitical transformation that had been triggered by the strangling of Radama II reached its zenith with Rainilaiarivony 's consolidation of administrative power . Rasoherina and her successors remained the figureheads of traditional authority , participated in political councils and provided official approval for policies . The Prime Minister issued new policies and laws in the Queen 's name . However , the day @-@ to @-@ day governance , security and diplomatic activities of the kingdom principally originated with , and were managed by , Rainilaiarivony and his counselors . This new level of authority enabled the Prime Minister to amass a vast personal fortune , whether through inheritance , gifts or purchase , including 57 houses , large plantations and rice paddies , numerous cattle and thousands of slaves . The most prominent of Rainilaiarivony 's properties was the Andafiavaratra Palace , constructed for him on the slope just below the royal Rova compound by English architect William Pool in 1873 . 
 = = = Policies and reforms = = = 
 Government administration and bureaucracy was strengthened under Rainilaiarivony 's leadership . In March 1876 , Rainilaiarivony established eight cabinet ministries to manage foreign affairs , the interior , education , war , justice , commerce and industry , finance , and legislation . State envoys were installed throughout the island 's provinces to manage administrative affairs , ensure the application of law , collect taxes and provide regular reports back to Antananarivo on the local state of affairs . The traditional method of tax collection through local administrators was expanded in the provinces , bringing in new revenues , most commonly in the form of locally produced goods such as woven mats , fish , or wood . Rainilaiarivony actively encouraged Merina settlement in the coastal provinces , but coastal peoples were not invited to participate in political administration of the territories they inhabited . Approximately one third of the island had no Merina presence and retained de facto independence from the authority of the crown , including parts of the western provinces of <unk> and Menabe , and areas in the southern Bara , Tanala , Antandroy and Mahafaly lands . 
 Rainilaiarivony 's first royal wife , Queen Rasoherina , died on 1 April 1868 , and was succeeded by her cousin Ranavalona II ( crowned on 3 September 1868 ) who , like Rasoherina , was a widow of Radama II . Ranavalona II was a pupil of Protestant missionaries and had converted to Christianity . Rainilaiarivony recognized the growing power of Christianity on the island and identified the need to bring it under his influence in order to avert destabilizing cultural and political power struggles . The Prime Minister encouraged the new queen to Christianize the court through a public baptism ceremony at Andohalo on 21 February 1869 , the day of their marriage . In this ceremony the supernatural royal talismans were ordered to be destroyed and replaced by the Bible . The Christianization of the court and the establishment of the independent royal Protestant chapel on the palace grounds prompted the wide @-@ scale conversion of hundreds of thousands of Malagasy . These conversions were commonly motivated by a desire to express political allegiance to the Crown , and as such were largely nominal , with the majority of converts practicing a syncretic blend of Christian and traditional religions . Rainilaiarivony 's biographers conclude that the Prime Minister 's own conversion was also largely a political gesture and most likely did not denote a genuine spiritual shift until late in his life , if ever . Some local officials attempted to force conversions to Protestantism by mandating church attendance and persecuting Catholics , but Rainilaiarivony quickly responded to quell these overzealous practices . The Prime Minister 's criminalization of polygamy and alcohol consumption , as well as the declaration of Sunday as a day of rest , were likewise inspired by the growing British and Protestant influences in the country . The Christianization of the court came at a steep personal price : with the outlawing of polygamy , Rainilaiarivony was forced to repudiate his first wife . The Prime Minister was deeply saddened by this necessity and by the consequent souring of his relationships with Rasoanalina and their children after the divorce . 
 The Prime Minister recognized that the modernization of Madagascar and its system of state administration could strengthen the country against invasion by a Western power and directed his energy to this end . In 1877 , he outlawed the enslavement of the <unk> community . Rainilaiarivony expanded the public education system , declaring school attendance mandatory in 1881 and forming a cadre of school inspectors the following year to ensure education quality . The island 's first pharmacy was established by LMS missionaries in 1862 , and the first hospital was inaugurated in Antananarivo three years later , followed by the launching in 1875 of a state medical system staffed by civil servant clinicians . Rainilaiarivony enacted a series of new legal codes over the course of his administration that sought to create a more humane social order . The number of capital offenses was reduced from eighteen to thirteen , and he put an end to the tradition of collective family punishment for the crimes of one individual . Fines were fixed for specific offenses and corporal punishment was limited to being locked in irons . The structure of legal administration was reorganized so that matters that exceeded the authority of the traditional community courts at the level of the <unk> village collective , administered by local magistrates and village heads , would be referred to the three high courts established in the capital in 1876 , although final judicial authority remained with Rainilaiarivony . The Code of 305 Laws established that same year would form the basis of the legal system applied in Madagascar for the remainder of the 19th century and throughout much of the colonial period . To strengthen rule of law , the Prime Minister introduced a rural police force , modernized the court system and eliminated certain unjust privileges that had disproportionately benefited the noble class . 
 Beginning in 1872 , Rainilaiarivony worked to modernize the army with the assistance of a British military instructor , who was hired to recruit , train and manage its soldiers . Rainilaiarivony purchased new local and imported firearms , reintroduced regular exercises and reorganized the ranking system . He prohibited the purchasing of rank promotions or exemptions from military service and instituted free medical care for soldiers in 1876 . The following year Rainilaiarivony introduced the mandatory conscription of 5 @,@ 000 Malagasy from each of the island 's six provinces to serve five years in the royal army , swelling its ranks to over 30 @,@ 000 soldiers . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 During his time in power , Rainilaiarivony proved himself a competent and temperate leader , administrator and diplomat . In foreign affairs he exercised acumen and prudent diplomacy , successfully forestalling French colonial designs upon Madagascar for nearly three decades . Rainilaiarivony established embassies in Mauritius , France and Britain , while treaties of friendship and trade were concluded with Britain and France in 1862 and revised in 1865 and 1868 respectively . Upon the arrival of the first American plenipotentiary in Antananarivo , a treaty between the United States and Madagascar was agreed in 1867 . A British contemporary observed that his diplomatic communication skills were particularly evident in his political speeches , describing Rainilaiarivony as a " Great orator among a nation of orators " . 
 The early years of Rainilaiarivony 's tenure as Prime Minister saw a reduction in French influence on the island , to the benefit of the British , whose alliance he strongly preferred . Contributing factors to the eclipse of French presence included a military defeat in 1870 and economic constraints that forced an end to French government subsidy of Catholic missions in Madagascar in 1871 . He permitted foreigners to lease Malagasy land for 99 years but forbade its sale to non @-@ citizens . The decision not to undertake the construction of roads connecting coastal towns to the capital was adopted as a deliberate strategy to protect Antananarivo from potential invasion by foreign armies . 
 Despite the strong presence of British missionaries , military advisers and diplomats in Antananarivo in the early part of Rainilaiarivony 's administration , the 1869 opening of the Suez Canal led the British to shift their focus to reducing French presence in Egypt , at the expense of their own long @-@ standing interests in Madagascar . When Jean Laborde died in 1878 and Rainilaiarivony refused to allow his heirs to inherit Malagasy land accorded him under Radama II 's Lambert Charter , France had a pretext for invasion . Rainilaiarivony sent a diplomatic mission to England and France to negotiate release of their claims on Malagasy lands and was successful in brokering a new agreement with the British . Talks with the French conducted between November 1881 and August 1882 broke down without reaching consensus on the status of French land claims . Consequently , France launched the First Franco @-@ Hova War in 1883 and occupied the coastal port towns of Mahajanga , Antsiranana , Toamasina and Vohemar . Queen Ranavalona II died during the height of these hostilities in July 1883 . Rainilaiarivony chose her 22 @-@ year @-@ old niece , Princess Razafindrahety , to replace her under the throne name Ranavalona III . It was widely rumored that Rainilaiarivony may have ordered the poisoning of Razafindrahety 's first husband in order to free the princess to become his spouse and queen . Thirty @-@ three years younger than her new husband , Ranavalona III was relegated to a largely ceremonial role during her reign , while the Prime Minister continued to manage the critical affairs of state . In December 1885 , Rainilaiarivony successfully negotiated the cessation of hostilities in the first Franco @-@ Hova War . 
 The agreement drafted between the French and Malagasy governments did not clearly establish a French protectorate over the island , partly because recent French military setbacks in the Tonkin Campaign had begun to turn popular opinion against French colonial expansion . The Malagasy crown agreed to pay ten million francs to France to settle the dispute , a sum that was partly raised through the unpopular decision to increase fanampoana ( forced labor in lieu of cash taxes ) to mobilize the populace in panning for gold in the kingdom 's rivers . This expense , coupled with Rainilaiarivony 's removal of $ 50 @,@ 000 in silver and gold coins from the tomb of Ranavalona I to offset the cost of purchasing arms in the run @-@ up to the First Franco @-@ Hova War , effectively emptied the royal treasury reserves . Capitalizing on Madagascar 's weakened position , the French government then occupied the port town of Antsiranana and installed French Resident @-@ General Le Myre de Vilers in Antananarivo , citing vague sections of the treaty as justification . The Resident @-@ General was empowered by the French government to control international trade and foreign affairs on the island , although the monarchy 's authority over internal administration was left unchallenged . Refusing to acknowledge the validity of the French interpretation of the treaty , Rainilaiarivony continued managing trade and international relations and unsuccessfully solicited assistance from the United States in maintaining the island 's sovereignty . In 1894 , the French government pressed Rainilaiarivony to unconditionally accept the status of Madagascar as a French protectorate . In response , Rainilaiarivony broke off all diplomatic relations with France in November 1894 . 
 = = Deposition and exile = = 
 The cessation of diplomatic relations between France and Madagascar prompted immediate French military action in a campaign that became known as the Second Franco @-@ Hova War . The expedition ended eleven months later in September 1895 when a French military column reached Antananarivo and bombarded the royal palace with heavy artillery , blasting a hole through the roof of the queen 's quarters and inflicting heavy casualties among the numerous courtiers gathered in the palace courtyard . Rainilaiarivony sent an interpreter to carry a white flag to the French commander and entreat his clemency . Forty @-@ five minutes later he was joined by Radilifera , the Prime Minister 's son , to request the conditions of surrender ; these were immediately accepted . The following day Queen Ranavalona signed a treaty accepting the French protectorate over Madagascar . She and her court were permitted to remain at the palace and administer the country according to French dictates . 
 Upon the queen 's signing of the treaty , the French government deposed Rainilaiarivony from his position as Prime Minister and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . The Minister of Foreign Affairs , an elderly man named <unk> , was jointly selected by the French and Ranavalona as his replacement . The French ordered Rainilaiarivony to be exiled to French Algeria , although he initially remained in Antananarivo for several months after the treaty was signed . On 15 October 1895 the former prime minister was placed under house arrest and put under the guard of Senegalese soldiers at his home in <unk> . On 6 February 1896 , at the age of 68 , Rainilaiarivony boarded a ship bound for Algiers and left his island for the first time in his life . He was accompanied by his grandson , <unk> , as well as an interpreter and four servants . On 17 March 1896 the ship docked at the port of Algiers , where he would live out the few remaining months of his life . 
 The French government installed Rainilaiarivony in the <unk> neighborhood of Algiers , one of the derelict parts of town . He was assigned a French attendant and guard named Joseph Vassé , who maintained detailed documentation on the personality and activities of Rainilaiarivony throughout his exile in French Algeria . Vassé described the former prime minister as a man of great spontaneity , sincere friendliness , and openness of heart , but also prone to mood swings , <unk> , and a tendency to be demanding , especially in regard to his particular tastes in clothing . His intelligence , tact and leadership qualities won him the admiration of many who knew him , including Le Myre des Vilers , who referred to him as both an enemy and a friend . Upon learning of Rainilaiarivony 's living situation in Algiers , Le Myre de Vilers privately lobbied the French government for better accommodation . Consequently , Vassé found a new home for the former Prime Minister at the elegant estate called Villa des Fleurs ( " Villa of the Flowers " ) in the upscale Mustapha Supérieur neighborhood , neighboring the residence of the exiled former king of Annam . 
 The beauty of his Villa des Fleurs home and the warm reception he received in French Algeria pleased Rainilaiarivony and contributed to a positive impression of his new life in Algiers . He quickly developed an excellent reputation among the local high society , who perceived him as a kind , intelligent , generous and charming figure . The Governor @-@ General of French Algeria regularly invited him to diplomatic balls and social events where Rainilaiarivony danced with the enthusiasm and endurance of a much younger man . When not busy with diverse social engagements , Rainilaiarivony avidly read the newspaper and corresponded with contacts in Madagascar . As an insurrection in Madagascar emerged against French rule , the former prime minister wrote a letter published in a Malagasy newspaper on 5 July 1896 that condemned the participants as ungrateful for the benefits that contact with the French would bring to the island . His last outing in Algiers was on 14 July 1896 to watch the Bastille Day fireworks show . As he walked through the streets to join other spectators in his party , he was greeted with cheers and calls of " Vive le Ministre ! " ( " Long live the Minister ! " ) from admiring onlookers . 
 = = Death = = 
 The intense heat at the outdoor Bastille Day event on 14 July exhausted the former prime minister , and that evening Rainilaiarivony developed a fever . He slept poorly , disturbed by a dream in which he saw the former queen Rasoherina stand beside his bed , saying , " In the name of your brother , Rainivoninahitriniony , be ready . " One of Rainilaiarivony 's servants reported the dream to Vassé , explaining it as a premonition that foretold Rainilaiarivony 's impending death . The former prime minister remained in bed and rapidly weakened over the next several days as his fever worsened and he developed a headache . He was constantly attended by his closest friends and loved ones . Rainilaiarivony died in his sleep on 17 July 1896 . 
 Rainilaiarivony 's body was initially interred within a stone tomb in Algiers . In 1900 , the former prime minister 's remains were exhumed and transported to Madagascar , where they were interred in the family tomb constructed by Jean Laborde in the Isotry neighborhood of Antananarivo . French colonial governor General Gallieni and Rainilaiarivony 's grandson both spoke at the funeral , which was heavily attended by French and Malagasy dignitaries . In his eulogy , Gallieni expressed esteem for the former prime minister in the following terms : " Rainilaiarivony was worthy of leading you . In the years to come , will there be a monument erected in his memory ? This should be an obligation for the Malagasy who will have the freedom to do so . France has now taken Madagascar , come what may , but it 's a credit to Rainilaiarivony to have protected it the way he did . " Following the funeral a commemorative plaque was installed at Rainilaiarivony 's family tomb , engraved with the words " <unk> , ex Premier Ministre et Commandant en chef de Madagascar , Commandeur de la Légion d 'honneur " ( " former Prime Minister and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of Madagascar , Commander of the Legion of Honor " ) . 
 = = Online resource = = 
 Registers of <unk> ( 1864 @-@ 1895 ) ( British Library - Endangered Archives Programme ) 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = National honours = = = 
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Royal Hawk . 
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Radama II . 
 Collar of the Order of Merit . 
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Ranavalona . 
 = = = Foreign honours = = = 
 Commander of the Order of the Legion of Honour ( 18 / 01 / 1887 ) . 
 = Holt Manufacturing Company = 
 The Holt Manufacturing Company traces its roots to the 1883 founding of Stockton Wheel Service in Stockton , California , United States . Benjamin Holt , who was later credited with patenting the first workable crawler tractor design , incorporated the Holt Manufacturing Company in 1892 . Holt Manufacturing Company was the first company to successfully manufacture a continuous track tractor . By the start of the 20th century , Holt Manufacturing Company was the leading manufacturer of combine harvesters in the United States and the leading California @-@ based manufacturer of steam traction engines . 
 Holt Manufacturing Company operated from its base in Stockton , California , until opening a satellite facility in Walla Walla , Washington , to serve the Pacific Northwest . In 1909 , Holt Manufacturing Company expanded by purchasing the facility of defunct farm implement maker Colean Manufacturing Company in East Peoria , Illinois . Holt changed the name of the company to Holt Caterpillar Company , although he did not trademark the name Caterpillar until 1910 . 
 The company 's initial products focused on agricultural machinery and were distributed internationally . During World War I , almost all of its production capacity was dedicated to military needs . Its tractors were widely used by the Allies in place of horses to haul heavy artillery and tow supply trains . Holt tractors also played a part , to varying degrees , in the development of military tanks in Great Britain , France , and Germany . Holt 's equipment was credited with helping the Allies to win the war , and its tractor was regarded as " one of the most important military vehicles of all time . " The Holt Manufacturing Company gained worldwide recognition for the quality and durability of its equipment . 
 As the war ended , the Holt company was left with huge surplus inventories of heavy @-@ duty tractors ill @-@ suited for the agricultural market , which had been dominated during the war by the Holt Company 's primary competitor , C. L. Best . The company decided to focus instead on heavy construction equipment and sought to capitalize on the passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 . Laden with debt and needing more capital to switch its product line , the company struggled to move forward . 
 Both the Holt Manufacturing Company and C. L. Best were hurt by the depression of 1920 – 21 which further inhibited sales . Both companies streamlined their over @-@ lapping product lines . The two companies had spent about US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( about $ 20 @,@ 240 @,@ 038 today ) in legal fees fighting each other in various contractual , trademark and patent infringement lawsuits since 1905 , but , on the advice of investors , the two companies merged in 1925 to form the Caterpillar Tractor Co . As of 2010 , Caterpillar Inc. was the 229th largest company in the world . 
 = = Company origins = = 
 Charles H. Holt arrived in San Francisco from Concord , New Hampshire , in 1864 to form C. H. Holt and Co . Initially the company produced wooden wheels for wagons and , later on , steel wheels for streetcars . In 1869 , at age 20 , his younger brother Benjamin went to work in their father 's sawmill in New Hampshire along with William Harrison Holt and Ames Frank Holt , preparing hardwoods for shipping to Charles in San Francisco . William and Ames joined Charles in San Francisco in 1871 . 
 In the same year , Charles and Ames established the Holt Brothers Company in San Francisco . The company sold hardwood , lumber , and wagon and carriage materials , primarily manufacturing wagon axles , wheels , and frames . W. Harrison Holt and Ames both temporarily returned around 1871 to New Hampshire – where both were married – to manage the eastern business . The brothers built a factory in Concord , New Hampshire , to manufacture wagon wheels , wheel components , bodies and running gear . In 1872 , at age 23 , Benjamin was given an interest in his father 's business , and he assumed more responsibility for the company 's operations . W. Harrison Holt moved to Tiffin , Ohio , to manage the company 's lumber business there , where he remained until the early 1880s . Their mother died in 1875 , and their father died eight years later in 1883 . After his father 's death , Benjamin Holt left New Hampshire in 1883 to help Charles build the business in California . 
 Charles , Benjamin and Frank incorporated the Holt Bros. Company on January 7 , 1892 , to deal in lumber and iron . Four days later , they also filed incorporation papers for " Holt Manufacturing Company " with Charles H. Holt , Benjamin Holt , Frank A. Holt , G. H. Cowie and G. L. Dickenson as directors . 
 The Holt Bros. Company formed a subsidiary , the " The Stockton Wheel Company " , to build the wheels . They based their company in the warm Central Valley town of Stockton , California . Stockton was an ideal location , as it could be reached by sea @-@ going ship via the San Joaquin River , 72 miles ( 116 km ) east of San Francisco , and was hot enough to season woods in a way that would prepare them for use in the arid valleys of California and the deserts of the West . The factory cost US $ 65 @,@ 000 ( or about $ 1 @,@ 848 @,@ 860 ) to build and used a 40 @-@ horsepower Corliss steam engine that had been manufactured in Providence , Rhode Island , and shipped around Cape Horn . All of the plant 's machines were driven by belts connected to the Corliss engine . 
 Brothers Charles and Benjamin eventually bought @-@ out the other brothers , with Charles running the business side and Benjamin running manufacturing operations . 
 During the first year , the Holt subsidiary Stockton Wheel Company produced 6 @,@ 000 wagon wheels and 5 @,@ 000 carriage bodies . One of their most popular wheel types was 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in diameter and used by redwood loggers , who connected two of these wheels with a strong 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) axle , and then attached a team of horses to pull logs from the forest . 
 = = = Farm equipment and tractors = = = 
 In the late 19th century , there was a large number of companies across the world striving to build a practical horse @-@ drawn combine harvester and other farm equipment . They soon moved on inventing steam @-@ powered farm machinery and , later , designs for crawler @-@ type tractors . More than 100 patents were issued for various crawler designs . Holt began manufacturing horse @-@ drawn combine harvesters in the 1890s and converted to steam @-@ power types around the start of the 20th century . Over the next few years , Benjamin Holt designed and manufactured the first successful crawler @-@ type tractor and designed a gasoline engine ( see Tractor design , below . ) 
 In California , the Best Manufacturing Company of San Leandro and the Holt Manufacturing Company were direct competitors . In 1905 , they resolved a patent infringement lawsuit when Daniel Best retired and gave one @-@ third of Best Manufacturing Company to his son , Clarence Leo ( " C. L. " ) Best . He sold the remaining two @-@ thirds to Benjamin Holt for US $ 325 @,@ 000 ( roughly equivalent to $ 8 @,@ 559 @,@ 537 today ) . C. L. Best was made plant manager of the new concern , but Holt retained effective control . C. L. did not stay long , however , but left in 1910 to form the C. L. Best Gas Traction Company to replace his father 's firm , resulting in further difficulties between the two men . Holt registered " Caterpillar " as a trademark in 1911 . 
 = = = Plant in Illinois = = = 
 Holt wanted to find manufacturing facilities closer to the vast agricultural markets of the midwest . Benjamin Holt 's nephew , Pliny E. Holt , had been dispatched in March 1909 to Minneapolis , Minnesota , where he began manufacturing operations . They shipped parts for ten Model 45 tractors , but only two were produced . Pliny met Murray Baker , an implement dealer , who knew of an available factory that had been used to manufacture farm implements and steam traction engines . Baker , who later became the first executive vice president of what became Caterpillar Tractor Company , wrote to Holt headquarters in Stockton and described the plant of the bankrupt Colean Manufacturing Co. of East Peoria , Illinois . Pliny inspected the Colean factory in late June 1909 and learned they had spent at least $ 450 @,@ 000 on the relatively new building and machinery . Holt could acquire the assets for the $ 50 @,@ 000 note held by a trust company . Pliny Holt wrote a letter to the Stockton management team on July 1 , 1909 , reporting , " The plant is as complete and perfect in every detail as I have ever seen ... and one of the best arranged plants that I ever saw . " 
 On October 25 , 1909 , Pliny Holt purchased the factory , and immediately began preparing the plant for operations with 12 employees . The " Holt Caterpillar Company " was incorporated in both Illinois and California on January 12 , 1910 , and Pliny accepted the deed to the plant on Feb 16 , 1910 . East Peoria became Holt Manufacturing Company 's eastern manufacturing plant , competing with the nearby Avery Tractor Company . 
 The Peoria facility proved so profitable that only two years later the Peoria facility employed 625 people and was exporting tractors to Argentina , Canada , and Mexico . Tractors were built in both Stockton and East Peoria . 
 = = = Los Angeles Aqueduct = = = 
 In 1909 , the engineers building the 233 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 375 km ) Los Angeles Aqueduct bought one of Holt 's Model 70 @-@ 120 tractors to haul supplies across the Mojave Desert . It effortlessly hauled 30 short tons ( 27 t ) up a 14 % grade . They were so impressed that they ordered 26 more , giving the Holt tractor and the company considerable credibility and substantially boosting sales . 
 = = = Subsidiaries merged = = = 
 In 1913 , Holt merged its various companies into the Holt Manufacturing Company , with a combined capital of US $ 3 million . The merged subsidiaries were : the Stockton Wheel Co . ; the Houser and Haines Manufacturing Company of Stockton ; the Aurora Engine Company of Stockton ; the Best Manufacturing Company of San Leandro ; the Canadian Holt Company , Limited of Calgary ; the Holt Manufacturing Company of Stockton ; and the Holt Caterpillar Company of Peoria , Illinois . 
 = = = Post @-@ war challenges = = = 
 Holt tractors were widely used as artillery tractors during World War I and their capabilities and reliability had become well @-@ known . Benjamin Holt also gained valuable experience securing government contracts . These capabilities separated him from his competition . Holt had obtained significant loans and begun a large expansion to meet the war planners ' need for his tractors . Holt also made a steam powered tank for evaluation using Doble steam engines . 
 C. L. Best Gas Tractor Company had meanwhile concentrated on supplying the market for smaller agricultural tractors . Although Best did not make tractors for the war effort , they had secured promises from the federal government that they would be able to obtain all the steel required to continue building tractors for farmers during the war . As a result , Best had gained a considerable market advantage over Holt by war 's end . Best also assumed considerable debt to allow it to continue expansion , especially production of its new Best Model 60 " Tracklayer " . 
 When the war ended , Holt 's planned expansion to meet the military 's needs was no longer needed . The company was left in a difficult situation . The types of tractors needed by the military were very different from what farmers needed . Their situation was worsened as artillery tractors were brought back from Europe , depressing prices for new equipment and Holt 's unsold inventory of military tractors . The company moved to focus less on agricultural machinery and more on producing road @-@ building equipment . To keep the company afloat , they borrowed heavily . 
 Both companies were affected by the transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy , which contributed to a nationwide depression , further inhibiting sales . 
 On December 5 , 1920 , 71 @-@ year @-@ old Benjamin Holt died after a month @-@ long illness . Holt had been considered a " quiet and unassuming man who loved his work " . He was well liked by his workers and dedicated a trust fund for employees who suffered financial difficulties . 
 = = = Caterpillar company formed = = = 
 The banks who held the company 's large debt forced the Holt board of directors to accept their candidate , Thomas A. Baxter , to succeed Benjamin Holt . Baxter was a former Boston banker who had joined the Holt company in 1913 as a business manager . The company struggled with the transition from wartime boom to peacetime bust . Baxter initially cut the large tractors from the company 's product line and introduced smaller models focused on the agricultural market . When the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 funded a US $ 1 billion federal highway building program , Baxter began focusing company assets towards road construction . Along with the C. L. Best Gas Traction Company , formed by Clarence Leo Best in 1910 , Holt faced fierce competition with the <unk> company . 
 Between 1907 and 1918 , Best and Holt had spent about US $ 1 @.@ 5 million in legal fees fighting each other . The two companies competed economically and intellectually : Benjamin Holt had 47 patents in his name , while his nephew Pliny Holt had 38 patents ; Best founder Daniel Best received 42 patents and his son C. L. Best had 27 patents . 
 Harry H. Fair of the bond brokerage house of Pierce , Fair & Company of San Francisco was involved in funding C. L. Best 's debt , when Holt shareholders approached him about their company 's financial plight . He concluded that both companies might not survive and recommended that the Holt and Best companies should consolidate operations . In April and May 1925 , the financially stronger C. L. Best merged with the market leader Holt Caterpillar to form the Caterpillar Tractor Co . Baxter had been removed as CEO earlier in 1925 , and Clarence Leo Best assumed the title of CEO , and remained in that role until October 1951 . The new company was headquartered in San Leandro until 1930 , when under the terms of the merger it was moved to Peoria . 
 The Caterpillar company consolidated its product lines , offering only five track @-@ type tractors : the 2 Ton , 5 Ton , and 10 Ton from the Holt Manufacturing Company 's old product line and the Caterpillar 30 and Caterpillar 60 from the C. L. Best Tractor Co . ' s former product line . The 10 Ton and 5 Ton models were discontinued in 1926 . In 1928 , the 2 Ton was discontinued . The first completely new tractor produced after the union of the two companies was the 1929 Caterpillar L20 . 
 After Benjamin Holt 's death in 1920 , William K. " Bill " Holt formed the first Caterpillar dealership in Mexico . In 1933 , he was authorized to operate the dealership for the 60 southern counties of Texas . The company merged with another Holt business and was renamed <unk> CAT . It continues as the largest Caterpillar dealership in the United States , under the ownership and management of Benjamin 's great @-@ grandson , Peter Holt ( who is better known as the owner of the NBA 's San Antonio Spurs , the five @-@ time world champions ) . 
 As of 2010 , Caterpillar Inc. was the <unk> largest company in the world , In 2011 , Caterpillar was the best @-@ performing stock last year among the 30 companies in the Dow Jones industrial average with a market value of US $ 45 @.@ 13 billion . Caterpillar is one of the 30 companies whose stock is tracked in the Dow Jones Industrial Average . It is a Fortune 500 company , ranked number 229 in 2010 , and first in its industry , with more than $ 67 billion in assets . 
 = = Tractor design = = 
 = = = Horse @-@ drawn combine harvester = = = 
 Among his brothers , Benjamin showed himself to be the most technically adept . He saw the need for farm machinery and expanded the company 's line to include farm equipment , including combine harvesters and the steam @-@ powered traction engines required to pull them through the fields . In 1883 , Benjamin Holt produced his first horse @-@ drawn " Link @-@ Belt Combined Harvester " . It allowed a farmer to combine cutting and threshing grain into a single mechanical operation , enabling farmers to cut more wheat in one pass , increasing productivity and cutting labor hours nearly in half . One key innovation Holt implemented was using flexible chain belts rather than gears to transmit power from the ground wheels to the working parts of the machine . 
 In 1886 , the company sold its first combine harvester . It had a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) cutting bar and was pulled by an 18 @-@ horse team . The largest combine Stockton Wheel Co. manufactured had a 50 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 15 m ) cutting bar . In comparison , large modern combines have a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) cutting bar . Some of the Holt combines needed as many as 40 horses to operate . 
 Holt adapted the combine to work on slopes . He added two separate wooden frames which enabled the drive wheels to be raised or lowered independently . This allowed the combine to operate on slopes as steep as 30 degrees while the threshing machine remained level . In 1890 , Holt built his first experimental steam traction engine , nicknamed " Old Betsy " . Built on a 24 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) frame , it developed 60 horsepower ( 45 kW ) from a single cylinder ( 11 @-@ inch diameter ( 280 mm ) , 12 @-@ inch stroke ( 300 mm ) ) . The firebox could burn wood , coal , or oil as fuel . Carrying 675 US gallons ( 2 @,@ 560 l ; 562 imp gal ) of water , the traction engine weighed 48 @,@ 000 pounds ( 22 @,@ 000 kg ) and rode on huge metal wheels . Holt 's tractors were popular despite their weight and awkward size because they could harvest large fields for one @-@ sixth the cost of a horse @-@ drawn combine . Foresters soon adapted them to haul redwood logs out of road @-@ less forests . By 1897 , the company had about 200 employees and had sold over 800 of their combined harvesters in California . Holt Manufacturing made about 130 steam @-@ powered tractors between 1890 and 1904 . 
 The steam tractors were extremely heavy , sometimes weighing 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) per horsepower , and often sank into the rich , soft earth of the San Joaquin Valley Delta farmland surrounding Stockton , California . Holt tried to solve the problem by increasing the size and width of the wheels , but this also made the tractors increasingly complex , expensive and difficult to maintain . One tractor had wheels 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) tall and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide , producing a tractor 46 feet ( 14 m ) wide . Holt could spend hours in his private workshop , and experimented by adding multiple wheels and ultimately with a track @-@ laying technique . 
 = = = First workable crawling tread = = = 
 Many people had attempted to add tracks to moving machines . Over 100 patents had already been issued worldwide , but all failed to work in practical situations . In 1903 Benjamin Holt paid Alvin Lombard US $ 60 @,@ 000 for the right to produce vehicles under Lombard 's patent for the Lombard Steam Log <unk> . The center of innovation was in England , and in the same year Holt traveled to England to learn more about ongoing development . During that period , the chief engineer ( and managing director ) of Richard Hornsby & Sons in Grantham , England , David Roberts , was experimenting with a chain @-@ track . Hornsby 's design incorporated a steering clutch that varied the speed of each set of wheels , allowing the operator to turn the tractor by retarding one tread or the other . Roberts of Hornsby & Sons obtained a patent for their design in July 1904 . 
 By December 1903 , Holt wielded considerable influence over former competitors , including Houser @-@ Haines Manufacturing and Mattison @-@ Williamson Works . 
 Holt returned to Stockton and applied his skills and his company 's expertise in metallurgy , design , and testing to develop a workable track @-@ laying system . He replaced the wheels on a 40 horsepower ( 30 kW ) Holt steamer , No. 77 , with a set of wooden tracks bolted to chains . On Thanksgiving Day , November 24 , 1904 , he successfully tested the updated machine plowing the soggy delta land of Roberts Island . Company photographer Charles Clements was reported to have observed that the tractor crawled like a caterpillar , and Holt seized on the metaphor . " Caterpillar it is . That 's the name for it ! " Others reported that Holt got the name from British troops who witnessed a working prototype of Hornsby 's track @-@ type vehicle in July 1907 . Continuous tracks allowed practical cultivation of the rich farmland on an industrial scale . The invention also allowed planters to reclaim thousands of acres of delta land previously unusable for farming . 
 Holt began producing models under the Caterpillar brand . His first production model had a dual @-@ track frame 30 inches ( 760 mm ) high by 42 inches ( 1 @,@ 100 mm ) wide by 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) long . Its tracks used 3 by 4 inches ( 76 mm × 102 mm ) slats made of the same redwood used previously to produce wagon wheels . Holt sold the first model of steam @-@ powered tractor crawlers for US $ 5 @,@ 500 . By 1915 , the Holt company employed 1 @,@ 000 workers in its Stockton plant . Nearly 2 @,@ 000 Caterpillar crawlers had been sold in more than 20 countries . 
 = = = Gasoline engines = = = 
 Pliny E. Holt , the son of Benjamin 's half @-@ brother , William Harrison Holt , had been working with Stockton Wheel Company for the past nine years . In 1906 , he was named president of the newly formed Aurora Engine Company , named after Aurora Street in Stockton where it was located . The new company manufactured gasoline engines to replace the large , heavy steam boilers used to power the earlier Holt tractors . A gasoline engine considerably reduced the overall size and weight of a tractor , produced more power per pound of weight , and reduced the tractor 's cost , making it more cost @-@ effective and affordable . Holt 's most popular gasoline engine tractor was a Model 75 , weighing 24 @,@ 000 pounds ( 11 @,@ 000 kg ) with a 75 horsepower ( 56 kW ) engine . Pliny was also treasurer of another subsidiary , the Houser and Haines Manufacturing Company of Stockton , from 1905 – 09 . 
 As well as having a better power @-@ to @-@ weight ratio , a gasoline @-@ engined tractor required fewer men to operate it . Competing steam engines typically required a crew of seven , including one highly skilled and well @-@ paid , licensed " farm engineer " . He was responsible for rising in the middle of the night to start the boiler fire to get up steam by first light . Steam traction boilers had a huge need for water and fuel , either coal or wood . Much of the seven @-@ man crew 's time was spent keeping it fueled . 
 = = = Tiller wheel = = = 
 C. L. Best introduced a crawler tractor in 1913 that was virtually a carbon copy of Holt 's design . Holt 's tractors had a conventional wheel on the front , which was used to steer , and crawling @-@ type wheels on the back , but otherwise looked very similar to a traction engine . During 1914 , both Best and Holt introduced models without the front " tiller " or steering wheel . Holt offered the Caterpillar 45 and Best introduced his C. L. Best Model 40 " Tracklayer " . 
 = = Patents and trademark disputes = = 
 Benjamin Holt aggressively defended his patents and was quick to sue anyone he felt might be infringing his rights . In June 1899 , he claimed that the Haines @-@ Houser 's tractors used certain devices for which Holt held the trademark . Holt sent all farmers who owned Haines @-@ Houser tractors in Yolo County , California , a letter containing a demand that they stop using the competitor 's harvesters or face a lawsuit . In the same month he sued William W. Nelson , George W. Bailey , Henry K. <unk> , Hugh A. Logan , William Sullivan and three other Sullivans for infringement of his patents for " traveling threshers and combined harvesters . " The defendants successfully filed a demurrer , getting the suit dismissed 16 months later . Competitors latched onto Holt 's litigious nature and warned farmers considering buying his equipment that they might be prosecuted for patent infringement . 
 = = = Holt payment to Best = = = 
 In 1905 , a patent infringement lawsuit ensued between the two . After three years of legal battles , the two companies decided to settle out of court . The parties resolved two suits when Holt made a cash payment to C. L. Best and provided C. L. Best a license giving them access to all Holt patents applying to manufacturing the C. L. Best 's " <unk> . " In 1916 , C. L. Best bought his father 's old factory in San Leandro , which Holt had closed after acquiring the company . C. L. Best built a new factory on the same location . His company gained attention for its continued improvements to its products . 
 = = = Holt buys Lombard patent = = = 
 Holt received a patent on December 7 , 1907 , for his improved " Traction Engine " ( " improvement in vehicles , and especially of the traction engine class ; and included endless traveling platform supports upon which the engine is carried " ) . In 1908 , he designed a gasoline engine to power the tractor . 
 Although Holt had paid Alvin Orlando Lombard US $ 20 @,@ 000 in 1903 ( about $ 526 @,@ 741 today ) for rights to use his patents , Lombard visited Holt in 1910 complaining of patent infringement . In the opinion of Holt 's " very expensive lawyers " , they concluded that Lombard 's patents had little value due to prior art . So when Lombard visited , Holt calmly took him on a leisurely country drive in his Oldsmobile roadster , and when Lombard raised the issue of money , Holt merely suggested that they divide the country . Lombard should take up the Northern woods and Holt would take the remainder of the nation . Holt promised to write a letter to that effect , although he never did . 
 = = = Best invalidates Lombard patent = = = 
 In 1915 , the C. L. Best Gas Traction Co. exhibited its new " Tracklayer " at the California state fair . Holt once again sued , this time for patent infringement . C. L. Best thought that his best defense was to prove that Holt 's patents violated Lombard 's patents . One of Best 's lawyers , Henry Montgomery , visited Lombard and sought his assistance as a friendly witness . Lombard was more than friendly . He allegedly responded , " By God , young man , I 'm glad to see you . If God Almighty could charter me to kill a man , I 'd get on the train and go to California and kill old Ben Holt . " Best bought all rights to Lombard 's 1901 and 1907 patents for $ 20 @,@ 000 , which pre @-@ dated Holt 's " crawler " patents also purchased from Lombard . Holt 's earlier rights to the Lombard patents were annulled and Best counter @-@ sued Holt . 
 = = = Caterpillar trademark = = = 
 Holt was credited with producing the first practical continuous tracks for use with tractors and he registered " Caterpillar " as a trademark in 1910 . Since Holt had trademarked Caterpillar , Best named his tractors <unk> . In 1911 , Holt began building the " Holt Model 60 Caterpillar " in its Stockton plant and a " Holt Model 40 @-@ 60 Caterpillar " at its East Peoria factory . Additional models followed , including the " Holt Model 60 @-@ 75 Caterpillar " , which sold very well , eventually renamed as the " Holt Model 75 Caterpillar " , their best @-@ selling front tiller @-@ wheeled tractor . 
 = = = New Best competitor re @-@ emerges = = = 
 In 1910 , Daniel Best 's son C. L. Best left the Holt Manufacturing Company where he had been general manager and re @-@ established his father 's company under the name C. L. Best Gas Traction Co. in Elmhurst , near San Leandro , California . Holt immediately sued , claiming breach of contract and infringement because as owner of the Best Manufacturing Company , he believed he also owned the " Best " name . Holt did not prevail and Best continued to produce tractors that directly competed with Holt 's models . 
 Holt continued to innovate and worked to build a tractor that could perform rugged tasks yet was not heavy itself . He fitted adjustable blades onto his tractors and hired them out to grade roads and move soil and rock for construction purposes . By 1916 , Holt had sold over 2 @,@ 000 tractors worldwide . 
 = = Early military uses = = 
 In England , starting in 1905 , David Roberts of Richard Hornsby & Sons had attempted to interest British military officials in a tracked vehicle , but failed . Holt bought the patents related to the " chain track " track @-@ type tractor from Richard Hornsby & Sons in 1912 for £ 4 @,@ 000 ( almost £ 400 @,@ 000 at 2012 value ) . Unlike the Holt tractor , which had a steerable tiller wheel in front of the tracks , the Hornsby crawler was steered by controlling power to each track . 
 When World War I broke out , with the problem of trench warfare and the difficulty of transporting supplies to the front , the pulling power of crawling @-@ type tractors drew the attention of the military . Company Vice @-@ President and general manager Pliny Holt had retired and traveled to Washington D.C. to offer his services , and was appointed by Gen. C. C. Williams , Chief of Ordnance , to serve as chairman of the board organized to handle the production of the " Caterpillar " Artillery program . 
 The British War Office ordered a Holt tractor and put it through trials at Aldershot . Although it was not as powerful as the 105 horsepower ( 78 kW ) Foster @-@ Daimler tractor , the 75 horsepower ( 56 kW ) Holt was better suited to haul heavy loads over uneven ground . Without a load , the Holt tractor managed a walking pace of 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . Towing a load , it could manage 2 miles per hour ( 3 @.@ 2 km / h ) . Most importantly , Holt tractors were readily available in quantity . The War Office was suitably impressed and chose it as a gun @-@ tractor . Representatives of the French company Schneider were also present at the trial , and they ordered a number of Holt 's <unk> model , known as the " Baby , " which unlike the 75 and 110 hp models , was fully tracked , with no forward tiller wheel . 
 The Holt 75 model gasoline @-@ powered tractor was the first " standard " tractor adopted in quantity . Holt vice president Murray M. Baker reported that the tractors weighed about 18 @,@ 000 pounds ( 8 @,@ 200 kg ) and had 120 horsepower ( 89 kW ) . The company could not meet the demand for their tractors and licensed other manufacturers to build their design . 
 Over the next four years , they became a major artillery tractor , mainly used to haul medium guns like the 6 @-@ inch howitzer , the 60 @-@ pounder , and later the 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch howitzer . 
 = = = <unk> artillery and supplies = = = 
 The Allies frequently used crawler tractors in place of horses for hauling artillery and other supplies , the tracks often allowing them to negotiate terrain that was impassable to horse teams and wheeled vehicles . The British Army Service Corps also used them to haul long trains of freight wagons over the unimproved dirt tracks behind the front . They were particularly useful in October 1917 , when Britain and France each sent six divisions to assist the Italians . Holt tractors ferried the supplies and ammunition over the steep and twisting mountain roads in less than two weeks . Two companies of Holt tractors with the dual role of gun @-@ tractors and supply trains were also used in the Mesopotamia campaign 
 = = = Influence on development of tanks = = = 
 In Europe , Major Ernest Swinton , sent to France as an army war correspondent , very soon saw the potential of a track @-@ laying tractor . He proposed to Sir Maurice Hankey , Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , that the British build a power @-@ driven , bullet @-@ proof , tracked vehicle that could destroy enemy machine @-@ guns . Holt tractors were " the inspiration for the development of the British tank . " 
 The British War Office carried out a rudimentary trial with a Holt tractor . Several key figures in tank development , including <unk> Estienne and Joseph Vollmer , were influenced by Holt tractors and investigated the possibilities of tracked fighting vehicles . They decided not to pursue production of the Holt design and instead independently developed the first British tanks . The French also purchased Holts from the USA and used them as the basis for their own early tanks , the Schneider and Saint @-@ Chamond . Later in the War , Holt tractors commandeered by the Austro @-@ Hungarian army and loaned to the Germans formed the basis of the German A7V tank . 
 By 1916 , about 1 @,@ 000 of Holt 's Caterpillar tractors were in use by the British in World War I. By the end of the war , the British War Office had received 2 @,@ 100 Holt tractors , about 1 @,@ 800 of the Holt Model 45 " Caterpillars " ; 1 @,@ 500 of the Holt Model 75 " Caterpillars " , and 90 of the Holt six @-@ cylinder Model 120 " Caterpillars " , about one @-@ eighth of approximately 5 @,@ 000 Holt vehicles used by all Allied forces . 
 = = = U.S. tank prototypes = = = 
 In Washington , Pliny Holt supervised the design and building of 10 Ton , 5 Ton , and 2 @.@ 5 Ton artillery tractors based on the Caterpillar crawler tractor design , at the request of the Naval Consulting board , which work was finally completed in conjunction with the engineers of the Westinghouse company . The first tank Holt built was the Holt Gas @-@ Electric , a prototype utilizing a combined gasoline @-@ electric propulsion . A Holt 90 horsepower ( 67 kW ) four cylinder engine produced power for a <unk> generator , which in its turn provided current to drive two electric motors , one motor for each track . It did not progress beyond the prototype stage . 
 Holt also produced tracked gun @-@ carriers . The first prototype was the " Caterpillar " Mark I Gun Mount , which carried an 8 inches ( 200 mm ) howitzer , weighed 58 @,@ 000 pounds ( 26 @,@ 000 kg ) and had a road speed of 1 mile per hour ( 1 @.@ 6 km / h ) to 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . Additional prototypes were produced , including the " Mark II " and " Mark III " , and the " Mark IV " , which departed slightly from the prior models . Pliny completed a preliminary study of a one @-@ man tank which was later built by the Ford company . The prototypes were rejected after trials found that their size and maneuverability did not offer the relative agility required by a tank for cross @-@ country travel . 
 Holt also produced a 75mm self @-@ propelled gun that could travel at 28 miles per hour ( 45 km / h ) , exceeding the military requirement of 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) , and climb a 45 @-@ degree slope . Before the work could be completed , the Armistice was signed and the war ended . Self @-@ propelled artillery however did not garner attention again until the end of the 1930s , just before World War II . 
 During 1919 , Pliny Holt returned to Stockton and the Holt company where the " Mark VII " was designed and built . It had a 75 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) gun mounted and ran at a top speed of 18 miles per hour ( 29 km / h ) . In 1921 , the company finished the " Mark VI " , which achieved speeds of up to 31 miles per hour ( 50 km / h ) on a test run from Stockton to San Francisco and back . 
 = = = British acknowledgement = = = 
 In April 1918 , British Colonel Ernest Dunlop Swinton , who had unsuccessfully advocated using the Holt 75 as the base for an armoured fighting vehicle , traveled to Stockton while on a tour of the USA , and publicly thanked Benjamin Holt and his workers for their contribution to the war effort , and relayed England 's gratitude to the developer of the track . A wooden , miniature mockup of an early British tank , powered by a motorcycle engine , was built especially for and showcased in pictures of Colonel Swinton 's visit . 
 = Hurricane Dolores ( 1974 ) = 
 Hurricane Dolores was regarded as the worst hurricane to strike Acapulco since 1938 . Developing on June 13 , 1974 , the system rapidly organized into a tropical storm the next day off the southern coast of Mexico . Over the following day , Dolores developed an eye @-@ like feature and attained hurricane status . With peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , the storm made landfall near Acapulco . Once onshore , Dolores rapidly dissipated and was last noted on June 17 . 
 Across Southwestern Mexico , Hurricane Dolores produced heavy rains that triggered widespread flooding and mudslides . Numerous roads sustained damage , separating communities from surrounding areas . At least 18 people were killed and 32 others were injured by the storm . Additionally , an estimated 173 @,@ 000 people were affected across the country . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 13 , 1974 , a tropical disturbance was identified several hundred miles south of Mexico . Tracking westward , rapid development ensued the following day and the system was classified a tropical depression around 12 UTC . Shortly thereafter , satellite intensity estimates indicated further strengthening and the storm was upgraded to Tropical Storm Dolores . Development temporarily slowed on June 15 as the structure gradually organized . Enhanced by the Intertropical Convergence Zone , a band of deep convection wrapped into the storm . A banding eye @-@ feature developed later that day , indicating Dolores to be near hurricane strength . 
 Late on June 15 , Dolores ' forward motion slowed as it turned almost due north towards the Mexican coastline . Around 00 UTC on June 16 , it is estimated that the storm intensified into a hurricane , with sustained winds peaking at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Based on satellite imagery , Dolores is also estimated to have attained a barometric pressure of 973 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 73 inHg ) . Roughly 18 hours later , Dolores made landfall near Acapulco . Winds in the area were measured up to 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) . Once onshore , rapid dissipation ensued and Dolores was last noted early on June 17 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Regarded as the worst hurricane since 1938 , Dolores brought torrential rains and high winds to much of Southwestern Mexico . Along the coast , near where Dolores made landfall , 30 homes were destroyed by winds estimated in excess of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Several rivers over @-@ topped their banks , inundating nearby communities . In the low @-@ lying suburbs of Acapulco , nearly 600 people were injured or left homeless . According to the Centro Nacional de Prevención de Desastres ( National Center for Prevention of Disasters ) , 18 people were killed in the states of Guerrero and Oaxaca ; media reports indicated a higher toll of 22 . Estimated losses from the storm exceeded $ 4 million . Nine people were killed by landslides in rural mountain communities surrounding Acapulco . The Costa Chica Highway , which runs from Acapulco to <unk> , sustained major damage and areas surrounding the roadway were declared disaster areas . Offshore , six people were listed as missing after their trawler , the Peregrine , was caught in the storm . In the storm 's wake , the Mexican Army was deployed in Oaxaca to distribute relief supplies , such as food , medicines , and blankets to an estimated 173 @,@ 000 people affected by the hurricane . 
 = Bryozoa = 
 The Bryozoa , also known as the Polyzoa , Ectoprocta or commonly as moss animals , are a phylum of aquatic invertebrate animals . Typically about 0 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) long , they are filter feeders that sieve food particles out of the water using a retractable lophophore , a " crown " of tentacles lined with cilia . Most marine species live in tropical waters , but a few occur in oceanic trenches , and others are found in polar waters . One class lives only in a variety of freshwater environments , and a few members of a mostly marine class prefer brackish water . Over 4 @,@ 000 living species are known . One genus is solitary and the rest are colonial . 
 The phylum was originally called " Polyzoa " , but this term was superseded by " Bryozoa " in 1831 . Another group of animals discovered subsequently , whose filtering mechanism looked similar , was also included in " Bryozoa " until 1869 , when the two groups were noted to be very different internally . The more recently discovered group was given the name Entoprocta , while the original " Bryozoa " were called " Ectoprocta " . However , " Bryozoa " has remained the more widely used term for the latter group . 
 Individuals in bryozoan ( ectoproct ) colonies are called zooids , since they are not fully independent animals . All colonies contain autozooids , which are responsible for feeding and excretion . Colonies of some classes have various types of non @-@ feeding specialist zooids , some of which are hatcheries for fertilized eggs , and some classes also have special zooids for defense of the colony . The class Cheilostomata have the largest number of species , possibly because they have the widest range of specialist zooids . A few species can creep very slowly by using spiny defensive zooids as legs . <unk> supply nutrients to non @-@ feeding zooids by channels that vary between classes . All zooids , including those of the solitary species , consist of a cystid that provides the body wall and produces the exoskeleton and a polypide that contains the internal organs and the lophophore or other specialist extensions . Zooids have no special excretory organs , and the polypides of autozooids are scrapped when the polypides become overloaded by waste products ; usually the body wall then grows a replacement polypide . In autozooids the gut is U @-@ shaped , with the mouth inside the " crown " of tentacles and the anus outside it . Colonies take a variety of forms , including fans , bushes and sheets . The Cheilostomata produce mineralized exoskeletons and form single @-@ layered sheets which encrust over surfaces . 
 Zooids of all the freshwater species are simultaneous hermaphrodites . Although those of many marine species function first as males and then as females , their colonies always contain a combination of zooids that are in their male and female stages . All species emit sperm into the water . Some also release ova into the water , while others capture sperm via their tentacles to fertilize their ova internally . In some species the larvae have large yolks , go to feed , and quickly settle on a surface . Others produce larvae that have little yolk but swim and feed for a few days before settling . After settling , all larvae undergo a radical metamorphosis that destroys and rebuilds almost all the internal tissues . Freshwater species also produce statoblasts that lie dormant until conditions are favorable , which enables a colony 's lineage to survive even if severe conditions kill the mother colony . 
 Predators of marine bryozoans include nudibranchs ( sea slugs ) , fish , sea urchins , pycnogonids , crustaceans , mites and starfish . Freshwater bryozoans are preyed on by snails , insects , and fish . In Thailand , many populations of one freshwater species have been wiped out by an introduced species of snail . A fast @-@ growing invasive bryozoan off the northeast and northwest coasts of the USA has reduced kelp forests so much that it has affected local fish and invertebrate populations . Bryozoans have spread diseases to fish farms and fishermen . Chemicals extracted from a marine bryozoan species have been investigated for treatment of cancer and Alzheimer 's disease , but analyses have not been encouraging . 
 <unk> skeletons of bryozoans first appear in rocks from Early Ordovician period , making it the last major phylum to appear in the fossil record . This has led researchers to suspect that bryozoans had arisen earlier but were initially unmineralized , and may have differed significantly from fossilized and modern forms . Early fossils are mainly of erect forms , but encrusting forms gradually became dominant . It is uncertain whether the phylum is monophyletic . Bryozoans ' evolutionary relationships to other phyla are also unclear , partly because scientists ' view of the family tree of animals is mainly influenced by better @-@ known phyla . Both morphological and molecular phylogeny analyses disagree over bryozoans ' relationships with entoprocts , about whether bryozoans should be grouped with brachiopods and phoronids in Lophophorata , and whether bryozoans should be considered protostomes or deuterostomes . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Distinguishing features = = = 
 Bryozoans , phoronids and brachiopods strain food out of the water by means of a lophophore , a " crown " of hollow tentacles . Bryozoans form colonies consisting of clones called zooids that are typically about 0 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) long . Phoronids resemble bryozoan zooids but are 2 to 20 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 to 7 @.@ 87 in ) long and , although they often grow in clumps , do not form colonies consisting of clones . Brachiopods , generally thought to be closely related to bryozoans and phoronids , are distinguished by having shells rather like those of bivalves . All three of these phyla have a coelom , an internal cavity lined by mesothelium . Some encrusting bryozoan colonies with mineralized exoskeletons look very like small corals . However , bryozoan colonies are founded by an <unk> , which is round rather than shaped like a normal zooid of that species . On the other hand , the founding polyp of a coral has a shape like that of its daughter polyps , and coral zooids have no coelom or lophophore . 
 Entoprocts , another phylum of filter @-@ feeders , look rather like bryozoans but their lophophore @-@ like feeding structure has solid tentacles , their anus lies inside rather than outside the base of the " crown " and they have no coelom . 
 = = = Types of zooid = = = 
 All bryozoans are colonial except for one genus , <unk> . Individual members of a bryozoan colony are about 0 @.@ 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 020 in ) long and are known as zooids , since they are not fully independent animals . All colonies contain feeding zooids , known as autozooids , and those of some groups also contain non @-@ feeding specialist heterozooids ; colony members are genetically identical and co @-@ operate , rather like the organs of larger animals . What type of zooid grows where in a colony is determined by chemical signals from the colony as a whole or sometimes in response to the scent of predators or rival colonies . 
 The bodies of all types have two main parts . The cystid consists of the body wall and whatever type of exoskeleton is secreted by the epidermis . The exoskeleton may be organic ( chitin , polysaccharide or protein ) or made of the mineral calcium carbonate . The body wall consists of the epidermis , basal lamina ( a mat of non @-@ cellular material ) , connective tissue , muscles , and the mesothelium which lines the coelom ( main body cavity ) – except that in one class , the mesothelium is split into two separate layers , the inner one forming a membranous sac that floats freely and contains the coelom , and the outer one attached to the body wall and enclosing the membranous sac in a <unk> . The other main part of the bryozoan body , known as the polypide and situated almost entirely within the cystid , contains the nervous system , digestive system , some specialized muscles and the feeding apparatus or other specialized organs that take the place of the feeding apparatus . 
 The Bryozoa , known as " moss animals " , currently contain about 5 @,@ 000 known species . The different species can come together to form a colony that can attach to different kind of rock surfaces as well as shells and algae . Of the 5 @,@ 000 species the 125 that have the most abundant population are known to attach themselves to the bottom of boats , pilings , piers and docks . These species are thought to be nuisance to boaters because they slow down the ship if they are attached to the bottom of the hull . However , there are species which have chemical compounds that can be used for medicine . One common species of the bryozoan is used for a serious anti cancer drug that is currently being used for testing . 
 = = = = Feeding zooids = = = = 
 The most common type of zooid is the feeding <unk> , in which the polypide bears a " crown " of hollow tentacles called a lophophore , which captures food particles from the water . In all colonies a large percentage of zooids are autozooids , and some consist entirely of autozooids , some of which also engage in reproduction . 
 The basic shape of the " crown " is a full circle . In the class Phylactolaemata the crown appears U @-@ shaped , but this impression is created by a deep dent in the rim of the crown , which has no gap in the fringe of tentacles . The sides of the tentacles bear fine hairs called cilia , whose beating drives a water current from the tips of the tentacles to their bases , where it exits . Food particles that collide with the tentacles are trapped by mucus , and further cilia on the inner surfaces of the tentacles convey the particles towards the mouth , which lies in the center of the base of the " crown " . The method used by ectoprocts is known as " upstream collecting " , as food particles are captured before they pass through the field of cilia that creates the feeding current . This method is also used by phoronids , brachiopods and pterobranchs . 
 The lophophore and mouth are mounted on a flexible tube , called the " invert " because it can be turned inside @-@ out and withdrawn into the polypide , rather like the finger of a rubber glove ; in this position the lophophore lies inside the invert and is folded like the spokes of an umbrella . The invert is withdrawn , sometimes within 60 milliseconds , by a pair of retractor muscles that are anchored at the far end of the cystid . Sensors at the tips of the tentacles may check for signs of danger before the invert and lophophore are fully extended . Extension is driven by an increase in internal fluid pressure , which species with flexible exoskeletons produce by contracting circular muscles that lie just inside the body wall , while species with a membranous sac use circular muscles to squeeze this . Some species with rigid exoskeletons have a flexible membrane that replaces part of the exoskeleton , and transverse muscles anchored on the far side of the exoskeleton increase the fluid pressure by pulling the membrane inwards . In others there is no gap in the protective skeleton , and the transverse muscles pull on a flexible sac which is connected to the water outside by a small pore ; the expansion of the sac increases the pressure inside the body and pushes the invert and lophophore out . In some species the retracted invert and lophophore are protected by an operculum ( " lid " ) , which is closed by muscles and opened by fluid pressure . In one class , a hollow lobe called the " epistome " <unk> the mouth . 
 The gut is U @-@ shaped , running from the mouth , in the center of the lophophore , down into the animal 's interior and then back to the anus , which is located on the invert , outside and usually below the lophophore . A network of strands of mesothelium called " funiculi " ( " little ropes " ) connects the mesothelium covering the gut with that lining the body wall . The wall of each strand is made of mesothelium , and surrounds a space filled with fluid , thought to be blood . A colony 's zooids are connected , enabling autozooids to share food with each other and with any non @-@ feeding heterozooids . The method of connection varies between the different classes of bryozoans , ranging from quite large gaps in the body walls to small pores through which nutrients are passed by funiculi . 
 There is a nerve ring round the pharynx ( throat ) and a ganglion that serves as a brain to one side of this . Nerves run from the ring and ganglion to the tentacles and to the rest of the body . Bryozoans have no specialized sense organs , but cilia on the tentacles act as sensors . Members of the genus <unk> grow towards the sun , and therefore must be able to detect light . In colonies of some species , signals are transmitted between zooids through nerves that pass through pores in the body walls , and coordinate activities such as feeding and the retraction of lophophores . 
 The solitary individuals of <unk> are autozooids with pear @-@ shaped bodies . The wider ends have up to 15 short , muscular projections by which the animals anchor themselves to sand or gravel and pull themselves through the sediments . 
 = = = = <unk> and vibracula = = = = 
 Some authorities use the term avicularia to refer to any type of zooid in which the lophophore is replaced by an extension that serves some protective function , while others restrict the term to those that defend the colony by snapping at invaders and small predators , killing some and biting the appendages of others . In some species the snapping zooids are mounted on a peduncle ( stalk ) , their bird @-@ like appearance responsible for the term – Charles Darwin described these as like " the head and beak of a vulture in miniature , seated on a neck and capable of movement " . <unk> avicularia are placed upside @-@ down on their stalks . The " lower jaws " are modified versions of the opercula that protect the retracted lophophores in autozooids of some species , and are snapped shut " like a mousetrap " by similar muscles , while the beak @-@ shaped upper jaw is the inverted body wall . In other species the avicularia are stationary box @-@ like zooids laid the normal way up , so that the modified operculum snaps down against the body wall . In both types the modified operculum is opened by other muscles that attach to it , or by internal muscles that raise the fluid pressure by pulling on a flexible membrane . The actions of these snapping zooids are controlled by small , highly modified polypides that are located inside the " mouth " and bear tufts of short sensory cilia . These zooids appear in various positions : some take the place of autozooids , some fit into small gaps between autozooids , and small avicularia may occur on the surfaces of other zooids . 
 In vibracula , regarded by some as a type of avicularia , the operculum is modified to form a long bristle that has a wide range of motion . They may function as defenses against predators and invaders , or as cleaners . In some species that form mobile colonies , vibracula around the edges are used as legs for burrowing and walking . 
 = = = = Other types of colonial zooid = = = = 
 <unk> ( from Greek <unk> meaning " empty " ) consist only of the body wall and funicular strands crossing the interior , and no polypide . In some species they form the stems of branching structures , while in others they act as spacers that enable colonies to grow quickly in a new direction . 
 <unk> form defensive spines , and sometimes appear on top of autozooids . <unk> act as brood chambers for fertilized eggs . Some species have miniature <unk> with small single @-@ tentacled polypides , and these may grow on other zooids or within the body walls of autozooids that have degenerated . 
 = = = Colony forms and composition = = = 
 Although zooids are microscopic , colonies range in size from 1 centimeter ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) to over 1 meter ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . However , the majority are under 10 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) across . The shapes of colonies vary widely , depend on the pattern of budding by which they grow , the variety of zooids present and the type and amount of skeletal material they secrete . 
 Some marine species are bush @-@ like or fan @-@ like , supported by " trunks " and " branches " formed by <unk> , with feeding autozooids growing from these . Colonies of these types are generally unmineralized but may have exoskeletons made of chitin . Others look like small corals , producing heavy lime skeletons . Many species form colonies which consist of sheets of autozooids . These sheets may form leaves , tufts or , in the genus <unk> , structures that resemble an open head of lettuce . 
 The most common marine form , however , is encrusting , in which a one @-@ layer sheet of zooids spreads over a hard surface or over seaweed . Some encrusting colonies may grow to over 50 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) and contain about 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 zooids . These species generally have exoskeletons reinforced with calcium carbonate , and the openings through which the lophophores protrude are on the top or outer surface . The moss @-@ like appearance of encrusting colonies is responsible for the phylum 's name ( Ancient Greek words <unk> <unk> meaning " moss " and <unk> <unk> meaning " animal " ) . Large colonies of encrusting species often have " chimneys " , gaps in the canopy of lophophores , through which they swiftly expel water that has been sieved , and thus avoid re @-@ filtering water that is already exhausted . They are formed by patches of non @-@ feeding heterozooids . New chimneys appear near the edges of expanding colonies , at points where the speed of the outflow is already high , and do not change position if the water flow changes . 
 Some freshwater species secrete a mass of gelatinous material , up to 1 meter ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in diameter , to which the zooids stick . Other freshwater species have plant @-@ like shapes with " trunks " and " branches " , which may stand erect or spread over the surface . A few species can creep at about 2 centimeters ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) per day . 
 Each colony grows by asexual budding from a single zooid known as the <unk> , which is round rather than shaped like a normal zooid . This occurs at the tips of " trunks " or " branches " in forms that have this structure . <unk> colonies grow round their edges . In species with calcareous exoskeletons , these do not mineralize until the zooids are fully grown . Colony lifespans range from one to about 12 years , and the short @-@ lived species pass though several generations in one season . 
 Species that produce defensive zooids do so only when threats have already appeared , and may do so within 48 hours . The theory of " induced defenses " suggests that production of defenses is expensive and that colonies which defend themselves too early or too heavily will have reduced growth rates and lifespans . This " last minute " approach to defense is feasible because the loss of zooids to a single attack is unlikely to be significant . Colonies of some encrusting species also produce special heterozooids to limit the expansion of other encrusting organisms , especially other bryozoans . In some cases this response is more belligerent if the opposition is smaller , which suggests that zooids on the edge of a colony can somehow sense the size of the opponent . Some species consistently prevail against certain others , but most turf wars are indecisive and the combatants soon turn to growing in uncontested areas . Bryozoans competing for territory do not use the sophisticated techniques employed by sponges or corals , possibly because the shortness of bryozoan lifespans makes heavy investment in turf wars unprofitable . 
 Bryozoans have contributed to carbonate sedimentation in marine life since the Ordovician period . Bryozoans take responsibility for many of the colony forms , which have evolved in different taxonomic groups and vary in sediment producing ability . The nine basic bryozoan colony @-@ forms include : encrusting , dome @-@ shaped , palmate , foliose , <unk> , robust branching , delicate branching , articulated and free @-@ living . Most of these sediments come from two distinct groups of colonies : <unk> , delicate branching , robust branching and palmate ; and <unk> . <unk> colonies generate rough particles both as sediment and components of <unk> coral reefs . The delicate colonies however , create both coarse sediment and form the cores of deep @-@ water , <unk> biogenic mounds . Nearly all post- bryozoan sediments are made up of growth forms , with the addition to free @-@ living colonies which include significant numbers of various colonies . “ In contrast to the Palaeozoic , post @-@ Palaeozoic bryozoans generated sediment varying more widely with the size of their grains ; they grow as they moved from mud , to sand , to gravel . ” 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The phylum was originally called " Polyzoa " , but this name was soon replaced by Ehrenberg 's term " Bryozoa " . The name " Bryozoa " was originally applied only to the animals also known as " Ectoprocta " , in which the anus lies outside the " crown " of tentacles ( based on the Ancient Greek prefix <unk> meaning " outside " and word <unk> meaning " anus " ) . After the discovery of the Entoprocta , in which the anus lies within a " crown " of tentacles ( based on the Ancient Greek prefix <unk> meaning " inside " and word <unk> meaning " anus " ) , the name " Bryozoa " was used at phylum level to include the two classes Ectoprocta and Entoprocta . However , in 1869 Hinrich Nitsche regarded the two groups as quite distinct for a variety of reasons , and coined the name " Ectoprocta " for Ehrenberg 's " Bryozoa " . Despite their apparently similar methods of feeding , they differed markedly anatomically ; in addition to the different positions of the anus , ectoprocts have hollow tentacles and a coelom , while entoprocts have solid tentacles and no coelom . Hence the two groups are now widely regarded as separate phyla , and the name " Bryozoa " is now synonymous with " Ectoprocta " . This has remained the majority view ever since , although most publications have preferred the name " Bryozoa " rather than " Ectoprocta " . Nevertheless , some notable scientists have continued to regard the " Ectoprocta " and Entoprocta as close relatives and group them under " Bryozoa " . 
 The ambiguity about the scope of the name " Bryozoa " led to proposals in the 1960s and 1970s that it should be avoided and the unambiguous term " Ectoprocta " should be used . However , the change would have made it harder to find older works about in which the phylum was called " Bryozoa " , and the desire to avoid ambiguity , if applied consistently to all classifications , would have necessitated renaming of several other phyla and many lower @-@ level groups . In practice , zoological naming of split or merged groups of animals is complex and not completely consistent . Works since 2000 have used various names to resolve the ambiguity , including : " Bryozoa " , " Ectoprocta " , " Bryozoa ( Ectoprocta ) " , and " Ectoprocta ( Bryozoa ) " . Some have used more than one approach in the same work . 
 The common name " moss animals " is based on the Greek <unk> ( moss ) and <unk> ( animals ) , and refers to the mossy appearance of encrusting species . 
 Up until recently ( 2008 ) there were " inadequately known and misunderstood type species belonging to the <unk> Bryozoan family <unk> . " ( Taylor , Zaton 2008 ) Modern research and experiments have been done using low @-@ vacuum scanning electron microscopy of <unk> type material to critically examine and perhaps revise the taxonomy of three genera belonging to this family , including Oncousoecia , <unk> , and <unk> . This method permits data to be obtained that would be difficult to recognize with an optical microscope . The valid type species of Oncousoecia was found to be Oncousoecia lobulata . This interpretation stabilizes Oncousoecia by establishing a type species that corresponds to the general usage of the genus . Fellow <unk> <unk> is now believed to be not conspecific with O. lobulata , as previously suggested , but shows enough similarities to be considered a junior synonym of Oncousoecia . <unk> <unk> has also been recently distinguished from O. lobulata and O. <unk> , using this modern method of low vacuum scanning , with which it has been inaccurately synonymized with in the past . A new genus has also been recently discovered called <unk> in the family <unk> , along with 10 relatively new species of bryozoa such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> serratus , <unk> <unk> , <unk> verrucosa , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Classification and diversity = = = 
 Counts of formally described species range between 4 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 500 . The Gymnolaemata and especially Cheilostomata have the greatest numbers of species , possibly because of their wide range of specialist zooids . Under the Linnaean system of classification , which is still used as a convenient way to label groups of organisms , living members of the phylum Bryozoa are divided into : 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 Fossils of about 15 @,@ 000 bryozoan species have been found . Bryozoans are among the three dominant groups of Paleozoic fossils . The oldest species with a mineralized skeleton occurs in the Lower Ordovician . It is likely that the first bryozoans appeared much earlier and were entirely soft @-@ bodied , and the Ordovician fossils record the appearance of mineralized skeletons in this phylum . By the <unk> stage of the Early Ordovician period , about 480 million years ago , all the modern orders of <unk> were present , and the <unk> order of <unk> had appeared by the Middle Ordovician , about 465 million years ago . The Early Ordovician fossils may also represent forms that had already become significantly different from the original members of the phylum . <unk> with <unk> soft tissue are known from the Devonian . Other types of filter feeders appeared around the same time , which suggests that some change made the environment more favorable for this lifestyle . Fossils of cheilostomates , another order of <unk> , first appear in the Mid Jurassic , about 172 million years ago , and these have been the most abundant and diverse bryozoans from the Cretaceous to the present . Evidence compiled from the last 100 million years show that cheilostomates consistently grew over <unk> in territorial struggles , which may help to explain how cheilostomates replaced <unk> as the dominant marine bryozoans . Marine fossils from the Paleozoic era , which ended 251 million years ago , are mainly of erect forms , those from the Mesozoic are fairly equally divided by erect and encrusting forms , and more recent ones are predominantly encrusting . Fossils of the soft , freshwater phylactolaemates are very rare , appear in and after the Late Permian ( which began about 260 million years ago ) and consist entirely of their durable statoblasts . There are no known fossils of freshwater members of other classes . 
 = = = Evolutionary family tree = = = 
 Scientists are divided about whether the Bryozoa ( Ectoprocta ) are a monophyletic group ( whether they include all and only a single ancestor species and all its descendants ) , about what are the phylum 's closest relatives in the family tree of animals , and even about whether they should be regarded as members of the protostomes or deuterostomes , the two major groups that account for all moderately complex animals . 
 The traditional view is that the Bryozoa are a monophyletic group , in which the class Phylactolaemata is most closely related to Stenolaemata and <unk> , the classes that appear earliest in the fossil record . However , in 2005 a molecular phylogeny study that focused on phylactolaemates concluded that these are more closely related to the phylum Phoronida , and especially to the only phoronid species that is colonial , than they are to the other ectoproct classes . That implies that the Entoprocta are not monophyletic , as the Phoronida are a sub @-@ group of ectoprocts but the standard definition of Entoprocta excludes the Phoronida . In 2009 another molecular phylogeny study , using a combination of genes from mitochondria and the cell nucleus , concluded that Bryozoa is a monophyletic phylum , in other words includes all the descendants of a common ancestor that is itself a bryozoan . The analysis also concluded that the classes Phylactolaemata , Stenolaemata and Gymnolaemata are also monophyletic , but could not determine whether Stenolaemata are more closely related to Phylactolaemata or Gymnolaemata . The Gymnolaemata are traditionally divided into the soft @-@ bodied <unk> and mineralized Cheilostomata , but the 2009 analysis considered it more likely that neither of these orders is monophyletic and that mineralized skeletons probably evolved more than once within the early Gymnolaemata . 
 Bryozoans ' relationships with other phyla are uncertain and controversial . Traditional phylogeny , based on anatomy and on the development of the adult forms from embryos , has produced no enduring consensus about the position of ectoprocts . Attempts to reconstruct the family tree of animals have largely ignored ectoprocts and other " minor phyla " , which have received little scientific study because they are generally tiny , have relatively simple body plans , and have little impact on human economies – despite the fact that the " minor phyla " include most of the variety in the evolutionary history of animals . In the opinion of Ruth <unk> , Judith Winston and Frank McKinney , " Our standard interpretation of bryozoan morphology and embryology is a construct resulting from over 100 years of attempts to synthesize a single framework for all invertebrates , " and takes little account of some peculiar features of ectoprocts . In ectoprocts , all of the larva 's internal organs are destroyed during the metamorphosis to the adult form and the adult 's organs are built from the larva 's epidermis and mesoderm , while in other bilaterians some organs including the gut are built from endoderm . In most bilaterian embryos the blastopore , a dent in the outer wall , deepens to become the larva 's gut , but in ectoprocts the blastopore disappears and a new dent becomes the point from which the gut grows . The ectoproct coelom is formed by neither of the processes used by other bilaterians , enterocoely , in which pouches that form on the wall of the gut become separate cavities , nor schizocoely , in which the tissue between the gut and the body wall splits , forming paired cavities . 
 Molecular phylogeny , which attempts to work out the evolutionary family tree of organisms by comparing their biochemistry and especially their genes , has done much to clarify the relationships between the better @-@ known invertebrate phyla . However , the shortage of genetic data about " minor phyla " such as bryozoans and entoprocts has left their relationships to other groups unclear . 
 When entoprocts were discovered in the 19th century , they and bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) were regarded as classes within the phylum Bryozoa , because both groups were sessile animals that filter @-@ fed by means of a crown of tentacles that bore cilia . However , from 1869 onwards increasing awareness of differences , including the position of the entoproct anus inside the feeding structure and the difference in the early pattern of division of cells in their embryos , caused scientists to regard the two groups as separate phyla , and " Bryozoa " became just an alternative name for ectoprocts , in which the anus is outside the feeding organ . A series of molecular phylogeny studies from 1996 to 2006 have also concluded that bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) and entoprocts are not sister groups . However , two well @-@ known zoologists , Claus Nielsen and Thomas Cavalier @-@ Smith , maintain on anatomical and developmental grounds that bryozoans and entoprocts are member of the same phylum , Bryozoa . A molecular phylogeny study in 2007 also supported this old idea , while its conclusions about other phyla agreed with those of several other analyses . 
 By 1891 bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) were grouped with phoronids in a super @-@ phylum called " Tentaculata " . In the 1970s comparisons between phoronid larvae and the cyphonautes larva of some <unk> bryozoans produced suggestions that the bryozoans , most of which are colonial , evolved from a semi @-@ colonial species of phoronid . Brachiopods were also assigned to the " Tentaculata " , which were renamed Lophophorata as they all use a lophophore for filter feeding . Although the majority of scientists accept this , Claus Nielsen thinks these similarities are superficial . The Lophophorata are usually defined as animals with a lophophore , a three @-@ part coelom and a U @-@ shaped gut . In Nielsen 's opinion , phoronids ' and brachiopods ' lophophores are more like those of pterobranchs , which are members of the phylum <unk> . Bryozoan 's tentacles bear cells with multiple cilia , while the corresponding cells of phoronids ' , brachiopods ' and pterobranchs ' lophophores have one cilium per cell ; and bryozoan tentacles have no hemal canal ( " blood vessel " ) , which those of the other three phyla have . 
 If the grouping of bryozoans with phoronids and brachiopods into Lophophorata is correct , the next issue is whether the Lophophorata are protostomes , along with most invertebrate phyla , or deuterostomes , along with chordates , hemichordates and echinoderms . The traditional view was that lophophorates were a mix of protostome and deuterostome features . Research from the 1970s onwards suggested they were deuterostomes , because of some features that were thought characteristic of deuterostomes : a three @-@ part coelom ; radial rather than spiral cleavage in the development of the embryo ; and formation of the coelom by enterocoely . However the coelom of ectoproct larvae shows no sign of division into three sections , and that of adult ectoprocts is different from that of other <unk> phyla as it is built anew from epidermis and mesoderm after metamorphosis has destroyed the larval coelom . 
 Molecular phylogeny analyses from 1995 onwards , using a variety of biochemical evidence and analytical techniques , placed the lophophorates as protostomes and closely related to annelids and molluscs in a super @-@ phylum called Lophotrochozoa . " Total evidence " analyses , which used both morphological features and a relatively small set of genes , came to various conclusions , mostly favoring a close relationship between lophophorates and Lophotrochozoa . A study in 2008 , using a larger set of genes , concluded that the lophophorates were closer to the Lophotrochozoa than to deuterostomes , but also that the lophophorates were not monophyletic . Instead , it concluded that brachiopods and phoronids formed a monophyletic group , but bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) were closest to entoprocts , supporting the original definition of " Bryozoa " . 
 They are also the only major phylum of exclusively clonal animals and are all colonial . They are colonies of modular units known as zooids . Because they thrive in colonies , colonial growth allows them to develop unrestricted variations in form . Despite this , only a small number of basic growth forms have been found and have commonly reappeared throughout the history of the bryozoa . 
 The phylogenetic position of the ectoproct bryozoans remains uncertain , but it remains certain that they belong to the <unk> and more specifically to the <unk> . This implies that the ectoproct larva is a trochophore with the corona being a homologue of the prototroch ; this is supported from the similarity between the <unk> larvae and the Type 1 <unk> larvae of some molluscs and sipunculans , where the prototroch zone is expanded to cover the <unk> . 
 A study of the mitochondrial DNA sequence suggests that the Bryozoa may be related to the <unk> . 
 = = Physiology = = 
 = = = Feeding and excretion = = = 
 Most species are filter feeders that sieve small particles , mainly phytoplankton ( microscopic floating plants ) , out of the water . The freshwater species Plumatella emarginata feeds on diatoms , green algae , cyanobacteria , non @-@ photosynthetic bacteria , dinoflagellates , rotifers , protozoa , small nematodes , and microscopic crustaceans . While the currents that bryozoans generate to draw food towards the mouth are well understood , the exact method of capture is still debated . All species also flick larger particles towards the mouth with a tentacle , and a few capture zooplankton ( planktonic animals ) by using their tentacles as cages . In addition the tentacles , whose surface area is increased by microvilli ( small hairs and pleats ) , absorb organic compounds dissolved in the water . Unwanted particles may be flicked away by tentacles or shut out by closing the mouth . A study in 2008 showed that both encrusting and erect colonies fed more quickly and grew faster in gentle than in strong currents . 
 In some species the first part of the stomach forms a muscular gizzard lined with chitinous teeth that crush armored prey such as diatoms . Wave @-@ like <unk> contractions move the food through the stomach for digestion . The final section of the stomach is lined with cilia ( minute hairs ) that compress undigested solids , which then pass through the intestine and out through the anus . 
 There are no nephridia ( " little kidneys " ) or other excretory organs in bryozoa , and it is thought that ammonia diffuses out through the body wall and lophophore . More complex waste products are not excreted but accumulate in the polypide , which degenerates after a few weeks . Some of the old polypide is recycled , but much of it remains as a large mass of dying cells containing accumulated wastes , and this is compressed into a " brown body " . When the degeneration is complete , the cystid ( outer part of the animal ) produces a new polypide , and the brown body remains in the coelom , or in the stomach of the new polypide and is expelled next time the animal defecates . 
 = = = Respiration and circulation = = = 
 There are no respiratory organs , heart or blood <unk> instead zooids absorb oxygen and eliminate carbon dioxide through diffusion . Bryozoa accomplish diffusion through the use of either a thin membrane ( in the case of <unk> and some <unk> ) or through <unk> located on the outer dermis of the zooid . The different bryozoan groups use various methods to share nutrients and oxygen between zooids : some have quite large gaps in the body walls , allowing the coelomic fluid to circulate freely ; in others the funiculi ( internal " little ropes " ) of adjacent zooids connect via small pores in the body wall . 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycles = = = 
 Zooids of all phylactolaemate species are simultaneous hermaphrodites . Although those of many marine species are <unk> , in other words function first as males and then as females , their colonies contain a combination of zooids that are in their male and female stages . In all species the ovaries develop on the inside of the body wall , and the testes on the funiculus connecting the stomach to the body wall . Eggs and sperm are released into the coelom , and sperm exit into the water through pores in the tips of some of the tentacles , and then are captured by the feeding currents of zooids that are producing eggs . Some species ' eggs are fertilized externally after being released through a pore between two tentacles , which in some cases is at the tip of a small projection called the " <unk> organ " in the base of a pair of tentacles . Others ' are fertilized internally , in the <unk> organ or in the coelom . In <unk> the mother provides a brood chamber for the fertilized eggs , and her polypide disintegrates , providing nourishment to the embryo . <unk> produce specialized zooids to serve as brood chambers , and their eggs divide within this to produce up to 100 identical embryos . 
 The cleavage of bryozoan eggs is <unk> , in other words the early stages are bilaterally symmetrical . It is unknown how the <unk> forms , since the metamorphosis from larva to adult destroys all of the larva 's internal tissues . In many animals the blastopore , an opening in the surface of the early embryo , tunnels through to form the gut . However , in bryozoans the blastopore closes , and a new opening develops to create the mouth . 
 Bryozoan larvae vary in form , but all have a band of cilia round the body which enables them to swim , a tuft of cilia at the top , and an adhesive sac that everts and anchors them when they settle on a surface . Some <unk> species produce cyphonautes larvae which have little yolk but a well @-@ developed mouth and gut , and live as plankton for a considerable time before settling . These larvae have triangular shells of chitin , with one corner at the top and the base open , forming a hood round the downward @-@ facing mouth . In 2006 it was reported that the cilia of cyphonautes larvae use the same range of techniques as those of adults to capture food . Species that brood their embryos form larvae that are nourished by large yolks , have no gut and do not feed , and such larvae quickly settle on a surface . In all marine species the larvae produce cocoons in which they metamorphose completely after settling : the larva 's epidermis becomes the lining of the coelom , and the internal tissues are converted to a food reserve that nourishes the developing zooid until it is ready to feed . The larvae of phylactolaemates produce multiple polypides , so that each new colony starts with several zooids . In all species the founder zooids then grow the new colonies by budding clones of themselves . In phylactolaemates , zooids die after producing several clones , so that living zooids are found only round the edges of a colony . 
 <unk> also reproduce asexually by a method that enables a colony 's lineage to survive the variable and uncertain conditions of freshwater environments . Throughout summer and autumn they produce disc @-@ shaped statoblasts , masses of cells that function as " survival pods " rather like the gemmules of sponges . <unk> form on the funiculus connected to the parent 's gut , which nourishes them . As they grow , statoblasts develop protective bivalve @-@ like shells made of chitin . When they mature , some statoblasts stick to the parent colony , some fall to the bottom ( " sessoblasts " ) , some contain air spaces that enable them to float ( " floatoblasts " ) , and some remain in the parent 's cystid to re @-@ build the colony if it dies . <unk> can remain dormant for considerable periods , and while dormant can survive harsh conditions such as freezing and desiccation . They can be transported across long distances by animals , floating vegetation , currents and winds , and even in the guts of larger animals . When conditions improve , the valves of the shell separate and the cells inside develop into a zooid that tries to form a new colony . Plumatella emarginata produces both " sessoblasts " , which enable the lineage to control a good territory even if hard times decimate the parent colonies , and " floatoblasts " , which spread to new sites . New colonies of Plumatella repens produce mainly " sessoblasts " while mature ones switch to " floatoblasts " . A study estimated that one group of colonies in a patch measuring 1 square metre ( 11 sq ft ) produced 800 @,@ 000 statoblasts . 
 <unk> Bryozoa are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction . The sexually reproducing colonies ( <unk> ) are the result of a larval <unk> growing into an adult stage whereas the asexual colonies ( clonal ) are a result of a fragment of a colony of <unk> growing into its own colony . The different forms of reproduction in <unk> are achieved through a variety of methods depending on the morphology and classification of the zooid . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitats and distribution = = = 
 Most marine species live in tropical waters at depths less than 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . However , a few have been found in deep @-@ sea trenches , especially around cold seeps , and others near the poles . The great majority are sessile . <unk> forms are much the commonest of these in shallow seas , but erect forms become more common as the depth increases . A few marine species can move , and an Antarctic species forms floating colonies . 
 In 2014 it was reported that the bryozoan <unk> <unk> had become a dominant species in parts of Antarctica . Global warming has increased the rate of scouring by icebergs , and this species is particularly adept at recolonizing scoured areas . 
 The phylactolaemates live in all types of freshwater environment – lakes and ponds , rivers and streams , and estuaries – and are among the most abundant sessile freshwater animals . Some <unk> are exclusively freshwater while others prefer brackish water but can survive in freshwater . Scientists ' knowledge of freshwater bryozoan populations in many parts of the world is incomplete , even in some parts of Europe . It was long thought that some freshwater species occurred worldwide , but since 2002 all of these have been split into more localized species . 
 Bryozoans are an immobile species typically residing on hard natural stone including , but not limited to : grains , shells , and rocks . Such sediment is customarily found in freshwater type marine niches , although a majority of Bryozoans develop in marine landscapes . It is not uncommon for colonies to grow on sediment and various other solid pseudo @-@ rock formations . They are native to all five oceans making them a more cosmopolitan species . 
 Bryozoans are generally associated with the term colonies . Once a Bryozoa settles on a hard substance , after its larval phase , it is physically capable of reproducing asexually through budding . The term colony literally stems from the word clones . These colonies can grow thousands of individual zooids in a relatively short period of time . Even though colonies of zooids grow through asexual reproduction , Bryozoans are hermaphrodites and colonies are started through sexual reproduction . When colonies grow too large , however , they can split in two . This is the only case where asexual reproduction results in a new colony separate from its predecessor . Most colonies are stationary . Indeed , these colonies tend to be settled on immobile substances such as sediment and coarse substances . There are , in fact , other colonies , that predominantly reside in freshwater , that are able to move to a new locale ; nevertheless , this movement is extremely slow , maximum 1 meter per hour , and demands energy . 
 = = = Interactions with non @-@ human organisms = = = 
 Marine species are common on coral reefs , but seldom a significant proportion of the total biomass . In temperate waters , the skeletons of dead colonies form a significant component of shell gravels , and live ones are abundant in these areas . The marine lace @-@ like bryozoan <unk> membranacea produces spines in response to predation by several species of nudibranchs ( " sea slugs " ) . Other predators on marine bryozoans include fish , sea urchins , pycnogonids , crustaceans , mites and starfish . In general marine echinoderms and molluscs eat masses of zooids by gouging pieces of colonies , breaking their mineralized " houses " , while most arthropod predators on bryozoans eat individual zooids . 
 In freshwater , bryozoans are among the most important filter feeders , along with sponges and mussels . Freshwater bryozoans are attacked by many predators , including snails , insects , and fish . 
 In Thailand the introduced species Pomacea <unk> ( golden apple snail ) , which is generally a destructive herbivore , has wiped out phylactolaemate populations wherever it has appeared . P. <unk> also preys on a common freshwater <unk> , but with less devastating effect . Indigenous snails do not feed on bryozoans . 
 Several species of the hydroid family <unk> have symbiotic relationships with bryozoans , some of which are beneficial to the hydroids while others are parasitic . Modifications appear in the shapes of some these hydroids , for example smaller tentacles or encrustation of the roots by bryozoans . The bryozoan <unk> nodosum protects the whelk Burnupena papyracea against predation by the powerful and voracious rock lobster Jasus lalandii . While whelk shells encrusted by the bryozoans are stronger than those without this reinforcement , chemical defenses produced by the bryozoans are probably the more significant deterrent . 
 In the Banc d 'Arguin offshore Mauritania the species <unk> <unk> , which is generally growing attached to gravel and hard @-@ substrate , has formed a non @-@ obligate symbiotic relationship with hermit crabs of the species <unk> cf. <unk> resulting in egg @-@ size structures known as <unk> . <unk> on an empty gastropod shell , the bryozoan colonies form multilamellar skeletal crusts that produce spherical encrustations and extend the living chamber of the hermit crab through <unk> tubular growth . 
 Some phylactolaemate species are parasitized by a group of <unk> that have also been found to cause <unk> Kidney Disease , which is often fatal in salmonid fish , and has severely reduced wild fish populations in Europe and North America . 
 <unk> membranacea , whose colonies feed and grow exceptionally fast in a wide range of current speeds , was first noticed in the Gulf of Maine in 1987 and quickly became the most abundant organism living on kelps . This invasion reduced the kelp population by breaking their fronds , so that its place as the dominant " vegetation " in some areas was taken by another invader , the large alga Codium fragile <unk> . These changes reduced the area of habitat available for local fish and invertebrates . M. membranacea has also invaded the northwest coast of the US A few freshwater species have been also found thousands of kilometers from their native ranges . Some may have been transported naturally as statoblasts . Others more probably were spread by humans , for example on imported water plants or as stowaways on ships . 
 = = = Interaction with humans = = = 
 Fish farms and hatcheries have lost stock to proliferative kidney disease , which is apparently caused by one or more myxozoans that also parasitize bryozoans . 
 Fishermen in the North Sea have had to find other work because of a form of eczema ( a skin disease ) known as " Dogger Bank itch " , caused by contact with bryozoans that have stuck to nets and lobster pots . 
 Marine bryozoans are often responsible for biofouling on ships ' hulls , on docks and marinas , and on offshore structures . They are among the first colonizers of new or recently cleaned structures . Freshwater species are occasional nuisances in water pipes , drinking water purification equipment , sewage treatment facilities , and the cooling pipes of power stations . 
 A group of chemicals called <unk> can be extracted from the marine bryozoan <unk> <unk> . In 2001 pharmaceutical company GPC Biotech licensed Bryostatin 1 from Arizona State University for commercial development as a treatment for cancer . GPC Biotech canceled development in 2003 , saying that Bryostatin 1 showed little effectiveness and some toxic side @-@ effects . In January 2008 a clinical trial was submitted to the United States National Institutes of Health to measure the safety and effectiveness of Bryostatin 1 in the treatment of Alzheimer 's Disease . However , no participants had been recruited by the end of December 2008 , when the study was scheduled for completion . About 1 tonne ( 160 st ) of bryozoans must processed to extract 1 gram ( 0 @.@ 035 oz ) of <unk> . As a result , synthetic equivalents have been developed that are simpler to produce and apparently at least as effective . 
 = Sonam Kapoor = 
 Sonam Kapoor ( pronounced [ <unk> kəˈpuːr ] ; born 9 June 1985 ) is an Indian actress who appears in Bollywood films . Kapoor is one of the highest @-@ paid actresses in the industry . She has been nominated for four Filmfare Awards . 
 The daughter of actor Anil Kapoor , Kapoor studied theatre and arts at the United World College of South East Asia in Singapore . She was an assistant director to Sanjay Leela Bhansali on the 2005 film Black . Kapoor made her acting debut in Bhansali 's romantic drama Saawariya ( 2007 ) , for which she was nominated for a Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut . She had her first commercial success three years later in the romantic comedy I Hate Luv Storys ( 2010 ) . 
 After a series of commercial failures , the sleeper hit Raanjhanaa ( 2013 ) marked a turning point in her career , earning her several Best Actress nominations . She then featured in the 2014 romantic comedy <unk> and the 2015 comedy drama Dolly Ki Doli , both of which earned her Filmfare Award for Best Actress nominations . Kapoor played a princess in the melodrama Prem Ratan Dhan <unk> ( 2015 ) , one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films of all time . She garnered critical acclaim for portraying the titular role in the biographical thriller Neerja ( 2016 ) , one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films featuring a female protagonist . 
 Kapoor supports various charities and causes , such as raising awareness of breast cancer and LGBT rights . She is known in the media for her outspoken personality , and is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life ( 1985 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Kapoor was born in the Mumbai suburb of Chembur on 9 June 1985 . Her father is actor and producer Anil Kapoor , the son of the late filmmaker Surinder Kapoor and the founder of the Anil Kapoor Films Company . Her mother , Sunita , is a former model and designer . Kapoor has two younger siblings : film producer Rhea and brother <unk> . She is the niece of film producer Boney Kapoor and actor Sanjay Kapoor ; actress Sridevi and producer Mona <unk> ( Boney 's wives ) are her aunts . Kapoor 's paternal cousins are actors Arjun Kapoor and Mohit Marwah , and maternal cousin is actor Ranveer Singh . 
 The family moved to the suburb of Juhu when Kapoor was one month old . She was educated at the Arya Vidya Mandir school in Juhu , where she confessed to being a " naughty " and " carefree " child who would bully the boys . She excelled at sports such as rugby and basketball , and trained in Kathak , classical music and Latin dance . Kapoor , who practices Hinduism , states that she is " quite religious " , and that it is a way of " reminding myself that I need to be thankful for so much " . 
 Kapoor 's first job was as a waitress at age 15 , although it lasted only a week . As a teenager , she struggled with her weight : " I had every issue related to weight that I could have . I was unhealthy , I had bad skin , and I had hair growing on my face ! " Kapoor was diagnosed with insulin resistance and polycystic ovarian disease , and has since begun an initiative to increase awareness of diabetes . Kapoor enrolled at the United World College of South East Asia in Singapore for her pre @-@ university education , where she studied theatre and arts . She has said she later started courses in economics and political science through University of Mumbai correspondence programme , after returning from University of East London where she began her bachelor 's degree in the same subjects but returned to Mumbai soon after she began . The actress Rani Mukerji , a family friend , visited her family in Singapore on holiday while working on Black ( 2005 ) . Kapoor , who had originally wanted to be a director and writer , expressed a desire to work as a crew member on the film . On her father 's recommendation to director Sanjay Leela Bhansali , she was appointed as his assistant . 
 = = = Debut and career fluctuations ( 2007 – 12 ) = = = 
 During the production of Black , Kapoor developed an interest in acting when Bhansali professed that he wanted to cast her in the lead in his next film , Saawariya . She was advised to lose weight ; at the time , she weighed about 80 kilograms ( 180 lb ) . Motivated by Bhansali 's confidence in her , she lost 35 kilograms ( 77 lb ) in two years . Kapoor studied acting with Roshan Taneja , <unk> Bhatia and Feroz Abbas Khan , and has cited actresses Waheeda Rehman and Nutan as influences , admiring their " path @-@ breaking films … [ and ] quality of doing different things " . 
 Released in 2007 , Saawariya saw Kapoor play a Muslim woman awaiting the return of her lover opposite Mukerji and Ranbir Kapoor . It was the first Indian feature film produced by a Hollywood studio , Sony Pictures Entertainment . Saawariya proved to be a major critical and commercial failure . Writing for BBC , Jaspreet Pandohar called the film a " misfire on a massive scale " . Raja Sen of Rediff.com described her laugh as " almost as infectious as her father 's " , but wished that she had been " allowed to <unk> softly , instead of having a clearly overdubbed plastic giggle plastered onto her . " The film earned her a Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut nomination and the Stardust Award for Superstar of Tomorrow – Female . 
 In 2009 , Kapoor played an aspiring singer opposite Waheeda Rehman and Abhishek Bachchan in the Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra @-@ directed drama Delhi @-@ 6 . Despite critical acclaim , the film was not a box @-@ office success . CNN @-@ IBN 's Rajeev Masand referred to Kapoor as a " revelation " , writing that she was " a firecracker , instinctive and uninhibited in what isn 't even a conventional female lead " . Sonia Chopra of Sify described Kapoor as an " earnest and effortless performer " , and found her character likeable , despite the " typical Delhi @-@ girl recipe " . 
 Kapoor 's first release in 2010 was Punit Malhotra 's romantic comedy I Hate Luv Storys , opposite Imran Khan . She played an engaged woman who develops a one @-@ sided attraction to her commitment @-@ phobic co @-@ worker . Khan said about Kapoor 's craft , " We 'd be shooting a scene from multiple angles — for three or four hours you 're doing the same scene , the same lines — and here is this person [ Kapoor ] who brings consistency to her work , from the way she talks , to her accent . " Although Shubhra Gupta of The Indian Express called Kapoor 's performance " stiff and rehearsed " , Daily News and Analysis ' Johnson Thomas found her " likeable and believable " . I Hate Luv Storys was Kapoor 's first commercial success , earning ₹ 725 @.@ 2 million ( US $ 11 million ) worldwide . 
 Kapoor next played the eponymous role in Aisha , a romantic comedy adaptation of Jane Austen 's novel Emma , which was produced by her sister Rhea . She described her role opposite Abhay Deol , Ira Dubey and Amrita Puri as " a meddlesome busybody with a passion for matchmaking and playing Cupid " . An Indo @-@ Asian News Service reviewer thought that Kapoor had stood out with her performance , making " the best of a rather rare opportunity for an Indian leading lady to be part of a Bollywood film that salutes Victorian mores and Delhi 's elitist affectations in one clean cool sweep " . 
 In 2011 , Kapoor starred in Thank You , a comedy about three women who teach a lesson to their philandering husbands . The film , along with Kapoor 's performance , received poor reviews ; Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India called her " terribly out of sync " . She then played the romantic interest of Shahid Kapoor in the Pankaj Kapur @-@ directed romantic drama , <unk> , which was also poorly received . Despite doubts about her acting ability , critic Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV thought Kapoor conveyed " the essential vulnerability of a girl forever under duress , bringing out just the right mix of feminine fragility and native resolve " . The following year , Kapoor played a computer hacker opposite Abhishek Bachchan and Bipasha Basu in the Abbas – Mustan @-@ directed action film , Players , a remake of 2003 's The Italian Job . Her role was originally written for Katrina Kaif , who was unavailable for the film . Although journalists had high expectations , it failed commercially , and Raja Sen of Rediff.com remarked <unk> that Kapoor " truly entertains with her childish attempt to pass off as a Gold @-@ medalist hacker " . Kapoor 's string of poorly @-@ received films began to hinder her career . 
 = = = Raanjhanaa and beyond ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 Kapoor 's role in the Anand L. Rai @-@ directed romantic drama Raanjhanaa ( 2013 ) marked a turning point in her career ; <unk> Sahgal called it her best performance to date in The Indian Express . Kapoor 's role was that of Zoya Haider , a young Muslim student from Varanasi who is drawn into politics after the murder of her Sikh lover . To prepare for her part , Kapoor interacted with students , attended workshops and practiced with theatre groups associated with Jawaharlal Nehru University . She also studied Jaya Bachchan 's work in <unk> ( 1971 ) , which she felt was " perfect " for her role . Discussing her character in the film , Kapoor described her approach to acting : " I have always tried to do different films and … I try to be different for every character . I like doing different things to challenge myself in every way and don 't like to repeat myself . " Although Raanjhanaa received mixed reviews , her performance was praised ; Rajeev Masand wrote that she " does some of her best work here , going smoothly from innocent to manipulative to cynical , without ever losing Zoya 's inherent vulnerability " . With worldwide earnings of over ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) , Raanjhanaa was a commercial success and Kapoor received her first nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress . 
 Kapoor followed the success of Raanjhanaa with a brief appearance in Bhaag Milkha Bhaag ( 2013 ) , a biopic on athlete Milkha Singh . She received ₹ 11 ( 16 ¢ US ) for the film , made on a budget of ₹ 300 million ( US $ 4 @.@ 5 million ) , citing her admiration for director Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra and the film itself as reasons for her appearance . Critically praised , Bhaag Milkha Bhaag was one of the top @-@ grossing Bollywood films of the year . The critic Sarita A. Tanwar wrote in her review that despite her minor role , Kapoor proved to " be the perfect warm counterpart to Milkha " . Both Raanjhanaa and Bhaag Milkha Bhaag received Filmfare Award for Best Film nominations , the latter of which won . 
 In 2014 , Kapoor portrayed the banker <unk> opposite Ayushmann Khurrana and Rishi Kapoor in the Yash Raj Films comedy @-@ drama <unk> , in a role which Anupama Chopra found to be poorly written and an " uphill climb " . She next starred in the romantic comedy <unk> , an adaptation of the 1980 film of the same name , playing the role which had originally been given to Rekha . Though she received a Filmfare Best Actress nomination for her performance , critics were divided in their response , with Shilpa Jamkhandikar of Reuters calling her " loud and exasperating " , and Andy Webster of The New York Times ' comparing her to a young Anne Hathaway and highlighting her " Julia Roberts @-@ like smile " . Later that year she met entrepreneur @-@ model Sahir Berry on a social media network , and began a romantic relationship with him , although they broke up a few months later . 
 In 2015 , Kapoor starred as a runaway bride in Dolly Ki Doli , a comedy co @-@ starring <unk> <unk> , Rajkummar Rao and Varun Sharma . Mint 's Udita Jhunjhunwala criticised Kapoor 's performance in the film , writing that her " range is too limited to bring alive a character that may have had heaps of potential on paper " . Shubhra Gupta wrote : " Kapoor is in almost every frame , and should have filled them all . But the treatment of the character shows up her limitations . " Despite the negative reviews for her performance , she was nominated for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress . While filming Sooraj R. Barjatya 's Prem Ratan Dhan <unk> with Salman Khan in <unk> , Gujarat in February 2015 , Kapoor was diagnosed with swine influenza , from which she recovered the following month . Kapoor portrayed <unk> Maithili Devi , a princess looking for love . The film became one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films of all time . She was praised by Rachit Gupta for her credibility as a royal , and Komal Nahta thought that the role was significant enough to be a turning point in her career . However , she won a Golden Kela Award for Worst Actress . 
 Following an appearance in the music video of Coldplay 's " Hymn for the Weekend " ( featuring Beyoncé ) , Kapoor starred in Ram Madhvani 's biographical thriller Neerja ( 2016 ) . She was cast as the eponymous air hostess Neerja Bhanot , who died while saving the passengers of the hijacked Pan Am Flight 73 in 1986 . Kapoor added that she felt a " little more responsible towards the film as it is based on a real person " , and to prepare for her role , she met Bhanot 's family . The film garnered wide critical acclaim , and several commentators considered Kapoor 's performance to be her best to date . Raja Sen found her performance to be career @-@ defining , while Hindustan Times ' Rohit Vats wrote that " she carries [ the film ] entirely on her shoulder . She looks earnest , scared , benevolent and bold , all at the same time . " With a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 47 billion ( US $ 22 million ) , the film emerged as one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films featuring a female protagonist . 
 As of June 2016 , Kapoor has committed to play one of the lead roles in <unk> Ghosh 's directorial debut film <unk> Di Wedding , a romantic comedy co @-@ starring Kareena Kapoor , Swara Bhaskar and Shikha Talsania about four girls who embark on a trip from Delhi to Europe . 
 = = In the media = = 
 Born into a prominent actor family , Kapoor has appeared in the media from an early age , and is one of the highest @-@ paid actresses in Bollywood . After the success of Raanjhanaa and Bhaag Milkha Bhaag she was cited by Subhash K. Jha as one of the top actresses in India , though a commentator for Rediff.com notes that several of her films have been commercial failures . In 2009 she was the first Indian actress to appear on The Hollywood Reporter 's " Next Generation : Asia Class " , a list of newcomers in film . Outspoken publicly , Kapoor 's comments about contemporaries and others in the Indian film industry have occasionally caused controversy . In a 2015 interview , she acknowledged that her opinions often get her into trouble , but remarked that " I believe it pays to be honest in the longer run " . 
 Kapoor is a popular figure nationally , with a significant following on Twitter since 2009 and Facebook . She appeared on The Huffington Post 's list of " 100 most influential women on Twitter " in 2015 . She has been described by the media as a style icon , and featured on Rediff.com 's list of " Bollywood 's Best Dressed Actresses " in 2012 and 2013 . Though Kapoor has earned praise for her dress sense and style , she has faced some criticism for wearing traditional Indian dresses . She was ranked seventh on The Times of India 's 2010 " Most Desirable Woman " list , placing 14th , 28th and 14th the next three years , and was in the top ten of UK magazine Eastern Eye 's " World 's Sexiest Asian Women " list from 2011 to 2014 . In 2012 and 2013 she also held 48th and 45th place , respectively , on the Indian edition of Forbes ' " Celebrity 100 " lists , based on the income and popularity of Indian celebrities . In 2014 , Kapoor reached 31st place , with an estimated annual income of ₹ 112 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 7 million ) , and peaked at the 26th position the following year . 
 As well as endorsing brands such as Colgate , Electrolux , Lux , Mont Blanc , Oppo Mobile , Salvatore Ferragamo S.p.A. and Signature , Kapoor is the Indian ambassador for international cosmetics manufacturer L 'Oréal . Rediff.com reported in 2012 that she received ₹ 30 million ( US $ 450 @,@ 000 ) for each endorsement , making her one of the highest @-@ paid celebrity endorsers in India . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Kapoor has supported charitable organisations for various causes . In 2009 , she participated in the International Indian Film Academy Awards fashion show , which supports widows and orphans of Indian film @-@ industry workers . On behalf of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) she wrote to Maharashtra Home Minister R. R. Patil , protesting against the use of glass @-@ coated <unk> ( used on fighter kites ) , which kills birds who become entangled in it . Kapoor is vocal in her support for LGBT rights in India . In 2012 , Kapoor asked fans to donate to the <unk> Cancer Foundation for her birthday , and collaborated with the foundation to increase awareness of breast cancer . She is also the brand ambassador for the Elle Breast Cancer Campaign . 
 Kapoor auctioned some of her clothes on stylist <unk> Qureshi 's online fashion boutique , <unk> 's Pop @-@ Up Shop , in 2012 . The proceeds were donated to Smile Foundation , a child @-@ welfare organisation . In 2014 , she attended a charitable art exhibition organised by the <unk> Nagi Art Foundation , and donated clothing and accessories to a website raising funds for In Defense of Animals . Kapoor walked the ramp in a 2015 fashion show by Manish Malhotra for the Mijwan Welfare Society , a non @-@ profit organisation dedicated to empowering girls . The same year , she appeared with Hrithik Roshan in the music video for " Dheere Dheere " , whose profits were donated to charity . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = = Other honours = = = 
 2011 : NDTV Brand Ambassador of the Year 
 2013 : Hindustan Times ' Style Icon ( Reader 's Choice ) 
 2013 : Indian GQ Woman of the Year 
 2013 : Indian Vogue Beauty Award Beauty of the Year 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Amir Blumenfeld = 
 Amir Shmuel Blumenfeld ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; Hebrew : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; born January 18 , 1983 ) is an Israeli American comedian , actor , writer and television host . Born in Israel , he moved to Los Angeles when he was two , and was hired by the New York @-@ based CollegeHumor in 2005 . As well as contributing to its books and articles , he has written and starred in original videos for the comedy website — appearing in series such as Hardly Working and Very Mary @-@ Kate — and was a cast member on its short @-@ lived MTV program The CollegeHumor Show . 
 Amir first came to national prominence in 2004 when he was a semi @-@ finalist during Yahoo 's inaugural national IM Live contest , losing to the eventual champions . Now , he is best known for appearing in the web series Jake and Amir with Jake Hurwitz , in which he plays an annoying and exaggerated version of himself . Originally made by Hurwitz and Blumenfeld in their spare time , the series was then produced by CollegeHumor . Blumenfeld 's acting in the series gained him a Webby Award for Best Individual Performance in 2010 . In 2011 , CollegeHumor released Jake and Amir : Fired , a 30 @-@ minute special that is the company 's first paid content . Episodes of Jake and Amir average over 500 @,@ 000 views ; by 2012 , over 500 had been produced . The pair have also hosted numerous live shows , and started the advice podcast If I Were You in 2013 . In December 2013 , it was announced that Jake and Amir would be adapted into a TBS television comedy with Ed Helms as an executive producer . TBS never filmed the pilot , despite a fan @-@ created # <unk> Twitter campaign that garnered tens of thousands of tweets . Instead , sister network <unk> picked up the pilot and filmed it , though it was never aired . 
 The Prank War series , which depicts Blumenfeld and Streeter Seidell as they play a series of escalating practical jokes on each other , became popular and led to the two appearing on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! in 2009 . MTV later hired Seidell and Blumenfeld to host Pranked , a clip show featuring prank videos from the Internet . Outside of CollegeHumor , Blumenfeld has appeared in the short film The Old Man and the Seymour , the television series Louie and I Just Want My Pants Back , and the 2011 film A Very Harold & Kumar 3D Christmas . He also writes for ESPN The Magazine and Mental Floss . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Blumenfeld was born in Afula , Israel , and moved to Los Angeles , California at the age of two with his parents and two older brothers — his family is Reform Jewish . He has described how he became aware of his humor early on : " I realized I was funny at an early age , I realized I could make people laugh at a later age , and then by college time , I was trying to make jokes in terms of writing " . 
 He attended a Jewish kindergarten and elementary school , before going to Milken Community High School , a private Jewish high school . During the summer , he attended computer camp and mathematics camp , but has expressed regret that he did not go to a Jewish summer camp . He then went on to study under the Haas Undergraduate Business Program at the University of California , Berkeley , hoping to get a creative job in advertising or marketing while writing comedy on the side . He graduated , and says he now uses his Bachelor of Science degree " to make somewhat intelligent jokes about finance and accounting , but nothing much beyond that . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = CollegeHumor = = = 
 In 2003 , while a sophomore at Berkeley , Blumenfeld began writing articles for the comedy website CollegeHumor after he emailed its co @-@ founder Ricky Van Veen ideas , which Van Veen found funny and posted on the website . When Blumenfeld graduated in 2005 , CollegeHumor hired him and Streeter Seidell full @-@ time to write The CollegeHumor Guide to College — a humorous book presented as a guide to university education — and he moved to New York aged 22 . He later moved to writing original videos for CollegeHumor with Dan <unk> , and has acted in CH Originals , as well as the series Hardly Working . He has portrayed Woody Allen in episodes of Hardly Working and Very Mary @-@ Kate — MTV 's Guy Code Blog listed his among " The 8 Best Woody Allen Impressions We Found On The Internet " . His favorite sketch written for CollegeHumor is entitled " Moments Before Cup Chicks " , and involves a director briefing the participants of the viral scatological video 2 Girls 1 Cup . 
 Beginning in 2007 , he and Streeter Seidell have appeared in the Prank War series of videos , in which the two play a series of escalating practical jokes on each other . Seidell has described how some of the pranks " showed Amir 's true colors , his desire to be famous ... [ and ] cut deeper emotionally " , and how he thought Blumenfeld 's faking a marriage proposal from Seidell to his girlfriend went " too far " . After seven videos were posted over two years , there was an 18 @-@ month hiatus culminating in Seidell tricking Blumenfeld into thinking he had won USD $ 500 @,@ 000 after taking a blindfolded half @-@ court basketball shot . The pranks have led to Seidell and Blumenfeld being interviewed by Wired magazine and appearing on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . 
 In 2009 , Blumenfeld starred in The CollegeHumor Show on MTV along with eight other CollegeHumor employees . The staff members wrote , filmed and starred in the show , which is set in the CollegeHumor offices and has a scripted reality premise . Structured as a half @-@ hour sitcom , it incorporates sketches that had alreadly been published online . However , the show was lambasted by critics — Pajiba 's Dustin <unk> called it " a series of atrocious sketches haphazardly strung together " ; <unk> 's Liz Shannon Miller said the show was " deeply disappointing " , and that although Blumenfeld 's character is " the iconic face of the web site ... none of the other personalities on the show have been developed beyond the surface level " — only one season , consisting of six episodes , was made . 
 Since 2010 , Seidell and Blumenfeld have hosted Pranked , an MTV series featuring pranks recorded on video and posted online . The show has generally received poor reviews , with critics looking down on its clip show format and use of content from YouTube , and calling it inferior to the " prank war " that inspired it . The Michigan Daily 's Eric Chiu said " Hosts Blumenfeld and Seidell do what they can with their material , but their banter and commentary is mostly forgettable " , and " the Prank War series on <unk> is a perfect example of discomforting gags done right ... It 's a shame that Pranked can 't muster up anything near the same level of ingenuity . " 
 = = = Jake and Amir = = = 
 Blumenfeld met his colleague Jake Hurwitz in 2006 , when the latter began an internship at CollegeHumor . The two were seated across from each other , and began to make short videos together , which they uploaded to the video @-@ sharing website Vimeo . Their first video was called " Quick Characters " : it was unscripted , and involved either Hurwitz or Blumenfeld spontaneously pointing a camera at the other and instructing them to act in a certain way . 
 The two later began the web series Jake and Amir , episodes of which they posted to <unk> In it , Hurwitz plays Jake , a " normal guy " , and Blumenfeld plays Amir , his annoying and obsessive co @-@ worker , who craves Jake 's attention . Their videos began to be promoted on CollegeHumor , and the website later adopted the series . By 2012 , the duo had made over 500 episodes of Jake and Amir — two per week for five years . Each episode averages more than 500 @,@ 000 views . The series has featured guest appearances by Thomas Middleditch , Ben Schwartz , Allison Williams , <unk> Allen and Rick Fox , among others . 
 Blumenfeld has described how his character " sort of evolved " from being " super needy [ and ] weird " to " a little crazier " , but that " the root of my character is still the same , the insecurity of it " . Regarding his similarity to his character , he said he is " hopefully very different but maybe at the root of it we 're the same person . I 'm probably a little smarter than the character though . Maybe the things that he thinks I also think but I 'm able to suppress them . " 
 In 2008 , PC Magazine listed the series among its " Top 100 Undiscovered Web Sites " , saying : " Considering it 's mainly a hobby they do after work , the webisodes at <unk> are better than some of the stuff they get paid to do for CollegeHumor . " At the 14th Webby Awards in 2010 , Jake and Amir won a People 's Voice award for Comedy : Long Form or Series , and Blumenfeld won one for Best Individual Performance . PC Magazine again featured Jake and Amir in 2011 , when it listed the series as one of its " 15 Best Web @-@ Only Shows " — Eric Griffith said " they show no sign of running out of very bizarre situations for this sometimes disturbing comedy . " Blumenfeld received a nomination for the 2013 Streamy Awards for Best Male Performance : Comedy because of his role in Jake and Amir . 
 On October 12 , 2011 , CollegeHumor released Jake and Amir : Fired , a 30 @-@ minute episode of Jake and Amir that the pair had produced and edited in the previous months , while continuing to release short episodes . Available to buy for $ 2 @.@ 99 on CollegeHumor and Facebook and for $ 13 on DVD , the special was the company 's first paid content . Its plot involves the fictitious new CEO of CollegeHumor , Alan Avery ( Matt Walton ) , promoting Jake and firing Amir ; Jake realizes this was a mistake , and the two try to get Amir 's job back . Sam Reich , CollegeHumor Media 's President of Original Content said " Fired is very much an extension of the Jake and Amir that people already know . ... That being said , it also expands the universe considerably by adding characters , locations , and something even newer to a Jake and Amir plot . " 
 He and Hurwitz have also hosted various live events as Jake and Amir , including CollegeHumor Live at various locations such as the UCB Theatre in New York and the University of California , Berkeley . They have also performed in Toronto , Canada and London 's Soho Theatre . The latter show was in June 2013 with Streeter Seidell , and although it sold out and extra dates were added , the performance was poorly received by local media : The Guardian 's Brian Logan said Hurwitz and Blumenfeld " cackle a lot , as they find various ways to repackage tales of puerile behaviour as comedy " . In June 2012 , at the International Student Film Festival in Tel Aviv , Israel , the pair gave a lecture at the New Media Conference . They have also appeared together on the MTV show Money from Strangers . On December 18 , 2013 , it was announced that Jake and Amir will be adapted into a television comedy for the network TBS , and that Blumenfeld will star in the series , as well as serve as a writer and executive producer ( alongside Hurwitz and Ed Helms , among others ) . 
 = = = = If I Were You = = = = 
 On May 13 , 2013 , Hurwitz and Blumenfeld announced their first new project since Jake and Amir : a comedy audio podcast called If I Were You , in which they give advice to listeners who submit questions . New episodes have been released every Monday since then , and the show has featured several guest stars , including Schwartz , Middleditch , Van Veen , Seidell and Williams . Kayla Culver of The Concordian lauded the podcast as " comfortable to listen to " and " genuinely funny " and said " It 's like listening to two best friends having a hilarious conversation on the couch next to you . " The Guardian 's Miranda Sawyer called If I Were You " a typical example of a comedy podcast " and " amiable enough " , but said it contained " far too much laughing " , commenting that " New Yorkers Jake and Amir laugh and laugh , giggle and <unk> their way around a topic " and " if I wanted stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness waffle with the occasional funny line , I 'd listen to [ my small children ] . " 
 HeadGum 
 In 2015 , following the success of Hurwitz and Blumenfeld 's If I Were You podcast , the duo founded the HeadGum podcasting network . HeadGum includes 11 podcasts , many of which are hosted by comedians who were involved with CollegeHumor , including Streeter Seidell and Josh Ruben . Some of the notable program that can be found on the network includes Blumenfeld 's very own If I Were You podcast , The Talk of Shame , and Gilmore Guys . 
 Lonely and Horny 
 In 2016 , Hurwitz and Blumenfeld announced their newest show " Lonely and Horny " available exclusively on Vimeo on Demand . 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 Blumenfeld starred in the 2009 short film The Old Man and the Seymour alongside colleagues Streeter Seidell and Dan <unk> , as well as Shawn Harrison , Liz <unk> and Jordan Carlos . It is about a growth @-@ hormone deficient man who is mistaken for a student at his nephew 's high school . The movie was chosen as a " Staff Pick " on Vimeo , and screened at the Austin Film Festival , the Sacramento Film and Music Festival , the LA Shorts Fest , the Friars Club Comedy Film Festival and the Portable Film Festival . 
 In 2011 , Blumenfeld appeared in comedian Louis C.K. ' s television series Louie , during the 10th episode of its second season , entitled " Halloween / Ellie " . He played a writer hired to improve a movie script in the second half of the episode . Better With Popcorn 's George <unk> said that he played " the ' unfunny ' guy who actually ends up coming off as the funniest of all to the audience " , and that Blumenfeld " should be guesting and starring in many more things " . He also called Blumenfeld 's first sitcom appearance a " clearly momentous occasion " . Blumenfeld also had a part in I Just Want My Pants Back , an MTV show produced by Doug Liman . 
 He played Kumar Patel 's friend Adrian in the 2011 stoner comedy film A Very Harold & Kumar 3D Christmas , alongside Thomas Lennon as Harold Lee 's friend Todd . Reviews largely did not remark on his performance , although IGN 's Eric Goldman said " there isn 't much to the Todd and Adrian scenes " , and Pajiba 's Daniel Carlson thought the scriptwriters treated the characters as " living props " . T. J. Mulligan of Movies on Film commented that " anything Adrian says or does ... elicit [ s ] a slight chuckle at best " . However , Robert Zak of WhatCulture ! commended the film 's " strong supporting cast " , saying that Lennon and Blumenfeld " provid [ ed ] constant amusement " . 
 As a writer , Blumenfeld works freelance for ESPN The Magazine , and contributed to the ESPN Guide to Psycho Fan Behavior . He also has a section in Mental Floss called " The Curious Comedian " . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Speaking about the role his education had in shaping his humor , Blumenfeld said : " I went to Jewish schools growing up and that 's where my sense of humor was cultivated . Everybody was funny . " Blumenfeld has said he is influenced by television programs that he watched while growing up , including The Simpsons , Seinfeld , and Saturday Night Live , which he says " taught me how to think ... absurdly ... creatively and originally about jokes that people were making " and make " jokes on jokes " . He has cited Larry David as an influence , and also likes Louie and Curb Your Enthusiasm . Blumenfeld has compared the NBC series The Office and Parks and Recreation to Jake and Amir , saying they " have these office workplace dynamics and the situations are funny and the characters are very funny " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Blumenfeld is Jewish , although he has described himself as " not too religious " and does not attend Temple every Saturday , nor does he keep Kosher . He does , however , celebrate Jewish holidays with his family and speaks Hebrew . He is a basketball fan , and supports the Los Angeles Lakers — his favorite players are Kobe Bryant and Nick Van Exel . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Online video = = = 
 = Italian cruiser Liguria = 
 Liguria was a protected cruiser built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . She was the fourth of six Regioni @-@ class cruisers , all of which were named for regions of Italy . Liguria was built by the Ansaldo shipyard in Genoa ; her keel was laid in July 1899 , she was launched in June 1893 , and was commissioned into the fleet in December 1894 . The ship was equipped with a main armament of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns , and she could steam at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Liguria served in a variety of roles throughout her career . She frequently was assigned to the main fleet , but in 1904 she was deployed to the American Station . In 1906 , she conducted tests with coaling while at sea , and from 1908 to 1911 , she was fitted with an experimental observation balloon . She saw extensive action during the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 – 12 . She took part in the seizure of Benghazi , provided gunfire support to the defenders of Tripoli , and conducted bombardments of Ottoman ports in western Libya and the Red Sea coast of Arabia . She was still in service during World War I as a training ship , but she did not see action during the conflict . Liguria was eventually sold for scrap in May 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Liguria was 84 @.@ 8 meters ( 278 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 12 @.@ 03 m ( 39 @.@ 5 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 67 m ( 15 @.@ 3 ft ) . She displaced up to 3 @,@ 110 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 060 long tons ; 3 @,@ 430 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion engines , with steam supplied by four cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . On her speed trials , she reached a maximum of 18 @.@ 1 knots ( 33 @.@ 5 km / h ; 20 @.@ 8 mph ) at 5 @,@ 536 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 128 kW ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 213 – 278 . 
 Liguria was armed with a main battery of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 40 guns mounted singly , with two side by side forward and two side by side aft . Six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 40 guns were placed between them , with three on each broadside . Light armament included eight 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and a pair of machine guns . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . Liguria was protected by a 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick deck , and her conning tower had 50 mm thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Liguria was built by the Ansaldo shipyard in Genoa ; her keel was laid on 1 July 1889 . Shortages of funding slowed the completion Liguria and her sister ships . Tight budgets forced the Navy to reduce the pace of construction so that the funds could be used to keep the active fleet in service . It took nearly four years to complete the hull , which was launched on 8 June 1893 . Fitting @-@ out work proceeded much more quickly , and the new cruiser was ready for service a year and a half later . She was commissioned into the fleet on 1 December 1894 . That year , Liguria was assigned to the Third Division of the Italian fleet , along with San Martino , an ancient center battery ironclad , which had been launched in 1862 . 
 In 1902 – 03 , Liguria was in the main Italian fleet ; while in their normal peacetime training routine , the ships of the main fleet were kept in commission for exercises for seven months of the year . For the remaining five months , they were kept in a partial state of readiness with reduced crews . The ship was assigned to the American Station in 1904 , the sole Italian warship in the region . In late 1906 , the ship took part in experiments with coaling while underway . She towed the collier SS Sterope at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) while coal was transferred via the towing cable . An average of 60 t ( 59 long tons ; 66 short tons ) of coal was transferred per hour during the test . Starting in 1908 , Liguria was modified to operate an observation balloon . This service , which lasted until 1911 , involved towing a " <unk> " balloon — invented by the Germans August von Parseval and Rudolf von <unk> — to spot naval mines for the fleet . 
 At the outbreak of the Italo @-@ Turkish War in September 1911 , Liguria was stationed in Italian Eritrea with four other cruisers . She was transferred to the Mediterranean Sea , and on 18 October she joined the escort for a troop convoy headed to Benghazi . The convoy was heavily protected against a possible Ottoman attack ; the escort comprised the four Regina Elena @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , two other cruisers , and five destroyers . The Italian fleet bombarded the city the next morning after the Ottoman garrison refused to surrender . During the bombardment , parties from the ships and the infantry from the troopships went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians . 
 Liguria thereafter moved to Tripoli , where she supported the Italians who had taken the city against Turkish counterattacks . On 9 November , she , the armored cruiser Carlo Alberto , the minelayer Partenope , and the torpedo boat <unk> provided critical gunfire support that broke a series of Ottoman attacks on the city . A month later , Liguria joined Partenope and the torpedo boats <unk> and Euro for a series of bombardments on the ports of Zuwarah , Misrata , and <unk> . Liguria then returned to Tripoli with Carlo Alberto , the torpedo cruiser Iride , and several torpedo boats while most of the Italian fleet returned to Italy for refitting . In January 1912 , Liguria and her sister Elba were transferred to the Red Sea , along with a pair of fast mail steamers . The cruiser fleet in the Red Sea then began a campaign of coastal bombardments of Ottoman ports in the area . A blockade was proclaimed of the Ottoman ports , which included the cities of Al Luḩayyah and Al Hudaydah . The Ottomans eventually agreed to surrender in October , ending the war . 
 By the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Liguria was assigned to the Third Division of the First Squadron as a training ship . Italy declared neutrality at the start of the war , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers . The old cruiser nevertheless saw no action during the war . She was sold for scrap on 15 May 1921 and was subsequently broken up . 
 = Birmingham Americans = 
 The Birmingham Americans were a professional American football team located in Birmingham , Alabama . They were members of the four @-@ team Central Division of the World Football League ( WFL ) . The Americans , founded in late December 1973 , played in the upstart league 's inaugural season in 1974 . The team was owned by William " Bill " Putnam , doing business as Alabama Football , Inc . 
 The club played all of their home games at Legion Field . The most successful of the World Football League franchises , the Americans led the league in attendance and won all 13 of their home games . Winning their first ten games in a row , they developed a reputation for come @-@ from @-@ behind victories and winning by narrow margins . The Americans finished the 1974 regular season at 15 – 5 and won the 1974 World Bowl by one point over the Florida Blazers . 
 Financially unstable due to investor reluctance and lavish signing bonuses paid to lure National Football League ( NFL ) players to the new league , the team folded after only one season . Most of the team 's assets were seized to pay back taxes ; failed lawsuits to recover the signing bonus money kept the team in the headlines long after the WFL was itself defunct . The Americans were replaced as the Birmingham WFL franchise for the 1975 season by a new team called the Birmingham Vulcans . 
 = = Franchise history = = 
 Atlanta businessman William R. " Bill " Putnam was awarded an expansion franchise for Birmingham in the upstart World Football League and secured a lease to play at Legion Field . The five original investors in Alabama Football , Inc . , all Atlanta businessmen , were majority owner Bill Putnam , Cecil Day , Lon Day , Jay Donnelly , and <unk> <unk> . Between them they had already invested over $ 1 @.@ 5 million in the franchise and hoped to find ten investors in Birmingham to buy in for an additional $ 150 @,@ 000 each . Unable to find local investors for the team , Putnam threatened to move the Americans from Birmingham before the start of the 1974 season . However , with more than 10 @,@ 000 season tickets sold before the first game , the team 's position in Birmingham was secured for the year . 
 Vince Costello , an assistant coach with the Cincinnati Bengals , was chosen as head coach / general manager . A few days after the announcement , he turned down the job to become an assistant with the Miami Dolphins . Jack Gotta , head coach of the Ottawa Rough Riders of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) , was hired . Gotta put together a solid squad , including veteran quarterback George Mira , rookie passer Matthew Reed , wide receiver Dennis Homan , running back Charley Harraway of the Redskins , and former St. Louis Cardinals and Auburn standout safety Larry Willingham . Johnny Musso , a former Alabama fullback with the CFL 's BC Lions , was the Americans ' first round pick in the WFL 's " pro draft " in March 1974 . Birmingham selected 42 @-@ year @-@ old retired professional basketball player and former Atlanta Hawks head coach Richie Guerin in the fortieth and last round of that draft , drawing laughter from the audience . Radio play @-@ by @-@ play duties were handled by Larry Matson with color commentary provided by a series of guest commentators . 
 = = 1974 season = = 
 Birmingham competed in the Central Division , along with the Chicago Fire , Memphis Southmen , and Detroit Wheels . The team began training camp on June 3 at the Marion Military Institute in Marion , Alabama , and broke camp during the first week in July . The Americans played a 20 @-@ game regular season with no pre @-@ season games . ( The team did however play one " controlled scrimmage " against the Jacksonville Sharks on Saturday , June 29 , 1974 . ) Most games were played on Wednesday nights with nationally televised games on Thursday nights . The Americans won their first ten games , finishing the regular season 15 – 5 , in second place in the Central Division behind Memphis . Midway through the season , the World Football League Players Association was formed and Americans fullback Charley Harraway was selected to serve as its first president . Alfred Jenkins was named the team 's Most Valuable Player for the 1974 season . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 The Americans ' first game was played on July 10 , 1974 , against the Southern California Sun in front of a crowd of 53 @,@ 231 at Legion Field . ( The 53 @,@ 231 figure is the official announced attendance , including free ticket distribution . The reported paid attendance figure was actually 43 @,@ 031 for the opening game . ) Held scoreless by the Sun for the first three quarters and trailing by a touchdown at the start of the fourth quarter , the Americans came back to win 11 – 7 . In their first road game , the Americans overcame a 26 @-@ point deficit at halftime to win 32 – 29 over the New York Stars in front of 17 @,@ 943 at Downing Stadium on July 17 , 1974 . The second home game , a 58 – 33 win over the Memphis Southmen on July 24 , drew 61 @,@ 319 fans . 
 In the first of back @-@ to @-@ back games against the Detroit Wheels , Birmingham quarterback Matthew Reed scored the game @-@ winning touchdown with 2 : 12 remaining in the fourth quarter to secure a 21 – 18 victory . The July 31 , 1974 , road win was witnessed by 14 @,@ 614 fans in <unk> Stadium in Ypsilanti , Michigan . Reed led a four @-@ play touchdown drive in the last 26 seconds of the Americans ' third home game to give Birmingham another win , 28 – 22 over Detroit . A reported 40 @,@ 367 fans sat through rain and foul weather to see the victory on August 7 . Weather was also a factor in the Americans ' fourth home game as driving rain delayed the start of the August 14 game against The Hawaiians and reduced attendance to 43 @,@ 297 . Fans at Legion Field saw a halftime show featuring grass skirt @-@ clad hula dancers with music provided by the Tuscaloosa High School marching band in addition to the 39 – 0 victory by Birmingham . 
 The Americans travelled to Florida to face the Jacksonville Sharks , 27 @,@ 140 Jacksonville fans , and the Sharks ' new coach , Charlie Tate . Birmingham managed a 15 – 14 win with a touchdown by Charlie Harraway and action point by quarterback Matthew Reed with 19 seconds remaining in the August 21 game . The Americans then went north to face the Chicago Fire on Thursday , August 29 , 1974 , in their first nationally televised game . Birmingham won that match @-@ up 22 – 8 with 44 @,@ 732 fans in attendance at Soldier Field . 
 A quick turnaround found the Americans back home for a Labor Day game against the Eastern Division @-@ leading Florida Blazers on Monday , September 2 , 1974 , with 36 @,@ 529 fans in the stadium . A fourth quarter scoring drive kept Birmingham 's winning streak intact with a narrow 8 – 7 win over Florida . Another short week found the Americans in action on Saturday , September 7 , 1974 , at home against the Chicago Fire . Weather was again a factor as Hurricane Carmen pushed " torrential rains " into the Birmingham area , drenching the field , the players , and the 54 @,@ 872 fans in attendance . A 34 @-@ yard field goal by Earl Sark with less than one minute to go in the game was the difference in Birmingham 's 41 – 40 victory over Chicago . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Four games in just two weeks proved too much for the Americans as their ten @-@ game winning streak came to an end on September 11 with a loss to the Memphis Southmen . After rallying for seven fourth @-@ quarter comebacks in their first ten games , Birmingham lost 46 – 7 in front of a 30 @,@ 675 @-@ strong crowd at Liberty Bowl Memorial Stadium . 
 The Americans ' nationally televised September 19 home game against the Houston Texans proved to be the last WFL game for Houston as the following week the Texans were taken over by the league and relocated to Shreveport , Louisiana . Just 33 @,@ 619 fans at Legion Field saw the 42 – 14 win for Birmingham , the beginning of a slow , downward trend in attendance figures that coincided with the start of college football season . The Americans who , in the words of UPI sportswriter Joe <unk> , " made the last @-@ minute score almost their trademark , " were upset 26 – 21 by the Portland Storm with 14 @,@ 273 in the stands at Portland 's Civic Stadium . The Storm scored the game @-@ winning touchdown with 35 seconds left in the September 25 road contest . 
 The long flight across the Pacific Ocean did not help Birmingham for their October 2 game in Honolulu . The Americans lost 14 – 8 to The Hawaiians in front of 12 @,@ 039 fans at Honolulu Stadium ( demolished in 1976 ) . Birmingham trailed after the first quarter but rallied to defeat the Portland Storm 30 – 8 in front of a below @-@ average 25 @,@ 621 hometown fans at Legion Field on October 9 . The following week , on October 16 , the Americans lost their third game in four weeks , falling 29 – 25 to the Southern California Sun before a crowd of 25 @,@ 247 in Anaheim . 
 In mid @-@ October , Americans team president Carol Stallworth announced that the team 's remaining home games would start at 7 p.m. to " make it easier for our early @-@ rising fans " than the original 8 p.m. kickoffs . Also , the Americans ' game schedule was adjusted to accommodate the league 's shifting and struggling franchises . The October 23 game against the Shreveport Steamer scheduled for Birmingham would be played on the road in Shreveport instead and , in return , their November 13 match @-@ up was relocated from Shreveport 's State Fair Stadium to Birmingham 's Legion Field . On the road unexpectedly , the Americans suffered their only shutout of the season , falling to the Steamer 31 – 0 in front of 24 @,@ 617 fans . 
 The October 30 game with the Florida Blazers was moved from Orlando to Birmingham , giving the Americans 11 home games in their 20 @-@ game regular season . This was one of two home games relocated out of Orlando as part of a legal settlement between the WFL and Blazers ownership to sell the financially troubled team , pay off debts , and get checks to players who had not been paid since mid @-@ September . Not included in the Americans ' season ticket package , this extra home game tallied the lowest home attendance to date for the Americans with 21 @,@ 872 present at Legion Field . In that game , quarterback George Mira injured his shoulder in the second quarter and rookie Matthew Reed came off the bench to lead the Americans to a 26 – 18 victory . 
 Birmingham scored all of their points in the first half of their November 6 home game against the Philadelphia Bell then fought off a second @-@ half comeback attempt by Philadelphia to win 26 – 23 before 22 @,@ 963 at Legion Field . With this victory , the team clinched a spot in the WFL playoffs but the Birmingham franchise 's increasing financial woes put the playing of the final regular season game in doubt . A deal with tax officials was worked out and the Americans wrapped up the regular season on November 13 with a 40 – 7 win over the Shreveport Steamer , marking three consecutive home game victories . With doubts as to whether this game would be played persisting until the day of the contest , ticket sales were poor ; only 14 @,@ 794 fans saw the final regular season game the Americans would play . Although they slumped to a .500 record in the second half , it was enough to finish second , behind Central Division @-@ winning Memphis , at 15 – 5 and take the wild card slot in the six @-@ team playoff series and earn a bye in the first round . 
 = = = Post @-@ season = = = 
 After receiving a bye from the quarterfinal playoff games , Birmingham beat the Western Division @-@ winning The Hawaiians in the semifinals , 22 – 19 , in front of a sparse 15 @,@ 379 at Legion Field . The Americans advanced to host the World Bowl , the WFL 's championship game , on Thursday , December 5 . Unpaid since early October , the Americans players staged a walkout on the Monday before the title game demanding back pay . The players returned when team ownership promised to buy each player a championship ring . The game went forward and Birmingham beat the Florida Blazers by a point , 22 – 21 . This game was played with 32 @,@ 376 fans in the stands , over 20 @,@ 000 fewer than had witnessed the Americans ' first game just five months before . This was the only championship game ever held by the WFL , as it folded 12 games into the 1975 regular season . 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Financial fallout = = 
 In early November 1974 , Alabama Attorney General Bill Baxley filed suit in Jefferson County Circuit Court for a tax lien against the team 's property . The suit sought to recover the $ 30 @,@ 000 in state income withholding taxes and more than $ 57 @,@ 000 in sales taxes for August and September 1974 ( plus a then @-@ undetermined amount due for October 1974 ) due to the state of Alabama . The judge ordered Jefferson County 's sheriff to " attach the property , real , personal and mixed , of the defendant , wherever it may be in Jefferson County . " The team also admitted it owed roughly US $ 14 @,@ 000 in back sales taxes to both Jefferson County and to the city of Birmingham . 
 The Birmingham motel where the coaching staff had its offices evicted the team for non @-@ payment on November 14 . At that time , the Americans had not paid their players for five weeks , nor their staff and coaches for two weeks . On November 18 , 1974 , the Internal Revenue Service filed its own tax liens of about $ 237 @,@ 000 against the Americans and $ 160 @,@ 000 against team owner Bill Putnam . 
 Putnam announced at a press conference that he was trying to raise the funds to pay the team 's debts . He reported that the team had taken in about $ 2 @.@ 3 million in gate receipts to that point , which left him " only $ 300 @,@ 000 short of operating the club " , but revealed that the team had also " paid out over $ 1 @.@ 2 million in bonuses to future players . " He asserted that the team would not be in such dire financial straits if that bonus money had not been paid . Putnam said that he would need to raise $ 750 @,@ 000 by November 28 so the team could pay back taxes due to the state , county , and city as well as the salaries of players who had not been paid in four weeks . He said " If the money comes from Birmingham , we 'll stay here but if the money comes from people in Timbuktu who want the team in Timbuktu , them we 'll move there . " Putnam said a group from New York was interested in purchasing the Americans . Putnam speculated that one reason he had been unable to secure " local money " to invest in the franchise was that local interests were still hoping to bring an NFL franchise to the city . 
 = = = Loss of property = = = 
 To attempt to pay back the debt and to allow the World Bowl to be played , the teams negotiated a deal with creditors to accept a portion of the gate receipts . After paying fixed costs associated with the game , the IRS and others due money would split 30 percent of the revenue with the teams receiving the remaining 70 percent to pay long @-@ overdue player salaries . This revenue was split by the Americans and Blazers on a 60 / 40 basis with the World Bowl winners receiving the larger share . Based on gate receipts , each Americans player was to be paid about US $ 1 @,@ 400 for their World Bowl play with each Blazers player taking home about US $ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 Hibbett Sporting Goods had provided uniforms and football equipment to the Americans but still had not been paid US $ 38 @,@ 800 by the end of the season . Immediately after the championship victory , members of the Jefferson County Sheriff 's Department seized the team 's equipment and uniforms from the locker room . One week later , Hibbett Sporting Goods began selling the reclaimed gear as souvenirs and Christmas presents in their retail stores . 
 = = = Loss of players = = = 
 Oakland Raiders quarterback Kenny Stabler signed a contract with Birmingham in 1974 . In January 1975 , a circuit court judge found that the team was in arrears on payment of the remaining US $ 30 @,@ 000 due to Stabler of the US $ 100 @,@ 000 he was guaranteed for 1974 and so ruled that the Americans were in breach of contract and thus Stabler was released . The three @-@ year deal was to have paid Stabler US $ 100 @,@ 000 in both 1974 and 1975 while he played out his contract option with the Raiders and US $ 135 @,@ 000 for the 1976 season when he would have been playing for the Americans . The judge ruled Stabler released from his contract and voided any debt to him by the then @-@ struggling Americans franchise . 
 While the successor to the Americans , the Vulcans were a different organization and ownership from the Americans and did not assume any of their debts or obligations , including any of the Americans ' player contracts . The Internal Revenue Service seized the Americans player contracts and placed them up for auction in March 1975 to pay the team 's US $ 236 @,@ 691 in overdue taxes but a judge ruled all of these player contracts breached and of no value . In any case , the auction was cancelled when a judge ruled that Birmingham Trust National Bank had a valid prior claim to the contracts . 
 = = = Loss of franchise = = = 
 Newly elected WFL president Chris Hemmeter was determined to impose a measure of financial sanity on the league . Among other things , he insisted that all potential owners establish a $ 650 @,@ 000 line of credit with the league . Putnam tried to find more local investors to meet this requirement , but there were few takers . 
 In late January 1975 , Hemmeter revoked the Americans ' franchise due to the team 's chronic financial woes . Hemmeter stated that the Americans owed a total of $ 2 million in bills , taxes and missed player salaries . However , the league said it had every intention of placing a new team in Birmingham . Putnam responded by suing the league , demanding to be compensated with the rights to New York City . However , the suit went nowhere . 
 On March 7 , 1975 , Ferd Weil , as president of the board of directors of a new WFL franchise for Birmingham , announced that the Birmingham WFL team for 1975 would be called the Birmingham Vulcans , a name previously registered by a group of Birmingham businessmen who had been trying to secure an NFL franchise for Birmingham . The Vulcans began selling shares of stock to the general public . Priced at US $ 10 per share and sold only in blocks of 10 shares , the team hoped to raise $ 1 @.@ 5 million with this offering . The Vulcans officially secured the Birmingham franchise in April 1975 . When the WFL folded for good 12 games into the ill @-@ fated 1975 season , the Vulcans had the best record . 
 = = = Legal pursuits = = = 
 Kenny Stabler was not the only NFL player that the Americans signed to contracts but who never played for the WFL team . Detroit Lions wide receiver Ron Jessie was paid a $ 45 @,@ 000 signing bonus in early 1974 , to begin playing for the Americans in the 1975 season after completing his option year with the Lions . Dallas Cowboys defensive tackle Jethro Pugh and offensive tackle Rayfield Wright each received a $ 75 @,@ 000 signing bonus , with Pugh set to start playing for the Americans in 1976 and Wright in 1977 . Pittsburgh Steelers defensive end L. C. Greenwood received a $ 50 @,@ 000 signing bonus to play from 1975 . However , when the team folded both the WFL commissioner and a federal judge ruled that the player contracts had all been voided . These players remained in the NFL , playing neither for the Americans nor the successor Birmingham Vulcans team . Bill Putnam and his Alabama Football , Inc . , still the legal owners of what little remained of the Americans ' assets , made headlines through the late 1970s when he sued these NFL players claiming " breach of contract " to recover the signing bonus money . The players were ultimately able to keep the money after the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled in their favor . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Financially devastated , former Americans team president Carol Stallworth became a bartender in a downtown Birmingham sports bar in early 1975 . Most of the former Americans players signed on with the Birmingham Vulcans for the 1975 WFL season . Notable exceptions included star players Charlie Harraway , Alfred Jenkins , Paul Robinson , and veteran quarterback George Mira . The Birmingham Bulls of the World Hockey Association held " Jack Gotta Night " on December 26 , 1976 , in honor of the former Americans head coach . 
 By July 1976 , Americans owner Bill Putnam was working to buy a World Hockey Association franchise and relocate it to Hollywood , Florida , as the " Florida Breakers " . The team was planned to start play in October 1976 with the Hollywood <unk> as its home ice . In August 1976 , Putnam announced that his plan had " collapsed " but he would continue his attempts to bring a hockey franchise to south Florida . 
 Fans of the team organized a reunion celebration held July 9 – 10 , 2004 , in honor of the 30th anniversary of the Americans ' first game played on July 10 , 1974 , against the Southern California Sun . One reason for the festivities was to help pay for the promised World Bowl championship rings that many players did not receive from the financial failing franchise . Dayton Daily News sportswriter Chick Ludwig discovered the omission while doing research for a book . He used his investigative skills to find that <unk> Manufacturing in El Paso , Texas , made the original rings and could create replacement rings for $ 809 each . The story received national attention which prompted Nestlé and the AF2 Birmingham <unk> to help sponsor the reunion at the Alabama Sports Hall of Fame in Birmingham . 
 As of April 2010 , three former Birmingham Americans players have been inducted into the Alabama Sports Hall of Fame . Muscle Shoals native Dennis Homan , who also played in Super Bowl V for the Dallas Cowboys , was inducted in the Class of 1999 . Oxford native Terry Henley , who also played pro football for the Atlanta Falcons , Washington Redskins , and New England Patriots , was inducted in the Class of 2000 . Cullman native Larry Willingham , who played for the St. Louis Cardinals and retired for medical reasons in 1973 but made a comeback in 1974 with the Americans , was inducted in the Class of 2003 . Willingham and Henley were also elected to the Auburn Tigers football " 1970s Team of the Decade " . 
 = Edge of Tomorrow = 
 Edge of Tomorrow ( alternatively known by its tagline Live . Die . Repeat. and marketed as such on home release ) is a 2014 American science fiction action film starring Tom Cruise and Emily Blunt . Doug Liman directed the film based on a screenplay adapted from the 2004 Japanese light novel All You Need Is Kill by Hiroshi Sakurazaka . The film takes place in a future where Earth is invaded by an alien race . Cruise plays Bill Cage , a public relations officer with no combat experience , who is ordered by his superior to film the first wave of a crucial landing operation against the aliens . Though Cage is killed in combat , he finds himself in a time loop that sends him back to the day preceding the battle every time he dies . Cage teams up with Special Forces warrior Rita Vrataski ( Blunt ) in seeking a way to defeat the extraterrestrials . 
 In late 2009 , 3 Arts Productions purchased the rights to the novel and sold a spec script to the American studio Warner Bros .. The studio produced the film with the involvement of 3 Arts , the novel 's publisher Viz Media , and Australian production company Village Roadshow . Filming began in late 2012 , taking place in England at Leavesden Studios outside London , and other locations such as Trafalgar Square and Saunton Sands . Nine companies handled the visual effects . 
 The film was released in theaters on the weekend of May 30 , 2014 in 28 territories , including the United Kingdom , Brazil , Germany , Spain , and Indonesia . On the weekend of June 6 , 2014 it was released in 36 additional territories , including North America ( United States and Canada ) , Australia , China , and Russia . The film grossed over $ 370 million in theaters worldwide and received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An extraterrestrial race called Mimics have taken over continental Europe . NATO allies form the United Defense Force to combat the invasion , but have only won one victory at Verdun . However , humanity has managed to hold the Mimics at the English Channel . In England , General Brigham , head of the UDF , orders Major William Cage , a public affairs officer with no combat experience , to cover Operation Downfall , the next day 's massive amphibious assault on France . Cage objects to the dangerous assignment and threatens to put the blame on Brigham if the landing fails . In response , Brigham orders the arrest of Cage , who is tasered when he attempts to escape . He awakes in handcuffs at a forward operating base at Heathrow Airport ; he has been demoted to private , identified as a deserter , and assigned to J Squad under the command of Master Sergeant <unk> . 
 The invasion proves to be disastrous ; instead of a surprise attack , the humans walk right into a Mimic trap . Cage , despite his inexperience and incompetence , kills an unusually large Mimic , but dies covered with its blood . He wakes up finding himself back at Heathrow the previous morning ; no one believes his story that the invasion is a trap . Cage repeats the loop of dying on the beach and waking at Heathrow over and over again . Finally , he encounters the famous Sergeant Rita Vrataski ( the " Angel of Verdun " ) during the invasion . She deduces his ability and tells him to locate her the next time he " wakes up " ; they both perish in an explosion . 
 When Cage next awakens at Heathrow , he finds Vrataski and explains what 's going on . Cage is introduced by Vrataski to Dr. Carter , a former government scientist and expert in Mimic biology . Carter explains that the Mimics are a hive mind : if an " Alpha " is killed , the Mimic hive queen , the " Omega " , responds by turning time back a day , thus giving the Mimics a seemingly unbeatable advantage . Cage acquired this ability after being doused in Alpha blood . Vrataski had herself gained this ability in Verdun , explaining her heroics in winning the battle , but lost it after receiving a blood transfusion , having been being wounded but not killed . She tells Cage that they must hunt and destroy the Omega . 
 Over many time loops , Vrataski trains Cage to become a more formidable soldier . Frustrated by his continued failures , he retreats to London , but discovers the Mimics will attack there after defeating the invasion force . After having a vision of the Omega in a dam in Switzerland , Cage and Vrataski spend many loops getting to the mainland and to the dam . Over the iterations , Cage comes to know Vrataski , who is humorless and only interested in killing Mimics . Upon reaching a point where she dies regardless , Cage decides to hunt the Omega alone . When he finally reaches the dam , he discovers that the Omega is not there . Realizing that the vision was a trap , Cage kills himself before an Alpha can bleed him out and remove his ability to reset the day . 
 After devising an alternative plan , Cage and Vrataski infiltrate the UK Ministry of Defence to obtain a prototype built by Carter that would allow Cage to see the Omega 's true location . Cage finally persuades General Brigham to give him the device , though his men then try to capture them . During the pursuit Cage uses the prototype and they discover that the Omega is under the Louvre Pyramid in Paris . However , both are captured and seriously injured . Cage wakes up in a hospital and discovered he has been given a blood transfusion , destroying his ability to reset time . 
 Vrataski frees Cage , and they go to Heathrow and recruit J Squad to help destroy the Omega before the invasion begins . They fly to Paris , where the other soldiers sacrifice themselves so Cage and Vrataski can get beneath the Louvre . Just before luring away an Alpha standing between them and the submerged Omega , Vrataski kisses Cage . The Alpha kills Vrataski and mortally wounds Cage , but he manages to drop a belt of grenades , destroying the Omega and neutralizing all Mimics . 
 The dying Cage floats down through the water into the Omega 's blood . He awakens en route to his first meeting with Brigham . Brigham announces on TV that Mimic activity has ceased following a mysterious energy surge in Paris . Cage travels to Heathrow on his own , where others treat him with respect due to his officer rank . He finds Vrataski , who is as curt to him as in previous loops , in response to which he laughs . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Edge of Tomorrow was co @-@ produced by Warner Bros. and Village Roadshow Pictures , with the involvement of production companies 3 Arts Entertainment and Viz Productions , on a budget of $ 178 million . The screenplay is adapted from the 2004 Japanese light novel All You Need Is Kill by Hiroshi Sakurazaka . 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 Viz Media published the novel in North America in 2009 . After drawing the interest of producer Erwin Stoff , his company 3 Arts Entertainment optioned the novel that same year . 3 Arts collaborated with the publisher 's filmmaking subsidiary Viz Productions , headed by Jason Hoffs . Viz Media president <unk> Fukuhara served as executive producer . Instead of making a pitch to a major studio to purchase the property and proceed with writing and producing a film adaptation , the company developed a spec script to show the studios . Stoff approached writer Dante Harper and sent him a copy of the novel . Harper found the book " too complex " to properly adapt , but , despite the prospect of not getting paid , he chose to " risk it " and accepted the job , taking eight months to write the script . Upon completion , Warner Bros. purchased it in a $ 3 million deal in April 2010 . The studio hired Doug Liman to direct the film the following August . Harper 's screenplay was listed in the 2010 edition of The Black List , a survey of most @-@ liked unproduced screenplays . 
 In June 2011 , Joby Harold was hired to rework the screenplay . By September , Warner approached Brad Pitt to star ; after he declined , the studio then approached Tom Cruise . Once Cruise accepted , the script changed the age of the leading role to fit the actor 's . In December 2011 , Cruise officially joined the film . Emily Blunt entered negotiations to star opposite Cruise in April 2012 . Screenwriting duo Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman also delivered a draft of their own . 
 Six months before filming started , Liman discarded two @-@ thirds of Harper 's original script . Jez Butterworth and John @-@ Henry Butterworth were hired to rewrite the script . Screenwriter Simon Kinberg took over from the Butterworths , and eight weeks before the start of filming , he was replaced by Christopher McQuarrie . McQuarrie was introduced to the project while directing Cruise in Jack Reacher . While reading the earlier script McQuarrie " understood very clearly what the premise of the story was and what they were looking for in terms of characters " . Even if the previous scripts were darker , Cruise stressed the importance of the story 's humor to McQuarrie . The actor compared Cage 's violent demises to Wile E. Coyote and The Road Runner , declaring , " It 's fun coming up with new ways to kill yourself . " 
 The screenplay did not yet have a satisfactory ending , and , despite the producers and studio executives worried about starting filming without a set conclusion , Liman opted to finish the script during principal photography . McQuarrie at one point suggested adding a twist involving the Mimics figuring out Cage 's attack on Paris and resetting time during his strike , but discarded it as " you were so exhausted by the time you got to that point . " Eventually , McQuarrie considered that focusing on the comedic aspects meant " it needed to end in a way that wasn 't harsh " , and thus opted to end the plot where it started , on the helicopter bringing Cage to London , fulfilling the notion that " comedies generally have to go back to the way things were " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production began at Leavesden Studios near London . Warner Bros. purchased Leavesden as a permanent studio site after previously renting space there for its production of the Harry Potter films . Though Liman intended to film the beach battle on location , the studio instead had a beach set built at the studio site . The set was surrounded by chroma key green screens , which the visual effects artists later used to extend the beach with plates shot at Saunton Sands in North Devon . It was intended for the battle scenes to be reminiscent of coastal battles during World War II such as the Invasion of Normandy and the Battle of Dunkirk . 
 Principal photography began at Leavesden on October 1 , 2012 . The Los Angeles Times said on the second day , Liman " demanded a total reshoot of everything filmed on Day 1 " , which concerned producers . Filming on the beach set was scheduled to last two weeks , but extended to nearly three months due to what the Los Angeles Times called " the director 's self @-@ described ' workshop @-@ y ' filming style " . Filming also took place in Trafalgar Square in London on November 24 , 2012 . The square was closed to the public , and tanks were brought in to film the action scenes . A former army base in the village of Barton Stacey in Hampshire , was also used as a filming location for two weeks . 
 Liman said filming took place seven days a week using two crews to film 20 days in addition to what had originally been scheduled . The crew struggled with changeable British weather since the film was supposed to be set in one day and had to maintain the same weather . The indoor beach set also became muddy , requiring the effects artists to enhance the environment with digital sand and surf . Though filming concluded by August 2013 , actor Jeremy Piven was added to the cast and extra scenes including him were filmed ; ultimately , however , Piven did not appear in the finished film . Cinematographer Dion Beebe made his first feature film with Liman , with whom he had worked previously on commercials . Beebe 's approach was to develop " a world under siege , but not a bleak , dark , post @-@ apocalyptic landscape " ; Beebe preferred to avoid the saturated bleach bypass look . 35mm film was used instead of digital cameras to evoke the World War II footage that provided inspiration for the battle scenes . 
 = = = Battle suits = = = 
 Production designer Oliver Scholl and his team worked with lead builder Pierre <unk> to develop concept art for several battle suit options based on contemporary , real @-@ world powered exoskeleton initiatives , such as those supported by DARPA . When director Doug Liman chose a design , the team built an aluminum prototype frame that had pivot points and hinges . Costume designer Kate Hawley contributed a gritty aesthetic design for the color palettes and surface treatments . While the design was meant to be utilitarian , it was also created so the actors could be seen in the suits and also run in them . The team created a foam mock @-@ up of Tom Cruise so the frame could be tailored for him . The team handcrafted 70 hard material and 50 soft material battle suits in the course of almost five months . There were three versions of the battle suits : " grunts , dogs , and tanks " . The battle suit for Blunt 's character had red slash marks sprayed on to reflect a Joan of Arc quality . 
 Cruise , known for performing his own film stunts , also did so in Edge of Tomorrow . Both he and Blunt wore the heavy metal suits . The battle suits weighed 85 pounds ( 39 kg ) on average . One of the heavier versions was around 130 pounds ( 59 kg ) due to it being equipped with a mock sniper rifle and rocket launcher . Blunt trained three months for her role , " focusing on everything from weights to sprints to yoga , aerial wire work and gymnastics " , and studying the Israeli combat system Krav Maga . 
 Each actor needed four people to help put on the battle suit . Initially , Cruise needed 30 minutes to put on the suit and another 30 minutes to remove it . Ultimately , the time was reduced to 30 seconds . Between takes , the actors would be suspended by chains from iron frames to take the weight of the suits off their shoulders . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Nine companies handled the visual effects for Edge of Tomorrow under VFX supervisor Nick Davis . Davis worked with the crew of The Third Floor on the film 's previsualization process . Sony Pictures Imageworks ( SPI ) worked on the first two acts of the film and created over 400 shots , including photorealistic environments , battle scenes , and computer @-@ generated creatures and characters . One major shot involved covering London Heathrow Airport with military troops , vehicles , and aircraft ; SPI split some of the work with <unk> . Cinesite joined late in the production and developed 221 shots for ten key sequences , with 189 appearing in the final cut . 
 Designers created the alien Mimics to look different from any terrestrial animal . Davis and Liman favored an early model composed primarily of tentacles . SPI 's Dan Kramer described its appearance as " heavy black spaghetti " and noted that the modelers faced a challenge creating the tentacled creatures . A technical animator created an Autodesk Maya plugin that made the movement of each tentacle independent . Since Liman did not want the Mimics to look " too organic or terrestrial " , Imageworks ' artists devised the idea of making the aliens out of an obsidian @-@ like material , " basically a glass that could cut " . Various debris was incorporated within the tentacles to give the creature a sense of weight and fast movement . The <unk> were given a definable head area to show their status as more sentient , while receiving a different color and a bigger size compared to the Mimic grunts . Cinesite created the mechanical Mimics used in the training areas , while MPC created the Omega in a digital environment into which the effects artists composited underwater footage filmed at Leavesden 's water tank . 
 Animators created digital versions of the battle suits , at times with the soldiers inside them . On the set a 3D scanner booth digitized the actors , while hand scanners captured the textures of the practical suits . Imageworks received pieces of the suits for reference . The company 's library of reflection data on various materials helped enhance the armor 's shading . SPI 's crew created the base at Heathrow by merging the set at Leavesden with digitally altered footage from the airport ; the film 's drop ships , barracks and mess halls , replaced the existing aircraft . Framestore created the digital Paris and recreated it with <unk> from three days of visits . Given that the city is a no @-@ fly zone , Framestore 's artists obtained their aerial images by climbing an 80 @-@ meter crane parked in the Louvre courtyard . The <unk> dropships were based on the Bell Boeing V @-@ 22 Osprey that can tilt its rotors to fly as either planes or helicopters , while having a design closer to the Quad <unk> . Aside from the crashed ship on the beachhead and a gimbal set to depict the plane used by Cage 's squad , the film used digital models for most ships . The computer @-@ generated dropships had some of Imageworks ' heaviest detail given the proximity of the actors to the aircraft in the camp scenes ; the effects artists wanted to make sure the ships broke apart in a realistic way during the crashes . 
 Prime Focus World converted the film into 3D in post @-@ production using the same tools for the stereoscopy in World War Z and Gravity . The company made use of scans of the cast 's faces from film production while vendor <unk> helped the company convert the hologram table used by Dr. Carter . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Composer Christophe Beck was a late addition to the film , taking over from Ramin Djawadi , who was Liman 's first choice to replace his frequent collaborator John Powell , as Powell was on sabbatical . Edge of Tomorrow marked Beck 's first science fiction film score . To prepare , Beck watched the film with temp tracks , including one from the 2012 film Battleship . He experimented with repeating the music with the scenes , but because this approach did not frequently fit the events on the screen , Beck used minimal repetition in the film . " The day is reset dozens of times in the film and it would get very repetitive to approach that musically the same way every time " , Beck recalled . He initially tried for " traditional heroic themes " that involved horns and trumpets , but he said Liman " preferred a non @-@ traditional approach , driven by percussion and distorted orchestra " . To that end , Beck used the pizzicato playing technique , " not in the traditional , plinky @-@ plinky @-@ isn 't @-@ this @-@ funny way , but a little darker , and always accompanied by some higher concept synth colors " . The distorted orchestral samples enhanced the comedic tone of the extended sequences where Cage recurrently dies in battle , as the director felt it was important for the audience to find humor in this sequence . With Liman 's approach , the composer said there were " only a couple of traditional themes " in the film , including one for Emily Blunt 's character Rita . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Warner Bros. invested over $ 100 million in a marketing campaign for Edge of Tomorrow . The film was initially titled All You Need Is Kill after the light novel . In July 2013 , Warner Bros. changed the title to Edge of Tomorrow ; Warner Bros. president Sue Kroll said the title was changed partly due to " negative chatter " about the word " kill " in the title . The film was promoted at Comic @-@ Con in San Diego , California in July 2013 , and at WonderCon in Anaheim , California in April 2014 . Turner Broadcasting , a subsidiary of Time Warner like the studio Warner Bros. , promoted the film across its TV properties , including CNN , TNT , TBS , Adult Swim , <unk> , and Funny or Die . Variety said the move " put forth the notion that buying bigger packages of advertisements across a TV company 's holdings is a viable option in an increasingly fragmented TV @-@ viewing landscape " . Turner also launched a website which would unlock film @-@ related content like " a 3D game , back stories and artwork " if its promotional hashtag was circulated enough through the social media website Twitter . 
 Viz Media released a new edition of the light novel on April 29 , 2014 , retitled Edge of Tomorrow . It also published a graphic novel adaptation of the light novel on May 5 , 2014 . 
 For the film 's release on home media , Warner Bros. formed two teams for a September 28 , 2014 , Tough <unk> endurance event series in Black Diamond , Washington . The teams included YouTube personalities and participants from the TV series American Ninja Warrior . Warner Bros. based the teams on the soldiers from " J Squad " in the film . To promote teamwork , the two teams competed in a Tough <unk> obstacle course . 
 = = = Box office forecast = = = 
 Weeks before the film 's release , reports in early May 2014 predicted an underwhelming performance in the North American ( United States and Canada ) box office for Edge of Tomorrow . Variety noted a " worrisome lack of buzz " leading up to the film 's release . Initial box office tracking at the start of the month for the film estimated a gross between $ 25 million and $ 30 million on its opening weekend . Several weeks later , the estimate decreased by $ 5 million . The film planned to compete with The Fault in Our Stars in the same opening weekend with an equivalent estimated gross around $ 25 million . The Wrap predicted that this competition could potentially impact the opening weekend gross of Edge of Tomorrow . In contrast , Variety said Edge of Tomorrow could serve as <unk> to The Fault in Our Stars since that film 's demographic is women under 25 years old . 
 With its budget of over $ 175 million , The Hollywood Reporter called Edge of Tomorrow , one of the " biggest box @-@ office risks " in North America for mid @-@ 2014 . The trade paper said the film was similar to Oblivion , a 2013 science fiction film that also starred Tom Cruise , and that like Oblivion , it would likely perform better outside North America . Box Office Mojo reported that four of Cruise 's films with original material — Valkyrie ( 2008 ) , Knight and Day ( 2010 ) , Jack Reacher ( 2012 ) , and Oblivion ( 2013 ) — failed to gross more than $ 100 million in North America . The website forecast that Edge of Tomorrow would gross $ 90 million in North America and $ 220 million in other territories . TheWrap said that the studio focused on theatrical releases in other territories where Cruise " remains a major force " in drawing audiences . Variety , writing from the US perspective , said , " Media reports have been quick to speculate that Edge of Tomorrow may be one of the summer 's first big bombs based on the lack of enthusiasm by U.S. audiences . That may come to pass , but these reports downplay the centrality of foreign markets in today 's globalized movie industry . " 
 In the week prior to the release of Edge of Tomorrow in North America , its estimated opening @-@ weekend gross increased from the mid- $ 20 million range to $ 27 million . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 Edge of Tomorrow initiated its theatrical run in several territories on May 28 , 2014 , and rolled out to a total of 28 territories for its opening weekend of May 30 – June 1 , 2014 . It grossed $ 20 @.@ 1 million on its opening weekend . For the second weekend of June 6 – 8 , 2014 , it was released in 36 additional territories . Edge of Tomorrow grossed $ 100 @.@ 2 million in North America and $ 270 @.@ 3 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 370 @.@ 5 million . After the film 's theatrical run , Entertainment Weekly said it had a " lukewarm box @-@ office reception " despite praise from critics . 
 = = = = Opening weekend = = = = 
 The film had premiere screenings in London , Paris , and New York City on May 28 , 2014 . The cast and the crew mimicked the film 's time loop premise by attending the premieres in a single day , traveling westward to attend them on a staggered schedule . The film was screened in New York City at 11 : 59 pm , the time chosen to refer to the film title . The film was released in theaters in 28 territories — including the United Kingdom , Brazil , Germany , Spain , and Indonesia — on the weekend of May 30 , 2014 . Certain territories with strong association football followings were chosen so the film could screen to audiences before the month @-@ long 2014 FIFA World Cup began on June 12 , 2014 . Edge of Tomorrow competed against Maleficent starring Angelina Jolie , which opened the same weekend in 46 territories . 
 On its opening weekend in 5 @,@ 018 screens across 28 territories , Edge of Tomorrow grossed $ 20 @.@ 1 million . The Hollywood Reporter called the film 's debut a " soft " opening . In many territories , Edge of Tomorrow ranked third behind fellow new release Maleficent and holdover X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past . These included the United Kingdom , where the film ranked third and grossed $ 3 @.@ 1 million , where Cruise 's 2013 film Oblivion had opened with $ 7 @.@ 6 million , and Germany , with an income of $ 2 @.@ 1 million compared to Oblivion 's $ 2 @.@ 6 million . Edge of Tomorrow ranked first in Indonesia and Taiwan , grossing $ 2 million and $ 1 @.@ 9 million , respectively . Its opening weekend in 286 screens in Indonesia was Tom Cruise 's biggest opening to date in the country . The film also grossed $ 1 @.@ 5 million in Italy and $ 1 @.@ 5 million in Spain . Deadline.com said the film had good word of mouth , citing significant increases in Saturday grosses compared to the Friday grosses in the United Kingdom , Germany , and Spain . Bloomberg Businessweek reported that $ 110 million was grossed in the first week of release and summarized its debut , " While it did solid business in Asia , its reception in Germany , France , and the U.K. has been tepid . " 
 = = = = Second weekend = = = = 
 In the first week of June 2014 , Edge of Tomorrow opened in 36 additional markets , including North America , China , Russia , South Korea and France . The film was now showing in 63 countries and 19 @,@ 000 screens . The film led the global weekend box office with $ 28 @.@ 8 million in North America and $ 82 million elsewhere . The debut in China occurred on Monday , June 2 , to take advantage of the Dragon Boat Festival holiday . Edge of Tomorrow topped the Chinese box office with $ 26 @.@ 7 million , encompassing 4 @.@ 06 million admissions in 99 @,@ 768 screenings . Edge of Tomorrow 's debut in both Russia ( $ 8 @.@ 6 million ) and South Korea ( $ 3 @.@ 8 million , taking advantage of a five @-@ day holiday ) marked Tom Cruise 's highest opening weekend in both countries . 
 Edge of Tomorrow was released in 3 @,@ 490 theaters in North America on June 6 , 2014 . The ticket service Fandango reported advance tickets surpassed Tom Cruise 's previous film Oblivion , but were being overcome by the competing film The Fault in Our Stars . Edge of Tomorrow grossed $ 28 @.@ 8 million on the opening weekend , ranking it third below The Fault in Our Stars ( $ 48 million ) and Maleficent ( $ 34 @.@ 3 million ) . Polling firm CinemaScore said 61 % of the opening weekend audiences were male . It reported that audiences overall gave Edge of Tomorrow a " B + " grade , where younger filmgoers gave " A " and " A – " grades . The Los Angeles Times said the disappointing box office performances of non @-@ franchise films Edge of Tomorrow and Blended , both produced and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures , indicated risky investments by the studio , which had better success earlier in the year with franchise films The Lego Movie and Godzilla ( 2014 ) . 
 = = = = Subsequent weekends = = = = 
 In its second weekend of release in North America ( June 13 – 15 , 2014 ) , Edge of Tomorrow had a " light " second @-@ weekend drop of 43 % due to word of mouth and grossed $ 16 @.@ 5 million on the second weekend . In the same weekend in territories outside North America , the film was on 14 @,@ 725 screens . With approximately 5 @.@ 1 million admissions , it grossed $ 37 @.@ 3 million . China , Russia , and South Korea respectively had the film 's largest weekend grosses among the territories . In South Korea , the film ranked first at the box office for two consecutive weekends , grossing a total of $ 25 @.@ 65 million by June 17 , 2014 . 
 In Japan , Edge of Tomorrow was released on July 4 , 2014 , under the light novel 's title All You Need Is Kill . The film opened second in the weekend rankings behind Maleficent , with an intake of $ 4 @.@ 5 million . As of November 30 , 2014 , with $ 15 @.@ 3 million , Edge of Tomorrow is the sixth highest @-@ grossing foreign movie of the year in Japan , and the 21st overall . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Edge of Tomorrow was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray Disc , and video on demand in the United States on October 7 , 2014 . The Blu @-@ ray disc includes over 90 minutes of bonus features . The home release 's packaging downplays the original Edge of Tomorrow title in favor of placing more prominence on the film 's original tagline , " Live . Die . Repeat . " Media critics believed that the re @-@ branding was an attempt by Warner Bros. to re @-@ launch the film 's marketing following its lackluster U.S. box office performance . Posters for the film 's theatrical release had similarly placed a larger emphasis on the " Live . Die . Repeat . " tagline than the actual title of the film . Similarly , some digital retailers listed the film under the title Live Die Repeat : Edge of Tomorrow . The film ranked first in home media sales for the week beginning October 7 , with 62 % of sales coming from the Blu @-@ ray version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Edge of Tomorrow received largely positive reviews from critics . Critics praised the humor , the aliens ' design , the performances of Cruise and Blunt , and the time @-@ loop premise 's ability to remain fresh . However , some critics had issues with the film 's conclusion . Based on 279 reviews , review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 90 % of critics gave the film a positive review , with a rating average of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 . The website 's critical consensus reads : " <unk> , well @-@ acted , funny , and clever , Edge of Tomorrow offers entertaining proof that Tom Cruise is still more than capable of shouldering the weight of a blockbuster action thriller . " Another aggregator Metacritic surveyed 43 critics and assessed 35 reviews as positive and eight as mixed , with none negative . Based on the reviews , it gave the film a score of 71 out of 100 , which it said indicated " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Justin Chang of Variety called Edge of Tomorrow " a cleverly crafted and propulsively executed sci @-@ fi thriller " , saying that the film was director Doug Liman 's best since The Bourne Identity ( 2002 ) . Chang said that the screenwriters , with the assistance of the editors , " tell their story in a breezy narrative shorthand ( and at times , sleight @-@ of @-@ hand ) , transforming what must surely be an unbelievably tedious gauntlet for our hero into a deft , playful and continually involving viewing experience " . Regarding the relationship between Cruise and Blunt 's characters , Chang said " Liman handles it with a pleasing lightness of touch that extends to the proceedings as a whole . " He also commended the visual effects of the " expertly designed Mimics " as well as Dion Beebe 's cinematography . 
 Todd McCarthy , writing for The Hollywood Reporter , said the film was " a narratively ambitious sci @-@ fi actioner " that " takes a relatively playful attitude toward the familiar battle tropes " . McCarthy said that , despite the humor , he found the time loop premise " tedious " and that " the final stretch becomes dramatically unconvincing and visually murky " . However , he also called the effects " exciting , convincing and gritty " and applauded Gleeson and Paxton in their supporting roles . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave the film a positive review , considering the film " a star @-@ driven mass @-@ market entertainment that 's smart , exciting and unexpected while not <unk> on genre satisfactions " that broke a string of " cookie @-@ cutter , been @-@ there blockbusters " . 
 Edge of Tomorrow was listed on 23 critics ' top ten lists ( out of 201 evaluated ) . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The theatrical trailer for Edge of Tomorrow was nominated at the 15th Annual Golden Trailer Awards for Best Action and for Best Summer 2014 Blockbuster Trailer , but lost to The Hunger Games : Catching Fire and Godzilla , respectively . The film also received nominations at the 2014 Teen Choice Awards for Best Action Film , Best Action Actor ( Tom Cruise ) , and Best Action Actress ( Emily Blunt ) , but lost to Divergent . The Japanese government gave director Doug Liman the Annual Japan Cool Content Contribution Award , an accolade that recognizes creatives who popularize Japanese media for worldwide audiences . 
 Edge of Tomorrow was nominated for Critics ' Choice Movie Awards in the following categories : Best Visual Effects , Best Action Movie , Best Actor in an Action Movie , and Best Actress in an Action Movie , with Blunt winning the latter . 
 = = Social commentary = = 
 = = = Gender roles = = = 
 Emily Blunt plays Sergeant Rita Vrataski , a veteran who guides and trains Tom Cruise 's character , Major William Cage . Blunt said of her role , " In these male @-@ fueled genres , it 's usually the woman who 's holding the hand of the guy and he 's running through explosions leading her , and I wanted to be doing the leading . " Chris Nashawaty , reviewing the film for Entertainment Weekly , called it " the most feminist summer action flick in years " . Bustle 's Alicia Lutes described Rita as " ruthless and exacting in her takedown ... of a bunch of aliens " and said : " This is very much counter to the age @-@ old ideals about ladies being the constant , delicate flowers of emotional heartstring @-@ pulling . " Lutes noted how Cage 's strength depended on Rita 's guidance , as " she trains him , aids him , and protects him ( and in turn the fate of humanity ) time and time again . " Tasha Robinson , writing a piece in The Dissolve about " strong female characters " that lack real purpose in films , said that Rita in Edge of Tomorrow was an exception . Robinson acknowledged that Rita existed to support Cage in his trials , but believed that " the story doesn 't degrade , devalue , weaken , or dismiss her " . 
 In contrast , The Wire 's Esther Zuckerman criticized the inclusion of a romantic relationship in the film , and said of the two characters ' kiss : " There 's a case to be made that the kiss is simply an acceptance of their fate , but everything we know about Rita up until this point implies that she 's a dedicated soldier , and making her a sudden romantic betrays her character . " Zuckerman added : " That 's not to say she can 't soften up a bit as humans do , but the moment reads less like she 's accepting her humanity and more like the filmmakers had to acknowledge two attractive leads ... who should lock lips because that 's what men and women do in movies . " Writing in The Week , Monika Bartyzel also criticized the romance in the film , stating that Rita is the one who kisses Cage , despite knowing him for only a day where he had known her for multiple days via time loop . Bartyzel said that Rita 's portrayal was part of a commonly seen motif in which a female character helps a male " Chosen One " character , and that this was " the new normal because it allows Hollywood to appeal to feminist concerns while continuing to feed male wish fulfillment " . Bartyzel said that Rita " at her most powerful " ultimately serves " to make the male hero into a fighter like herself " . 
 = = = Comparison to video games = = = 
 Liman said that the film 's repeated scenes intentionally paralleled the respawning feature in video games , where players have to start over on a level when their character dies . In the afterword of All You Need Is Kill , author Hiroshi Sakurazaka notes his experience playing video games as a source of inspiration while writing the novel . Salon 's Ryan Leas said analyses of the film noted that it " steals from the video game genre " . Leas called Edge of Tomorrow 's looped action " a meta @-@ commentary on the blockbuster genre " , saying : " It 's a blockbuster interested in the question of how mind @-@ numbing its genre has become to its viewers . " Comparing Edge of Tomorrow to film adaptations of video games , Wired 's Angela Watercutter said Liman 's film was more successful for basing itself around the medium 's narrative structure , and for its " ability to continue after ' Game Over ' and discover something new " . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 McQuarrie told Collider that Cruise had an idea for a sequel , and that the concept is " locked and loaded " . In April 2016 Doug Liman had signed on to direct the sequel , while screenwriters of Race , Joe Shrapnel and Anna Waterhouse will write the script for the film . 
 = Thomas the Slav = 
 Thomas the Slav ( c . 760 – October 823 AD ) was a 9th @-@ century Byzantine military commander , most notable for leading a wide @-@ scale revolt in 821 – 23 against Emperor Michael II the Amorian ( ruled 820 – 29 ) . 
 An army officer of Slavic origin from the Pontus region ( now north @-@ eastern Turkey ) , Thomas rose to prominence , along with the future emperors Michael II and Leo V the Armenian ( r . 813 – 820 ) , under the protection of general Bardanes Tourkos . After Bardanes 's failed rebellion in 803 , Thomas fell into obscurity until Leo V 's rise to the throne , when Thomas was raised to a senior military command in central Asia Minor . After the murder of Leo and usurpation of the throne by Michael the Amorian , Thomas revolted , claiming the throne for himself . Thomas quickly secured support from most of the themes ( provinces ) and troops in Asia Minor , defeated Michael 's initial counter @-@ attack and concluded an alliance with the Abbasid Caliphate . After winning over the maritime themes and their ships as well , he crossed with his army to Europe and laid siege to Constantinople . The imperial capital withstood Thomas 's attacks by land and sea , while Michael II called for help from the Bulgarian ruler Omurtag . Omurtag attacked Thomas 's army , but although repelled , the Bulgarians inflicted heavy casualties on Thomas 's men , who broke and fled when Michael took to the field a few months later . Thomas and his supporters sought refuge in Arcadiopolis , where he was soon blockaded by Michael 's troops . In the end , Thomas 's supporters surrendered him in exchange for a pardon , and he was executed . 
 Thomas 's rebellion was one of the largest in the Byzantine Empire 's history , but its precise circumstances are unclear due to competing historical narratives , which have come to include claims fabricated by Michael to blacken his opponent 's name . Consequently , various motives and driving forces have been attributed to Thomas and his followers . As summarized by the Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium , " Thomas 's revolt has been variously attributed to a reaction against Iconoclasm , a social revolution and popular uprising , a revolt by the Empire 's non @-@ Greek ethnic groups , Thomas 's personal ambitions , and his desire to avenge Leo V. " Its effects on the military position of the Empire , particularly vis @-@ à @-@ vis the Arabs , are also disputed . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 The 11th @-@ century Theophanes Continuatus states that Thomas was descended from South Slavs resettled in Asia Minor by successive Byzantine emperors , while the 10th @-@ century chronicler Genesios calls him " Thomas from Lake <unk> , of Armenian race " . Most modern scholars support his Slavic descent and believe his birthplace to have been near <unk> in the Pontus . Hence his epithet of " the Slav " , which has been applied to him only in modern times . Nothing is known about his family and early life , except that his parents were poor and that Thomas himself had received no education . Given that he was between 50 and 60 years old at the time of the rebellion , he was probably born around 760 . 
 Two different accounts of Thomas 's life are recounted in both Genesios and Theophanes Continuatus . According to the first account , Thomas first appeared in 803 accompanying general Bardanes Tourkos , and pursued a military career until launching his revolt in late 820 . In the second version , he came to Constantinople as a poor youth and entered the service of a man with the high court rank of patrikios . Then , discovered trying to commit adultery with his master 's wife , Thomas fled to the Arabs in Syria , where he remained for 25 years . Pretending to be the murdered emperor Constantine VI ( r . 780 – 797 ) , he then led an Arab @-@ sponsored invasion of Asia Minor , but was defeated and punished . Classical and Byzantine scholar J.B. Bury tried to reconcile the two narratives , placing Thomas 's flight to the Abbasid Caliphate at around 788 and then having him return to Byzantine service before 803 , while the Russian scholar Alexander Vasiliev interpreted the sources as implying that Thomas fled to the Caliphate at Constantine VI 's deposition in 797 , and that his participation in Bardanes 's revolt must be discounted entirely . The second version of Thomas 's story is explicitly preferred by Genesios and Theophanes Continuatus , and is the only one recorded in 9th @-@ century sources , namely the chronicle of George the Monk and the Life of Saints David , Symeon , and George of Lesbos . Nevertheless , the French Byzantinist Paul Lemerle came to consider it an unreliable later tradition created by his rival Michael II to discredit Thomas , and rejected it altogether , preferring to rely on the first account alone . Most modern scholars follow him in this interpretation . 
 The first tradition relates that Thomas served as a spatharios ( staff officer ) to Bardanes Tourkos , the monostrategos ( " single @-@ general " , i.e. commander @-@ in @-@ chief ) of the eastern themes , who in 803 rose in rebellion against Emperor Nikephoros I ( r . 802 – 811 ) . Alongside Thomas were two other young <unk> in Bardanes 's retinue , who formed a fraternal association : Leo the Armenian , the future Leo V , and Michael the Amorian , the future Michael II . According to a later hagiographic tradition , before launching his revolt , Bardanes , in the company of his three young protégés , is said to have visited a monk near Philomelion who was reputed to foresee the future . The monk predicted what would indeed happen : that Bardanes 's revolt would fail , that Leo and Michael would both become emperors , and that Thomas would be acclaimed emperor and killed . When Bardanes did in fact rise up , he failed to win any widespread support . Leo and Michael soon abandoned him and defected to the imperial camp and were rewarded with senior military posts . Thomas alone remained loyal to Bardanes until his surrender . In the aftermath of Bardanes 's failure , Thomas disappears from the sources for ten years . Bury suggests that he fled ( for a second time according to his interpretation ) to the Arabs , a view accepted by a number of other scholars , such as Romilly James Heald Jenkins . The historian Warren Treadgold , however , argues that Thomas stayed in the empire and that may have even remained in active military service , and explains his obscurity by Thomas 's association with Bardanes , which hampered his career . 
 In July 813 , Leo the Armenian became emperor and quickly rewarded his old companions , giving them command over elite military forces . Michael received the tagma of the Excubitors ( one of the professional guard cavalry regiments stationed around Constantinople ) , and Thomas the <unk> ( division ) of the Foederati , stationed in the Anatolic Theme . 
 = = Rebellion = = 
 = = = Background and motives = = = 
 On Christmas Day 820 , Leo was murdered in the palace chapel by officials under the direction of Michael the Amorian , who was quickly crowned emperor . At about the same time , Thomas launched a rebellion in the Anatolic Theme . Sources are divided on the exact chronology and motives of the revolt . George the Monk , the hagiographic sources , and a letter from Michael II to the western emperor Louis the Pious claim that Thomas had risen up against Leo before Michael 's usurpation . This chronology is followed by almost all later Byzantine chroniclers like Genesios , Theophanes Continuatus , and Skylitzes , as well as a number of modern scholars like John B. Bury and Alexander <unk> . In his study of Thomas and the revolt , Paul Lemerle dismisses this timeline as a later attempt by Michael to justify his revolt as a response to Leo 's failure to suppress the rebellion , and to exculpate himself of the early defeats suffered by the imperial forces . Some recent studies follow Lemerle and prefer the account of Symeon Logothetes — generally considered the most accurate of the 10th @-@ century sources — according to which Thomas rebelled a few days after the murder of Leo and in reaction to it . 
 Consequently , the empire became divided in a struggle that was less a rebellion against the established government and more a contest for the throne between equal contenders . Michael held Constantinople and the European provinces , controlled the imperial bureaucracy , and had been properly crowned by the Patriarch , but he had come to the throne through murder , while Thomas gained support and legitimacy through his claim to avenge the fallen Leo , and he won the backing of themes both in Asia and later in Europe . Thomas was a well @-@ known , popular , and respected figure in Asia Minor , where Leo V had enjoyed considerable support . Michael , on the other hand , was virtually unknown outside the capital ; his military record was unremarkable , he was uneducated and coarse of manner , his stutter earned him ridicule , and he was reputed to sympathize with the heretical religious sect of the <unk> , to which his family had belonged . 
 Byzantine accounts of Thomas 's rebellion state that he did not in fact claim the throne under his own name but assumed the identity of Emperor Constantine VI , who had been deposed and murdered by his mother , Irene of Athens , in 797 . Most modern scholars follow Lemerle , who dismisses this as yet another later fabrication . If it contains any truth , it is possible that this story may originate from Thomas choosing to be crowned under the regnal name of " Constantine " , but there is no evidence for such an act . The possible appropriation of Constantine VI 's identity is linked in some Byzantine sources with the statement that Thomas was a rumoured supporter of <unk> , as opposed to Michael 's support for iconoclasm : it was under Constantine VI that veneration of the icons was restored . Nevertheless , the ambiguous phrasing of the sources , the iconoclast leanings of many themes in Asia Minor , and Thomas 's alliance with the Arabs seem to speak against any open commitment to icon worship on his part . However , given Michael II 's conciliatory approach during his early reign , the icon worship controversy does not seem to have been a major issue at the time , and in the view of modern scholars most probably did not play a major role in Thomas 's revolt . The image of Thomas as an iconophile champion opposed to the iconoclast Michael II in later , Macedonian @-@ era sources was probably the result of their own anti @-@ iconoclast bias . Warren Treadgold furthermore suggests that if true , Thomas 's claim to be Constantine VI may have been little more than a tale circulated to win support , and that Thomas pursued a " studied ambiguity " towards icons , designed to attract support from iconophiles . In Treadgold 's words , " Thomas could be all things to all men until he had conquered the whole empire , and then he would have time enough to disappoint some of his followers " . 
 The account of Theophanes Continuatus on Thomas 's revolt states that in this time , " the servant raised his hand against his master , the soldier against his officer , the captain against his general " . This has led some scholars , chiefly Alexander Vasiliev and George Ostrogorsky , to regard Thomas 's revolt as an expression of widespread discontent among the rural population , which suffered under heavy taxation . Other <unk> , notably Lemerle , dismiss rural discontent as a primary factor during the revolt . 
 Genesios and other chroniclers further state that Thomas won the support of " <unk> , Indians , Egyptians , Assyrians , Medians , Abasgians , <unk> , Iberians , <unk> , Slavs , Huns , Vandals , Getae , the <unk> of Manes , Laz , <unk> , <unk> , Armenians and every kind of other peoples " . This has led to modern claims that Thomas 's rebellion represented an uprising of the empire 's non @-@ Greek ethnic groups , but according to Lemerle , this exaggerated account is yet another piece of hostile disinformation . It is almost certain , however , that Thomas could count on support among the empire 's Caucasian neighbours , for the presence of Abasgians , Armenians , and Iberians in his army is mentioned in the near @-@ contemporary letter of Michael II to Louis the Pious . The reasons for this support are unclear ; Thomas may have made unspecified promises to their rulers , but Lemerle suggests that the Armenians might have in part been motivated by revenge for Leo , their murdered kinsman . 
 = = = Outbreak and spread of the revolt in Asia Minor = = = 
 As commander of the Foederati , Thomas was based at Amorion , the capital of the Anatolic Theme . Although junior to the theme 's strategos ( military governor ) , his proclamation received widespread support throughout Asia Minor . Within a short time , all the Asian themes supported Thomas , except for the Opsician Theme under the patrician <unk> , a nephew of Michael II , and the Armeniac Theme , under its strategos , Olbianos . The Thracesian Theme wavered between the two rivals , but finally threw its support behind Thomas . More than two @-@ thirds of the empire 's Asian army eventually aligned with Thomas , while the defection of the provincial tax officials provided him with much @-@ needed revenue . 
 Michael 's first response was to order the Armeniac army to attack Thomas . The Armeniacs were easily defeated in battle and Thomas proceeded through the eastern parts of the Armeniac Theme to occupy the frontier region of Chaldia . His conquest of the Armeniac province was left incomplete because the Abbasids , taking advantage of the Byzantine civil war , launched raids by land and sea against southern Asia Minor , where Thomas had left few troops . Instead of returning to face these raids , Thomas launched a large @-@ scale invasion of his own against Abbasid territory in spring 821 , either in Syria ( according to Bury and others ) or in Arab @-@ held Armenia ( according to Treadgold ) . Thomas then sent an emissary to the Caliph al @-@ Ma 'mun , who was sufficiently impressed by Thomas 's show of force to receive his proposals , especially in view of the Caliphate 's own problems with the rebellion of the Khurramites under Babak Khorramdin . Thomas and Ma 'mun concluded a treaty of peace and mutual alliance . The Caliph allowed Thomas to recruit men from Arab @-@ ruled territories , and gave leave for him to cross the border and travel to Arab @-@ held Antioch , where he was crowned emperor by the iconophile Patriarch of Antioch , Job . In exchange , Thomas is said to have promised to cede unspecified territories and become a tributary vassal of the Caliph , though the agreement 's exact terms are left unclear in the sources . At about the same time , Thomas adopted a young man of obscure origin , whom he named Constantius and made his co @-@ emperor . 
 Meanwhile , Michael II tried to win support among the iconophiles by appointing a relative of his as Archbishop of Ephesus , but his plan failed when the latter refused to be consecrated by the avowedly iconoclast Patriarch Antony I <unk> . In an effort to consolidate his hold on the provinces , and especially the two Asian themes still loyal to him , Michael proclaimed a 25 percent reduction in taxes for 821 – 822 . 
 By summer 821 , Thomas had consolidated his position in the East , though the Opsician and Armeniac themes still eluded his control . He set his sights on the ultimate prize , Constantinople , the possession of which alone conferred full legitimacy to an emperor . Thomas assembled troops , gathered supplies , and built siege machines . To counter the powerful Imperial Fleet stationed in the capital , he built new ships to augment his existing fleet , which came from the Cibyrrhaeot and Aegean Sea naval themes , and possibly included task forces from the theme of Hellas . Thomas recalled Gregory Pterotos , a general and nephew of Leo V whom Michael had exiled to the island of Skyros , and gave him command of the fleet . By October , the thematic fleets loyal to Thomas had finished assembling at Lesbos , and Thomas 's army began marching from the Thracesian Theme towards Abydos , where he intended to cross over into Europe . 
 At this point , Thomas suffered his first reversal of fortune : before his departure for Abydos , he had sent an army under his adoptive son Constantius against the Armeniacs . Constantius was ambushed by strategos Olbianos and killed , although the army was able to withdraw with relatively few casualties . Constantius 's severed head was sent to Michael , who dispatched it to Thomas at Abydos . Thomas was undaunted by this relatively minor setback , and crossed over into Europe some time in late October or early November . There , Constantius was soon replaced as co @-@ emperor by another obscure individual , a former monk whom Thomas also adopted and named Anastasius . 
 = = = Siege of Constantinople = = = 
 Anticipating Thomas 's move , Michael had gone out at the head of an army to the themes of Thrace and Macedonia in Constantinople 's European hinterland and strengthened the garrisons of several fortresses there to secure the loyalty of their populace . When Thomas landed , the people of the European themes welcomed him with enthusiasm , and Michael was forced to withdraw to Constantinople . Volunteers , including many Slavs , flocked to Thomas 's banner . As he set out towards Constantinople , chroniclers recount that his army swelled to some 80 @,@ 000 men . The capital was defended by the imperial tagmata , augmented by reinforcements from the Opsician and Armeniac themes . Michael had ordered the city walls to be repaired , and chained off the entrance to the Golden Horn , while the Imperial Fleet further guarded the capital from the sea . Nevertheless , judging from Michael 's passive stance , his forces were inferior to Thomas 's ; Warren Treadgold estimates Michael 's army to have numbered approximately 35 @,@ 000 men . 
 Thomas 's fleet arrived at the capital first . Facing no opposition from the Imperial Fleet , the rebels broke or <unk> the chain and entered the Golden Horn , taking station near the mouths of the <unk> river , where they awaited the arrival of Thomas and his army . Thomas arrived in early December . The sight of his huge force did not cow the capital 's inhabitants : unlike the provinces , the capital 's citizens and garrison stood firmly behind Michael . To further encourage his troops , Michael had his young son Theophilos lead a procession along the walls , carrying a piece of the True Cross and the mantle of the Virgin Mary , while a large standard was hoisted on top of the Church of St. Mary at Blachernae , in full view of both armies . 
 After subduing the cities around the capital , Thomas resolved to attack Constantinople from three sides , perhaps hoping his assault would impress its inhabitants or lead to defections . His deputies Anastasius and Gregory Pterotos would attack the Theodosian land and sea walls , respectively , while he would lead the main attack against the less formidable defenses protecting Blachernae . All of Thomas 's forces were amply supplied with siege engines and catapults , and his fleet fielded quantities of Greek fire in addition to large shipborne catapults . Each of Thomas 's attacks failed : the defenders ' artillery proved superior and kept Thomas 's engines away from the land walls , while adverse winds hindered the fleet from taking any meaningful action . Deciding that operations in the midst of winter were hazardous and unlikely to succeed , Thomas suspended all further attacks until spring and withdrew his army to winter quarters . 
 Michael used the respite to ferry in additional reinforcements from Asia Minor and repair the walls of Blachernae . When Thomas returned in spring , he decided to focus his attack on the Blachernae sector . Before the offensive , Michael himself ascended the walls and addressed Thomas 's troops , exhorting them to abandon their commander and promising amnesty if they would defect . Thomas 's army viewed the plea as a sign of weakness , and advanced confidently to begin the assault , but as they neared the wall , the defenders opened the gates and attacked . The sudden onslaught drove back Thomas 's army ; at the same time , the Imperial Fleet defeated Thomas 's ships , whose crews broke and fled to the shore in panic . This defeat diminished Thomas 's naval strength , and although he continued blockading the capital by land , the loss demoralized his supporters , who began defecting . Gregory Pterotos , whose family was in Michael 's hands , resolved to desert Thomas , followed by a small band of men loyal to him . He departed the rebel camp , headed west , and sent a monk to inform Michael of his defection , but the monk failed to circumvent the blockade and reach the capital . Upon learning of this defection , Thomas reacted quickly : with a select detachment , he followed Gregory , defeated his troops and killed the deserter . 
 Thomas exploited this small victory for all it was worth , widely proclaiming that he had defeated Michael 's troops " by land and sea " . He sent messages to the themes of Greece , whose support had been lukewarm until that point , demanding additional ships . The themes responded forcefully , sending their squadrons , allegedly numbering 350 vessels , to join him . Thus reinforced , Thomas decided to launch a two @-@ pronged assault against Constantinople 's sea walls , with his original fleet attacking the wall of the Golden Horn , and the new fleet attacking the south coast , looking towards the Sea of Marmara . Michael , however , did not remain idle : his own fleet attacked the thematic force soon after it arrived at its anchorage in <unk> . Using Greek fire , the Imperial Fleet destroyed many of the rebel vessels and captured most of the remaining ships . Only a few managed to escape and rejoin Thomas 's forces . 
 Through this victory , Michael secured control of the sea , but Thomas 's army remained superior on land and continued its blockade of Constantinople . Minor skirmishes ensued for the remainder of the year , with Michael 's forces sallying forth from the city to attack Thomas 's forces . Although both sides claimed minor successes in these clashes , neither was able to gain a decisive advantage . 
 Michael turned to the empire 's northern neighbour , Bulgaria , for help . The two states were bound by a 30 @-@ year treaty signed under Leo V , and the Bulgarian ruler , khan Omurtag ( r . 814 – 831 ) , was happy to respond to Michael 's request for assistance . A later tradition , reported by Genesios and Theophanes Continuatus , holds that Omurtag acted of his own accord and against Michael 's will , but this is almost universally rejected as a version started or at least encouraged by Michael , who did not wish to be seen encouraging " barbarians " to invade the empire . The Bulgarian army invaded Thrace , probably in November 822 ( Bury believes that the Bulgarian attack occurred in spring 823 ) , and advanced towards Constantinople . Thomas raised the siege , and marched to meet them with his army . The two armies met at the plain of <unk> near Heraclea ( hence known as the Battle of <unk> in the Byzantine sources ) . The accounts of the subsequent battle differ : the later sources state that Thomas lost the battle , but the near @-@ contemporary George the Monk states that Thomas " killed many Bulgarians " . Given the lack of Bulgarian activity after the battle , most modern scholars ( with the notable exception of Bury ) believe that Thomas won the battle . 
 = = = Defeat and death of Thomas , end of the revolt = = = 
 Thomas was unable to resume the siege : aside from the heavy casualties his army likely suffered , his fleet , which he had left behind in the Golden Horn , surrendered to Michael during his absence . Thomas set up camp at the plain of <unk> , spending winter and early spring some 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) west of Constantinople . While a few of his men deserted , the bulk remained loyal . Finally , in late April or early May 823 , Michael marched with his troops against Thomas , accompanied by the generals Olbianos and <unk> with new troops from Asia Minor . Thomas marched to meet them and planned to use a stratagem to outwit his opponents : his men , ostensibly demoralized , would pretend to flee , and when the imperial army broke ranks to pursue them , they would turn back and attack . However , Thomas 's troops were by now weary of the prolonged conflict , and their submission was <unk> . Many surrendered to Michael , while others fled to nearby fortified cities . Thomas sought refuge in Arcadiopolis with a large group ; his adopted son Anastasius went with some of Thomas 's men to Bizye , and others fled to Panium and Heraclea . 
 Michael blockaded Thomas 's cities of refuge but organized no assaults , instead aiming to capture them peacefully by wearing out their defenders . His strategy was motivated by the political and propaganda expedient of appearing merciful — " in order to spare Christian blood " , as Michael himself put it in his letter to Louis the Pious — but also , according to the chroniclers , by fear of demonstrating to the Bulgarians that the Byzantine cities ' fortifications could fall to attack . In Asia Minor , Thomas 's partisans hoped to lure Michael away by allowing the Arabs free passage to raid the provinces of Opsikion and <unk> , which were loyal to the emperor . Michael was unmoved and continued the blockade . His troops barred access to Arcadiopolis with a ditch . To conserve supplies , the blockaded troops sent away women and children , followed by those too old , wounded , or otherwise incapable of bearing arms . After five months of blockade , Thomas 's loyalists were eventually forced to eat starved horses and their hides . Some began deserting by lowering themselves with ropes over the city walls or jumping from them . Thomas sent messengers to Bizye , where the blockade was less close , to arrange a relief attempt by Anastasius . Before anything could be done , however , the exhausted troops at Arcadiopolis surrendered their leader in exchange for an imperial pardon . Thomas was delivered to Michael seated on a donkey and bound in chains . He was prostrated before the emperor , who placed his foot on his defeated rival 's neck and ordered his hands and feet cut off and his corpse impaled . Thomas pleaded for clemency with the words " Have mercy on me , oh True Emperor ! " Michael only asked his captive to reveal whether any of his own senior officials had had dealings with Thomas . Before Thomas could respond , the <unk> of the Course , John <unk> , advised against hearing whatever claims a defeated rebel might make . Michael agreed , and Thomas 's sentence was carried out immediately . 
 When the inhabitants of Bizye heard of Thomas 's fate , they surrendered Anastasius , who suffered the same fate as Thomas . In Panium and Heraclea , Thomas 's men held out until an earthquake struck in February 824 . The tremor severely damaged the wall of Panium , and the city surrendered . The damage at Heraclea was less severe , but after Michael landed troops at its seaward side , it too was forced to surrender . In Asia Minor , Thomas 's loyalists mostly submitted peacefully , but in the Cibyrrhaeot Theme , resistance lingered until suppressed by strategos John <unk> . In the Thracesian theme , Thomas 's soldiers turned to brigandage . The most serious opposition was offered in central Asia Minor by two officers , who had possibly served Thomas as strategoi : <unk> , with his base at <unk> northwest of Iconium , and <unk> <unk> , based at <unk> , southeast of Ancyra . From their strongholds , they spurned Michael 's offer of a pardon and the high title of magistros and raided the provinces that had gone over to him . Soon , however , Michael 's agents persuaded the inhabitants of the two forts to shut their gates against the officers . <unk> and <unk> then tried to seek refuge in Arab territory but were attacked en route by loyalist troops , captured , and crucified . 
 = = = Aftermath and effects = = = 
 The end of Thomas the Slav 's great rebellion was marked by Michael II 's triumph , held in May 824 in Constantinople . While he executed Thomas 's volunteers from the Caliphate and perhaps also the Slavs , the sheer number of individuals involved , the necessity of appearing clement and sparing with Christian lives , and the need to restore internal tranquillity to his realm compelled Michael to treat Thomas 's defeated partisans with leniency : most were released after being paraded in the Hippodrome during his celebration , and only the most dangerous were exiled to remote corners of the empire . In an effort to discredit his opponent , Michael authorized an " official " and heavily distorted version of Thomas 's life and revolt . The document was written by the deacon Ignatios and published in 824 as Against Thomas . This report quickly became the commonly accepted version of events . 
 Thomas failed in spite of his qualities and the widespread support he had gained , which brought him control of most of the empire . Lemerle holds that several factors played a role in his defeat : the Asian themes he did not subdue supplied reinforcements to Michael ; Thomas 's fleet performed badly ; and the Bulgarian offensive diverted him away from the capital and weakened his army . But the most decisive obstacles were the impregnable walls of Constantinople , which ensured that an emperor who controlled Constantinople could only be overthrown from within the city . 
 Thomas 's rebellion was the " central domestic event " of Michael II 's reign , but it was not very destructive in material terms : except for Thrace , which had suffered from the prolonged presence of the rival armies and the battles fought there , the larger part of the empire was spared the ravages of war . The Byzantine navy suffered great losses , with the thematic fleets in particular being devastated , while the land forces suffered comparatively few casualties . This is traditionally held to have resulted in a military weakness and internal disorder which was swiftly exploited by the Muslims : in the years after Thomas 's rebellion , Andalusian exiles captured Crete and the Tunisian Aghlabids began their conquest of Sicily , while in the East , the Byzantines were forced to maintain a generally defensive stance towards the Caliphate . More recent scholarship has disputed the degree to which the civil war was responsible for Byzantine military failures during these years , citing other reasons to explain them : Warren Treadgold opines that the empire 's military forces recovered fairly quickly , and that incompetent military leadership coupled with " the remoteness of Sicily , the absence of regular troops on Crete , the simultaneity of the attacks on both islands , and the government 's long @-@ standing lack of interest in sea @-@ power " were far more responsible for the loss of the islands . 
 = Shojo Beat = 
 Shojo Beat is a shōjo manga magazine formerly published in North America by Viz Media . Released in June 2005 as a sister magazine to Shonen Jump , it featured serialized chapters from six manga series , as well as articles on Japanese culture , manga , anime , fashion and beauty . After its initial launch , Shojo Beat underwent two redesigns , becoming the first English anthology to use the cyan and magenta ink tones common to Japanese manga anthologies . Viz launched related " Shojo Beat " imprints in its manga , Japanese light novel , and anime divisions to coordinate with the magazine 's contents . 
 Targeted at women ages 16 – 18 , the first issue of Shojo Beat launched with a circulation of 20 @,@ 000 . By 2007 , the average circulation was approximately 38 @,@ 000 copies , with half coming from subscriptions rather than store sales . It was well received by critics , who praised its mix of manga series and the inclusion of articles on Japanese culture , though some critics found the early issues boring and poorly written . In May 2009 , Viz announced that it was discontinuing the magazine ; the July 2009 issue was the last released . Fans were disappointed at the sudden news . Industry experts felt its loss would leave female comic fans without a magazine of their own , but praised Viz for its choice to continue using the " Shojo Beat " imprint and branding for its shōjo manga and anime releases . 
 = = History = = 
 In February 2005 , Viz Media announced the creation of a new manga anthology , Shojo Beat . Marketed as a sister publication of Viz 's existing Shonen Jump , the magazine started with six manga titles : Crimson Hero , Kaze Hikaru , Baby & Me , Godchild , Nana , and Absolute Boyfriend . Of the six titles , two each came from Japanese publishers Shueisha , Shogakukan , and Hakusensha . The first issue , released in June 2005 , featured Nana Komatsu of Nana on its July cover . 
 Yumi Hoashi was the publication 's original editor @-@ in @-@ chief . In November 2006 , Hoashi left Viz , and Marc Weidenbaum replaced him as the magazine 's editor @-@ in @-@ chief . Weidenbaum remained the magazine 's editor until February 13 , 2009 , when Viz announced that he had left the company , though the magazine continued to list his name in the role through the May 2009 issue . Starting with the June 2009 issue , publisher <unk> Narita was listed as the editor @-@ in @-@ chief . 
 The magazine 's panda mascot , Moko , was first introduced in the October 2005 issue , though he remained nameless until the July 2006 issue . He later was given his own MySpace account run by Viz . With the July 2007 issue , a new mascot , Beat Girl , was introduced . Included in each issue on the " Editor 's Letter " page as the magazine 's " illustrated spokesperson , " she was drawn by different artists each time . A third mascot , a star @-@ shaped figure named <unk> , was introduced with the March 2008 issue as a friend for Moko . 
 With the magazine 's first anniversary issue , dated July 2006 , Shojo Beat switched to using cyan and magenta ink tones for the manga pages rather than black @-@ and @-@ white . Though this mirrors the format of Japanese manga anthologies , it was a first for manga anthologies published in North America . Shojo Beat launched another redesign with the January 2007 issue . The new design included more vivid color schemes and fonts and introduced a new " Girl Hero " column to spotlight women Viz felt were charitable and selfless and who would inspire readers . The existing columns were also expanded . 
 In May 2009 , the magazine stopped accepting new subscriptions and ceased publication with the release of the July issue . Existing Shojo Beat subscriptions were transferred to Viz 's Shonen Jump magazine . With the first copy of Shonen Jump sent to former subscribers , a letter informed them of the transfer and how to request a refund for the unfilled portion of their subscriptions if they would prefer . In a press release , Viz stated that the " difficult economic climate " was behind the magazine 's cancellation . 
 = = Features = = 
 As a manga anthology , the bulk of Shojo Beat 's content was its manga chapters . Additional features included a letter from the editor , manga related news , a preview chapter from another Viz manga title being published under the " Shojo Beat " imprint , and articles on Japanese culture , current trends in Japan , and fashion and beauty . Sections toward the back of the magazine featured fan @-@ related material , including fan art , letters from readers , manga drawing lessons , and cosplay how @-@ to guides and highlights . The magazine 's official website included additional articles , downloads of templates for dressing up the magazine 's panda mascot " Moko " , and online previews of many of the manga series being published under the " Shojo Beat " label . 
 = = = Series = = = 
 Shojo Beat contained chapters from six Japanese manga series licensed and translated to English by Viz . During its run , the magazine featured fourteen series , of which seven ended their runs and were replaced by other series . Only four of those replacements remained in the magazine until all of their chapters had been published . Each title serialized in the magazine was also published in tankōbon volumes under Viz 's " Shojo Beat " label . Viz noted that it periodically removed incomplete series from the magazine to help " keep the magazine fresh " and to allow it to speed up publication of the individual volumes . 
 This is a complete list of all titles that were serialized in Shojo Beat . It does not include preview chapters . The titles that were running in the magazine when it was discontinued are highlighted . 
 = = = Imprints = = = 
 With the launch of the Shojo Beat magazine , Viz Media created new imprints for its manga and fiction lines . The " Shojo Beat " imprint included series featured in the magazine as well as other shōjo manga titles licensed by Viz after the magazine 's conception . Viz began releasing a few Japanese light novels under a " Shojo Beat Fiction " imprint that were related to its " Shojo Beat " manga titles . In February 2006 , Viz launched the " Shojo Beat Home Video " line for releasing anime titles primarily designed for female viewers . The first title under the new imprint was Full Moon o <unk> , the anime adaptation of the same titled manga that was also released by Viz . To promote the new anime line , Viz included a preview disc of the first volume of Full Moon in the June 2006 issue of Shojo Beat . Though the magazine itself has been canceled , Viz stated in May 2009 that it will continue releasing both existing and new series under the " Shojo Beat " manga and anime imprints . 
 = = Circulation and audience = = 
 When Shojo Beat launched , it had a circulation of 20 @,@ 000 . In 2006 , its average circulation had increased to 35 @,@ 000 , of which 41 % were distributed through subscriptions , and the rest sold in newsstands and stores . In 2007 , the circulation grew to 38 @,@ 000 , and subscriptions increased to 51 % . The magazine 's audience was overwhelmingly female , comprising 91 % of its readers . Targeted towards " young women " , Shojo Beat 's " core audience " was between the ages of 13 and 19 and made up 61 % of its readers ; 47 % of readers were 12 – 17 and 45 % were 18 – 34 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Shojo Beat was nominated for a 2008 Society for the Promotion of Japanese Animation Award in the category of " Best Publication " , but lost to Japan 's Newtype . 
 In reviewing the premiere release of Shojo Beat , IGN 's Jessica Chobot sharply criticized the magazine . She felt it looked and read " like a <unk> @-@ <unk> magazine " and referred to the issue 's cover as a " bright , hot @-@ pink , migraine @-@ inducing , bubble @-@ lettered spectacle " . She considered the contents boring , and disagreed with Viz 's selection of series , noting , " it 's as if Viz had taken everything from their backed @-@ up reject pile and tried to pull one over on the female populace . 90 % of what I was reading was either poorly drawn or poorly written ( more often than not , it was both ) . " Comic World News ' David Welsh disagreed , as he felt that the magazine had several good series , and he praised Nana , Absolute Boyfriend and Crimson Hero as the top three series of the initial issue . Greg McElhatton , co @-@ founder of Wizard : The Guide to Comics and former reviewer for <unk> , praised the magazine 's mainstream appearance , calling it a " smart " decision , as it would draw in its target audience by visually showing them that it 's a magazine for teenage girls . While he felt that two of the manga titles in the premiere issue had weak openings , he found that the magazine was " off to a good , if not great start " . 
 After its cancellation , Publishers Weekly 's Heidi MacDonald reported that the common response she saw from fans was that " everyone liked it but nobody paid for it " . She noted that many fans expressed sorrow over the magazine 's demise while indicating that they did not subscribe to it . Katherine Dacey , the former senior manga editor for PopCultureShock , remarked that the magazine had offered " just the right mixture of new stories , continuing series , and articles " and praised it for having a " funky , DIY vibe " . The staff of the School Library Journal called the magazine " one of a kind " and felt that its loss would leave a void for female fans , a generally under @-@ acknowledged group of comic and manga readers . Staff member Brigid <unk> felt Shojo Beat was a great overall package that " featured intelligent articles that allowed the reader to be enthusiastic about Japanese pop culture without being geeky " making it distinct from other magazines for girls that were normally " filled with brainless celebrity stories or service articles tied to commercial products " . Other participants praised the magazine 's fashion articles for its educational articles on Japanese culture and for featuring girls of a variety of body types wearing affordable fashions . Two staffers questioned Viz 's decision to drop the magazine and wondered if the company had unrealistically expected the magazine to have the same circulation numbers as Shonen Jump . 
 = Intelligent design = 
 Intelligent design ( ID ) is the pseudoscientific view that " certain features of the universe and of living things are best explained by an intelligent cause , not an undirected process such as natural selection . " Educators , philosophers , and the scientific community have demonstrated that ID is a religious argument , a form of creationism which lacks empirical support and offers no testable or tenable hypotheses . Proponents argue that it is " an evidence @-@ based scientific theory about life 's origins " that challenges the methodological naturalism inherent in modern science , while conceding that they have yet to produce a scientific theory . The leading proponents of ID are associated with the Discovery Institute , a politically conservative think tank based in the United States . Although they state that ID is not creationism and deliberately avoid assigning a personality to the designer , many of these proponents express belief that the designer is the Christian deity . 
 ID presents negative arguments against evolutionary explanations , and its positive argument is an analogy between natural systems and human artifacts , a version of the theological argument from design for the existence of God . Both irreducible complexity and specified complexity present detailed negative assertions that certain features ( biological and informational , respectively ) are too complex to be the result of natural processes . Proponents then conclude by analogy that these features are evidence of design . Detailed scientific examination has rebutted the claims that evolutionary explanations are inadequate , and this premise of intelligent design — that evidence against evolution constitutes evidence for design — has been criticized as a false dichotomy . 
 Though the phrase " intelligent design " had featured previously in theological discussions of the design argument , the first publication of the term intelligent design in its present use as an alternative term for creationism was in Of Pandas and People , a 1989 textbook intended for high school biology classes . The term was substituted into drafts of the book after the 1987 United States Supreme Court 's Edwards v. Aguillard decision , which barred the teaching of creation science in public schools on constitutional grounds . From the mid @-@ 1990s , the intelligent design movement ( IDM ) , supported by the Discovery Institute , advocated inclusion of intelligent design in public school biology curricula . This led to the 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial in which U.S. District Judge John E. Jones III ruled that intelligent design is not science , that it " cannot uncouple itself from its creationist , and thus religious , antecedents , " and that the school district 's promotion of it therefore violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , often described as the " wall of separation between church and state " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin of the concept = = = 
 By 1910 evolution was not a topic of major religious controversy in America , but in the 1920s the Fundamentalist – Modernist Controversy in theology resulted in Fundamentalist Christian opposition to teaching evolution , and the origins of modern creationism . Teaching of evolution was effectively suspended in U.S. public schools until the 1960s , and when evolution was then reintroduced into the curriculum , there was a series of court cases in which attempts were made to get creationism taught alongside evolution in science classes . Young Earth creationists ( YEC ) promoted creation science as " an alternative scientific explanation of the world in which we live . " This frequently invoked the argument from design to explain complexity in nature as demonstrating the existence of God . 
 The argument from design , the teleological argument or " argument from intelligent design , " has been advanced in theology for centuries . It can be summarised briefly as " Wherever complex design exists , there must have been a designer ; nature is complex ; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer . " Thomas Aquinas presented it in his fifth proof of God 's existence as a syllogism . In 1802 , William Paley 's Natural Theology presented examples of intricate purpose in organisms . His version of the watchmaker analogy argued that , in the same way that a watch has evidently been designed by a craftsman , complexity and adaptation seen in nature must have been designed , and the perfection and diversity of these designs shows the designer to be omnipotent , the Christian God . Like creation science , intelligent design centers on Paley 's religious argument from design , but while Paley 's natural theology was open to deistic design through God @-@ given laws , intelligent design seeks scientific confirmation of repeated miraculous interventions in the history of life . Creation science prefigured the intelligent design arguments of irreducible complexity , even featuring the bacterial flagellum . In the United States , attempts to introduce creation science in schools led to court rulings that it is religious in nature , and thus cannot be taught in public school science classrooms . Intelligent design is also presented as science , and shares other arguments with creation science but avoids literal Biblical references to such things as the Flood story from the Book of Genesis or using Bible verses to age the Earth . 
 Barbara Forrest writes that the intelligent design movement began in 1984 with the book The Mystery of Life 's Origin : <unk> Current Theories , co @-@ written by creationist Charles B. Thaxton , a chemist , with two other authors , and published by Jon A. Buell 's Foundation for Thought and Ethics . Thaxton held a conference in 1988 , " Sources of Information Content in DNA , " which attracted creationists such as Stephen C. Meyer . 
 In March 1986 , a review by Meyer used information theory to suggest that messages transmitted by DNA in the cell show " specified complexity " specified by intelligence , and must have originated with an intelligent agent . In November of that year , Thaxton described his reasoning as a more sophisticated form of Paley 's argument from design . At the " Sources of Information Content in DNA " conference in 1988 , he said that his intelligent cause view was compatible with both metaphysical naturalism and supernaturalism . 
 Intelligent design avoids identifying or naming the intelligent designer — it merely states that one ( or more ) must exist — but leaders of the movement have said the designer is the Christian God . Whether this lack of specificity about the designer 's identity in public discussions is a genuine feature of the concept , or just a posture taken to avoid alienating those who would separate religion from the teaching of science , has been a matter of great debate between supporters and critics of intelligent design . The Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District court ruling held the latter to be the case . 
 = = = Origin of the term = = = 
 Since the Middle Ages , discussion of the religious " argument from design " or " teleological argument " in theology , with its concept of " intelligent design , " has persistently referred to the theistic Creator God . Although ID proponents chose this provocative label for their proposed alternative to evolutionary explanations , they have de @-@ emphasized their religious antecedents and denied that ID is natural theology , while still presenting ID as supporting the argument for the existence of God . 
 While intelligent design proponents have pointed out past examples of the phrase intelligent design which they said were not creationist and faith @-@ based , they have failed to show that these usages had any influence on those who introduced the label in the intelligent design movement . 
 Variations on the phrase appeared in YEC publications : a 1967 book co @-@ written by Percival Davis referred to " design according to which basic organisms were created . " In 1970 , A. E. Wilder @-@ Smith published The Creation of Life : A Cybernetic Approach to Evolution which defended Paley 's design argument with computer calculations of the improbability of genetic sequences , which he said could not be explained by evolution but required " the abhorred necessity of divine intelligent activity behind nature , " and that " the same problem would be expected to beset the relationship between the designer behind nature and the intelligently designed part of nature known as man . " In a 1984 article as well as in his affidavit to Edwards v. Aguillard , Dean H. Kenyon defended creation science by stating that " biomolecular systems require intelligent design and engineering know @-@ how , " citing Wilder @-@ Smith . Creationist Richard B. Bliss used the phrase " creative design " in Origins : Two Models : Evolution , Creation ( 1976 ) , and in Origins : Creation or Evolution ( 1988 ) wrote that " while evolutionists are trying to find non @-@ intelligent ways for life to occur , the creationist insists that an intelligent design must have been there in the first place . " The first systematic use of the term , defined in a glossary and claimed to be other than creationism , was in Of Pandas and People , co @-@ authored by Davis and Kenyon . 
 = = = = Of Pandas and People = = = = 
 The most common modern use of the words " intelligent design " as a term intended to describe a field of inquiry began after the United States Supreme Court ruled in 1987 in the case of Edwards v. Aguillard that creationism is unconstitutional in public school science curricula . 
 A Discovery Institute report says that Charles B. Thaxton , editor of Pandas , had picked the phrase up from a NASA scientist , and thought " That 's just what I need , it 's a good engineering term . " In drafts of the book , over one hundred uses of the root word " creation , " such as " creationism " and " Creation Science , " were changed , almost without exception , to " intelligent design , " while " creationists " was changed to " design proponents " or , in one instance , " <unk> <unk> " [ sic ] . In June 1988 , Thaxton held a conference titled " Sources of Information Content in DNA " in Tacoma , Washington , and in December decided to use the label " intelligent design " for his new creationist movement . Stephen C. Meyer was at the conference , and later recalled that " The term intelligent design came up ... " 
 Of Pandas and People was published in 1989 , and in addition to including all the current arguments for ID , was the first book to make systematic use of the terms " intelligent design " and " design proponents " as well as the phrase " design theory , " defining the term intelligent design in a glossary and representing it as not being creationism . It thus represents the start of the modern intelligent design movement . " Intelligent design " was the most prominent of around fifteen new terms it introduced as a new lexicon of creationist terminology to oppose evolution without using religious language . It was the first place where the phrase " intelligent design " appeared in its primary present use , as stated both by its publisher Jon A. Buell , and by William A. Dembski in his expert witness report for Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District . 
 The National Center for Science Education ( <unk> ) has criticized the book for presenting all of the basic arguments of intelligent design proponents and being actively promoted for use in public schools before any research had been done to support these arguments . Although presented as a scientific textbook , philosopher of science Michael Ruse considers the contents " worthless and dishonest . " An American Civil Liberties Union lawyer described it as a political tool aimed at students who did not " know science or understand the controversy over evolution and creationism . " One of the authors of the science framework used by California schools , Kevin Padian , condemned it for its " sub @-@ text , " " intolerance for honest science " and " incompetence . " 
 = = Concepts = = 
 = = = Irreducible complexity = = = 
 The term " irreducible complexity " was introduced by biochemist Michael Behe in his 1996 book Darwin 's Black Box , though he had already described the concept in his contributions to the 1993 revised edition of Of Pandas and People . Behe defines it as " a single system which is composed of several well @-@ matched interacting parts that contribute to the basic function , wherein the removal of any one of the parts causes the system to effectively cease functioning . " 
 Behe uses the analogy of a mousetrap to illustrate this concept . A mousetrap consists of several interacting pieces — the base , the catch , the spring and the hammer — all of which must be in place for the mousetrap to work . Removal of any one piece destroys the function of the mousetrap . Intelligent design advocates assert that natural selection could not create irreducibly complex systems , because the selectable function is present only when all parts are assembled . Behe argued that irreducibly complex biological mechanisms include the bacterial flagellum of E. coli , the blood clotting cascade , cilia , and the adaptive immune system . 
 Critics point out that the irreducible complexity argument assumes that the necessary parts of a system have always been necessary and therefore could not have been added sequentially . They argue that something that is at first merely advantageous can later become necessary as other components change . Furthermore , they argue , evolution often proceeds by altering preexisting parts or by removing them from a system , rather than by adding them . This is sometimes called the " scaffolding objection " by an analogy with scaffolding , which can support an " irreducibly complex " building until it is complete and able to stand on its own . Behe has acknowledged using " sloppy prose , " and that his " argument against Darwinism does not add up to a logical proof . " Irreducible complexity has remained a popular argument among advocates of intelligent design ; in the Dover trial , the court held that " Professor Behe 's claim for irreducible complexity has been refuted in peer @-@ reviewed research papers and has been rejected by the scientific community at large . " 
 = = = Specified complexity = = = 
 In 1986 , Charles B. Thaxton , a physical chemist and creationist , used the term " specified complexity " from information theory when claiming that messages transmitted by DNA in the cell were specified by intelligence , and must have originated with an intelligent agent . The intelligent design concept of " specified complexity " was developed in the 1990s by mathematician , philosopher , and theologian William A. Dembski . Dembski states that when something exhibits specified complexity ( i.e. , is both complex and " specified , " simultaneously ) , one can infer that it was produced by an intelligent cause ( i.e. , that it was designed ) rather than being the result of natural processes . He provides the following examples : " A single letter of the alphabet is specified without being complex . A long sentence of random letters is complex without being specified . A Shakespearean sonnet is both complex and specified . " He states that details of living things can be similarly characterized , especially the " patterns " of molecular sequences in functional biological molecules such as DNA . 
 Dembski defines complex specified information ( CSI ) as anything with a less than 1 in <unk> chance of occurring by ( natural ) chance . Critics say that this renders the argument a tautology : complex specified information cannot occur naturally because Dembski has defined it thus , so the real question becomes whether or not CSI actually exists in nature . 
 The conceptual soundness of Dembski 's specified complexity / CSI argument has been discredited in the scientific and mathematical communities . Specified complexity has yet to be shown to have wide applications in other fields , as Dembski asserts . John Wilkins and Wesley R. <unk> characterize Dembski 's " explanatory filter " as eliminative because it eliminates explanations sequentially : first regularity , then chance , finally defaulting to design . They argue that this procedure is flawed as a model for scientific inference because the asymmetric way it treats the different possible explanations renders it prone to making false conclusions . 
 Richard Dawkins , another critic of intelligent design , argues in The God Delusion ( 2006 ) that allowing for an intelligent designer to account for unlikely complexity only postpones the problem , as such a designer would need to be at least as complex . Other scientists have argued that evolution through selection is better able to explain the observed complexity , as is evident from the use of selective evolution to design certain electronic , aeronautic and automotive systems that are considered problems too complex for human " intelligent designers . " 
 = = = Fine @-@ tuned Universe = = = 
 Intelligent design proponents have also occasionally appealed to broader teleological arguments outside of biology , most notably an argument based on the fine @-@ tuning of universal constants that make matter and life possible and which are argued not to be solely attributable to chance . These include the values of fundamental physical constants , the relative strength of nuclear forces , electromagnetism , and gravity between fundamental particles , as well as the ratios of masses of such particles . Intelligent design proponent and Center for Science and Culture fellow Guillermo Gonzalez argues that if any of these values were even slightly different , the universe would be dramatically different , making it impossible for many chemical elements and features of the Universe , such as galaxies , to form . Thus , proponents argue , an intelligent designer of life was needed to ensure that the requisite features were present to achieve that particular outcome . 
 Scientists have generally responded that these arguments are poorly supported by existing evidence . Victor J. Stenger and other critics say both intelligent design and the weak form of the anthropic principle are essentially a tautology ; in his view , these arguments amount to the claim that life is able to exist because the Universe is able to support life . The claim of the improbability of a life @-@ supporting universe has also been criticized as an argument by lack of imagination for assuming no other forms of life are possible . Life as we know it might not exist if things were different , but a different sort of life might exist in its place . A number of critics also suggest that many of the stated variables appear to be interconnected and that calculations made by mathematicians and physicists suggest that the emergence of a universe similar to ours is quite probable . 
 = = = Intelligent designer = = = 
 The contemporary intelligent design movement formulates its arguments in secular terms and intentionally avoids identifying the intelligent agent ( or agents ) they posit . Although they do not state that God is the designer , the designer is often implicitly hypothesized to have intervened in a way that only a god could intervene . Dembski , in The Design Inference ( 1998 ) , speculates that an alien culture could fulfill these requirements . Of Pandas and People proposes that SETI illustrates an appeal to intelligent design in science . In 2000 , philosopher of science Robert T. Pennock suggested the Raëlian UFO religion as a real @-@ life example of an extraterrestrial intelligent designer view that " make [ s ] many of the same bad arguments against evolutionary theory as creationists " . The authoritative description of intelligent design , however , explicitly states that the Universe displays features of having been designed . Acknowledging the paradox , Dembski concludes that " no intelligent agent who is strictly physical could have presided over the origin of the universe or the origin of life . " The leading proponents have made statements to their supporters that they believe the designer to be the Christian God , to the exclusion of all other religions . 
 Beyond the debate over whether intelligent design is scientific , a number of critics argue that existing evidence makes the design hypothesis appear unlikely , irrespective of its status in the world of science . For example , Jerry Coyne asks why a designer would " give us a pathway for making vitamin C , but then destroy it by disabling one of its enzymes " ( see pseudogene ) and why a designer would not " stock oceanic islands with reptiles , mammals , amphibians , and freshwater fish , despite the suitability of such islands for these species " . Coyne also points to the fact that " the flora and fauna on those islands resemble that of the nearest mainland , even when the environments are very different " as evidence that species were not placed there by a designer . Previously , in Darwin 's Black Box , Behe had argued that we are simply incapable of understanding the designer 's motives , so such questions cannot be answered definitively . Odd designs could , for example , " ... have been placed there by the designer for a reason — for artistic reasons , for variety , to show off , for some as @-@ yet @-@ undetected practical purpose , or for some <unk> reason — or they might not . " Coyne responds that in light of the evidence , " either life resulted not from intelligent design , but from evolution ; or the intelligent designer is a cosmic prankster who designed everything to make it look as though it had evolved . " 
 Intelligent design proponents such as Paul Nelson avoid the problem of poor design in nature by insisting that we have simply failed to understand the perfection of the design . Behe cites Paley as his inspiration , but he differs from Paley 's expectation of a perfect Creation and proposes that designers do not necessarily produce the best design they can . Behe suggests that , like a parent not wanting to spoil a child with extravagant toys , the designer can have multiple motives for not giving priority to excellence in engineering . He says that " Another problem with the argument from imperfection is that it critically depends on a psychoanalysis of the unidentified designer . Yet the reasons that a designer would or would not do anything are virtually impossible to know unless the designer tells you specifically what those reasons are . " This reliance on inexplicable motives of the designer makes intelligent design scientifically untestable . Retired UC Berkeley law professor , author and intelligent design advocate Phillip E. Johnson puts forward a core definition that the designer creates for a purpose , giving the example that in his view AIDS was created to punish immorality and is not caused by HIV , but such motives cannot be tested by scientific methods . 
 Asserting the need for a designer of complexity also raises the question " What designed the designer ? " Intelligent design proponents say that the question is irrelevant to or outside the scope of intelligent design . Richard Wein counters that " ... scientific explanations often create new unanswered questions . But , in assessing the value of an explanation , these questions are not irrelevant . They must be balanced against the improvements in our understanding which the explanation provides . <unk> an unexplained being to explain the origin of other beings ( ourselves ) is little more than question @-@ begging . The new question raised by the explanation is as problematic as the question which the explanation purports to answer . " Richard Dawkins sees the assertion that the designer does not need to be explained as a thought @-@ terminating cliché . In the absence of observable , measurable evidence , the very question " What designed the designer ? " leads to an infinite regression from which intelligent design proponents can only escape by resorting to religious creationism or logical contradiction . 
 = = Movement = = 
 The intelligent design movement is a direct outgrowth of the creationism of the 1980s . The scientific and academic communities , along with a U.S. federal court , view intelligent design as either a form of creationism or as a direct descendant that is closely intertwined with traditional creationism ; and several authors explicitly refer to it as " intelligent design creationism . " 
 The movement is headquartered in the Center for Science and Culture , established in 1996 as the creationist wing of the Discovery Institute to promote a religious agenda calling for broad social , academic and political changes . The Discovery Institute 's intelligent design campaigns have been staged primarily in the United States , although efforts have been made in other countries to promote intelligent design . Leaders of the movement say intelligent design exposes the limitations of scientific orthodoxy and of the secular philosophy of naturalism . Intelligent design proponents allege that science should not be limited to naturalism and should not demand the adoption of a naturalistic philosophy that dismisses out @-@ of @-@ hand any explanation that includes a supernatural cause . The overall goal of the movement is to " reverse the stifling dominance of the materialist worldview " represented by the theory of evolution in favor of " a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions . " 
 Phillip E. Johnson stated that the goal of intelligent design is to cast creationism as a scientific concept . All leading intelligent design proponents are fellows or staff of the Discovery Institute and its Center for Science and Culture . Nearly all intelligent design concepts and the associated movement are the products of the Discovery Institute , which guides the movement and follows its wedge strategy while conducting its " Teach the Controversy " campaign and their other related programs . 
 Leading intelligent design proponents have made conflicting statements regarding intelligent design . In statements directed at the general public , they say intelligent design is not religious ; when addressing conservative Christian supporters , they state that intelligent design has its foundation in the Bible . Recognizing the need for support , the Institute affirms its Christian , evangelistic orientation : 
 Alongside a focus on influential opinion @-@ makers , we also seek to build up a popular base of support among our natural constituency , namely , Christians . We will do this primarily through apologetics seminars . We intend these to encourage and equip believers with new scientific evidences that support the faith , as well as to " popularize " our ideas in the broader culture . 
 Barbara Forrest , an expert who has written extensively on the movement , describes this as being due to the Discovery Institute 's obfuscating its agenda as a matter of policy . She has written that the movement 's " activities betray an aggressive , systematic agenda for promoting not only intelligent design creationism , but the religious worldview that <unk> it . " 
 = = = Religion and leading proponents = = = 
 Although arguments for intelligent design by the intelligent design movement are formulated in secular terms and intentionally avoid positing the identity of the designer , the majority of principal intelligent design advocates are publicly religious Christians who have stated that , in their view , the designer proposed in intelligent design is the Christian conception of God . Stuart Burgess , Phillip E. Johnson , William A. Dembski , and Stephen C. Meyer are evangelical Protestants ; Michael Behe is a Roman Catholic ; and Jonathan Wells is a member of the Unification Church . Non @-@ Christian proponents include David Klinghoffer , who is Jewish , Michael Denton and David <unk> , who are agnostic , and Muzaffar Iqbal , a Pakistani @-@ Canadian Muslim . Phillip E. Johnson has stated that cultivating ambiguity by employing secular language in arguments that are carefully crafted to avoid overtones of theistic creationism is a necessary first step for ultimately reintroducing the Christian concept of God as the designer . Johnson explicitly calls for intelligent design proponents to obfuscate their religious motivations so as to avoid having intelligent design identified " as just another way of packaging the Christian evangelical message . " Johnson emphasizes that " ... the first thing that has to be done is to get the Bible out of the discussion . ... This is not to say that the biblical issues are unimportant ; the point is rather that the time to address them will be after we have separated materialist prejudice from scientific fact . " 
 The strategy of deliberately disguising the religious intent of intelligent design has been described by William A. Dembski in The Design Inference . In this work , Dembski lists a god or an " alien life force " as two possible options for the identity of the designer ; however , in his book Intelligent Design : The Bridge Between Science and Theology ( 1999 ) , Dembski states : 
 Christ is indispensable to any scientific theory , even if its practitioners don 't have a clue about him . The pragmatics of a scientific theory can , to be sure , be pursued without recourse to Christ . But the conceptual soundness of the theory can in the end only be located in Christ . 
 Dembski also stated , " ID is part of God 's general revelation [ ... ] Not only does intelligent design rid us of this ideology [ materialism ] , which suffocates the human spirit , but , in my personal experience , I 've found that it opens the path for people to come to Christ . " Both Johnson and Dembski cite the Bible 's Gospel of John as the foundation of intelligent design . 
 Barbara Forrest contends such statements reveal that leading proponents see intelligent design as essentially religious in nature , not merely a scientific concept that has implications with which their personal religious beliefs happen to coincide . She writes that the leading proponents of intelligent design are closely allied with the ultra @-@ conservative Christian <unk> movement . She lists connections of ( current and former ) Discovery Institute Fellows Phillip E. Johnson , Charles B. Thaxton , Michael Behe , Richard <unk> , Jonathan Wells and Francis J. Beckwith to leading Christian Reconstructionist organizations , and the extent of the funding provided the Institute by Howard Ahmanson , Jr . , a leading figure in the Reconstructionist movement . 
 = = = Reaction from other creationist groups = = = 
 Not all creationist organizations have embraced the intelligent design movement . According to Thomas Dixon , " Religious leaders have come out against ID too . An open letter affirming the compatibility of Christian faith and the teaching of evolution , first produced in response to controversies in Wisconsin in 2004 , has now been signed by over ten thousand clergy from different Christian denominations across America . In 2006 , the director of the Vatican Observatory , the Jesuit astronomer George Coyne , condemned ID as a kind of ' crude creationism ' which reduced God to a mere engineer . " Hugh Ross of Reasons to Believe , a proponent of Old Earth creationism , believes that the efforts of intelligent design proponents to divorce the concept from Biblical Christianity make its hypothesis too vague . In 2002 , he wrote : " Winning the argument for design without identifying the designer yields , at best , a sketchy origins model . Such a model makes little if any positive impact on the community of scientists and other scholars . [ ... ] ... the time is right for a direct approach , a single leap into the origins fray . Introducing a biblically based , scientifically verifiable creation model represents such a leap . " 
 Likewise , two of the most prominent YEC organizations in the world have attempted to distinguish their views from those of the intelligent design movement . Henry M. Morris of the Institute for Creation Research ( ICR ) wrote , in 1999 , that ID , " even if well @-@ meaning and effectively articulated , will not work ! It has often been tried in the past and has failed , and it will fail today . The reason it won 't work is because it is not the Biblical method . " According to Morris : " The evidence of intelligent design … must be either followed by or accompanied by a sound presentation of true Biblical creationism if it is to be meaningful and lasting . " In 2002 , Carl Wieland , then of Answers in Genesis ( <unk> ) , criticized design advocates who , though well @-@ intentioned , " ' left the Bible out of it ' " and thereby unwittingly aided and abetted the modern rejection of the Bible . Wieland explained that " <unk> 's major ' strategy ' is to boldly , but humbly , call the church back to its Biblical foundations … [ so ] we neither count ourselves a part of this movement nor campaign against it . " 
 = = = Reaction from the scientific community = = = 
 The unequivocal consensus in the scientific community is that intelligent design is not science and has no place in a science curriculum . The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has stated that " creationism , intelligent design , and other claims of supernatural intervention in the origin of life or of species are not science because they are not testable by the methods of science . " The U.S. National Science Teachers Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science have termed it pseudoscience . Others in the scientific community have denounced its tactics , accusing the ID movement of manufacturing false attacks against evolution , of engaging in misinformation and misrepresentation about science , and marginalizing those who teach it . More recently , in September 2012 , Bill Nye warned that creationist views threaten science education and innovations in the United States . 
 In 2001 , the Discovery Institute published advertisements under the heading A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism , with the claim that listed scientists had signed this statement expressing skepticism : 
 We are skeptical of claims for the ability of random mutation and natural selection to account for the complexity of life . Careful examination of the evidence for Darwinian theory should be encouraged . 
 The ambiguous statement did not exclude other known evolutionary mechanisms , and most signatories were not scientists in relevant fields , but starting in 2004 the Institute claimed the increasing number of signatures indicated mounting doubts about evolution among scientists . The statement formed a key component of Discovery Institute campaigns to present intelligent design as scientifically valid by claiming that evolution lacks broad scientific support , with Institute members continued to cite the list through at least 2011 . As part of a strategy to counter these claims , scientists organised Project Steve which gained more signatories named Steve ( or variants ) than the Institute 's petition , and a counter @-@ petition , A Scientific Support for Darwinism , which quickly gained similar numbers of signatories . 
 = = = Polls = = = 
 Several surveys were conducted prior to the December 2005 decision in Kitzmiller v. Dover School District , which sought to determine the level of support for intelligent design among certain groups . According to a 2005 Harris poll , 10 % of adults in the United States viewed human beings as " so complex that they required a powerful force or intelligent being to help create them . " Although Zogby polls commissioned by the Discovery Institute show more support , these polls suffer from considerable flaws , such as having a very low response rate ( 248 out of 16 @,@ 000 ) , being conducted on behalf of an organization with an expressed interest in the outcome of the poll , and containing leading questions . 
 A series of Gallup polls in the United States from 1982 through 2014 on " Evolution , Creationism , Intelligent Design " found support for " human beings have developed over millions of years from less advanced formed of life , but God guided the process " of between 31 % and 40 % , support for " God created human beings in pretty much their present form at one time within the last 10 @,@ 000 years or so " varied from 40 % to 47 % , and support for " human beings have developed over millions of years from less advanced forms of life , but God had no part in the process " varied from 9 % to 19 % . The polls also noted answers to a series of more detailed questions . 
 = = = Allegations of discrimination against ID proponents = = = 
 There have been allegations that ID proponents have met discrimination , such as being refused tenure or being harshly criticized on the Internet . In the documentary film Expelled : No Intelligence Allowed , released in 2008 , host Ben Stein presents five such cases . The film contends that the mainstream science establishment , in a " scientific conspiracy to keep God out of the nation 's laboratories and classrooms , " suppresses academics who believe they see evidence of intelligent design in nature or criticize evidence of evolution . Investigation into these allegations turned up alternative explanations for perceived persecution . 
 The film portrays intelligent design as motivated by science , rather than religion , though it does not give a detailed definition of the phrase or attempt to explain it on a scientific level . Other than briefly addressing issues of irreducible complexity , Expelled examines it as a political issue . The scientific theory of evolution is portrayed by the film as contributing to fascism , the Holocaust , communism , atheism , and eugenics . 
 Expelled has been used in private screenings to legislators as part of the Discovery Institute intelligent design campaign for Academic Freedom bills . Review screenings were restricted to churches and Christian groups , and at a special pre @-@ release showing , one of the interviewees , PZ Myers , was refused admission . The American Association for the Advancement of Science describes the film as dishonest and divisive propaganda aimed at introducing religious ideas into public school science classrooms , and the Anti @-@ Defamation League has denounced the film 's allegation that evolutionary theory influenced the Holocaust . The film includes interviews with scientists and academics who were misled into taking part by misrepresentation of the topic and title of the film . Skeptic Michael Shermer describes his experience of being repeatedly asked the same question without context as " surreal . " 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Scientific criticism = = = 
 Advocates of intelligent design seek to keep God and the Bible out of the discussion , and present intelligent design in the language of science as though it were a scientific hypothesis . For a theory to qualify as scientific , it is expected to be : 
 Consistent 
 <unk> ( sparing in its proposed entities or explanations ; see Occam 's razor ) 
 Useful ( describes and explains observed phenomena , and can be used in a predictive manner ) 
 <unk> testable and falsifiable ( potentially <unk> or disprovable by experiment or observation ) 
 Based on multiple observations ( often in the form of controlled , repeated experiments ) 
 <unk> and dynamic ( modified in the light of observations that do not support it ) 
 Progressive ( refines previous theories ) 
 Provisional or tentative ( is open to experimental checking , and does not assert certainty ) 
 For any theory , hypothesis or conjecture to be considered scientific , it must meet most , and ideally all , of these criteria . The fewer criteria are met , the less scientific it is ; and if it meets only a few or none at all , then it cannot be treated as scientific in any meaningful sense of the word . Typical objections to defining intelligent design as science are that it lacks consistency , violates the principle of parsimony , is not scientifically useful , is not falsifiable , is not empirically testable , and is not correctable , dynamic , progressive or provisional . 
 Intelligent design proponents seek to change this fundamental basis of science by eliminating " methodological naturalism " from science and replacing it with what the leader of the intelligent design movement , Phillip E. Johnson , calls " theistic realism . " Intelligent design proponents argue that naturalistic explanations fail to explain certain phenomena and that supernatural explanations provide a very simple and intuitive explanation for the origins of life and the universe . Many intelligent design followers believe that " scientism " is itself a religion that promotes secularism and materialism in an attempt to erase theism from public life , and they view their work in the promotion of intelligent design as a way to return religion to a central role in education and other public spheres . 
 The failure to follow the procedures of scientific discourse and the failure to submit work to the scientific community that withstands scrutiny have weighed against intelligent design being accepted as valid science . The intelligent design movement has not published a properly peer @-@ reviewed article supporting ID in a scientific journal , and has failed to publish supporting peer @-@ reviewed research or data . The only article published in a peer @-@ reviewed scientific journal that made a case for intelligent design was quickly withdrawn by the publisher for having circumvented the journal 's peer @-@ review standards . The Discovery Institute says that a number of intelligent design articles have been published in peer @-@ reviewed journals , but critics , largely members of the scientific community , reject this claim and state intelligent design proponents have set up their own journals with peer review that lack impartiality and rigor , consisting entirely of intelligent design supporters . 
 Further criticism stems from the fact that the phrase intelligent design makes use of an assumption of the quality of an observable intelligence , a concept that has no scientific consensus definition . The characteristics of intelligence are assumed by intelligent design proponents to be observable without specifying what the criteria for the measurement of intelligence should be . Critics say that the design detection methods proposed by intelligent design proponents are radically different from conventional design detection , undermining the key elements that make it possible as legitimate science . Intelligent design proponents , they say , are proposing both searching for a designer without knowing anything about that designer 's abilities , parameters , or intentions ( which scientists do know when searching for the results of human intelligence ) , as well as denying the very distinction between natural / artificial design that allows scientists to compare complex designed artifacts against the background of the sorts of complexity found in nature . 
 Among a significant proportion of the general public in the United States , the major concern is whether conventional evolutionary biology is compatible with belief in God and in the Bible , and how this issue is taught in schools . The Discovery Institute 's " Teach the Controversy " campaign promotes intelligent design while attempting to discredit evolution in United States public high school science courses . The scientific community and science education organizations have replied that there is no scientific controversy regarding the validity of evolution and that the controversy exists solely in terms of religion and politics . 
 = = = Arguments from ignorance = = = 
 Eugenie C. Scott , along with Glenn Branch and other critics , has argued that many points raised by intelligent design proponents are arguments from ignorance . In the argument from ignorance , a lack of evidence for one view is erroneously argued to constitute proof of the correctness of another view . Scott and Branch say that intelligent design is an argument from ignorance because it relies on a lack of knowledge for its conclusion : lacking a natural explanation for certain specific aspects of evolution , we assume intelligent cause . They contend most scientists would reply that the unexplained is not unexplainable , and that " we don 't know yet " is a more appropriate response than invoking a cause outside science . Particularly , Michael Behe 's demands for ever more detailed explanations of the historical evolution of molecular systems seem to assume a false dichotomy , where either evolution or design is the proper explanation , and any perceived failure of evolution becomes a victory for design . Scott and Branch also contend that the supposedly novel contributions proposed by intelligent design proponents have not served as the basis for any productive scientific research . 
 In his conclusion to the Kitzmiller trial , Judge John E. Jones III wrote that " ID is at bottom premised upon a false dichotomy , namely , that to the extent evolutionary theory is discredited , ID is confirmed . " This same argument had been put forward to support creation science at the McLean v. Arkansas ( 1982 ) trial which found it was " contrived dualism , " the false premise of a " two model approach . " Behe 's argument of irreducible complexity puts forward negative arguments against evolution but does not make any positive scientific case for intelligent design . It fails to allow for scientific explanations continuing to be found , as has been the case with several examples previously put forward as supposed cases of irreducible complexity . 
