 = = Review and events = = 
 The pre @-@ season period was a turbulent one , with a potential take @-@ over of the club by Mike Turl being rejected by then @-@ chairman Geoff Dunford . Directors Kevin Spencer and Colin Williams left the club in protest at the rejection , followed shortly after by the Bristol Rovers Supporters Club representative on the football club 's board , Kim Stuckey . 
 Ryan Green had signed for the club from Hereford United at the end of the previous season , and he was joined by three more new players before the start of the 2006 @-@ 07 season . Sammy Igoe , who had been on loan at Rovers from Millwall the previous season , joined on a full @-@ time basis , young defender Byron Anthony , who had yet to make an appearance in the Football League , joined from Cardiff City , and experienced goalkeeper Steve Phillips crossed the city to join from local rivals Bristol City . 
 A number of players left the club following the end of the 2005 – 06 season . Senior players John Anderson , who had been assistant manager to Paul Trollope during his spell as caretaker manager the previous year , Ali Gibb , Jon Bass and Christian Edwards were released , while Jamie Forrester moved to Lincoln City on a free transfer . Also leaving the club were a number of younger players who had failed to earn extensions to their contracts . These were Mark Preece , Matt Thorne , Ben Willshire and goalkeepers Ryan Clarke and Martin <unk> . 
 The first game of the season was away to Peterborough United in League Two , and ended in a 4 – 1 defeat , resulting in the lowest league position , 23rd , that Rovers would occupy all season . As the season progressed , Rovers gradually climbed the league table , eventually clinching a playoff spot after winning their final league match 2 – 1 against Hartlepool United . 
 The playoff campaign was a high @-@ scoring one , with there being an average of 4 ⅔ goals per game in the three matches played . The semi @-@ final was against Lincoln City , and was played over two legs . The first leg at the Memorial Stadium was won 2 – 1 by Rovers , thanks to goals by Craig Disley and Richard Walker . The second leg was played at Sincil Bank and ended 5 – 3 , with Stuart Campbell , Rickie Lambert , Richard Walker , Sammy Igoe and Sean Rigg scoring the goals . This gave Rovers a 7 – 4 aggregate win and a place in the final at Wembley Stadium . A record attendance for a League Two playoff final of 61 @,@ 589 watched the game , and saw Rovers win the match 3 – 1 and gain promotion for only the fourth time in the club 's history . Richard Walker scored two of the goals and Sammy Igoe scored the other . 
 The League Cup campaign was a brief one . Rovers were knocked out in the first round by Luton Town on penalty kicks after drawing the match 1 – 1 . The FA Cup was more successful , with the team reaching the fourth round where they were beaten 1 – 0 by Derby County . The best cup run of the season was in the Football League Trophy , where they reached the final after beating rivals Bristol City 1 – 0 in the southern area final . The game was played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff , but resulted in a 3 – 2 defeat after extra time , the score being 2 – 2 after 90 minutes . 
 = = = Chronological list of events = = = 
 This is a list of the significant events to occur at the club during the 2006 – 07 season , presented in chronological order . This list does not include transfers , which are listed in the transfers section below , or match results , which are in the results section . 
 28 July : Played a pre @-@ season friendly against Plymouth Argyle wearing pink shirts . 
 22 August : Knocked out of the League Cup at the first round by Luton Town on penalties , having drawn the match 1 – 1 . 
 15 September : The club submit plans for a new 18 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium to Bristol City Council . 
 27 September : Rovers record their first win in a home midweek evening game for almost two years . The 2 – 1 win over Hereford United was the first since beating Chester City 4 – 1 on 7 December 2004 . This was also the first game this season where Rovers scored more than one goal in the match . 
 6 October : Chairman Geoff Dunford announces that he will step down from his position at the end of April 2007 , but intends to remain as a director of the club . 
 7 October : Back to back home wins recorded for the first time since May 2005 , thanks to a 1 – 0 win over Boston United following on from the victory over Hereford United the previous week . 
 9 October : Kevin Hodges is appointed as head of youth football . He also takes charge of the reserve team as part of his duties . 
 16 October : Rod King is appointed to the club 's board of directors . 
 17 October : Former player Carl Saunders is appointed as the club 's Community Liaison Officer . 
 11 November : Sean Rigg suffers a broken jaw after being punched by James Cotterill during an FA Cup first round match at Barrow . 
 10 January : Rovers receive £ 50 @,@ 000 as part of the deal taking Scott Sinclair to Chelsea after he makes his debut for the London club . 
 17 January : Bristol City Council grant planning permission for a new 18 @,@ 000 capacity all @-@ seater stadium to be built on the site of the Memorial Stadium . 
 27 January : Rovers knocked out of the FA Cup in the fourth round by Derby County . 
 27 February : Rovers reach the final of the Football League Trophy by beating rivals Bristol City 1 – 0 on aggregate over the two legs of the southern area final . 
 29 March : Rovers announce that Ron Craig will succeed Geoff Dunford as chairman of the club from 2 April 2007 . 
 1 April : Rovers are beaten 3 – 2 ( after extra time ) by Doncaster Rovers in the final of the Football League Trophy at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium . 
 21 April : Byron Anthony signed a new 2 @-@ year contract with Rovers , tying him to the club until the end of the 2008 @-@ 09 season . 
 30 April : Steve Phillips signs a two @-@ year extension to his contract , which was due to expire in summer 2008 . This keeps him at the club until 2010 . 
 5 May : Rovers finish the season in 6th place , earning a spot in the playoffs . 
 11 May : Mike Green and James Palmer were offered new contracts . 
 16 May : Stuart Campbell signs a new two @-@ year contract . 
 17 May : Rovers beat Lincoln City 5 – 3 at Sincil Bank to win 7 – 4 on aggregate and reach their second major final of the season , the League Two play @-@ off final . It was their first appearance at the new Wembley Stadium . Rovers became only the second club to play at both the Millennium Stadium and Wembley in one season behind Chelsea who played the League Cup final at the Millennium Stadium on 25 February 2007 and played the FA Cup final on 19 May 2007 . 
 26 May : Rovers beat Shrewsbury Town 3 – 1 in the Football League Two play @-@ off final at Wembley Stadium to clinch promotion to League One . Richard Walker scored two goals and Sammy Igoe one after having gone 1 – 0 down . A record crowd for a League Two playoff final of 61 @,@ 589 watched the game . 
 5 June : The club announce that the first team will play their home games at Whaddon Road in Cheltenham while the Memorial Stadium is being redeveloped . The move is due to happen in December 2007 . 
 21 June : Steve Elliott signs a new three @-@ year contract , running until June 2010 . 
 = = Match results = = 
 Bristol Rovers played a total of 62 competitive matches during the 2006 – 07 season , as well as nine pre @-@ season friendlies , making a total of 71 games played . The team finished sixth in Football League Two , reaching the play @-@ offs for the first time since the 1997 @-@ 98 season . 
 In the cup competitions , Rovers were knocked out of the League Cup at the first round stage in a penalty shootout , having drawn 1 – 1 with Championship side Luton Town after extra time . They fared better in the FA Cup however , reaching the fourth round stage where they lost again to a Championship team ; this time Derby County . The most successful cup competition for Rovers was the Football League Trophy , in which they reached the final for the first time since the 1989 – 90 competition . They were beaten by Doncaster Rovers after extra time at the Millennium Stadium . 
 = = = Legend = = = 
 = = = Football League Two = = = 
 = = = Football League Two Playoffs = = = 
 = = = FA Cup = = = 
 = = = League Cup = = = 
 = = = Football League Trophy = = = 
 = = League progress = = 
 This chart shows the league position of Bristol Rovers F.C. over the course of the season . The green area represents the automatic promotion positions ( positions 1 to 3 ) , the yellow area represents the play @-@ off positions ( positions 4 to 7 ) and the red area represents the relegation places ( positions 23 and 24 ) . The lowest position in the league that Bristol Rovers reached during the course of the season was 23rd , after the first game , and their highest placing was 6th , after the final game . 
 = = Player details = = 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , Rovers used 24 different players , and there were nine squad members who did not make an appearance on the pitch . The table below shows the number of appearances and goals scored by each player . Play @-@ off appearances are included in the league appearances column . 
 = = Transfers = = 
 = = = In = = = 
 Five players were signed during the 2006 – 07 season , with a total transfer cost of £ 200 @,@ 000 , all of which was spent on Rickie Lambert . The remainder of the transfers were free . In addition to this , five players were loaned in over the course of the season , with Stuart Nicholson having two loan spells at the club , and seven scholars from the Bristol Academy of Sport were awarded their first professional contracts at the end of the season . 
 The players that joined Bristol Rovers during the 2006 – 07 season , along with their previous club , are listed below . 
 = = = Out = = = 
 Six players were loaned out during the 2006 – 07 season , and seven left the club permanently . The club received a transfer fee for one player only , Junior <unk> , but the amount received was not made public . 
 Listed below are the players that were transferred out , loaned out or released during the season , along with the club that they joined . For players that were transferred or loaned , this is the club that they joined from Rovers . For players that were released by the club , the next team that they joined after leaving Bristol Rovers is listed , even if they did not join that club immediately . 
 = Landing at Jacquinot Bay = 
 The Landing at Jacquinot Bay was an Allied amphibious operation undertaken on 4 November 1944 during the New Britain Campaign of World War II . The landing was conducted as part of a change in responsibility for Allied operations on New Britain with the Australian 5th Division , under Major General Alan Ramsay , taking over from the US 40th Infantry Division , which was needed for operations in the Philippines . The purpose of the operation was to establish a logistics base at Jacquinot Bay on the south coast of New Britain to support the 5th Division 's planned operations near the major Japanese garrison at Rabaul . 
 As part of the first stage of the Australian take over , Brigadier Raymond Sandover 's 6th Brigade was directed to secure the Jacquinot Bay area . While the region was believed to be undefended , the initial landing was conducted by a combat @-@ ready force comprising the reinforced Australian 14th / 32nd Battalion protected by warships and with aircraft on standby . As expected , there was no opposition to the landing on 4 November and work soon began on logistics facilities . 
 Once a base was established at Jacquinot Bay it was used to support Australian operations near Rabaul which were conducted in early 1945 in conjunction with advances on the northern side of New Britain . The campaign was effectively one of containment as the larger Japanese force was isolated while the Allies conducted further operations elsewhere . 
 = = Background = = 
 During December 1943 and early 1944 United States Army and United States Marine Corps units landed in western New Britain with the goal of securing the area so it could not be used to launch attacks against the flank of the main Allied offensive along the north coast of New Guinea . The American forces defeated the Japanese garrison of western New Britain during the Battle of Arawe , Battle of Cape Gloucester and Battle of Talasea . In late April 1944 the US Army 's 40th Infantry Division assumed responsibility for garrisoning the Allied positions in New Britain . The division subsequently maintained positions around Talasea – Cape Hoskins , Arawe and Cape Gloucester and did not conduct offensive operations against the Japanese forces in the east of the island . As a result , the fighting on New Britain devolved largely into what Peter Dennis has called a " tacit truce " with the US and Japanese troops being separated by a " no man 's land " , in which Australian @-@ led native troops from the Allied Intelligence Bureau ( AIB ) conducted a small scale guerilla campaign . 
 In mid @-@ 1944 , the Australian Government agreed to take on responsibility for the military operations in the northern Solomon Islands and Australian New Guinea , including New Britain . The Australian Army 's 5th Division , under Major General Alan Ramsay , was selected to replace the 40th Infantry Division on New Britain in August , with the unit to assume responsibility for the island on 1 November . Instead of maintaining the American bases in western New Britain the Australians planned to operate closer to the Japanese forces which were positioned around the Gazelle Peninsula in the north @-@ east of the island . By the time of the Australian take @-@ over , Allied intelligence estimated that the Japanese forces on New Britain amounted to 38 @,@ 000 personnel , but in actuality there were 93 @,@ 000 Japanese on the island , forming part of General Hitoshi Imamura 's Eighth Area Army . The Japanese personnel were focused upon sustaining themselves , with rice @-@ growing and gardening being undertaken to supplement the limited supplies that were arriving . Japanese supporting elements were limited , with only two aircraft capable of action and no ships other than 150 barges that could move up to 90 personnel or 15 tons of stores . 
 As of April 1944 , small Japanese observation posts were located along the south coast of New Britain as far west as the village of <unk> near Cape Dampier ( approximately 100 miles [ 160 km ] east of Arawe ) . A larger force was also stationed at Henry Reid Bay in the Wide Bay area to the south of the main force stationed around Rabaul . During that month the AIB force responsible for the south coast of New Britain was ordered to destroy all the Japanese posts to the west of Henry Reid Bay . This unit comprised about 140 native troops led by five Australian officers and ten non @-@ commissioned officers . 
 Operations against the Japanese observation posts began in June . On the fifth of the month a patrol of American troops attacked the position at <unk> , causing its garrison to retreat into the centre of the island . Other attacks by the AIB force followed , and by early September all of the Japanese observation posts west of Wide Bay had been destroyed . Japanese troops conducted small scale reprisals against the native population of the Wide Bay hinterland , and the AIB officers attempted to persuade the population of this area to move inland before more severe reprisals were conducted . 
 During the operations along the south coast of New Britain the AIB officers sought to discourage the Japanese from moving west of the Wide Bay area by circulating rumours among the local population that a large Australian base had been established at Jacquinot Bay . In reality no such base existed at this time . The AIB force continued to make guerilla attacks on Japanese positions until early October , when it was ordered to cease offensive operations and concentrate on intelligence gathering ahead of the landing of Australian infantry and support units at Jacquinot Bay . The AIB 's operations from June to October were assisted by occasional air attacks and naval bombardments conducted by elements of the Allied air forces and navies . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 To support the 5th Division 's planned offensive operations the Australian high command in the New Guinea area , New Guinea Force , determined that a logistics base needed to established closer to Rabaul than those used by the US Army forces on New Britain . At a conference held on 24 August involving the commanders of New Guinea Force and the 5th Division , it was decided to investigate whether the Talasea @-@ Hoskins area on the north coast of New Britain and the Jacquinot Bay area on the south coast of the island could accommodate bases for the 5th Division . 
 On 5 September a party of 105 personnel from the 5th Division , New Guinea Force and Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) was landed at Jacquinot Bay from the corvette HMAS Kiama . They investigated the area for two days , assisted by AIB personnel , while Kiama surveyed the bay . It was concluded that the region was suitable for a base as the bay could accommodate up to six liberty ships and an airstrip could be built nearby . The party which visited the Talasea – Hoskins area ( which already housed an American base ) made a less favourable report . M Special Unit also reported that no Japanese personnel remained in the Jacquinot Bay area . On 15 September the commander of the Australian Army 's combat forces , General Thomas Blamey , approved a proposal to establish a base at Jacquinot Bay . He also agreed for two battalions of the 6th Brigade to be landed at Jacquinot Bay , with the formation 's third battalion being sent to Talasea – Hoskins . 
 At this time the 6th Brigade – consisting of the 19th , 36th and 14th / 32nd Battalions – was led by Brigadier Raymond Sandover . A Militia formation , it had not previously seen combat as a whole , though one of its infantry battalions – the 36th – had fought in the Battle of Buna – Gona during late 1942 and early 1943 . Nevertheless , Sandover and his three battalion commanders were all Australian Imperial Force veterans who had taken part in the fighting against the Germans and Italians in North Africa , Greece and Syria during 1941 and 1942 . The 36th Battalion was dispatched to Cape Hoskins in early October , and relieved a battalion of the US 158th Infantry Regiment . 
 The RAAF conducted three attacks on Rabaul as part of the preparations for the landing at Jacquinot Bay . On the night of 26 October a force of 18 Bristol Beaufort light bombers drawn from No. 6 , No. 8 and No. 100 Squadrons attacked Japanese stores dumps and anti @-@ aircraft positions at Rabaul . The results of this mission were unclear , however . The next raid by the three squadrons was conducted against stores dumps to the north of Rabaul on the evening of 27 October , and most of the bombs which were dropped landed in the target area . The third raid took place on 29 October , and involved 20 Beauforts from the three squadrons striking stores dumps to the west of Rabaul . 
 = = Landing = = 
 While AIB patrols continued to report that no Japanese troops were located in the Jacquinot Bay area , the Australian command decided that the landing there would be made by a combat @-@ ready force protected by naval vessels . This was intended both as a precaution against a sudden Japanese offensive and to provide useful experience for the units involved . The landing was designated Operation Battleaxe . 
 The initial landing force for the Jacquinot Bay operation comprised the 14th / 32nd Battalion Group , ' B ' Company of the 1st New Guinea Infantry Battalion , and an advance party from the 5th Base Sub Area . The combat troops and base personnel embarked on the transport Cape Alexander at Lae on 2 November . The transport sailed that afternoon under the escort of three Royal Australian Navy warships : the destroyer HMAS Vendetta , frigate HMAS Barcoo and sloop HMAS Swan . The other Australian forces involved in the landing were the transport Frances Peat which was escorted by RAN motor launch ML 827 , and the tugboat HMAS Tancred which towed a workshop barge to Jacquinot Bay under the escort of ML 802 . In addition , ' B ' Company of the US Army 's <unk> Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment was attached to the force ; this unit was equipped with landing craft and sailed to Jacquinot Bay with Tancred . The 14th / 32nd Battalion had been raised in the state of Victoria during 1942 , and was still mainly made up of Victorian soldiers . 
 Elements of the RAAF were also available to support the landing . The plan for the operation specified that , if required , No. 6 Squadron , reinforced with Beauforts from No. 8 and No. 100 Squadrons , would attack the landing area before 6 am on 4 November . An additional two Beauforts could also observe for any bombardments made by the warships . Prior to the landing , the air strike was cancelled by the RAAF officer who was attached to the landing force to coordinate air support as no opposition was expected . 
 Cape Alexander and her escorts arrived at Jacquinot Bay at 6 : 35 am on 4 November , and were joined by the other Allied vessels shortly thereafter . While the voyage from Lae had been uneventful , the 14th / 32nd Battalion 's war diary records that the unit 's accommodation on board the transport was " VERY <unk> " as it was " very cramped , dirty and wet " and sanitary facilities were greatly insufficient . 
 The landing of the 14th / 32nd Battalion commenced at 9 : 30 am , with ' A ' Company making up the first wave . All elements of the battalion were ashore by 11 : 30 am . No opposition was encountered , and the 14th / 32nd Battalion began to establish defensive and living positions . In addition , personnel from the battalion were detailed to unload stores . Sandover regarded the lack of opposition as fortunate , as the landing craft which were to carry the soldiers from the ships to the shore arrived late and he perceived that the RAAF had failed to provide adequate support . However , he was pleased with his brigade 's performance during operations in New Britain up to that time , and expressed pleasure at having " nearly reached the war " . The 180 man @-@ strong advanced party of the 5th Base Sub Area was landed on 5 November , and began work on establishing logistics facilities . 
 After covering the landing force for two days , HMAS Vendetta , Barcoo and Swan proceeded to Wide Bay and bombarded Japanese positions there before departing the New Britain area . The motor launches ML 802 and ML 827 remained at Jacquinot Bay and conducted patrols along the south coast of the island in search of Japanese barges . ML 827 ran aground during a patrol on 17 November , and sank three days later while under tow to an Allied base ; all of her crew survived . A Japanese air raid was conducted against Jacquinot Bay on 23 November . 
 During the days after the landing , the ground forces secured the Jacquinot Bay area . AIB personnel manned an outpost to warn of the approach of Japanese forces , while the combat troops patrolled and established positions near the main landing area . On 6 November the company from the 1st New Guinea Infantry Battalion was moved by landing craft to the northern shore of Jacquinot Bay , and subsequently guarded the tracks leading to this area . This unit later relieved the AIB of responsibility for maintaining some of its positions to the east of Jacquinot Bay . During this period the 14th / 32nd Battalion remained near the landing area , though one of its companies gradually established an outpost between 8 and 12 November . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Base construction = = = 
 The remainder of the 5th Base Sub Area arrived at Jacquinot Bay on 11 and 12 November , accompanied by a party of 670 native labourers . By this time the advance party had erected a pontoon jetty in the bay and unloaded 3 @,@ 400 cubic metres ( 4 @,@ 400 cu yd ) of stores and equipment . Major base construction works began on the second week after the landing , though the completion of some buildings was delayed by shortages of engineer stores . The 2 / 3rd Railway Construction Company reinforced the logistics units on 21 November , and worked on building roads . The headquarters of the 5th Division opened at Jacquinot Bay on 27 November . 
 Work on major facilities at Jacquinot Bay began in December . These were to include a large dock , an airstrip , buildings to be used by 2 / 8th General Hospital and stores depots . By this time it had been decided to stockpile sufficient stores at Jacquinot Bay to support 13 @,@ 000 soldiers for 60 days . Work on the airstrip was completed in May 1945 . Two squadrons of Corsair fighter aircraft from the Royal New Zealand Air Force were later based there . 
 The 6th Brigade , less the 36th Battalion , was gradually brought into the Jacquinot Bay area , with its final elements arriving on 16 December . Due to shipping shortages and the low priority given to building up forces on New Britain , it was not until April 1945 that all elements of the 5th Division had been brought forward to Jacquinot Bay . The company from the <unk> Engineer Boat and Shore Regiment remained at Jacquinot Bay until it was replaced by the 41st Australian Landing Craft Company on 15 February 1945 . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 As Allied intelligence regarding the Japanese was still uncertain , Ramsay , who officially assumed command of the forces on New Britain on 27 November , adopted a cautious approach . Jacquinot Bay was built up as a base of operations and the Australians began sending out patrols to fight for information and harass the Japanese , with limited advances taking place on both the northern and southern coasts of the island , pushing east towards the Japanese strong hold around the Gazelle Peninsula . The AIB also continued to operate in the area , passing information to the 5th Division . The Japanese lacked information on the movements of Allied forces in New Britain , and only learned of the change in command from Australian radio broadcasts . 
 The Australian advance was hampered by shortages of shipping , aircraft and communications , which limited operations to brigade @-@ strength only . In January 1945 the 36th Battalion was dispatched from Cape Hoskins to Ea Ea on the north coast of New Britain by barge , and began sending out company @-@ sized patrols ; they subsequently reached <unk> Point , in Open Bay , at the base of the Gazelle Peninsula by April . The Australian forces also advanced along the south coast of the island , and began securing the Waitavalo – Tol area in late February , with engineer support enabling the crossing of the <unk> River . Several clashes followed around Mount Sugi as the Australians fought to gain control of several heavily defended ridges overlooking Henry Reid Bay . Heavy rain and flooding hampered their efforts , but by April the Australians had secured Wide Bay and had effectively hemmed the Japanese into the Gazelle Peninsula , where they were able to be contained for the remainder of the campaign . This enabled the Allies to focus their attention elsewhere , such as Borneo . 
 = Pontiac 's War = 
 Pontiac 's War , Pontiac 's Conspiracy , or Pontiac 's Rebellion was a war that was launched in 1763 by a loose confederation of elements of Native American tribes primarily from the Great Lakes region , the Illinois Country , and Ohio Country who were dissatisfied with British postwar policies in the Great Lakes region after the British victory in the French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1763 ) . Warriors from numerous tribes joined the uprising in an effort to drive British soldiers and settlers out of the region . The war is named after the Odawa leader Pontiac , the most prominent of many native leaders in the conflict . 
 The war began in May 1763 when Native Americans , offended by the policies of British General Jeffrey Amherst , attacked a number of British forts and settlements . Eight forts were destroyed , and hundreds of colonists were killed or captured , with many more fleeing the region . Hostilities came to an end after British Army expeditions in 1764 led to peace negotiations over the next two years . Native Americans were unable to drive away the British , but the uprising prompted the British government to modify the policies that had provoked the conflict . 
 Warfare on the North American frontier was brutal , and the killing of prisoners , the targeting of civilians , and other atrocities were widespread . The ruthlessness and treachery of the conflict was a reflection of a growing divide between the separate populations of the British colonists and Native Americans . Contrary to popular belief , the British government did not issue the Royal Proclamation of 1763 in reaction to Pontiac 's War , though the conflict did provide an impetus for the application of the Proclamation 's Indian clauses . This proved unpopular with British colonists , and may have been one of the early contributing factors to the American Revolution . 
 = = Naming the conflict = = 
 The conflict is named after its most famous participant , the Ottawa leader Pontiac ; variations include " Pontiac 's War " , " Pontiac 's Rebellion " , and " Pontiac 's Uprising " . An early name for the war was the " <unk> and Pontiac War " , " <unk> " being an alternate spelling for Guyasuta , an influential Seneca / Mingo leader . The war became widely known as " Pontiac 's Conspiracy " after the publication in 1851 of Francis Parkman 's The Conspiracy of Pontiac . Parkman 's influential book , the definitive account of the war for nearly a century , is still in print . 
 In the 20th century , some historians argued that Parkman exaggerated the extent of Pontiac 's influence in the conflict and that it was misleading to name the war after Pontiac . For example , in 1988 Francis Jennings wrote : " In Francis Parkman 's murky mind the backwoods plots emanated from one savage genius , the Ottawa chief Pontiac , and thus they became ' The Conspiracy of Pontiac , ' but Pontiac was only a local Ottawa war chief in a ' resistance ' involving many tribes . " Alternate titles for the war have been proposed , but historians generally continue to refer to the war by the familiar names , with " Pontiac 's War " probably the most commonly used . " Pontiac 's Conspiracy " is now infrequently used by scholars . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In the decades before Pontiac 's Rebellion , France and Great Britain participated in a series of wars in Europe that also involved the French and Indian Wars in North America . The largest of these wars was the worldwide Seven Years ' War , in which France lost New France in North America to Great Britain . Peace with the Shawnee and Lenape who had been combatants came in 1758 with the Treaty of Easton , where the British promised not to settle further beyond the ridge of the Alleghenies - a demarcation later to be confirmed by the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , though it was little respected . Most fighting in the North American theater of the war , generally called the French and Indian War in the United States , came to an end after British General Jeffrey Amherst captured the last important French settlement , Montréal , in 1760 . 
 British troops proceeded to occupy the various forts in the Ohio Country and Great Lakes region previously garrisoned by the French . Even before the war officially ended with the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) , the British Crown began to implement changes in order to administer its vastly expanded North American territory . While the French had long cultivated alliances among certain of the Native Americans , the British post @-@ war approach was essentially to treat the Native Americans as a conquered people . Before long , Native Americans who had been allies of the defeated French found themselves increasingly dissatisfied with the British occupation and the new policies imposed by the victors . 
 = = = Tribes involved = = = 
 Native Americans involved in Pontiac 's Rebellion lived in a vaguely defined region of New France known as the pays d 'en haut ( " the upper country " ) , which was claimed by France until the Paris peace treaty of 1763 . Native Americans of the pays d 'en haut were from many different tribes . At this time and place , a " tribe " was a linguistic or ethnic group rather than a political unit . No chief spoke for an entire tribe , and no tribe acted in unison . For example , Ottawas did not go to war as a tribe : some Ottawa leaders chose to do so , while other Ottawa leaders denounced the war and stayed clear of the conflict . The tribes of the pays d 'en haut consisted of three basic groups . 
 The first group was composed of tribes of the Great Lakes region : Ottawa , Ojibwa , and Potawatomi , who spoke Algonquian languages ; and the Huron , who spoke an Iroquoian language . They had long been allied with French habitants , with whom they lived , traded , and intermarried . Great Lakes Native Americans were alarmed to learn that they were under British sovereignty after the French loss of North America . When a British garrison took possession of Fort Detroit from the French in 1760 , local Native Americans cautioned them that " this country was given by God to the Indians . " 
 The second group was made up of the tribes from eastern Illinois Country , which included the Miami , Wea , Kickapoo , <unk> , and Piankashaw . Like the Great Lakes tribes , these people had a long history of close trading and other relations with the French . Throughout the war , the British were unable to project military power into the Illinois Country , which was on the remote western edge of the conflict . The Illinois tribes were the last to come to terms with the British . 
 The third group was made up of tribes of the Ohio Country : Delawares ( Lenape ) , Shawnee , Wyandot , and Mingo . These people had migrated to the Ohio valley earlier in the century from the mid @-@ Atlantic and other eastern areas in order to escape British , French , and Iroquois domination in the New York and Pennsylvania area . Unlike the Great Lakes and Illinois Country tribes , Ohio Native Americans had no great attachment to the French regime . They had fought as French allies in the previous war in an effort to drive away the British . They made a separate peace with the British with the understanding that the British Army would withdraw from the Ohio Country . But after the departure of the French , the British strengthened their forts in the region rather than abandoning them , and so the Ohioans went to war in 1763 in another attempt to drive out the British . 
 Outside the pays d 'en haut , most warriors of the influential Iroquois Confederacy did not participate in Pontiac 's War because of their alliance with the British , known as the Covenant Chain . However , the westernmost Iroquois nation , the Seneca tribe , had become disaffected with the alliance . As early as 1761 , the Seneca began to send out war messages to the Great Lakes and Ohio Country tribes , urging them to unite in an attempt to drive out the British . When the war finally came in 1763 , many Seneca were quick to take action . 
 = = = Amherst 's policies = = = 
 General Amherst , the British commander @-@ in @-@ chief in North America , was in overall charge of administering policy towards Native Americans , which involved both military matters and regulation of the fur trade . Amherst believed that with France out of the picture , the Native Americans would have no other choice than to accept British rule . He also believed that they were incapable of offering any serious resistance to the British Army ; therefore , of the 8 @,@ 000 troops under his command in North America , only about 500 were stationed in the region where the war erupted . Amherst and officers such as Major Henry Gladwin , commander at Fort Detroit , made little effort to conceal their contempt for the Native Americans . Native Americans involved in the uprising frequently complained that the British treated them no better than slaves or dogs . 
 Additional Native resentment resulted from Amherst 's decision in February 1761 to cut back on the gifts given to the Native Americans . Gift giving had been an integral part of the relationship between the French and the tribes of the pays d 'en haut . Following a Native American custom that carried important symbolic meaning , the French gave presents ( such as guns , knives , tobacco , and clothing ) to village chiefs , who in turn redistributed these gifts to their people . By this process , the village chiefs gained stature among their people , and were thus able to maintain the alliance with the French . Amherst , however , considered this process to be a form of bribery that was no longer necessary , especially since he was under pressure to cut expenses after the war with France . Many Native Americans regarded this change in policy as an insult and an indication that the British looked upon them as conquered people rather than as allies . 
 Amherst also began to restrict the amount of ammunition and gunpowder that traders could sell to Native Americans . While the French had always made these supplies available , Amherst did not trust the Native Americans , particularly after the " Cherokee Rebellion " of 1761 , in which Cherokee warriors took up arms against their former British allies . As the Cherokee war effort had collapsed because of a shortage of gunpowder , so Amherst hoped that future uprisings could be prevented by restricting gunpowder . This created resentment and hardship because gunpowder and ammunition were wanted by native men because it helped them to provide game for their families and skins for the fur trade . Many Native Americans began to believe that the British were disarming them as a prelude to making war upon them . Sir William Johnson , the Superintendent of the Indian Department , tried to warn Amherst of the dangers of cutting back on gifts and gunpowder , to no avail . 
 = = = Land and religion = = = 
 Land was also an issue in the coming of the war . While the French colonists — most of whom were farmers who seasonally engaged in fur trade — had always been relatively few , there seemed to be no end of settlers in the British colonies , who wanted to clear the land of trees and occupy it . Shawnees and Delawares in the Ohio Country had been displaced by British colonists in the east , and this motivated their involvement in the war . On the other hand , Native Americans in the Great Lakes region and the Illinois Country had not been greatly affected by white settlement , although they were aware of the experiences of tribes in the east . Historian Gregory Dowd argues that most Native Americans involved in Pontiac 's Rebellion were not immediately threatened with displacement by white settlers , and that historians have therefore overemphasized British colonial expansion as a cause of the war . Dowd believes that the presence , attitude , and policies of the British Army , which the Native Americans found threatening and insulting , were more important factors . 
 Also contributing to the outbreak of war was a religious awakening which swept through Native settlements in the early 1760s . The movement was fed by discontent with the British as well as food shortages and epidemic disease . The most influential individual in this phenomenon was Neolin , known as the " Delaware Prophet " , who called upon Native Americans to shun the trade goods , alcohol , and weapons of the whites . Merging elements from Christianity into traditional religious beliefs , Neolin told listeners that the Master of Life was displeased with the Native Americans for taking up the bad habits of the white men , and that the British posed a threat to their very existence . " If you suffer the English among you , " said Neolin , " you are dead men . Sickness , smallpox , and their poison [ alcohol ] will destroy you entirely . " It was a powerful message for a people whose world was being changed by forces that seemed beyond their control . 
 = = Outbreak of war , 1763 = = 
 = = = Planning the war = = = 
 Although fighting in Pontiac 's Rebellion began in 1763 , rumors reached British officials as early as 1761 that discontented Native Americans were planning an attack . Senecas of the Ohio Country ( Mingos ) circulated messages ( " war belts " made of wampum ) which called for the tribes to form a confederacy and drive away the British . The Mingos , led by Guyasuta and <unk> , were concerned about being surrounded by British forts . Similar war belts originated from Detroit and the Illinois Country . The Native Americans were not unified , however , and in June 1761 , Native Americans at Detroit informed the British commander of the Seneca plot . After William Johnson held a large council with the tribes at Detroit in September 1761 a tenuous peace was maintained , but war belts continued to circulate . Violence finally erupted after the Native Americans learned in early 1763 of the imminent French cession of the pays d 'en haut to the British . 
 The war began at Fort Detroit under the leadership of Pontiac , and quickly spread throughout the region . Eight British forts were taken ; others , including Fort Detroit and Fort Pitt , were unsuccessfully besieged . Francis Parkman 's The Conspiracy of Pontiac portrayed these attacks as a coordinated operation planned by Pontiac . Parkman 's interpretation remains well known , but other historians have since argued that there is no clear evidence that the attacks were part of a master plan or overall " conspiracy " . The prevailing view among scholars today is that , rather than being planned in advance , the uprising spread as word of Pontiac 's actions at Detroit traveled throughout the pays d 'en haut , inspiring already discontented Native Americans to join the revolt . The attacks on British forts were not simultaneous : most Ohio Native Americans did not enter the war until nearly a month after the beginning of Pontiac 's siege at Detroit . 
 Parkman also believed that Pontiac 's War had been secretly instigated by French colonists who were stirring up the Native Americans in order to make trouble for the British . This belief was widely held by British officials at the time , but subsequent historians have found no evidence of official French involvement in the uprising . ( The rumor of French instigation arose in part because French war belts from the Seven Years ' War were still in circulation in some Native villages . ) Rather than the French stirring up the Native Americans , some historians now argue that the Native Americans were trying to stir up the French . Pontiac and other native leaders frequently spoke of the imminent return of French power and the revival of the Franco @-@ Native alliance ; Pontiac even flew a French flag in his village . All of this was apparently intended to inspire the French to rejoin the struggle against the British . Although some French colonists and traders supported the uprising , the war was initiated and conducted by Native Americans who had Native — not French — objectives . 
 Historian Richard Middleton ( 2007 ) argues that Pontiac 's vision , courage , persistence , and organizational abilities allowed him to activate a remarkable coalition of Indian nations prepared to fight successfully against the British . Though the idea to gain independence for all Native Americans west of the Allegheny Mountains did not originate with him but with two Seneca leaders , <unk> and Guyasuta , by February 1763 Pontiac appeared to embrace the idea . At an emergency council meeting , Pontiac clarified his military support of the broad Seneca plan and worked to galvanize other nations into the military operation that he helped lead , in direct contradiction to traditional Indian leadership and tribal structure . He achieved this coordination through the distribution of war belts : first to the northern Ojibwa and Ottawa near Michilimackinac ; and then after the failure to seize Detroit by stratagem , to the Mingo ( Seneca ) on the upper Allegheny River , the Ohio Delaware near Fort Pitt , and the more westerly Miami , Kickapoo , Piankashaw and Wea peoples . 
 = = = Siege of Fort Detroit = = = 
 On April 27 , 1763 , Pontiac spoke at a council on the banks of the Ecorse River , in what is now Lincoln Park , Michigan , about 10 miles ( 15 km ) southwest of Detroit . Using the teachings of Neolin to inspire his listeners , Pontiac convinced a number of Ottawas , Ojibwas , Potawatomis , and Hurons to join him in an attempt to seize Fort Detroit . On May 1 , Pontiac visited the fort with 50 Ottawas in order to assess the strength of the garrison . According to a French chronicler , in a second council Pontiac proclaimed : 
 It is important for us , my brothers , that we exterminate from our lands this nation which seeks only to destroy us . You see as well as I that we can no longer supply our needs , as we have done from our brothers , the French .... Therefore , my brothers , we must all swear their destruction and wait no longer . Nothing prevents us ; they are few in numbers , and we can accomplish it . 
 Hoping to take the stronghold by surprise , on May 7 Pontiac entered Fort Detroit with about 300 men carrying concealed weapons . The British had learned of Pontiac 's plan , however , and were armed and ready . His tactic foiled , Pontiac withdrew after a brief council and , two days later , laid siege to the fort . Pontiac and his allies killed all of the British soldiers and settlers they could find outside of the fort , including women and children . One of the soldiers was ritually cannibalized , as was the custom in some Great Lakes Native cultures . The violence was directed at the British ; French colonists were generally left alone . Eventually more than 900 soldiers from a half @-@ dozen tribes joined the siege . Meanwhile , on May 28 a British supply column from Fort Niagara led by Lieutenant Abraham Cuyler was ambushed and defeated at Point Pelee . 
 After receiving reinforcements , the British attempted to make a surprise attack on Pontiac 's encampment . But Pontiac was ready and waiting , and defeated them at the Battle of Bloody Run on July 31 , 1763 . Nevertheless , the situation at Fort Detroit remained a stalemate , and Pontiac 's influence among his followers began to wane . Groups of Native Americans began to abandon the siege , some of them making peace with the British before departing . On October 31 , 1763 , finally convinced that the French in Illinois would not come to his aid at Detroit , Pontiac lifted the siege and removed to the Maumee River , where he continued his efforts to rally resistance against the British . 
 = = = Small forts taken = = = 
 Before other British outposts had learned about Pontiac 's siege at Detroit , Native Americans captured five small forts in a series of attacks between May 16 and June 2 . The first to be taken was Fort Sandusky , a small blockhouse on the shore of Lake Erie . It had been built in 1761 by order of General Amherst , despite the objections of local Wyandots , who in 1762 warned the commander that they would soon burn it down . On May 16 , 1763 , a group of Wyandots gained entry under the pretense of holding a council , the same stratagem that had failed in Detroit nine days earlier . They seized the commander and killed the other 15 soldiers , as well as British traders at the fort . These were among the first of about 100 traders who were killed in the early stages of the war . The dead were ritually scalped and the fort — as the Wyandots had warned a year earlier — was burned to the ground . 
 Fort St. Joseph ( the site of present @-@ day Niles , Michigan ) was captured on May 25 , 1763 , by the same method as at Sandusky . Potawatomis seized the commander and killed most of the 15 @-@ man garrison outright . Fort Miami ( on the site of present Fort Wayne , Indiana ) was the third fort to fall . On May 27 , 1763 , the commander was lured out of the fort by his Native mistress and shot dead by Miami Native Americans . The nine @-@ man garrison surrendered after the fort was surrounded . 
 In the Illinois Country , <unk> , Kickapoos , and <unk> took Fort Ouiatenon ( about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of present Lafayette , Indiana ) on June 1 , 1763 . They lured soldiers outside for a council , and took the 20 @-@ man garrison captive without bloodshed . The Native Americans around Fort Ouiatenon had good relations with the British garrison , but emissaries from Pontiac at Detroit had convinced them to strike . The warriors apologized to the commander for taking the fort , saying that " they were obliged to do it by the other Nations . " In contrast with other forts , the Natives did not kill the British captives at Ouiatenon . 
 The fifth fort to fall , Fort Michilimackinac ( present Mackinaw City , Michigan ) , was the largest fort taken by surprise . On June 2 , 1763 , local Ojibwas staged a game of <unk> ( a forerunner of lacrosse ) with visiting Sauks . The soldiers watched the game , as they had done on previous occasions . The ball was hit through the open gate of the fort ; the teams rushed in and were given weapons which Native women had smuggled into the fort . The warriors killed about 15 of the 35 @-@ man garrison in the struggle ; later they killed five more in ritual torture . 
 Three forts in the Ohio Country were taken in a second wave of attacks in mid @-@ June . Iroquois Senecas took Fort Venango ( near the site of the present Franklin , Pennsylvania ) around June 16 , 1763 . They killed the entire 12 @-@ man garrison outright , keeping the commander alive to write down the grievances of the Senecas . After that , they ritually burned him at the stake . Possibly the same Seneca warriors attacked Fort Le Boeuf ( on the site of Waterford , Pennsylvania ) on June 18 , but most of the 12 @-@ man garrison escaped to Fort Pitt . 
 On June 19 , 1763 , about 250 Ottawa , Ojibwa , Wyandot , and Seneca warriors surrounded Fort Presque Isle ( on the site of Erie , Pennsylvania ) , the eighth and final fort to fall . After holding out for two days , the garrison of about 30 to 60 men surrendered , on the condition that they could return to Fort Pitt . The warriors killed most of the soldiers after they came out of the fort . 
 = = = Siege of Fort Pitt = = = 
 Colonists in western Pennsylvania fled to the safety of Fort Pitt after the outbreak of the war . Nearly 550 people crowded inside , including more than 200 women and children . Simeon Ecuyer , the Swiss @-@ born British officer in command , wrote that " We are so crowded in the fort that I fear disease ... ; the smallpox is among us . " Fort Pitt was attacked on June 22 , 1763 , primarily by Delawares . Too strong to be taken by force , the fort was kept under siege throughout July . Meanwhile , Delaware and Shawnee war parties raided deep into Pennsylvania , taking captives and killing unknown numbers of settlers in scattered farms . Two smaller strongholds that linked Fort Pitt to the east , Fort Bedford and Fort Ligonier , were sporadically fired upon throughout the conflict , but were never taken . 
 Before the war , Amherst had dismissed the possibility that the Native Americans would offer any effective resistance to British rule , but that summer he found the military situation becoming increasingly grim . He ordered subordinates to " immediately ... put to death " captured enemy Native American warriors . To Colonel Henry Bouquet at Lancaster , Pennsylvania , who was preparing to lead an expedition to relieve Fort Pitt , Amherst wrote on about June 29 , 1763 : " Could it not be contrived to send the small pox among the disaffected tribes of Indians ? We must on this occasion use every stratagem in our power to reduce them . " Bouquet responded to Amherst ( summer of 1763 ) : 
 P.S. I will try to <unk> [ sic ] the Indians by means of Blankets that may fall in their hands , taking care however not to get the disease myself . As it is pity to oppose good men against them , I wish we could make use of the Spaniard 's Method , and hunt them with English Dogs . Supported by Rangers , and some Light Horse , who would I think effectively extirpate or remove that <unk> . 
 In a postscript , Amherst replied : 
 P.S. You will Do well to try to <unk> [ sic ] the Indians by means of Blankets , as well as to try Every other method that can serve to <unk> this <unk> Race . I should be very glad your Scheme for Hunting them Down by Dogs could take Effect , but England is at too great a Distance to think of that at present . 
 Officers at the besieged Fort Pitt had already attempted to do what Amherst and Bouquet were discussing , apparently on their own initiative . During a parley at Fort Pitt on June 24 , 1763 , Ecuyer gave Delaware representatives , <unk> and <unk> , two blankets and a handkerchief that had been exposed to smallpox , hoping to spread the disease to the Native Americans in order to " extirpate " them from the territory . William Trent , the militia commander , left records that showed the purpose of giving the blankets was " to <unk> the Smallpox to the Indians . " <unk> and <unk> would later represent the Delaware at the Treaty of Fort Stanwix in 1768 . Based on the testimony of a captive of the Shawnee and Delaware , Gershom Hicks , the disease had afflicted three local Native American population by the spring of 1763 and " still continued amongst them " through 1764 . 
 On July 22 , Trent writes , " Gray Eyes , <unk> , Turtle 's Heart and <unk> , came over the River told us their Chiefs were in Council , that they waited for <unk> who they expected that Day " . There are eyewitness reports that outbreaks of smallpox and other diseases had plagued the Ohio Native Americans in the years prior to the siege of Fort Pitt . Colonists also caught smallpox from Native Americans at a peace conference in 1759 which then led to an epidemic in Charleston and the surrounding areas in South Carolina . 
 Historians are at odds as to how much damage the attempt to spread smallpox at Fort Pitt caused . Historian Francis Jennings concluded that the attempt was " unquestionably successful and effective " and inflicted great damage to the Native Americans . Historian Michael McConnell writes that , " Ironically , British efforts to use pestilence as a weapon may not have been either necessary or particularly effective " , noting that smallpox was already entering the territory by several means , and Native Americans were familiar with the disease and adept at isolating the infected . Historians widely agree that smallpox devastated the Native American population , as it did the European populations . It is estimated that 400 @,@ 000 @-@ 500 @,@ 000 ( possibly up to 1 @.@ 5 million ) Native Americans died during and years after the Pontiac 's War , mostly from smallpox , 
 = = = Bushy Run and Devil 's Hole = = = 
 On August 1 , 1763 , most of the Native Americans broke off the siege at Fort Pitt in order to intercept 500 British troops marching to the fort under Colonel Bouquet . On August 5 , these two forces met at the Battle of Bushy Run . Although his force suffered heavy casualties , Bouquet fought off the attack and relieved Fort Pitt on August 20 , bringing the siege to an end . His victory at Bushy Run was celebrated in the British colonies — church bells rang through the night in Philadelphia — and praised by King George . 
 This victory was soon followed by a costly defeat . Fort Niagara , one of the most important western forts , was not assaulted , but on September 14 , 1763 , at least 300 Senecas , Ottawas , and Ojibwas attacked a supply train along the Niagara Falls portage . Two companies sent from Fort Niagara to rescue the supply train were also defeated . More than 70 soldiers and teamsters were killed in these actions , which Anglo @-@ Americans called the " Devil 's Hole Massacre " , the deadliest engagement for British soldiers during the war . 
 = = Paxton Boys = = 
 The violence and terror of Pontiac 's War convinced many western Pennsylvanians that their government was not doing enough to protect them . This discontent was manifested most seriously in an uprising led by a vigilante group that came to be known as the Paxton Boys , so @-@ called because they were primarily from the area around the Pennsylvania village of Paxton ( or <unk> ) . The <unk> turned their anger towards Native Americans — many of them Christians — who lived peacefully in small enclaves in the midst of white Pennsylvania settlements . Prompted by rumors that a Native war party had been seen at the Native village of Conestoga , on December 14 , 1763 , a group of more than 50 Paxton Boys marched on the village and murdered the six Susquehannocks they found there . Pennsylvania officials placed the remaining 16 Susquehannocks in protective custody in Lancaster , but on December 27 the Paxton Boys broke into the jail and slaughtered most of them . Governor John Penn issued bounties for the arrest of the murderers , but no one came forward to identify them . 
 The Paxton Boys then set their sights on other Native Americans living within eastern Pennsylvania , many of whom fled to Philadelphia for protection . Several hundred <unk> marched on Philadelphia in January 1764 , where the presence of British troops and Philadelphia militia prevented them from doing more violence . Benjamin Franklin , who had helped organize the local militia , negotiated with the Paxton leaders and brought an end to the immediate crisis . Franklin published a scathing indictment of the Paxton Boys . " If an Indian injures me , " he asked , " does it follow that I may revenge that Injury on all Indians ? " One leader of the Paxton Boys was Lazarus Stewart who would be killed in the Wyoming Massacre of 1778 . 
 = = British response , 1764 – 1766 = = 
 Native American raids on frontier settlements escalated in the spring and summer of 1764 . The hardest hit colony that year was Virginia , where more raids occurred on July 26 , when four Delaware Indian soldiers killed and scalped a school teacher and ten children in what is now Franklin County , Pennsylvania . Incidents such as these prompted the Pennsylvania Assembly , with the approval of Governor Penn , to reintroduce the scalp bounties offered during the French and Indian War , which paid money for every Native killed above the age of ten , including women . 
 General Amherst , held responsible for the uprising by the Board of Trade , was recalled to London in August 1763 and replaced by Major General Thomas Gage . In 1764 , Gage sent two expeditions into the west to crush the rebellion , rescue British prisoners , and arrest the Native Americans responsible for the war . According to historian Fred Anderson , Gage 's campaign , which had been designed by Amherst , prolonged the war for more than a year because it focused on punishing the Native Americans rather than ending the war . Gage 's one significant departure from Amherst 's plan was to allow William Johnson to conduct a peace treaty at Niagara , giving those Native Americans who were ready to " bury the hatchet " a chance to do so . 
 = = = Fort Niagara treaty = = = 
 From July to August 1764 , Johnson negotiated a treaty at Fort Niagara with about 2 @,@ 000 Native Americans in attendance , primarily Iroquois . Although most Iroquois had stayed out of the war , Senecas from the Genesee River valley had taken up arms against the British , and Johnson worked to bring them back into the Covenant Chain alliance . As restitution for the Devil 's Hole ambush , the Senecas were compelled to cede the strategically important Niagara portage to the British . Johnson even convinced the Iroquois to send a war party against the Ohio Native Americans . This Iroquois expedition captured a number of Delawares and destroyed abandoned Delaware and Shawnee towns in the Susquehanna Valley , but otherwise the Iroquois did not contribute to the war effort as much as Johnson had desired . 
 = = = Two expeditions = = = 
 Having secured the area around Fort Niagara , the British launched two military expeditions into the west . The first expedition , led by Colonel John Bradstreet , was to travel by boat across Lake Erie and reinforce Detroit . Bradstreet was to subdue the Native Americans around Detroit before marching south into the Ohio Country . The second expedition , commanded by Colonel Bouquet , was to march west from Fort Pitt and form a second front in the Ohio Country . 
 Bradstreet set out from Fort Schlosser in early August 1764 with about 1 @,@ 200 soldiers and a large contingent of Native allies enlisted by Sir William Johnson . Bradstreet felt that he did not have enough troops to subdue enemy Native Americans by force , and so when strong winds on Lake Erie forced him to stop at Presque Isle on August 12 , he decided to negotiate a treaty with a delegation of Ohio Native Americans led by Guyasuta . Bradstreet exceeded his authority by conducting a peace treaty rather than a simple truce , and by agreeing to halt Bouquet 's expedition , which had not yet left Fort Pitt . Gage , Johnson , and Bouquet were outraged when they learned what Bradstreet had done . Gage rejected the treaty , believing that Bradstreet had been duped into abandoning his offensive in the Ohio Country . Gage may have been correct : the Ohio Native Americans did not return prisoners as promised in a second meeting with Bradstreet in September , and some Shawnees were trying to enlist French aid in order to continue the war . 
 Bradstreet continued westward , as yet unaware that his unauthorized diplomacy was angering his superiors . He reached Fort Detroit on August 26 , where he negotiated another treaty . In an attempt to discredit Pontiac , who was not present , Bradstreet chopped up a peace belt the Ottawa leader had sent to the meeting . According to historian Richard White , " such an act , roughly equivalent to a European ambassador 's urinating on a proposed treaty , had shocked and offended the gathered Indians . " Bradstreet also claimed that the Native Americans had accepted British sovereignty as a result of his negotiations , but Johnson believed that this had not been fully explained to the Native Americans and that further councils would be needed . Although Bradstreet had successfully reinforced and reoccupied British forts in the region , his diplomacy proved to be controversial and inconclusive . 
 Colonel Bouquet , delayed in Pennsylvania while mustering the militia , finally set out from Fort Pitt on October 3 , 1764 , with 1 @,@ 150 men . He marched to the Muskingum River in the Ohio Country , within striking distance of a number of native villages . Now that treaties had been negotiated at Fort Niagara and Fort Detroit , the Ohio Native Americans were isolated and , with some exceptions , ready to make peace . In a council which began on October 17 , Bouquet demanded that the Ohio Native Americans return all captives , including those not yet returned from the French and Indian War . Guyasuta and other leaders reluctantly handed over more than 200 captives , many of whom had been adopted into Native families . Because not all of the captives were present , the Native Americans were compelled to surrender hostages as a guarantee that the other captives would be returned . The Ohio Native Americans agreed to attend a more formal peace conference with William Johnson , which was finalized in July 1765 . 
 = = = Treaty with Pontiac = = = 
 Although the military conflict essentially ended with the 1764 expeditions , Native Americans still called for resistance in the Illinois Country , where British troops had yet to take possession of Fort de Chartres from the French . A Shawnee war chief named Charlot Kaské emerged as the most strident anti @-@ British leader in the region , temporarily surpassing Pontiac in influence . Kaské traveled as far south as New Orleans in an effort to enlist French aid against the British . 
 In 1765 , the British decided that the occupation of the Illinois Country could only be accomplished by diplomatic means . As Gage commented to one of his officers , he was determined to have " none our enemy " among the Indian peoples , and that included Pontiac , to whom he now sent a wampum belt suggesting peace talks . Pontiac had by now become less militant after hearing of Bouquet 's truce with the Ohio country Native Americans . Johnson 's deputy , George Croghan , accordingly travelled to the Illinois country in the summer of 1765 , and although he was injured along the way in an attack by Kickapoos and <unk> , he managed to meet and negotiate with Pontiac . While Charlot Kaské wanted to burn Croghan at the stake , Pontiac urged moderation and agreed to travel to New York , where he made a formal treaty with William Johnson at Fort Ontario on July 25 , 1766 . It was hardly a surrender : no lands were ceded , no prisoners returned , and no hostages were taken . Rather than accept British sovereignty , Kaské left British territory by crossing the Mississippi River with other French and Native refugees . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The total loss of life resulting from Pontiac 's War is unknown . About 400 British soldiers were killed in action and perhaps 50 were captured and tortured to death . George Croghan estimated that 2 @,@ 000 settlers had been killed or captured , a figure sometimes repeated as 2 @,@ 000 settlers killed . The violence compelled approximately 4 @,@ 000 settlers from Pennsylvania and Virginia to flee their homes . Native American losses went mostly unrecorded . 
 Pontiac 's War has traditionally been portrayed as a defeat for the Native Americans , but scholars now usually view it as a military stalemate : while the Native Americans had failed to drive away the British , the British were unable to conquer the Native Americans . Negotiation and accommodation , rather than success on the battlefield , ultimately brought an end to the war . The Native Americans had in fact won a victory of sorts by compelling the British government to abandon Amherst 's policies and instead create a relationship with the Native Americans modeled on the Franco @-@ Native alliance . 
 Relations between British colonists and Native Americans , which had been severely strained during the French and Indian War , reached a new low during Pontiac 's Rebellion . According to historian David Dixon , " Pontiac 's War was unprecedented for its awful violence , as both sides seemed intoxicated with genocidal fanaticism . " Historian Daniel Richter characterizes the Native attempt to drive out the British , and the effort of the Paxton Boys to eliminate Native Americans from their midst , as parallel examples of ethnic cleansing . People on both sides of the conflict had come to the conclusion that colonists and Native Americans were inherently different and could not live with each other . According to Richter , the war saw the emergence of " the novel idea that all Native people were ' Indians , ' that all Euro @-@ Americans were ' Whites , ' and that all on one side must unite to destroy the other . " 
 The British government also came to the conclusion that colonists and Native Americans must be kept apart . On October 7 , 1763 , the Crown issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , an effort to reorganize British North America after the Treaty of Paris . The Proclamation , already in the works when Pontiac 's War erupted , was hurriedly issued after news of the uprising reached London . Officials drew a boundary line between the British colonies along the seaboard , and Native American lands west of the Allegheny Ridge ( i.e. , the Eastern Divide ) , creating a vast ' Indian Reserve ' that stretched from the Alleghenies to the Mississippi River and from Florida to Quebec . It thus confirmed the antebellum demarcation that had been set by the Treaty of Easton in 1758 . By forbidding colonists from trespassing on Native lands , the British government hoped to avoid more conflicts like Pontiac 's Rebellion . " The Royal Proclamation , " writes historian Colin Calloway , " reflected the notion that segregation not interaction should characterize Indian @-@ white relations . " 
 The effects of Pontiac 's War were long @-@ lasting . Because the Proclamation officially recognized that indigenous people had certain rights to the lands they occupied , it has been called the Native Americans ' " Bill of Rights " , and still informs the relationship between the Canadian government and First Nations . For British colonists and land speculators , however , the Proclamation seemed to deny them the fruits of victory — western lands — that had been won in the war with France . The resentment which this created undermined colonial attachment to the Empire , contributing to the coming of the American Revolution . According to Colin Calloway , " Pontiac 's Revolt was not the last American war for independence — American colonists launched a rather more successful effort a dozen years later , prompted in part by the measures the British government took to try to prevent another war like Pontiac 's . " 
 For Native Americans , Pontiac 's War demonstrated the possibilities of pan @-@ tribal cooperation in resisting Anglo @-@ American colonial expansion . Although the conflict divided tribes and villages , the war also saw the first extensive multi @-@ tribal resistance to European colonization in North America , and was the first war between Europeans and Native North Americans that did not end in complete defeat for the Native Americans . The Proclamation of 1763 ultimately did not prevent British colonists and land speculators from expanding westward , and so Native Americans found it necessary to form new resistance movements . Beginning with conferences hosted by Shawnees in 1767 , in the following decades leaders such as Joseph Brant , Alexander McGillivray , Blue Jacket , and Tecumseh would attempt to forge confederacies that would revive the resistance efforts of Pontiac 's War . 
 = Deep , Deep Trouble = 
 " Deep , Deep Trouble " is a rap song from the 1990 Simpsons album The Simpsons Sing the Blues , sung by the fictional character Bart Simpson ( voiced by Nancy Cartwright ) about his trouble @-@ making antics . It was written by Matt Groening and DJ Jazzy Jeff and recorded during the fall of 1990 . The song was released as the second single from the album in early 1991 and an accompanying music video ( directed by Gregg Vanzo ) was broadcast on television on March 7 , 1991 . This video has since been released on DVD as part of the 2002 boxset The Simpsons : The Complete Second Season . " Deep , Deep Trouble " charted in several countries around the world , including the top ten in Ireland , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom . Critical reception of the song was positive and it has been praised for its humorous lyrics . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Deep , Deep Trouble " appeared on the successful 1990 album The Simpsons Sing the Blues that features songs sung by the characters from the American animated television series The Simpsons . It was recorded along with the rest of the album during the fall of 1990 , at which point the cast members of The Simpsons were also recording the second season of the series . The song was written by The Simpsons creator Matt Groening and DJ Jazzy Jeff , and produced by DJ Jazzy Jeff and John Boylan . DJ Jazzy Jeff provided the drum programming , keyboards , and scratches on " Deep , Deep Trouble " . 
 The song is a rap performed by the character Bart Simpson about his trouble @-@ making antics . Groening has described it as " the tragic story of Bart Simpson , a bad youth gone worse . " The Simpsons cast member Nancy Cartwright , who voices Bart on the show , provided the character 's voice in " Deep , Deep Trouble " as well . The characters Homer Simpson and Maggie Simpson are also featured , with Homer ranting at Bart , and Maggie sucking on her pacifier to the beat of the song . 
 " Deep , Deep Trouble " was released in early 1991 as the second single from The Simpsons Sing the Blues after " Do the Bartman " , which also features Bart rapping . That single achieved much popularity , placing first on the singles charts in Australia , Ireland , New Zealand , Norway , and the United Kingdom , and eventually becoming certified gold in the latter country with 400 @,@ 000 units sold . In Ireland , " Do the Bartman " spent nine weeks at number one on the Irish Singles Chart — only seven singles have ever managed a longer run at number one there . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The song received a positive response from critics . Sommer Swindell of the Observer @-@ Reporter commented that " after listening to [ The Simpsons Sing the Blues ] once , no one will forget ' Deep , Deep Trouble ' [ ... ] It would be hard not to crack a smile while listening closely to the lyrics , as they are very creative and humorous . " Thor Christensen of The Milwaukee Journal wrote that Bart " gets in a few good yuks " in the song , and Walt Belcher of The Tampa Tribune reported that Bart " raps out an amusing story about his misadventures while mowing the lawn " . The Orange County Register 's Cary Darling noted that " Bart turning his life into a hip @-@ hop autobiography on ' Deep , Deep Trouble ' is an absolute joy . " Cartwright 's rapping was praised by Tom Hopkins of the Dayton Daily News . 
 The single was a commercial success , reaching number one on the singles chart in Ireland . It charted in the top ten in New Zealand and the United Kingdom , and outside the top ten in Australia , the Netherlands , Sweden , and the United States . " Deep , Deep Trouble " spent nine weeks on the chart in New Zealand , seven weeks on the charts in Ireland , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom , five weeks on the Australian chart , and three weeks on the chart in Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the single premiered on the Fox network in the United States on March 7 , 1991 together with the Simpsons episode " Bart 's Dog Gets an F " of the series ' second season . When " Do the Bartman " was released it was also accompanied by a music video , which ended up being nominated for Best Special Effects at the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards and becoming the number one music video on the American network MTV . 
 The video for " Deep , Deep Trouble " illustrates the things Bart raps about in the song , showing how he is forced by Homer to mow the lawn after throwing a buzzing alarm clock at his father in his sleep . When Homer tells Bart to hurry up , Bart accidentally runs over the sprinkler and as a result he has to stay at home when the family goes to see a boat show . After they leave , Bart decides to throw a party and invites his friends . They make a mess in the house and when Homer and Marge return home , Bart realizes he is in deep trouble . Joanne Ostrow of The Denver Post thought the video was not " nearly as clever as the cartoon " and that it had " ' promotional gimmick ' written all over it . " " Then again , I never thought the video of the dance rap ' Do the Bartman ' would be a ratings hit when it aired in December . So what do I know ? " , she added . 
 The music video features both original animation and old animation from the series and the Simpsons shorts that aired on The Tracey Ullman Show before they were spun off into The Simpsons in 1989 . Gregg Vanzo directed the video , which , according to him , features quicker character poses than in episodes of the show to allow the animation to match the hip @-@ hop beat . The music video was later included on the 2002 DVD boxset The Simpsons : The Complete Second Season , with audio commentary from its producers . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Sam Strachan = 
 Samuel Noel " Sam " Strachan is a fictional character in the BBC medical drama Holby City , portrayed by actor Tom Chambers . The character first appeared on @-@ screen on 3 January 2006 , in episode " Mother Love " - series 8 , episode 12 of the programme . Chambers was cast in the role after sending a video of himself performing a Fred Astaire dance routine to over 800 television producers , and piquing the interest of BBC Casting Director Julie Harkin . Although he originally auditioned for only a minor role in the show , he was later asked back to audition for the newly created role of major character Sam Strachan . 
 Sam 's initial function in the show was that of hospital Lothario – romancing and fathering a child with his boss , Connie Beauchamp ( Amanda Mealing ) , as well as engaging in relationships with Ward Sisters Chrissie Williams ( Tina Hobley ) and Faye Morton ( Patsy Kensit ) , SHO Maddy Young ( Nadine Lewington ) , and Staff Nurse Zoe Foxe ( Alicia Davies ) . However , he was taken on a redemptive path and was seen to change his philandering ways after being diagnosed with Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma stage three , with just a 40 % survival rate . 
 The character has proven highly popular with fans of the show , being voted in 2006 ' Favourite Newcomer ' of the series , and in 2007 ' Favourite All @-@ Time Male ' within the show . However , in October 2007 , the character also came under heavy criticism by drinks industry body the Portman Group , resulting from an incident of on @-@ screen binge drinking , broadcast without showing any negative effects , which the group lambasted as " highly irresponsible . " 
 It was announced on 4 October 2008 that the character would depart from Holby City in a Christmas 2008 storyline . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Sam Strachan was one of eight new characters to join Holby City 's cast in its eighth series . In the context of the show , the character 's arrival coincided with the on @-@ screen expansion of Darwin , the Cardiothoracic surgical ward . Over the course of series 7 and 8 , medical staff on this ward had been reduced solely to nurses , and Consultant Connie Beauchamp . However , the series 8 plot strand which saw Connie strive to turn Holby City Hospital into a Cardiothoracic Centre of Excellence required a similar expansion of ward staff , and so three new Cardiothoracic surgical characters were created — Consultant Elliot Hope ( Paul Bradley ) , and Registrars Sam Strachan and Joseph Byrne ( Luke Roberts ) . 
 Tom Chambers was approached about assuming the role of Sam by BBC casting director Julie Harkin , who was also responsible for casting fellow Holby City newcomers Rakie Ayola as Kyla Tyson and Luke Roberts as Joseph Byrne . Chambers has revealed that he sent a video of himself performing a Fred Astaire tap dance routine to over 800 stage and television directors and producers in the UK , explaining : " Julie Harkin in casting at Holby saw it and gave me a call because they thought it was unusual . Originally I went up for a small role as an American doctor , but after the audition they said come back next week to audition for a bigger part and that was it ! " Upon assuming the role of Sam , Chambers revealed that he had once been an avid viewer of Holby City 's sister show , Casualty , recalling watching it as far back as 1991 . 
 Prior to beginning work on the show , Chambers underwent observational training at the NHS Heart Hospital in London , watching three open @-@ heart operations . He has described it as " the most amazing experience I 've ever witnessed . " Speaking of his nerves on his first day on set , Chambers has commented that the experience was made worse by the fact it was also new co @-@ star Luke Roberts ' first day , and : " we had rehearsals and all the top producers , executive producers and everyone from the script writers to the floor runners came on set and watched us . That 's normal but I wasn 't expecting such a big audience just for the rehearsals . " 
 Chambers has spoken highly of his relationship with his co @-@ stars , explaining that : " Luke and I joined at the same time so we 've always had a kinship and on our dressing room corridor we have Patsy , Rosie , Phoebe , Rakie and Jaye so there 's always some banter going on , it 's like being back at school . I think we 're lucky because the guests we have on the show often comment on what a good atmosphere Holby has . [ ... ] Paul Bradley who plays Elliot is one of the funniest people to work with - when the cameras aren 't rolling he 's very good at turning difficult moments into humour when everyone 's feeling the strain to finish the day . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 The BBC have described Sam as a compassionate , decisive adrenaline junkie . A hugely volatile person , his emotions can land him in hot water " . Chambers has added to this , assessing of his character : " In brief I 'd say he loves his job and loves a challenge , is laid back but a bit of a rule @-@ bender and slightly mischievous when it comes to trying to help the patients against hospital policy and hierarchy . He loves women but can 't let himself get too wrapped up in them because work comes first ... at the moment . " 
 Sam 's personality was further developed in an episode which saw the character discover one of his patients to be a male escort . Although he was aware that the woman accompanying his patient was a client rather than a relative , he persuaded her to sign consent forms on the patient 's behalf . Chambers has described this plot strand as portraying Sam " ( bending ) the rules to make something happen [ ... ] It 's yet another example of Sam not thinking about the repercussions of his actions . " 
 The character went on to form a close bond with 14 @-@ year @-@ old child prostitute , patient Jade MacGuire ( Ophelia Lovibond ) . Despite his colleagues ' malicious gossip about the potentially inappropriate nature of their relationship , he repeatedly pushed the boundaries of their doctor / patient relationship in an attempt to take care of her , going as far as to shelter her in his own home after discovering her to be pregnant . Chambers has commented : " The storyline with the homeless prostitute was a challenge . Sam , trying to help but making stupid mistakes and having to suffer the consequences - it could have easily been seen as sleaze if you didn 't get the balance right . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 During his time at Holby City hospital , Sam has romanced Connie Beauchamp , Chrissie Williams , Faye Morton , Maddy Young and Zoe Foxe . His brief relationship with Connie resulted in the birth of their daughter Grace . Sam has one other child - a son he fathered in his teenage years who was subsequently adopted and who he has only seen once , shortly after his birth . 
 Interviewed in January 2006 , Chambers foreshadowed major developments for his character when he stated : " I think Sam 's ideal woman might be Connie because she 's feisty , doesn 't beat around the bush and is very talented , which is always sexy . However I reckon they clash quite a lot because she manipulates with her power play and won 't drop the act so it would be very much on a love hate basis . " The two characters went on to have a brief sexual relationship , resulting in Connie becoming pregnant with Sam 's child . Once the revelation of Connie 's pregnancy had been made , Chambers asserted of the tension between the separated couple : " Some of the scenes with Connie work amazingly well because we do genuinely get worked up and we like to keep it that way until filming is finished . It 's a useful tip to let the frustrations come through in your work - it makes good viewing . " 
 From his relationship with Connie , Sam moved on to a love triangle storyline with Ward Sisters Faye Morton and Chrissie Williams . Kensit said of the relationship in August 2007 , as the storyline was ongoing : " For Faye , Sam is not Mr Right , simply Mr Right Now . But Faye is not as sweet as she looks - there 's a streak of toughness there ... It 's all going to get very messy ! " Once his deception was uncovered , Sam attempted to salvage his romantic relationship with Chrissie , but was unsuccessful . For some weeks thereafter , Sam engaged in casual sexual relationships with Senior house officer Maddy Young and Staff Nurse Zoe Foxe . These were , however , stymied by the discovery he had cancer . 
 = = = Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma = = = 
 In November 2007 , the character was diagnosed with Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma . Although he had been shown to be feeling sickly in the show for some time , he was wary of being tested . Even when forced into it by friend and colleague Maddy Young , he initially refused to so much as look at his results . Chambers explained : " It 's serious , but Sam 's playing it down . Of course he 's scared but he deals with it by just wanting to laugh it off and make jokes about it " . He speculated that the experience would force Sam to grow up and appreciate life more , as well as seriously consider the future of his daughter , Grace , and cease his philandering way with female staff . Chambers has also spoken extensively about the research he did before beginning the cancer storyline : 
 " When I was first told about the storyline , I felt honoured to be given such a big opportunity . But I was also aware that I had a huge responsibility to get it right and do justice to those suffering in real life . Because Sam has chemotherapy , I was asked if I 'd be willing to shave off my hair , and I said , " Absolutely , " which is why I 'm bald . I 've also done a lot of research , and try hard to separate my character from my life off @-@ screen , but I feel guilty that at the end of each day I can walk away from the illness , when many aren 't so fortunate . " 
 Sam 's illness was played out over the course of the show 's tenth series , reaching its zenith when he developed septicemia and went into septic shock in episode " Long Dark Night " . He pulled through , however , and was eventually given the all @-@ clear from cancer eight months after having been diagnosed , in episode " Only Believe " . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 It was announced on 4 October 2008 that Sam would depart from Holby City in " a blaze of glory in a big Christmas storyline " . A show insider revealed that " Tom ’ s departure will leave his fans in tears , but Holby bosses are keeping tight @-@ lipped about whether or not Sam will be killed off . " Chambers explained of his decision to leave : " I was worried about telling the bosses , but I wrote a long letter to the producers explaining my decision and they were incredibly nice about it . Sam Strachan has gone through so much in the past year with his cancer – it seemed like the perfect time to make the break . " Several episodes before the character 's departure , his estranged son Kieron played by Misha Crosby , was introduced to Holby City . Father and son both developed romantic feelings for nurse Maria Kendall , leading to Sam asking her to accompany them both to New York , where Kieron was a famous violinist . After being shown her future should she accept , Maria declined Sam 's offer , and he and <unk> departed together . 
 In the episode " What Will Survive of Us " , Sam sent flowers for Maddy from New York when she died . His mother , Audrey , was introduced to Holby City 's sister show , Casualty in December 2014 @.@ in January 2015 Grace moves to New York to be him and half @-@ brother Kieron . 
 = = = Return & Crossover into Casualty = = = 
 In the Christmas trailer of 2015 it is seen that Chambers reprises his role as Sam Strachan , as he is seen to reappear , but in Casualty not Holby City . His first episode airs on 13 February 2016 , titled : " Hearts and Flowers " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2006 , Tom Chambers was named tenth ' Best Actor ' in the BBC Drama awards for his portrayal of the character . He has proven popular with fans of the show , performing well in the annual official fan awards . In 2006 he was named ' Favourite Male ' and second ' Favourite Newcomer of Series 8 ' , with the Connie / Sam / Chrissie storyline voted second ' Favourite Storyline of Series 8 ' , and his pairing with Connie ' Best Couple of Series 8 ' . In 2007 he ranked second ' Favourite Male of Series 9 ' , and also ' Favourite All @-@ Time Male ' . Connie and Sam were again voted ' Best Couple of Series 9 ' , with Tom Chambers ' portrayal of Sam during the birth of their daughter voted fifth ' Best Acting Performance ' of the series . Asked to comment on why he thought Sam had proven so popular with viewers , Chambers responded : " No idea ! I just try to turn up on time and learn my lines . I love playing Sam and finding different ways of doing things . It 's a roller @-@ coaster of emotions and storylines - some are not as easy to manage as others and it 's always a challenge to find the most natural and interesting way to deliver . " 
 Controversy arose in September 2006 , when a set of publicity shots were released to weekly TV magazines showing Sam and Connie engaging in a raunchy kiss in Connie 's office , but the scene failed to ever materialise on screen . Series producer Diana Kyle addressed complaints from fans with the statement : 
 " To those people who complained that a photograph appeared in the press showing Connie and Sam kissing when they did not actually kiss in the transmitted episode , I am afraid I must say a genuine mistake occurred for which I apologise . The only script that ever featured Connie and Sam actually kissing was in the final scene of Episode 44 ( transmitted on 29 August ) . This was edited together as scripted and shot . Nothing was cut [ ... ] I am sorry if some members of our audience felt cheated . A photographer attended the shoot for Episode 46 and took a selection of shots of Sam and Connie . A photograph from this shoot was mistakenly released and marked as being from Episode 45 as Connie was wearing the same outfit in both episodes . I can only apologise for this mistake . [ ... ] I am sorry a few people had concerns over these episodes . " 
 Chambers has contradicted this statement , asserting that a cut scene did in fact exist , but that he is not aware of the reason it was omitted from the relevant episode . He stated : " It may have given off the wrong idea , it may have been too risky . The producers work very hard to get the right image at the right time and it may have just looked out of place . It 's still a mystery to this day ... " 
 In October 2007 , drinks ' industry body the Portman Group made an official complaint to communications regulator Ofcom about a scene in Holby City episode " Trial and Retribution " , which depicted characters Sam and Maddy Young each taking five shots of tequila following a stressful day at work . The body 's chief executive David Poley claimed that in failing to show the negative consequences of this action , the series was presenting a " highly irresponsible portrayal of excessive and rapid drinking " . In response to the groups ' accusation that " We would expect the BBC to take greater care with the portrayal of alcohol in programmes " , the BBC released a statement explaining that : " Holby City takes the issue of the negative effects of alcohol abuse very seriously . On occasions when our continuing drama series deal with alcohol within a storyline we always seek to handle the issue sensitivity . 
 Medical journal The Lancet featured an article in May 2008 entitled ' Cancer in Medical Dramas ' , which examined the character 's Non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma storyline . Talha Burki , author of the article , quoted Martin <unk> , Cancer Research UK 's head of patient information , as approving of the plot , stating : " There is a value in dramas , they can make cancer more normal , less frightening . [ ... ] If people see a character they like get cancer , and that character fights the illness , then that 's a good message to take home " . 
 = Copper ( I ) chloride = 
 Copper ( I ) chloride , commonly called cuprous chloride , is the lower chloride of copper , with the formula CuCl . The substance is a white solid sparingly soluble in water , but very soluble in concentrated hydrochloric acid . Impure samples appear green due to the presence of copper ( II ) chloride . 
 = = History = = 
 Copper ( I ) chloride was first prepared by Robert Boyle in the mid @-@ seventeenth century from mercury ( II ) chloride ( " Venetian sublimate " ) and copper metal : 
 HgCl2 + 2 Cu → 2 CuCl + Hg 
 In 1799 , J.L. Proust characterized the two different chlorides of copper . He prepared CuCl by heating CuCl2 at red heat in the absence of air , causing it to lose half of its combined chlorine followed by removing residual CuCl2 by washing with water . 
 An acidic solution of CuCl was formerly used for analysis of carbon monoxide content in gases , for example in Hempel 's gas apparatus . This application was significant during the time that coal gas was widely used for heating and lighting , during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries . 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 Copper ( I ) chloride is <unk> by reducing copper ( II ) chloride , e.g. with sulfur dioxide : 
 2 CuCl2 + SO2 + 2 H2O → 2 CuCl + H2SO4 + 2 HCl 
 Many other reducing agents can be used . 
 = = Chemical properties = = 
 Copper ( I ) chloride is a Lewis acid , which is classified as soft according to the Hard @-@ Soft Acid @-@ Base concept . Thus , it tends to form stable complexes with soft Lewis bases such as triphenylphosphine : 
 CuCl + P ( C6H5 ) 3 → [ CuCl ( P ( C6H5 ) 3 ) ] 4 
 Although CuCl is insoluble in water , it dissolves in aqueous solutions containing suitable donor molecules . It forms complexes with halide ions , for example forming H3O + CuCl2 − with concentrated hydrochloric acid . It is attacked by CN − , <unk> − , and NH3 to give the corresponding complexes . 
 Solutions of CuCl in HCl or NH3 absorb carbon monoxide to form colourless complexes such as the chloride @-@ bridged dimer [ CuCl ( CO ) ] 2 . The same hydrochloric acid solutions also react with acetylene gas to form [ CuCl ( <unk> ) ] . <unk> solutions of CuCl react with <unk> to form the explosive copper ( I ) acetylide , <unk> . Complexes of CuCl with alkenes can be prepared by reduction of CuCl2 by sulfur dioxide in the presence of the alkene in alcohol solution . Complexes with dienes such as 1 @,@ 5 @-@ cyclooctadiene are particularly stable : 
 In absence of other ligands , its aqueous solutions are unstable with respect to disproportionation into Cu and CuCl2 . In part for this reason samples in air assume a green coloration ( see photograph in upper right ) . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The main use of copper ( I ) chloride is as a precursor to the fungicide copper oxychloride . For this purpose aqueous copper ( I ) chloride is generated by <unk> and then air @-@ oxidized : 
 Cu + CuCl2 → 2 CuCl 
 6 CuCl + 3 / 2 O2 + 3 H2O → 2 <unk> ( OH ) 4 + CuCl2 
 Copper ( I ) chloride catalyzes a variety of organic reactions , as discussed above . Its affinity for carbon monoxide in the presence of aluminium chloride is exploited in the <unk> process . 
 = = = In organic synthesis = = = 
 CuCl is used with carbon monoxide , aluminium chloride , and hydrogen chloride in the <unk> @-@ Koch reaction to form <unk> . 
 In the <unk> reaction . Treatment of an <unk> salt with CuCl leads to an aryl chloride , for example : 
 The reaction has wide scope and usually gives good yields . 
 Early investigators observed that copper ( I ) halides catalyse 1 @,@ 4 @-@ addition of Grignard reagents to alpha , beta @-@ unsaturated ketones led to the development of <unk> reagents that are widely used today in organic synthesis : 
 This finding led to the development of organocopper chemistry . For example , CuCl reacts with <unk> ( <unk> ) to form " Gilman reagents " such as ( CH3 ) <unk> , which find extensive use in organic synthesis . Grignard reagents form similar organocopper compounds . Although other copper ( I ) compounds such as copper ( I ) iodide are now more often used for these types of reactions , copper ( I ) chloride is still recommended in some cases : 
 Here , Bu indicates an n @-@ butyl group . Without CuCl , the Grignard reagent alone gives a mixture of <unk> and 1 @,@ 4 @-@ addition products ( i.e. , the butyl adds at the C closer to the C = O ) . 
 Copper ( I ) chloride is also an intermediate formed from copper ( II ) chloride in the Wacker process . 
 = = = In polymer chemistry = = = 
 CuCl is used as a catalyst in Atom Transfer Radical <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = Battle of the Chesapeake = 
 The Battle of the Chesapeake , also known as the Battle of the Virginia Capes or simply the Battle of the Capes , was a crucial naval battle in the American War of Independence that took place near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay on 5 September 1781 , between a British fleet led by Rear Admiral Sir Thomas Graves and a French fleet led by Rear Admiral Francois Joseph Paul , the Comte de Grasse . Although tactically indecisive , the battle was strategically decisive , since it prevented the Royal Navy from reinforcing or evacuating the forces of Lieutenant General Lord Cornwallis at Yorktown , Virginia . When the French were able to achieve control of the sea lanes against the British , the result was the reinforcement of the Franco @-@ American army with siege artillery and French reinforcements — all of which proved decisive in the Siege of Yorktown , effectively securing independence for the Thirteen Colonies . 
 Presented in July 1781 with the options of attacking British forces in either New York or Virginia , Admiral de Grasse opted for the latter , arriving at the Chesapeake at the end of August . Upon learning that de Grasse had sailed from the West Indies for North America , and that French Admiral de Barras had also sailed from Newport , Rhode Island , Admiral Graves concluded that they were going to join forces at the Chesapeake . Sailing south from New York with 19 ships of the line , Graves arrived at the mouth of the Chesapeake early on 5 September to see de Grasse 's fleet at anchor in the bay . De Grasse hastily prepared most of his fleet , 24 ships of the line , for battle and sailed out to meet Graves . In a two @-@ hour engagement that took place after hours of manoeuvring , the lines of the two fleets did not completely meet , with only the forward and center sections of the lines fully engaging . The battle was consequently fairly evenly matched , although the British suffered more casualties and ship damage . The battle broke off when the sun set . British tactics in the battle have been a subject of contemporary and historical debate ever since . 
 For several days the two fleets sailed within view of each other , with de Grasse preferring to lure the British away from the bay , where Barras was expected to arrive carrying vital siege equipment . On 13 September de Grasse broke away from the British and returned to the Chesapeake , where Barras had arrived . Graves returned to New York to organize a larger relief effort ; this did not sail until 19 October , two days after Cornwallis surrendered . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the early months of 1781 , both pro @-@ British and separatist forces began concentrating in Virginia , a state that had previously not experienced more than naval raids . The British forces were led at first by the turncoat Benedict Arnold , and then by William Phillips before General Charles , Earl Cornwallis arrived in late May with his southern army to take command . In June he marched to Williamsburg , where he received a confusing series of orders from General Sir Henry Clinton that culminated in a directive to establish a fortified deep water port ( which would allow resupply by sea ) . In response to these orders , Cornwallis moved to Yorktown in late July , where his army began building fortifications . The presence of these British troops , coupled with General Clinton 's desire for a port there , made control of the Chesapeake Bay an essential naval objective for both sides . 
 On 21 May Generals George Washington and the Comte de Rochambeau , respectively the commanders of the Continental Army and the Expédition <unk> , met to discuss potential operations against the British and Loyalists . They considered either an assault or siege on the principal British base at New York City , or operations against the British forces in Virginia . Since either of these options would require the assistance of the French fleet , then in the West Indies , a ship was dispatched to meet with French Rear Admiral François Joseph Paul , comte de Grasse who was expected at Cap @-@ Français ( now known as Cap @-@ Haïtien , Haiti ) , outlining the possibilities and requesting his assistance . Rochambeau , in a private note to de Grasse , indicated that his preference was for an operation against Virginia . The two generals then moved their forces to White Plains , New York , to study New York 's defenses and await news from de Grasse . 
 = = Arrival of the fleets = = 
 De Grasse arrived at Cap @-@ Français on 15 August . He immediately dispatched his response , which was that he would make for the Chesapeake . Taking on 3 @,@ 200 troops , he sailed from Cap @-@ Français with his entire fleet , 28 ships of the line . Sailing outside the normal shipping lanes to avoid notice , he arrived at the mouth of Chesapeake Bay on August 30 , and disembarked the troops to assist in the land blockade of Cornwallis . Two British frigates that were supposed to be on patrol outside the bay were trapped inside the bay by de Grasse 's arrival ; this prevented the British in New York from learning the full strength of de Grasse 's fleet until it was too late . 
 British Admiral George Brydges Rodney , who had been tracking de Grasse around the West Indies , was alerted to the latter 's departure , but was uncertain of the French admiral 's destination . Believing that de Grasse would return a portion of his fleet to Europe , Rodney detached Rear Admiral Sir Samuel Hood with 14 ships of the line and orders to find de Grasse 's destination in North America . Rodney , who was ill , sailed for Europe with the rest of his fleet in order to recover , refit his fleet , and to avoid the Atlantic hurricane season . 
 Sailing more directly than de Grasse , Hood 's fleet arrived off the entrance to the Chesapeake on 25 August . Finding no French ships there , he then sailed for New York . Meanwhile , his colleague and commander of the New York fleet , Rear Admiral Sir Thomas Graves , had spent several weeks trying to intercept a convoy organized by John Laurens to bring much @-@ needed supplies and hard currency from France to Boston . When Hood arrived at New York , he found that Graves was in port ( having failed to intercept the convoy ) , but had only five ships of the line that were ready for battle . 
 De Grasse had notified his counterpart in Newport , the Comte de Barras Saint @-@ Laurent , of his intentions and his planned arrival date . Barras sailed from Newport on 27 August with 8 ships of the line , 4 frigates , and 18 transports carrying French armaments and siege equipment . He deliberately sailed via a circuitous route in order to minimize the possibility of an encounter with the British , should they sail from New York in pursuit . Washington and Rochambeau , in the meantime , had crossed the Hudson on 24 August , leaving some troops behind as a ruse to delay any potential move on the part of General Clinton to mobilize assistance for Cornwallis . 
 News of Barras ' departure led the British to realize that the Chesapeake was the probable target of the French fleets . By 31 August , Graves had moved his five ships of the line out of New York harbor to meet with Hood 's force . Taking command of the combined fleet , now 19 ships , Graves sailed south , and arrived at the mouth of the Chesapeake on 5 September . His progress was slow ; the poor condition of some of the West Indies ships ( contrary to claims by Admiral Hood that his fleet was fit for a month of service ) necessitated repairs en route . Graves was also concerned about some ships in his own fleet ; Europe in particular had difficulty manoeuvring . 
 = = Battle lines form = = 
 French and British patrol frigates each spotted the other 's fleet around 9 : 30 am ; both at first underestimated the size of the other fleet , leading each commander to believe the other fleet was the smaller fleet of Admiral de Barras . When the true size of the fleets became apparent , Graves assumed that de Grasse and Barras had already joined forces , and prepared for battle ; he directed his line toward the bay 's mouth , assisted by winds from the north @-@ northeast . 
 De Grasse had detached a few of his ships to blockade the York and James Rivers farther up the bay , and many of the ships at anchor were missing officers , men , and boats when the British fleet was sighted . He faced the difficult proposition of organizing a line of battle while sailing against an incoming tide , with winds and land features that would require him to do so on a tack opposite that of the British fleet . At 11 : 30 am , 24 ships of the French fleet cut their anchor lines and began sailing out of the bay with the noon tide , leaving behind the shore contingents and ships ' boats . Some ships were so seriously undermanned , missing as many as 200 men , that not all of their guns could be manned . De Grasse had ordered the ships to form into a line as they exited the bay , in order of speed and without regard to its normal sailing order . Admiral Louis de Bougainville 's Auguste was one of the first ships out . With a squadron of three other ships Bougainville ended up well ahead of the rest of the French line ; by 3 : 45 pm the gap was large enough that the British could have cut his squadron off from the rest of the French fleet . 
 By 1 : 00 pm , the two fleets were roughly facing each other , but sailing on opposite tacks . In order to engage , and to avoid some shoals ( known as the Middle Ground ) near the mouth of the bay , Graves around 2 : 00 pm ordered his whole fleet to wear , a manoeuvre that reversed his line of battle , but enabled it to line up with the French fleet as its ships exited the bay . This placed the squadron of Hood , his most aggressive commander , at the rear of the line , and that of Admiral Francis Samuel Drake in the van . 
 At this point , both fleets were sailing generally east , away from the bay , with winds from the north @-@ northeast . The two lines were approaching at an angle so that the leading ships of the vans of both lines were within range of each other , while the ships at the rear were too far apart to engage . The French had a firing advantage , since the wind conditions meant they could open their lower gun ports , while the British had to leave theirs closed to avoid water washing onto the lower decks . The French fleet , which was in a better state of repair than the British fleet , outnumbered the British in the number of ships and total guns , and had heavier guns capable of throwing more weight . In the British fleet , Ajax and Terrible , two ships of the West Indies squadron that were among the most heavily engaged , were in quite poor condition . Graves at this point did not press the potential advantage of the separated French van ; as the French centre and rear closed the distance with the British line , they also closed the distance with their own van . One British observer wrote , " To the astonishment of the whole fleet , the French center were permitted without molestation to bear down to support their van . " 
 The need for the two lines to actually reach parallel lines so they might fully engage led Graves to give conflicting signals that were interpreted critically differently by Admiral Hood , directing the rear squadron , than Graves intended . None of the options for closing the angle between the lines presented a favourable option to the British commander : any manoeuvre to bring ships closer would limit their firing ability to their bow guns , and potentially expose their decks to raking or enfilading fire from the enemy ships . Graves hoisted two signals : one for " line ahead " , under which the ships would slowly close the gap and then straighten the line when parallel to the enemy , and one for " close action " , which normally indicated that ships should turn to directly approach the enemy line , turning when the appropriate distance was reached . This combination of signals resulted in the piecemeal arrival of his ships into the range of battle . Admiral Hood interpreted the instruction to maintain line of battle to take precedence over the signal for close action , and as a consequence his squadron did not close rapidly and never became significantly engaged in the action . 
 = = Battle = = 
 It was about 4 : 00 pm , over 6 hours since the two fleets had first sighted each other , when the British — who had the weather gage , and therefore the initiative — opened their attack . The battle began with HMS Intrepid opening fire against the Marseillais , its counterpart near the head of the line . The action very quickly became general , with the van and center of each line fully engaged . The French , in a practice they were known for , tended to aim at British masts and rigging , with the intent of crippling their opponent 's mobility . The effects of this tactic were apparent in the engagement : Shrewsbury and HMS Intrepid , at the head of the British line , became virtually impossible to manage , and eventually fell out of the line . The rest of Admiral Drake 's squadron also suffered heavy damage , but the casualties were not as severe as those taken on the first two ships . The angle of approach of the British line also played a role in the damage they sustained ; ships in their van were exposed to raking fire when only their bow guns could be brought to bear on the French . 
 The French van also took a beating , although it was less severe . Captain de <unk> of the <unk> was killed in the opening broadside of Admiral Drake 's Princessa , and the four ships of the French van were , according to a French observer , " engaged with seven or eight vessels at close quarters . " The <unk> , according to a French officer " was utterly unable to keep up the battle , having only four thirty @-@ six @-@ pounders and nine eighteen @-@ pounders fit for use " and was badly shot up ; she was rescued by the timely intervention of the Saint @-@ Esprit . 
 The Princessa and Bougainville 's Auguste at one point were close enough that the French admiral considered a boarding action ; Drake managed to pull away , but this gave Bougainville the chance to target the Terrible . Her foremast , already in bad shape before the battle , was struck by several French cannonballs , and her pumps , already overtaxed in an attempt to keep her afloat , were badly damaged by shots " between wind and water " . 
 Around 5 : 00 pm the wind began to shift , to British disadvantage . De Grasse gave signals for the van to move further ahead so that more of the French fleet might engage , but Bougainville , fully engaged with the British van at musket range , did not want to risk " severe handling had the French presented the stern . " When he did finally begin pulling away , British leaders interpreted it as a retreat : " the French van suffered most , because it was obliged to bear away . " Rather than follow , the British hung back , continuing to fire at long range ; this prompted one French officer to write that the British " only engaged from far off and simply in order to be able to say that they had fought . " Sunset brought an end to the firefight , with both fleets continuing on a roughly southeast tack , away from the bay . 
 The center of both lines was engaged , but the level of damage and casualties suffered was noticeably less . Ships in the rear squadrons were almost entirely uninvolved ; Admiral Hood reported that three of his ships fired a few shots . The ongoing conflicting signals left by Graves , and discrepancies between his and Hood 's records of what signals had been given and when , led to immediate recriminations , written debate , and an eventual formal inquiry . 
 = = Standoff = = 
 That evening Graves did a damage assessment . He noted that " the French had not the appearance of near so much damage as we had sustained " , and that five of his fleet were either leaking or virtually crippled in their mobility . De Grasse wrote that " we perceived by the sailing of the English that they had suffered greatly . " Nonetheless , Graves maintained a windward position through the night , so that he would have the choice of battle in the morning . Ongoing repairs made it clear to Graves that he would be unable to attack the next day . On the night of 6 September he held council with Hood and Drake . During this meeting Hood and Graves supposedly exchanged words concerning the conflicting signals , and Hood proposed turning the fleet around to make for the Chesapeake . Graves rejected the plan , and the fleets continued to drift eastward , away from Cornwallis . On 8 and 9 September the French fleet at times gained the advantage of the wind , and briefly threatened the British with renewed action . French scouts spied Barras ' fleet on 9 September , and de Grasse turned his fleet back toward Chesapeake Bay that night . Arriving on 12 September , he found that Barras had arrived two days earlier . Graves ordered the Terrible to be scuttled on 11 September due to her leaky condition , and was notified on 13 September that the French fleet was back in the Chesapeake ; he still did not learn that de Grasse 's line had not included the fleet of Barras , because the frigate captain making the report had not counted the ships . In a council held that day , the British admirals decided against attacking the French , due to " the truly lamentable state we have brought ourself . " Graves then turned his battered fleet toward New York , arriving off Sandy Hook on 20 September . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The British fleet 's arrival in New York set off a flurry of panic amongst the Loyalist population . The news of the defeat was also not received well in London . King George III wrote ( well before learning of Cornwallis 's surrender ) that " after the knowledge of the defeat of our fleet [ ... ] I nearly think the empire ruined . " 
 The French success left them firmly in control of Chesapeake Bay , completing the encirclement of Cornwallis . In addition to capturing a number of smaller British vessels , de Grasse and Barras assigned their smaller vessels to assist in the transport of Washington 's and Rochambeau 's forces from Head of Elk to Yorktown . 
 It was not until 23 September that Graves and Clinton learned that the French fleet in the Chesapeake numbered 36 ships . This news came from a dispatch sneaked out by Cornwallis on the 17 September , accompanied by a plea for help : " If you cannot relieve me very soon , you must be prepared to hear the worst . " After effecting repairs in New York , Admiral Graves sailed from New York on 19 October with 25 ships of the line and transports carrying 7 @,@ 000 troops to relieve Cornwallis . It was two days after Cornwallis surrendered at Yorktown . General Washington acknowledged to de Grasse the importance of his role in the victory : " You will have observed that , whatever efforts are made by the land armies , the navy must have the casting vote in the present contest . " The eventual surrender of Cornwallis led to peace two years later and British recognition of the independent United States of America . 
 Admiral de Grasse returned with his fleet to the West Indies . In a major engagement that ended Franco @-@ Spanish plans for the capture of Jamaica in 1782 , he was defeated and taken prisoner by Rodney in the Battle of the Saintes . His flagship Ville de Paris was lost at sea in a storm while being conducted back to England as part of a fleet commanded by Admiral Graves . Graves , despite the controversy over his conduct in this battle , continued to serve , rising to full admiral and receiving an Irish peerage . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Many aspects of the battle have been the subject of both contemporary and historical debate , beginning right after the battle . On 6 September , Admiral Graves issued a memorandum justifying his use of the conflicting signals , indicating that " [ when ] the signal for the line of battle ahead is out at the same time with the signal for battle , it is not to be understood that the latter signal shall be rendered ineffectual by a too strict adherence to the former . " Hood , in commentary written on the reverse of his copy , observed that this eliminated any possibility of engaging an enemy who was disordered , since it would require the British line to also be disordered . Instead , he maintained , " the British fleet should be as compact as possible , in order to take the critical moment of an advantage opening ... " Others criticise Hood because he " did not wholeheartedly aid his chief " , and that a lesser officer " would have been court @-@ martialled for not doing his utmost to engage the enemy . " 
 One contemporary writer critical of the scuttling of the Terrible wrote that " she made no more water than she did before [ the battle ] " , and , more <unk> , " If an able officer had been at the head of the fleet , the Terrible would not have been destroyed . " Admiral Rodney was critical of Graves ' tactics , writing , " by contracting his own line he might have brought his nineteen against the enemy 's fourteen or fifteen , [ ... ] disabled them before they could have received succor , [ ... and ] gained a complete victory . " Defending his own behaviour in not sending his full fleet to North America , he also wrote that " [ i ] f the admiral in America had met Sir Samuel Hood near the Chesapeake " , that Cornwallis 's surrender might have been prevented . 
 United States Navy historian Frank Chadwick believed that de Grasse could have thwarted the British fleet simply by staying put ; his fleet 's size would have been sufficient to impede any attempt by Graves to force a passage through his position . Historian Harold Larrabee points out that this would have exposed Clinton in New York to blockade by the French if Graves had successfully entered the bay ; if Graves did not do so , Barras ( carrying the siege equipment ) would have been outnumbered by Graves if de Grasse did not sail out in support . 
 = = Memorial = = 
 At the Cape Henry Memorial located at Joint Expeditionary Base East in Virginia Beach , Virginia , there is monument commemorating the contribution of de Grasse and his sailors to the cause of American independence . The memorial and monument are part of the Colonial National Historical Park and are maintained by the National Park Service . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Sources consulted ( including de Grasse 's memoir , and works either dedicated to the battle or containing otherwise detailed orders of battle , like Larrabee ( 1964 ) and Morrissey ( 1997 ) ) do not list per @-@ ship casualties for the French fleet . Larrabee reports the French to have suffered 209 casualties ; Bougainville recorded 10 killed and 58 wounded aboard Auguste alone . 
 The exact order in which the French lined up as they exited the bay is also uncertain . Larrabee notes that many observers wrote up different sequences when the line was finally formed , and that Bougainville recorded several different configurations . 
 = PowerBook 100 = 
 The PowerBook 100 is a portable <unk> personal computer manufactured by Apple Computer and introduced on October 21 , 1991 , at the COMDEX computer expo in Las Vegas , Nevada . Priced at US $ 2 @,@ 300 , the PowerBook 100 was the low @-@ end model of the first three simultaneously released PowerBooks . Its CPU and overall speed closely resembled those of its predecessor , the Macintosh Portable . It had a Motorola 68000 16 @-@ megahertz ( MHz ) processor , 2 @-@ 8 megabytes ( MB ) of memory , a 9 @-@ inch ( 23 cm ) monochrome backlit liquid crystal display ( LCD ) with 640 × 400 pixel resolution , and the System 7 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 operating system . It did not have a built @-@ in floppy disk drive and was noted for its unique compact design that placed a trackball pointing device in front of the keyboard for ease of use . 
 Apple 's then @-@ chief executive officer ( CEO ) John Sculley started the PowerBook project in 1990 , allocating $ 1 million for marketing . Despite the small marketing budget , the new PowerBook line was a success , generating over $ 1 billion in revenue for Apple in its first year . Sony designed and manufactured the PowerBook 100 in collaboration with the Apple Industrial Design Group , Apple 's internal design team . It was discontinued on September 3 , 1992 , and superseded by the PowerBook 145 and PowerBook Duo series . Since then , it has been praised several times for its design ; PC World named the PowerBook 100 the tenth @-@ greatest PC of all time in 2006 , and US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time in 2005 . 
 = = History = = 
 From 1990 , John Sculley , then CEO of Apple , oversaw product development personally to ensure that Apple released new computers to market more quickly . His new strategy was to increase market share by lowering prices and releasing more " hit " products . This strategy contributed to the commercial success of the low @-@ end Macintosh Classic and Macintosh LC , desktop computers released by Apple in 1990 . Sculley wanted to replicate the success of these products with Apple 's new PowerBook line . 
 Sculley began the project in 1990 and wanted the PowerBook to be released within one year . The project had three managers : John Medica , who managed engineering for the new laptop ; Randy Battat , who was the vice president for product marketing ; and Neil Selvin , who headed the marketing effort . In 1991 , the two leaders in the laptop computer industry were Toshiba and Compaq , both of which had introduced models weighing less than 8 lb ( 3 @.@ 63 kg ) . Medica , Battat , and Selvin deliberately designed the PowerBook to weigh less than its competitors . 
 Sculley allocated a $ 1 million marketing budget to the PowerBook product line , in contrast to the $ 25 million used to market the Macintosh Classic . Medica , Battat , and Selvin used most of the money to produce and air a television commercial that viewers would remember . Advertising agency Chiat / Day filmed retired Los Angeles Lakers basketball star Kareem Abdul @-@ Jabbar sitting uncomfortably in a small airline coach seat yet comfortably typing on his PowerBook . The ad caption read : " At least his hands are comfortable . " 
 Apple unveiled the PowerBook 100 on October 21 , 1991 , at the <unk> computer expo in Las Vegas , with two other models , the PowerBook 140 and PowerBook 170 . The advertisement and the product were both successful . Apple projected US sales of more than 200 @,@ 000 PowerBooks in the first year , with peak demand in the first three months of release . By January 1992 , Apple had sold more than 100 @,@ 000 PowerBooks , by which time they were in short supply . Apple soon solved the supply problems , and the proceeds from PowerBook sales reached $ 1 billion in the first year after launch . Apple surpassed Toshiba and Compaq as the market leader in worldwide share of portable computer shipments . The PowerBook 100 , 140 , and 170 contributed greatly to Apple 's financial success in 1992 . At the end of the financial year , Apple announced its highest figures yet , $ 7 @.@ 1 billion in revenues and an increase in global market share from 8 % to 8 @.@ 5 % , the highest it had been in four years . 
 However , the initial popularity of the PowerBook 100 did not last . Sales decreased , and by December 1991 the 140 and 170 models had become more popular because customers were willing to pay more for a built @-@ in floppy disk drive and second serial port , which the PowerBook 100 lacked . By August 10 , 1992 , Apple quietly dropped the PowerBook 100 from its price list but continued to sell existing stock through its own dealers and alternative discount consumer @-@ oriented stores such as Price Club . In these stores , a 4MB RAM / <unk> hard drive configuration with a floppy drive sold for less than $ 1 @,@ 000 ( more than $ 1 @,@ 500 less than the similar <unk> / <unk> configuration 's original list price ) . 
 On September 17 , 1992 , Apple recalled 60 @,@ 000 PowerBook 100s because of a potential safety problem . An electrical short , it was discovered , could melt a small hole in the casing , which occurred in three of the 60 @,@ 000 notebooks manufactured between October 1991 and March 1992 . On the day of the recall , Apple shares closed at $ 47 , down $ 1 @.@ 25 , but some analysts discounted the recall 's importance . In addition , the original power supplies had problems with insulation cracks that could cause a short in a fuse on the motherboard ; and the computer was prone to cracks in the power adapter socket on the motherboard , which required a $ 400 replacement motherboard if the warranty had expired . 
 = = Features = = 
 Most of the PowerBook 100 's internal components were based on its predecessor , the Macintosh Portable . It included a Motorola <unk> 16 MHz processor , had 2 MB memory , no floppy disk drive , and cost approximately $ 2 @,@ 300 . An external floppy disk drive was available for $ 279 . The dimensions of the PowerBook 100 were an improvement over the Portable . It was 8 @.@ 5 inches ( 22 cm ) deep , 11 inches ( 28 cm ) wide , and 1 @.@ 8 inches ( 4 @.@ 6 cm ) high , compared to the Portable , which was 14 @.@ 83 inches ( 37 @.@ 7 cm ) deep , 15 @.@ 25 inches ( 38 @.@ 7 cm ) wide and 4 @.@ 05 inches ( 10 @.@ 3 cm ) high . Another significant difference was the less expensive passive matrix display used instead of the sharper active matrix used on the Portable ( and the 170 ) . The PowerBook 100 included the System 7 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 operating system as standard , with support for all versions up to System 7 @.@ 5 @.@ 5 . Apple , however , released System <unk> , which allowed the PowerBook 100 to run System 6 . It could also be used with some earlier System 6 versions , although Apple did not officially support this . 
 The PowerBook 100 had one external serial port , designed for use with a printer or any compatible RS @-@ 422 device . It was the first Macintosh to omit an external modem port , instead offering an optional built @-@ in 2400 <unk> modem for communications . As a result , for the first time a user could not print directly and access AppleTalk or a faster external modem simultaneously , and devices such as advanced MIDI interfaces could not be used because they required the dedicated use of both ports . A third @-@ party serial modem port could , however , be installed in the internal modem slot for consumers who needed traditional functions . 
 When the computer was not in use , contents of the memory were preserved as long as the main lead @-@ acid battery remained charged . The PowerBook 100 Power Manager was an integrated circuit , usually placed on the logic board of a PowerBook , and was responsible for the power management of the computer . Identical to that of the Macintosh Portable , it controlled the display 's backlight , hard drive spin @-@ down , sleep and wake , battery charging , trackball control , and input / output ( I / O ) . The 100 did add a new feature : 3 @.@ 5 V batteries backed up permanent and expansion random access memory ( RAM ) when the PowerBook 100 's battery was being replaced or when the 100 was otherwise temporarily removed from all power sources . This made it a perfect candidate for use with Apple 's RAM disk to help increase battery life by accessing the hard disk less frequently , since the 100 was the only PowerBook that maintained the contents of RAM on shutdown in order to reduce startup time . 
 The PowerBook 100 was the first PowerBook to incorporate SCSI Disk Mode , which allowed it to be used as an external hard disk on a desktop Macintosh . This provided a convenient method for software to be installed onto the PowerBook or transferred to the desktop , without the need for the 100 's optional floppy disk drive . A specialized SCSI cable with a unique connector was required , however , to use any SCSI device on the PowerBook series . A second dedicated cable was required for SCSI Disk Mode . This feature was unique to the 100 until Apple introduced new PowerBooks more than a year later . 
 There are two versions of the PowerBook 100 's QWERTY layout keyboard : a domestic US version with 63 keys and an international ISO version with 64 keys . The caps lock key on the PowerBook 100 did not have a locking position or a lighted indicator of its status , and to compensate , the System 7 operating system software includes an extension file that causes an icon of the international caps lock symbol ( <unk> ) to appear in the upper right @-@ hand corner of the menu bar when Caps Lock is active . 
 = = Design = = 
 Both the PowerBook 140 and 170 were designed before the 100 by the Apple Industrial Design Group , from March 1990 @-@ February 1991 . The 100 's styling was based on those computers and represents the first improvements to the PowerBook line as Apple benefited from the lessons learned in developing the more powerful models ' enclosure . The 100 was designed between September and December 1990 , and retained the same design elements , which were a variation on the Snow White design language Apple had been using since 1984 . Specifically , 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 in ) raised ridges spaced 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) apart intended to tie it into the existing product line . 
 Apple approached Sony in late 1989 because it did not have enough engineers to handle the number of new products that were planned for delivery in 1991 . Using a basic blueprint from Apple , including a list of chips and other components , and the Portable 's architecture , the 100 was miniaturized and manufactured by Sony in San Diego , California , and Japan . Sony engineers had little experience building personal computers but nonetheless completed Apple 's smallest and lightest machine in under 13 months , cancelling other projects and giving the PowerBook 100 top priority . Sony president Norio Ohga gave project manager <unk> Yamamoto permission to recruit engineers from any Sony division . 
 Robert Brunner , Apple 's head of industrial design at the time , led the design team that developed the laptop , including its trackball and granite color . Brunner said he designed the PowerBook " so it would be as easy to use and carry as a regular book " . The dark granite grey color set it apart from other notebook computers of the time and also from Apple 's other products , which traditionally were beige or platinum grey . The trackball , another new design element , was placed in the middle of the computer , allowing the PowerBook to be easily operated by both left- and right @-@ handed users . The designers were trying to create a fashion statement with the overall design of the laptop , which they felt made it a more personal accessory , like a wallet or briefcase . Brunner said : " It says something about the identity of the person who is carrying it " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Crystal Waters of Home Office Computing praised the PowerBook 100 's " unique , effective design " but was disappointed because the internal modem did not receive faxes , and the 100 had no monitor port . The low @-@ capacity 20 MB hard drive was also criticized . Once a user 's core applications had been installed , little room was left for optional programs and documents . Waters concluded : " Having used the 100 constantly in the past few weeks , I know I wouldn 't feel cheated by buying it - if only it had a <unk> hard @-@ disk drive option . " 
 PC Week <unk> the PowerBook 100 , measuring it against its predecessor , the Macintosh Portable . The PowerBook 100 took 5 @.@ 3 seconds to open a Microsoft Word document and 2 @.@ 5 seconds to save it . The Portable took 5 @.@ 4 and 2 @.@ 6 seconds respectively . PC Week tested the battery life , which delivered 3 hours 47 minutes of use . Byte magazine 's review concluded , " The PowerBook 100 is recommended for word processing and communications tasks ; the higher @-@ end products offer enough power for complex reports , large spreadsheets and professional graphics . " MacWEEK described it as " ideal for writers and others on a tight budget . " 
 The PowerBook 100 continues to receive recognition from the press . PC World named the PowerBook 100 the 10th @-@ greatest PC of all time in 2006 , and in 2005 , US magazine Mobile PC chose the PowerBook 100 as the greatest gadget of all time , ahead of the Sony Walkman and Atari 2600 . The PowerBook 100 received multiple awards for its design , including the 1999 <unk> Silver Design of the Decade Award , Form magazine 's 1993 Designer 's Design Awards , the 1992 <unk> Gold Industrial Design Excellence Award , the 1992 Appliance Manufacturer Excellence in Design award , and the Industry Forum Design 10 Best - Hannover Fair award . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = Timeline of portable Macintoshes = = 
 = New York State Route 16 = 
 New York State Route 16 ( NY 16 ) is a state highway in western New York , in the United States . It runs from the Pennsylvania state line , where it is one of the highest highways in the state in elevation , to downtown Buffalo . NY 16 is a major route through Erie County , despite the construction of the paralleling NY 400 expressway from East Aurora . In Cattaraugus County it also plays an important role , serving as the major connection from Olean to the Southern Tier Expressway ( Interstate 86 or I @-@ 86 and NY 17 ) . Between those two areas , and indeed for much of its length , it is a two @-@ lane rural road . 
 NY 16 initially ended in Olean when it was assigned in 1924 . It was extended south to the Pennsylvania state line in the early 1930s ; however , it initially overlapped NY 17 east to Portville , where it connected to Pennsylvania by way of modern NY 305 . NY 16 's current alignment south of Olean was originally designated as New York State Route 16A around this time . NY 16 was rerouted to follow the routing of NY 16A south of Olean in the early 1960s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Cattaraugus County = = = 
 When PA 646 becomes NY 16 at the state line , it is already at a very high elevation on a <unk> , and at a rise two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) into New York , it reaches 2 @,@ 386 feet ( 727 m ) in elevation , making it the highest state highway in western New York and among the highest in the state . It remains at a high elevation for several more miles , through what was once one of New York 's major oil fields . Afterwards , NY 16 then begins to drop through a narrow valley to cross the Allegheny River and enter its first major community , the city of Olean ( which , like several other communities in the region , takes its name from oil ) . It crosses the city as Union Street , intersecting its first state highway , NY 417 , at State Street . Here , ownership and maintenance of NY 16 shifts to the city for six blocks before becoming state @-@ maintained once more at the point where North Union Street heads northwest to serve North Olean . 
 A mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of NY 417 , NY 16 reaches a bridge over Olean Creek , a tributary of the Allegheny . On the other side , it becomes a four @-@ lane road with a divider as it approaches NY 17 , currently concurrent with I @-@ 86 pending the entire expressway 's upgrade to Interstate Highway standards . A trumpet interchange provides access to I @-@ 86 and NY 17 in both directions in the vicinity of Baldwin Heights . But NY 16 runs parallel to the freeway and remains a four @-@ lane route , although no longer divided , following the Olean valley . At Hinsdale it finally does cross I @-@ 86 / NY 17 . Shortly afterwards , in the hamlet of <unk> , NY 446 , the former route of NY 408 , comes in from the east and terminates . 
 NY 16 now follows the narrow valley of <unk> Creek , one of the Olean 's tributaries , north past the road to the city 's airport , north to <unk> . NY 98 joins NY 16 just south of the village and leaves north of it . NY 16 continues to Machias and the eastern end of NY 242 . A straight course takes the highway from this junction to the Cattaraugus Creek bridge . This bridge heads into Erie County . 
 = = = Erie County = = = 
 In the southwestern corner of the county , NY 16 intersects with NY 39 . NY 16 then begins heading slightly northwestward through a wider , more developed valley in the towns of Holland and Wales to the first sign of an approaching major metropolitan area , the south end of NY 400 , the Aurora Expressway . After joining the expressway for two miles ( 3 km ) , it again leaves to become a two @-@ lane that enters East Aurora as Olean Street . At the intersection with Main Street , NY 16 turns left and briefly joins with U.S. Route 20A ( US 20A ) and NY 78 . US 20A leaves the two state routes behind at a fork at the village 's east end , leaving NY 16 and NY 78 to head to the northwest again as Buffalo Street . At this point , NY 16 and NY 78 become county @-@ maintained for the next 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) as the unsigned County Route 572 ( CR 572 ) . At <unk> Road as the highway passes the industrial parks and other facilities associated with local company Moog Inc . North of the village , it enters the Town of Elma and becomes Seneca Street , the name it will retain all the way to the city . 
 NY 78 takes on its best @-@ known name as well when it leaves at Transit Road ( US 20 ) , as NY 16 assumes an east – west heading across the suburban neighborhoods of West Seneca . It crosses NY 277 , a major retail strip , at Union Road in the hamlet of Ebenezer . One final trumpet exit to NY 400 ( and by extension , the New York State Thruway ) precedes its junction with Harlem Road ( NY 240 ) , where county maintenance of NY 16 , and thus the overlap with CR 572 , ends . Just west of NY 240 , NY 16 crosses the Thruway itself as it begins to head to the northwest and enter the city of Buffalo , where the route is locally maintained . Running almost due northwest through the residential neighborhoods of South Buffalo , NY 16 reaches its last major junction , with US 62 , at Bailey Avenue just after crossing the Buffalo River . Immediately afterwards it crosses I @-@ 190 with no exit ( but with northbound access ) and returns to a more east – west course through industrial areas before ending at Main Street , NY 5 , in the city center . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of modern NY 16 between Hinsdale and Buffalo was originally designated as Route 17 , an unsigned legislative route , by the New York State Legislature in 1908 . At the same time , the segment of what is now NY 16 from Olean to Hinsdale was included in Route 4 , a lengthy east – west route that extended from Lake Erie in Chautauqua County to the Hudson River in Orange County . The portion from Olean south to the state line was part of the old " Kittanning Road , " a road constructed by the Continental Army during the 1779 Sullivan Expedition that connected Kittanning , Pennsylvania to the Allegheny River ; the road is among the oldest roads in the region . 
 When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , much of Route 4 — including the Olean – Hinsdale segment — was designated as NY 17 while legislative Route 17 became part of NY 16 , which began in Olean and overlapped with NY 17 along former legislative Route 4 between Olean and Hinsdale . 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 17 was realigned between Olean and Wellsville to follow modern NY 417 , eliminating its overlap with NY 16 . By the following year , NY 16 was extended south to the Pennsylvania state line near Portville via NY 17 and what is now NY 305 . The modern routing of NY 16 between Pennsylvania and Olean was designated as NY 16A c . 1932 . The alignments of both NY 16 and NY 16A remained the same until c . 1963 when NY 16A was supplanted by a rerouted NY 16 . The former routing of NY 16 between the Pennsylvania state line and NY 17 became an extension of NY 305 . 
 The portion of the Aurora Expressway ( NY 400 ) between East Aurora and South Wales was completed in the early 1970s . NY 16 was rerouted to follow the new highway for two miles ( 3 km ) before exiting the freeway and returning to its previous alignment . The former routing of NY 16 in the area , a 2 @.@ 24 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 60 km ) long portion of Olean Road , is now NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Schinderhannes ( genus ) = 
 Schinderhannes bartelsi is an anomalocarid known from one specimen from the lower Devonian Hunsrück Slates . Its discovery was astonishing because previously , anomalocaridids were known only from exceptionally well @-@ preserved fossil beds ( Lagerstätten ) from the Cambrian , 100 million years earlier . 
 <unk> , such as Anomalocaris , were organisms thought to be distantly related to the arthropods . These creatures looked quite unlike any organism living today — they had segmented exoskeletons , with lateral lobes used for swimming , typically large compound eyes , often set on stalks , and most strikingly , a pair of large , claw @-@ like great appendages that resembled headless shrimp . These appendages are thought to have passed food to the animal 's mouth , which resembled a ring of sliced pineapple . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The single specimen was discovered in the Eschenbach @-@ <unk> Quarry in <unk> , and is named after the outlaw Schinderhannes who frequented the area . Its specific epithet bartelsi honours Christoph Bartels , a Hunsrück Slate expert . The specimen is now housed in the Naturhistorisches Museum , Mainz . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 Schinderhannes is about 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long ; like other anomalocaridids , it bears a pair of great appendages ( very similar to those of <unk> ) , a radial Peytoia ' pineapple @-@ ring ' mouth , and large , stalked , compound eyes . It has 12 body segments ; large flap @-@ like structures used for swimming protrude from the 11th segment , and from just behind the head . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The preserved contents of its digestive tract are typical of those of other predators ' , and this lifestyle is supported by the raptor @-@ like nature of the spiny great appendages and the size of the eyes . The organism was clearly a competent swimmer , propelling itself with the ' flippers ' attached to its head , and using its wing @-@ like lobes on the 11th segment to steer . These lobes presumably derived from the lateral lobes of Cambrian anomalocaridids , ancestors that used lobes along their sides to swim , and lacked the specializations of Schinderhannes . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The organism 's discovery was most significant because of the huge range extension of the anomalocaridids it caused : the group was only previously known from lagerstätten of the lower @-@ to @-@ middle Cambrian , 100 million years before . This underlined the utility of lagerstätten like the Hunsrück Slate : these exceptionally preserved fossil horizons may be the only available opportunity to observe non @-@ mineralised forms . 
 The organism has also prompted novel hypotheses about the classification of early arthropods . One classification scheme has Schinderhannes classified basally to the crown arthropods , but closer to that group than Anomalocaris . This would mean that the crown arthropod lineage evolved from a paraphyletic grade of anomalocaridids , and that the group of early arthropods with short ' great appendages ' are not a natural grouping . The biramous limb of arthropods may then have arisen through fusion of <unk> lateral lobes and gills . 
 = Croatian European Union membership referendum , 2012 = 
 A referendum on the EU accession of the Republic of Croatia was held on 22 January 2012 . Croatia finished accession ( membership ) negotiations on 30 June 2011 and signed the Treaty of Accession on 9 December 2011 , setting it on course to become the bloc 's 28th member state . The Constitution of Croatia requires that a binding referendum be held on any political union reducing national sovereignty , such as via European Union membership . On 23 December 2011 the Croatian Parliament made a preliminary decision on EU accession and determined that the referendum would be held on 22 January 2012 . The 2012 Croatian EU accession referendum was the first referendum held in Croatia since the Croatian independence referendum held more than 20 years earlier , in 1991 . 
 The Croatian EU accession referendum campaign officially began on 3 January 2012 ; a yes vote was supported by both the political parties in government and the larger opposition parties in Croatia . The largest parties ' joint support of EU membership existed since 2005 , when the Alliance for Europe ( Croatian : Savez za <unk> ) was set up as an informal alliance aimed at achieving membership as a strategic goal of Croatian foreign policy . Opposition to Croatian EU accession was voiced by non @-@ parliamentary parties only . The pro @-@ membership and informational campaign – which included television promotional videos , addresses by leading government and opposition politicians , and information booklets mailed to every household in Croatia – was announced to have cost 4 @.@ 8 million kuna ( c . € 640 @,@ 000 ) . Opinion polling was regularly carried out by three different agencies ; since May 2011 , percentages supporting EU membership ranged between 55 % and 63 % . The Croatian State Election Committee was in charge of vote organization , ballot counting and result publication . 
 The EU accession referendum passed with 66 @.@ 27 % votes cast in support , 33 @.@ 13 % against the proposed joining of the EU and 0 @.@ 60 % invalid or blank votes ; it also passed in all Croatian counties . The greatest support for the referendum was recorded in Međimurje and Brod @-@ Posavina counties , at 75 @.@ 73 % and 72 @.@ 61 % respectively . The lowest support for EU accession was recorded in Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva County , where 42 @.@ 22 % of votes were cast against the proposal . The average official turnout for the referendum was 43 @.@ 51 % ; the highest official turnouts were recorded in the city of Zagreb and in Varaždin County at 55 @.@ 13 % and 53 @.@ 66 % respectively . The result was binding on the Croatian Parliament ; as a consequence , it ratified the accession treaty on 9 March 2012 . The outcome was welcomed by all political parties represented in Croatia 's parliament ; some right @-@ wing politicians objected to the low turnout and what they consider a loss of independence . 
 = = Background = = 
 Croatia applied for European Union ( EU ) membership in 2003 , the European Commission recommended making it an official candidate in early 2004 , and the European Council granted candidate country status to Croatia in mid @-@ 2004 . Accession negotiations , while originally set for March 2005 , began in October of that year . Croatia completed the accession negotiations on 30 June 2011 ; on 9 December 2011 it signed the Treaty of Accession , changing its status from a candidate to an acceding country as it prepared to become the 28th EU member state . The ratification process by the Parliaments of all 27 current EU member states was expected to be concluded by the end of June 2013 , and Croatia 's accession to the EU was expected to take place on 1 July 2013 . In addition to ratification by the current EU member states , Article 142 of the Constitution of Croatia requires that a binding referendum be held on sovereignty issues such as Croatian EU membership . 
 = = = Voting issues = = = 
 The Croatian Parliament tasked the Croatian State Election Committee with referendum voting organization , ballot counting , and result publication . The committee scheduled the referendum vote for 22 January 2012 starting at 07 : 00 and lasting until 19 : 00 , at regular polling stations in Croatia , in Croatian military units , in Croatian diplomatic missions abroad , on Croatian @-@ flagged vessels and in prisons : 6 @,@ 750 polling stations in all . For the referendum , all polling stations were grouped in a single district . Voters traveling abroad were permitted to vote in the Croatian diplomatic missions as with Croatian presidential elections ; however , the initial instructions by the Ministry of Public Administration did not allow voters within Croatia who were away from their place of residence to vote in the referendum , nor did it allow absentee ballots . GONG , the Croatian election supervision NGO , requested that the authorities correct this . One restriction was removed by 3 January , when voters were permitted to register to vote in Croatia away from their legal residence . Registration was possible until 7 January , in person , by fax , or by e @-@ mail . When the registration process completed in early January 2012 ahead of the referendum , there were 4 @,@ 504 @,@ 686 voters in the voter registry ( the same one used in parliamentary and presidential elections ) . 
 The State Election Committee defined the polling stations 's appearance and their immediate surroundings up to 50 metres ( 160 feet ) away , prohibiting campaigning and displaying of promotional materials there as with elections in Croatia . Unlike Croatian elections , there is no mandatory halt to campaigning before a referendum . GONG appointed approximately 300 observers to monitor the referendum voting . The Election Committee announced that it would start publishing voting results on its web site two hours after the polling stations in Croatia closed , and it would expect to determine the referendum 's outcome by midnight . If a proposed question was supported by a simple majority of those voting , the proposal would be considered passed and the result binding on the Croatian Parliament pursuant to § 87 , paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Croatian Constitution . Since the referendum passed , the Croatian Parliament was required to ratify the Croatian EU accession treaty . Amendments ( from 2010 ) to the constitution provide that referendums are valid regardless of actual turnout . If the referendum proposal were to have failed , it could have been repeated in six months or a year . It is estimated that a referendum rejection would have cost Croatia approximately € 1 @.@ 6 billion in lost EU funding until 2014 . 
 = = Date = = 
 In November 2010 , the Croatian Parliament decided to hold the EU accession referendum 30 days after the treaty was signed ; since the treaty was signed on 9 December 2011 , the referendum was consequently ( originally ) scheduled for 9 January 2012 . In November 2010 , the Croatian Government proposed to hold the EU accession referendum simultaneously with another referendum aimed at altering general referendum rules . 
 Days after the 2011 parliamentary elections in early December 2011 , it was suggested by Vesna Pusić – already recognized as the future Minister of Foreign and European Affairs – that the referendum should be postponed until March 2012 to allow better preparation for the poll . The suggestion was soon followed by a similar request made by GONG that the referendum be postponed until mid @-@ February or later ; its request was also supported by five major trade unions . GONG 's request was made because of what they stated to be : poor information provided to citizens ; undefined procedures for voter registration away from a voter 's permanent residence ; unclear directions for voting abroad ; no legal provisions specifically defining the composition of ballot counting commissions ; no provisions for referendum vote monitoring by partisan , non @-@ partisan and foreign monitors ; no legal provisions regarding referendum funding ( since the 2011 state budget did not appropriate any funds to cover referendum expenses ) ; no legal provisions funding the pro @-@ referendum campaign or allowing the campaign itself ; and the lack of restrictions against campaigning on the day of the referendum . The union support for this request was due to the government 's ultimately not putting forward the other referendum ( altering the conditions for referendums from citizens by changing the number of petitioners required and the time allowed to gather their signatures ) , which they had earlier agreed to do . Another request to postpone the election was made by more than a thousand signatories of a petition to the government , demanding that the referendum be postponed until after the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) returned the final verdict in the case against generals Ante Gotovina and Mladen Markač . They cited concerns over EU support for the ICTY , which they describe as biased ; they therefore questioned if the EU favoured some nations over others . 
 On 23 December 2011 , the Croatian Parliament made a preliminary decision on EU membership and determined that the EU accession referendum would be held on 22 January 2012 . Furthermore , no other referendum question would be presented at that time . The preliminary accession decision was supported by 129 MPs , with the 6 Croatian Democratic Alliance of Slavonia and Baranja ( HDSSB ) MPs abstaining . During the debate that preceded the vote , the HDSSB MPs requested that the EU accession referendum be postponed for three to six months in order to allow a broader discussion on EU accession . Their specific concern was that Croatia might lose elements of its statehood and sovereignty , and the postponement was requested to present to the voters the effects of the Treaty of Lisbon on Croatia before the referendum was held . The parliamentary decision to hold the referendum on 22 January 2012 was supported by 124 MPs , with 6 HDSSB MPs and 6 Croatian <unk> – Labour Party MPs voting against the decision . The Labour party advocated postponing the referendum until 12 February in order to give more time to provide information on the consequences of EU membership . The referendum question was announced by the newly elected Prime Minister designate Zoran Milanović as " simple and bare " : " Are you for the membership of the Republic of Croatia in the European Union ? " The 2012 Croatian EU accession referendum was the first referendum held in Croatia since the Croatian independence referendum in 1991 . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 The Croatian EU accession referendum campaign officially started on 3 January 2012 , with a declaration that it was aimed at providing to Croatian citizens clear , concise and transparent information on the EU accession negotiations and EU membership . The campaign included television promotions and addresses by leading politicians such as : the President of Croatia , Ivo Josipović ; the prime minister , Zoran Milanović ; the foreign minister , Vesna Pusić ; other government members , such as <unk> Opačić , Radimir Čačić , Neven Mimica and Željko Jovanović ; and former prime minister and opposition leader Jadranka Kosor . ( All of these supported the referendum in their addresses . ) A telephone information hotline was also set up , and 2 @.@ 15 million EU information booklets were prepared for mailing to every household in the country . Finally , summaries of the accession treaty , negotiation documents and governmental report on the EU accession negotiations were published online , as were the original documents . It was announced that the campaign cost 4 @.@ 8 million kuna ( c . € 640 @,@ 000 ) . 
 The leading parliamentary political parties in Croatia have jointly supported EU accession since 2005 , when a group called the Alliance for Europe ( Croatian : Savez za <unk> ) was set up as an informal alliance aimed at achieving EU membership as a strategic goal of Croatian foreign policy . Opposition to the referendum was voiced by the Croatian Party of Rights dr . Ante Starčević , a political party holding a single seat in the Croatian Parliament , claiming too little information provided to the voters , rather than the party being eurosceptic . Further opposition was voiced by several non @-@ parliamentary parties . The most substantial opposition to the accession came from the Croatian Party of Rights ( HSP ) , which demanded that the government fund its television campaign against EU membership . HSP also printed leaflets advocating rejecting EU accession . The party also organized other activities at 150 locations in the country aimed at the referendum proposal 's rejection . During the 2011 parliamentary election campaign , HSP declared itself as the only party advocating rejection of Croatian EU accession ; it failed to win a single seat , receiving 3 % of the votes . Further opposition to the Croatian EU membership came from a group of non @-@ parliamentary political parties organized as the Alliance for Croatia ( Croatian : Savez za <unk> ) claiming that the move jeopardizes Croatian independence , but the alliance 's December 2011 protest in Zagreb drew only 150 people . 
 The government 's campaign was criticized as having poor promotional videos , especially lacking in informational value . The final days of the campaign were marked by events in support of and opposition to joining the EU , as the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs set up an EU information event in Zagreb , while a protest against EU accession at the main city square drew 200 ( some arrests occurred ) . The Croatian Bishops ' Conference called on citizens to vote in the referendum , reminding Croatians that Croatia is a part of European culture while refraining from directly advocating either position . The Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts also supported joining the EU with 93 academicians in favour , 2 against and 1 abstention ; they said that the event represents a great opportunity for Croatia . In contrast to EU accession opponents ' request to postpone the referendum until Generals Gotovina and Markač were released by the ICTY , Gotovina himself urged citizens of Croatia to vote in the referendum and said that he would vote in favour of joining the EU . 
 = = Opinion polls = = 
 Opinion polling regarding Croatian EU membership was regularly carried out by the <unk> <unk> , Ipsos Puls and <unk> <unk> agencies . Since 2008 , these polls overall indicated support for Croatian EU membership ; in May 2011 and after , support ranged between 55 % and 63 % . The highest support since 2008 was 64 % in the first half of November 2010 . The lowest level of EU membership support ( between 23 % and 38 % ) was reported on 15 – 16 April 2011 in the wake of the ICTY 's guilty verdict for Generals Gotovina and Markač . 
 In early January 2012 , an NGO advocating voting against the referendum called the " Council for Croatia – NO TO EU " ( Croatian : <unk> za <unk> – NE U EU ) reported that they had contracted a Canadian company ( one unknown to the Croatian public ) called the " Business Knowledge Corporation " to conduct their own poll on the issue ; they stated that with 1 @,@ 942 polled , 57 @.@ 2 % were against the referendum while 41 % declined to answer the poll question . The NGO said that the apparent gross disparity between these results and the results of all other recent polls was due to government manipulation . 
 = = Results = = 
 The EU accession referendum passed with 66 @.@ 27 % of votes cast in support and 33 @.@ 13 % against EU membership for Croatia . There were 0 @.@ 6 % blank or invalid votes . Even though all Croatian citizens were voting in a single constituency for the referendum 's purposes , the State Election Committee published the results by individual counties , cities , and municipalities . The referendum passed in all Croatian counties . The greatest support for the referendum was recorded in Međimurje and Brod @-@ Posavina counties at 75 @.@ 73 % and 72 @.@ 61 % respectively . The lowest support for the EU accession was recorded in Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva County , where 42 @.@ 22 % votes were cast against the proposal . The Croatian diaspora voted 83 @.@ 13 % in support . Only 18 out of 556 cities or municipalities in Croatia voted against the referendum proposal . Of those , six are in Split @-@ Dalmatia County , four in Koprivnica @-@ Križevci County , two in Zagreb and Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva counties each , and a single municipality in Istria , Primorje @-@ Gorski Kotar , Šibenik @-@ Knin and Zadar counties each . 
 The average turnout at the referendum was 43 @.@ 51 % . The figure includes the voters living abroad , whose turnout was only 3 @.@ 51 % ; they comprise more than 9 % of the total Croatian electorate . The highest turnouts were recorded in the city of Zagreb and in Varaždin County , at 55 @.@ 13 % and 53 @.@ 66 % respectively , while the lowest turnout in Croatia was recorded in Lika @-@ Senj County at just 34 @.@ 52 % . There is no turnout threshold for a referendum to be legally valid . 
 The low turnout was attributed in part to poor voter registry maintenance . The registry allegedly contains up to 900 @,@ 000 nonexistent voters due to poor database maintenance , especially in updating the registry using death certificates and change of residence records . This allegation was supported by the 2011 census . The poor voter records were subsequently cited as the cause of the low formal turnout , which would otherwise have exceeded 50 % . It was later estimated that the actual turnout in Croatia itself , without the diaspora , was 61 % . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 = = = = Domestic = = = = 
 After the result 's announcement , President Josipović commented that the day was of great significance to Croatia , defining the nation as one with a European future . Prime Minister Milanović welcomed the decision as historic and as the first such decision made by Croatians alone ; he also said that the referendum represented a turning point for Croatia . Croatian Parliament Speaker Boris <unk> said that a new chapter of Croatian history and better fortune for the nation was dawning . The Croatian Minister of the Economy , Radimir Čačić , concluded that Croatia 's credit rating would have been downgraded if the referendum had not passed . He also stated that , since the referendum passed , it was a good opportunity to upgrade the rating . Minister of Finance Slavko <unk> stated that he was pleased with the result , but not with the voter turnout . He disagreed with Čačić that the credit rating could be saved by this result , since everybody had already counted on Croatian entry to the EU . Foreign and European Affairs Minister Vesna Pusić commented that the result was good news for Europe , which faced internal problems . Former Speaker Vladimir <unk> said that the low turnout was caused by external factors – the debt crisis in Europe and a loss of confidence in Croatian political parties and institutions . Luka <unk> , also a former speaker of the Parliament , added that it was good that Croats had voted to join the EU . Former Croatian foreign minister Gordan <unk> commented that the result is especially important for the nation 's youth , and former Croatian President Stjepan Mesić stated that Croatia should be competitive and use EU funds , adding that it is not enough to be happy with entering the EU . He also commented on claims that joining the EU was tantamount to entering a new Yugoslavia , saying that " only idiots think that Yugoslavia should be renewed " . 
 On the other side , the HSP president Daniel Srb argued that the referendum was illegitimate since 71 % of Croatian voters had not taken part in the referendum or had voted against the entry of Croatia into the EU , and warned that only 28 % of Croatian voters had supported joining the EU . Srb also added that Croatian citizens had shown distrust of the Croatian Government . Željko <unk> , a right @-@ wing politician , stated that the government destroyed the concept of Croatian citizens and created an impression that Croatia was unable to govern itself . <unk> stated that the government had brought Croatia into a decaying organization in an illegitimate way , adding that the referendum result was a defeat of Croatian independence and they would challenge its validity in court . By the 3 March 2012 deadline , the Constitutional Court of Croatia received 22 appeals challenging the referendum 's legality ; it ruled against them all . 
 = = = = International = = = = 
 Supranational bodies 
 European Union : Herman Van Rompuy , President of the European Council , and Jose Manuel Barroso stated that they salute the decision of Croatian voters . They stated that EU membership will bring Croatia new opportunities and contribute to its stability and prosperity . 
 States 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina : Members of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the results of the referendum , expressing an expectation that Croatia would be a representative of former Yugoslavia once it became a member of the EU . 
 Germany : German Chancellor Angela Merkel saluted the referendum 's outcome and stated that Germany anticipated the Croatian EU entry with joy . 
 Ireland : <unk> and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade Eamon Gilmore congratulated the Croatian people on their passing of the referendum on EU accession . 
 Montenegro : Montenegrin President Filip Vujanović congratulated the Croatian president Ivo Josipović and the Croatian Government on the , as he called it , historic decision to enter the EU . 
 Serbia : Serbian President Boris Tadić congratulated the Croatian people for their decision to enter the EU . He concluded that this act was significant for Croatia 's future and was moreover a positive signal for the whole region . He stated that the Croatian EU entry would make it easier for Serbia and other countries of the region to enter the EU . 
 Kosovo : Minister of Foreign Affairs Enver Hoxhaj congratulated the Croatian people for a successful referendum through a note sent to the Minister of Foreign and European Affairs of Croatia , Vesna Pusić . Minister Hoxhaj said in the note that Croatia remains a model to the other Balkan states aspiring to EU membership . " The referendum of Croatia 's people which represents their aspiration to become member of the European Union is a momentum and an important drive for the other Balkan countries , aiming towards the great European family " . 
 Slovenia : Slovene Prime Minister Borut Pahor congratulated Croatia on a strategic decision of importance to Europe and the whole region . He added that EU entry is not a solution to all problems , but it makes it easier to solve them . 
 United Kingdom : David <unk> of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office stated that he saluted the decision of Croatian citizens to join the EU . He also added that he hoped he would see Croatia as an EU member in July 2013 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Pursuant to the referendum 's outcome , the Croatian parliament ratified the accession treaty unanimously ( with 136 votes in favour ) on 9 March 2012 . 
 = The Man with the Golden Gun ( film ) = 
 The Man with the Golden Gun is a 1974 British spy film , the ninth entry in the James Bond series and the second to star Roger Moore as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . A loose adaptation of Ian Fleming 's novel of same name , the film has Bond sent after the Solex Agitator , a device that can harness the power of the sun , while facing the assassin Francisco Scaramanga , the " Man with the Golden Gun " . The action culminates in a duel between them that settles the fate of the Solex . 
 The Man with the Golden Gun was the fourth and final film in the series directed by Guy Hamilton . The script was written by Richard Maibaum and Tom Mankiewicz . The film was set in the face of the 1973 energy crisis , a dominant theme in the script — Britain had still not yet fully overcome the crisis when the film was released in December 1974 . The film also reflects the then @-@ popular martial arts film craze , with several kung fu scenes and a predominantly Asian location , being shot in Thailand , Hong Kong , and Macau . Part of the film is also set in Beirut , Lebanon , making it the first Bond film to include a Middle Eastern location . 
 The film saw mixed reviews , with Christopher Lee 's performance as Scaramanga , intended to be a villain of similar skill and ability to Bond , being praised ; but reviewers criticised the film as a whole , particularly the comedic approach , and some critics described it as the lowest point in the canon . Although the film was profitable , it is the fourth @-@ lowest @-@ grossing Bond film in the series . It was also the final film to be co @-@ produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman , with Saltzman selling his 50 % stake in Danjaq , LLC , the parent company of Eon Productions , after the release of the film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In London , a golden bullet with James Bond 's code " 007 " etched into its surface is received by MI6 . It is believed that it was sent by famed assassin Francisco Scaramanga , who uses a golden gun , to intimidate the agent . Because of the perceived threat to the agent 's life , M relieves Bond of a mission revolving around the work of a scientist named Gibson , thought to be in possession of information crucial to solving the energy crisis with solar power . Bond sets out unofficially to find Scaramanga . 
 After retrieving a spent golden bullet from a belly dancer in Beirut and tracking its manufacturer to Macau , Bond sees Andrea Anders , Scaramanga 's mistress , collecting the shipment of golden bullets at a casino . Bond follows her to Hong Kong and in her Peninsula Hotel room pressures her to tell him about Scaramanga , his appearance and his plans ; she directs him to the Bottoms Up Club . The club proves to be the location of Scaramanga 's next ' hit ' , Gibson , from whom Scaramanga 's dwarf henchman Nick Nack steals the " Solex agitator " , a key component of a solar power station . Before Bond can assert his innocence , however , Lieutenant Hip escorts him away from the scene , taking him to meet M and Q in a hidden headquarters in the wreck of the RMS Queen Elizabeth in the harbour . M assigns 007 to retrieve the Solex agitator and assassinate Scaramanga . 
 Bond then travels to Bangkok to meet Hai Fat , a wealthy Thai entrepreneur suspected of arranging Gibson 's murder . Bond poses as Scaramanga , but his plan backfires because Scaramanga himself is being hosted at Hai Fat 's estate . Bond is captured and placed in Fat 's dojo , where the fighters are instructed to kill him . After escaping with the aid of Hip and his nieces , Bond speeds away on a long tail boat along the river and reunites with his British assistant Mary Goodnight . Scaramanga subsequently kills Hai Fat and usurps control of his enterprise , taking the Solex with him . 
 Anders visits Bond , revealing that she had sent the bullet to London and wants Bond to kill Scaramanga . In payment , she promises to hand the Solex over to him at a Muay Thai venue the next day . At the match , Bond discovers Anders dead and meets Scaramanga . Bond spots the Solex on the floor and is able to smuggle it away to Hip , who passes it to Goodnight . Attempting to place a homing device on Scaramanga 's car , she is locked into the vehicle 's boot . Bond sees Scaramanga driving away and steals a showroom car to give chase , coincidentally with Sheriff J.W. Pepper seated within it . Bond and Pepper follow Scaramanga in a car chase across Bangkok , which concludes when Scaramanga 's car transforms into a plane , which flies him , Nick Nack and Goodnight to his private island . 
 Picking up Goodnight 's tracking device , Bond flies a seaplane into Red Chinese waters and lands at Scaramanga 's island . Scaramanga welcomes Bond and shows him the high @-@ tech solar power plant he has taken over , the technology for which he intends to sell to the highest bidder . While demonstrating the equipment , Scaramanga uses a powerful solar beam to destroy Bond 's plane . 
 Scaramanga then proposes a pistol duel with Bond on the beach ; the two men stand back to back and are instructed by Nick Nack to take twenty paces , but when Bond turns and fires , Scaramanga has vanished . Nick Nack leads Bond into Scaramanga 's Funhouse where Bond stands in the place of a mannequin of himself ; when Scaramanga walks by , Bond takes him by surprise and kills him . Goodnight , in <unk> one of Scaramanga 's henchman who falls into a pool of liquid helium , upsets the balance of the solar plant , which begins to go out of control . Bond retrieves the Solex unit just before the island explodes , and they escape unharmed in Scaramanga 's Chinese junk . Bond then fends off a final attack by Nick Nack , who had smuggled himself aboard , subduing him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roger Moore as James Bond : An MI6 agent who receives a golden bullet , supposedly from Scaramanga , indicating that he is a target of Scaramanga . 
 Christopher Lee as Francisco Scaramanga : The main villain and assassin who is identified by his use of a golden gun ; he also has a ' superfluous papilla ' , or supernumerary nipple . Scaramanga plans to misuse solar energy for destructive purposes . Lee was Ian Fleming 's step @-@ cousin and regular golf partner . Scaramanga has been called " the best @-@ characterised Bond villain yet . " 
 Britt Ekland as Mary Goodnight : Bond 's assistant . Described by the critic of the The Sunday Mirror as being " an astoundingly stupid blonde British agent " . Ekland had previously been married to Peter Sellers , who appeared in the 1967 Bond film , Casino Royale . 
 Maud Adams as Andrea Anders : Scaramanga 's mistress . Adams described the role as " a woman without a lot of choices : she 's under the influence of this very rich , strong man , and is fearing for her life most of the time ; and when she actually rebels against him and defects is a major step . " The Man with the Golden Gun was the first of three Bond films in which Maud Adams appeared ; in 1983 , she played a different character , Octopussy , in the film of the same name . She would also later have a cameo as an extra in Roger Moore 's last Bond film , A View to a Kill . 
 Hervé Villechaize as Nick Nack : Scaramanga 's dwarf manservant and accomplice . Villechaize was later known to television audiences as Tattoo , in the series Fantasy Island . 
 Richard Loo as Hai Fat : A Thai millionaire industrialist who was employing Scaramanga to assassinate the inventor of the " Solex " ( a revolutionary solar energy device ) and steal the device . 
 Soon @-@ Tek Oh as Lieutenant Hip : Bond 's local contact in Hong Kong and Bangkok . Soon @-@ Tek Oh trained in martial arts for the role , and his voice was partially dubbed over . 
 Clifton James as Sheriff J.W. Pepper : A Louisiana sheriff who happens to be on holiday in Thailand . Hamilton liked Pepper in the previous film , Live and Let Die , and asked <unk> to write him into The Man with the Golden Gun as well . Pepper 's inclusion has been seen as one of " several ill @-@ advised lurches into comedy " in the film . 
 Bernard Lee as M : The head of MI6 . 
 Marc Lawrence as Rodney : An American gangster who attempts to outshoot Scaramanga in his funhouse . Lawrence also appeared in Diamonds Are Forever . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q : The head of MI6 's technical department . 
 Marne Maitland as Lazar : A Portuguese gunsmith based in Macau who manufactures golden bullets for Scaramanga . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny . 
 James Cossins as <unk> : An MI6 armaments expert who identifies the maker of Scaramanga 's golden bullets . The first draft of the script originally called the role Boothroyd until it was realised that was also Q 's name and it was subsequently changed . 
 Carmen du Sautoy as Saida : A Beirut belly dancer . Saida was originally written as overweight and wearing excessive make @-@ up , but the producers decided to cast a woman closer to the classic Bond girl . 
 = = Production = = 
 Albert R. Broccoli and Harry Saltzman intended to follow You Only Live Twice with The Man with the Golden Gun , inviting Roger Moore to the Bond role . However , filming was planned in Cambodia , and the Samlaut Uprising made filming impractical , leading to the production being cancelled . On Her Majesty 's Secret Service was produced instead with George Lazenby as Bond . Lazenby 's next Bond film , Saltzman told a reporter , would be either The Man with the Golden Gun or Diamonds Are Forever . The producers chose the latter title , with Sean Connery returning as Bond . 
 Broccoli and Saltzman then decided to start production on The Man with the Golden Gun after Live and Let Die . This was the final Bond film to be co @-@ produced by Saltzman as his partnership with Broccoli was dissolved after the film 's release . Saltzman sold his 50 % stake in Eon Productions 's parent company , Danjaq , LLC , to United Artists to alleviate his financial problems . The resulting legalities over the Bond property delayed production of the next Bond film , The Spy Who Loved Me , for three years . 
 The novel is mostly set in Jamaica , a location which had been already used in the earlier films , Dr. No and Live and Let Die ; The Man with the Golden Gun saw a change in location to put Bond in the Far East for the second time . After considering Beirut , where part of the film is set , Iran , where the location scouting was done but eventually discarded because of the Yom Kippur War , and the Hạ Long Bay in Vietnam , the production team chose Thailand as a primary location , following a suggestion of production designer Peter Murton after he saw pictures of the Phuket bay in a magazine . Saltzman was happy with the choice of the Far East for the setting as he had always wanted to go on location in Thailand and Hong Kong . During the reconnaissance of locations in Hong Kong , Broccoli saw the wreckage of the former RMS Queen Elizabeth and came up with the idea of using it as the base for MI6 's Far East operations . 
 = = = Writing and themes = = = 
 Tom Mankiewicz wrote a first draft for the script in 1973 , delivering a script that was a battle of wills between Bond and Scaramanga , who he saw as Bond 's alter ego , " a super @-@ villain of the stature of Bond himself . " Tensions between Mankiewicz and Guy Hamilton and Mankiewicz 's growing sense that he was " feeling really tapped out on Bond " led to the re @-@ introduction of Richard Maibaum as the Bond screenwriter . 
 Maibaum , who had worked on six Bond films previously , delivered his own draft based on Mankiewicz 's work . Much of the plot involving Scaramanga being Bond 's equal was sidelined in later drafts . For one of the two main aspects of the plot , the screenwriters used the 1973 energy crisis as a backdrop to the film , allowing the MacGuffin of the " Solex agitator " to be introduced ; Broccoli 's stepson Michael G. Wilson researched solar power to create the Solex . 
 While Live and Let Die had borrowed heavily from the blaxploitation genre , The Man with the Golden Gun borrowed from the martial arts genre that was popular in the 1970s through films such as Fist of Fury ( 1972 ) and Enter the Dragon ( 1973 ) . However , the use of the martial arts for a fight scene in the film " lapses into <unk> " when Lt Hip and his two nieces defeat an entire dojo . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Originally , the role of Scaramanga was offered to Jack Palance , but he turned the opportunity down . Christopher Lee , who was eventually chosen to portray Scaramanga , was Ian Fleming 's step @-@ cousin and Fleming had suggested Lee for the role of Dr. Julius No in the 1962 series opener Dr. No . Lee noted that Fleming was a forgetful man and by the time he mentioned this to Broccoli and Saltzman they had cast Joseph Wiseman in the part . Due to filming on location in Bangkok , his role in the film affected Lee 's work the following year , as director Ken Russell was unable to sign Lee to play Specialist in the 1975 film Tommy , a part eventually given to Jack Nicholson . 
 Two Swedish models were cast as the Bond girls , Britt Ekland and Maud Adams . Ekland had been interested in playing a Bond girl since she had seen Dr. No , and contacted the producers about the main role of Mary Goodnight . Hamilton met Adams in New York , and cast her because " she was elegant and beautiful that it seemed to me she was the perfect Bond girl " . When Ekland read the news that Adams had been cast for The Man with the Golden Gun , she became upset , thinking Adams had been selected to play Goodnight . Broccoli then called Ekland to invite her for the main role , as after seeing her in a film , Broccoli thought Ekland 's " generous looks " made her a good contrast to Adams . Hamilton decided to put Marc Lawrence , whom he had worked with on Diamonds Are Forever , to play a gangster shot dead by Scaramanga at the start of the film , because he found it an interesting idea to " put sort of a Chicago gangster in the middle of Thailand " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming commenced on 6 November 1973 at the partly submerged wreck of the RMS Queen Elizabeth , which acted as a top @-@ secret MI6 base grounded in Victoria Harbour in Hong Kong . The crew was small , and a stunt double was used for James Bond . Other Hong Kong locations included the Hong Kong Dragon Garden as the estate of Hai Fat , which portrayed a location in Bangkok . The major part of principal photography started on 18 April 1974 in Thailand . Thai locations included Bangkok , Thon Buri , Phuket and the nearby Phang Nga Province , on the islands of Ko Khao Phing Kan ( Thai : <unk> ) and Ko Tapu ( Thai : เกาะตะปู ) . Scaramanga 's hideout is on Ko Khao Phing Kan , and Ko Tapu is often now referred to as James Bond Island both by locals and in tourist guidebooks . The scene during the boxing match used an actual Muay Thai fixture at the <unk> Boxing Stadium . 
 " [ A ] car chase [ in Bangkok occurred ] near a [ canal or ] <unk> on <unk> Kasem Road " . 
 In late April , production returned to Hong Kong , and also shot in Macau , as the island is famous for its casinos , which Hong Kong does not have . As some scenes in Thailand had to be finished , and also production had to move to studio work in Pinewood Studios — which included sets such as Scaramanga 's solar energy plant and island interior — Academy Award winner Oswald Morris was hired to finish the job after cinematographer Ted Moore became ill . Morris was initially reluctant , as he did not like his previous experiences taking over other cinematographers ' work , but accepted after dining with Broccoli . Production wrapped in Pinewood in August 1974 . 
 One of the main stunts in the film consisted of stunt driver " Bumps " Willard ( as James Bond ) driving an AMC Hornet leaping a broken bridge and spinning around 360 degrees in mid @-@ air about the longitudinal axis , doing an " aerial twist " ; Willard successfully completed the jump on the first take . The stunt was shown in slow motion as the scene was too fast . Composer John Barry added a slide whistle sound effect over the stunt , which Broccoli kept in despite thinking that it " <unk> the stunt " . Barry later regretted his decision , thinking the whistle " broke the golden rule " as the stunt was " for what it was all worth , a truly dangerous moment , ... true James Bond style " . The sound effect was described as " simply crass " , with one writer , Jim Smith , suggesting that the stunt " brings into focus the lack of excitement in the rest of the film and is spoilt by the use of ' comedy ' sound effects . " Eon Productions had licensed the stunt , which had been designed by Raymond McHenry ; the stunt was initially conceived at Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory ( CAL ) in Buffalo , New York as a test for their powerful vehicle simulation software . After development in simulation , ramps were built and the stunt was tested at CAL 's proving ground . It toured as part of the All American Thrill Show as the Astro Spiral before it was picked up for the film . The television programme Top Gear attempted to repeat the stunt in June 2008 , but failed . The scene where Scaramanga 's car flies was done at Bovington Camp , with a model inspired by an actual car plane prototype . Bond 's duel with Scaramanga , which <unk> said was inspired by the climactic faceoff in Shane , had its length shortened as the producers felt it was causing pacing problems . The trailers featured some of the cut scenes . 
 Hamilton adapted an idea of his involving Bond in Disneyland for Scaramanga 's funhouse . The funhouse was designed to be a place where Scaramanga could get the upper hand by distracting the adversary with obstacles , and was described by Murton as a " melting pot of ideas " which made it " both a funhouse and a horror house " . While an actual wax figure of Roger Moore was used , Moore 's stunt double Les Crawford was the cowboy figure , and Ray <unk> played the Al Capone figure . The canted sets such as the funhouse and the Queen Elizabeth had inspiration from German Expressionism films such as The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari . For Scaramanga 's solar power plant , Hamilton used both the Pinewood set and a miniature projected by Derek Meddings , often cutting between each other to show there was no discernible difference . The destruction of the facility was a combination of practical effects on the set and a destruction of the miniature . Meddings based the island blowing up on footage of the Battle of Monte Cassino . 
 = = = = Golden Gun prop = = = = 
 Three Golden Gun props were made ; a solid piece , one that could be fired with a cap and one that could be assembled and disassembled , although Christopher Lee said that the process " was extremely difficult . " The gun was " one of the more memorable props in the Bond series " and consisted of an interlocking fountain pen ( the barrel ) , cigarette lighter ( the bullet chamber ) , cigarette case ( the handle ) and cufflink ( the trigger ) with the bullet secured in Scaramanga 's belt buckle . The gun was designed to accept a single 4 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter , 23 @-@ carat gold bullet produced by Lazar , a gunsmith in Macau who specialized in custom weapons and ammunition . The Golden Gun ranked sixth in a 2008 20th Century Fox poll of the most popular film weapons , which surveyed approximately 2 @,@ 000 film fans . 
 On 10 October 2008 , it was discovered that one of the golden guns used in the film , which is estimated to be worth around £ 80 @,@ 000 , was missing ( suspected stolen ) from Elstree Props , a company based at Hertfordshire studios . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The theme tune to The Man with the Golden Gun , released in 1974 , was performed by Scottish singer Lulu and composed by John Barry . Tony Bramwell , who worked for Harry Saltzman 's music @-@ publishing company " Hilary Music " , wanted Elton John or Cat Stevens to sing the title song . However , by this time the producers were taking turns producing the films ; Albert Broccoli — whose turn it was to produce — rejected Bramwell 's suggestions . The lyrics to the Lulu song were written by Don Black and have been described variously as " ludicrous " , " inane " and " one long stream of smut " , because of its sexual innuendo . Bramwell subsequently dismissed the Barry @-@ Lulu tune as " mundane " . 
 Alice Cooper wrote a song titled " Man with the Golden Gun " to be used by the producers of the film , but they opted for Lulu 's song instead . Cooper released his song in his album Muscle of Love . 
 Barry had only three weeks to score The Man with the Golden Gun and the theme tune and score are generally considered by critics to be among the weakest of Barry 's contributions to the series — an opinion shared by Barry himself : " It 's the one I hate most ... it just never happened for me . " The Man with the Golden Gun was also the first to drop the distinctive plucked guitar from the theme heard over the gun barrel opening . A sample from one of the songs , " Hip 's Trip " , was used by The Prodigy in the " <unk> " track on the album The Fat of the Land . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Man with the Golden Gun was premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 19 December 1974 , with general release in the United Kingdom the same day . The film was made with an estimated budget of $ 7 million ; despite initial good returns from the box office , The Man with the Golden Gun grossed a total of $ 97 @.@ 6 million at the worldwide box office , with $ 21 million earned in the USA , making it the fourth lowest @-@ grossing Bond film in the series . 
 The promotion of the film had " one of the more anaemic advertising campaigns of the series " and there were few products available , apart from the soundtrack and paperback book , although Lone Star Toys produced a " James Bond 007 pistol " in gold ; this differed from the weapon used by Scaramanga in the film as it was little more than a Walther P38 with a silencer fitted . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 The Man with the Golden Gun met with mixed reviews upon its release . Derek Malcolm in The Guardian savaged the film , saying that " the script is the <unk> of the lot and ... Roger Moore as 007 is the last man on earth to make it sound better than it is . " There was some praise from Malcolm , although it was muted , saying that " Christopher Lee ... makes a <unk> villain and Britt Ekland a passable Mary Goodnight ... Up to scratch in production values ... the film is otherwise merely a potboiler . Maybe enough 's enough . " Tom Milne , writing in The Guardian 's sister paper , The Observer was even more caustic , writing that " This series , which has been scraping the bottom of the barrel for some time , is now through the bottom ... with depressing borrowings from Hong Kong kung fu movies , not to mention even more depressing echoes of the ' Carry On ' smut . " He summed up the film by saying it was " sadly lacking in wit or imagination . " 
 David Robinson , the film critic at The Times dismissed the film and Moore 's performance , saying that Moore was " substituting non @-@ acting for Connery 's throwaway " , while Britt Ekland was " his beautiful , idiot side @-@ kick ... the least appealing of the Bond heroines . " Robinson was equally damning of the changes in the production crew , observing that Ken Adam , an " attraction of the early Bond films , " had been " replaced by decorators of competence but little of his flair . " The writers " get progressively more naive in their creation of a suburban dream of <unk> and adventure . " Writing for The New York Times , Nora Sayre considered the film to suffer from " poverty of invention and excitement " , criticising the writing and Moore 's performance and finding Villechaize and Lee as the only positive points for their " sinister vitality that cuts through the narrative dough . " 
 The Sunday Mirror critic observed that The Man with the Golden Gun " isn 't the best Bond ever " but found it " remarkable that Messrs. Saltzman and Broccoli can still produce such slick and inventive entertainment " . Arthur <unk> , writing in the Sunday Mirror 's sister paper , the Daily Mirror concentrated more on lead actor Roger Moore than the film itself : " What Sean Connery used to achieve with a touch of sardonic sadism , Roger Moore conveys with roguish schoolboy charm and the odd , dry quip . " <unk> also said that Moore " manages to make even this reduced @-@ voltage Bond a character with plenty of sparkle . " Judith Crist of New York Magazine gave a positive review , saying " the scenery 's grand , the lines nice and the gadgetry entertaining " , also describing the production as a film that " capture [ s ] the free @-@ wheeling , whooshing non @-@ sense of early Fleming 's fairy tale for grown @-@ ups orientation " . 
 Jay Cocks , writing in Time , focused on gadgets such as Scaramanga 's flying car , as what is wrong with both The Man with the Golden Gun and the more recent films in the Bond series , calling them " <unk> , uninspired , these exercises show the strain of stretching fantasy well past wit . " Cocks also criticised the actors , saying that Moore " lacks all Connery 's strengths and has several deep deficiencies " , while Lee was " an unusually unimpressive villain " . 
 = = = Reflective reviews = = = 
 Opinion on The Man with the Golden Gun has not changed with the passing of time : as of November 2015 , the film holds a 45 % rating from Rotten Tomatoes , while Ian Freer of Empire found the film " an entertaining 007 adventure , something that tonally , if not qualitatively , could happily sit within the Connery era . " IGN chose The Man with the Golden Gun as the worst Bond film , claiming it " has a great concept ... but the execution is sloppy and silly " , and Entertainment Weekly chose it as the fourth worst , saying that the " plot is almost as puny as the sidekick " . On the other hand , Norman Wilner of MSN chose it as the tenth best , with much praise for Christopher Lee 's performance . 
 Some critics saw the film as uninspired , tired and boring . Roger Moore was also criticised for playing Bond against type , in a style more reminiscent of Sean Connery , although Lee 's performance received acclaim . Danny Peary wrote that The Man with the Golden Gun " lacks invention ... is one of the least interesting Bond films " and " a very laboured movie , with Bond a stiff bore , Adams and Britt Ekland uninspired leading ladies " . Peary believes that the shootout between Bond and Scaramanga in the funhouse " is the one good scene in the movie , and even it has an unsatisfying finish " and also bemoaned the presence of Clifton James , " unfortunately reprising his unfunny redneck sheriff from Live and Let Die . " 
 Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly argues that Scaramanga is the best villain of the Roger Moore James Bond films , while listing Mary Goodnight among the worst Bond girls , saying that " Ekland may have had one of the series ' best bikinis , but her dopey , <unk> portrayal was a turnoff as much to filmgoers as to fans of Ian Fleming 's novels " . The Times put Scaramanga as the fifth best Bond villain in their list , and Ekland was the third in their list of the top 10 most fashionable Bond girls . Maxim listed Goodnight at fourth in their Top Bond Babes list , saying that " Agent Goodnight is the <unk> spy alive . But who cares as long as she 's using her perfect bikini bottom to muck things up ? " 
 = Hack Wilson = 
 Lewis Robert Wilson ( April 26 , 1900 – November 23 , 1948 ) was an American Major League Baseball player who played 12 seasons for the New York Giants , Chicago Cubs , Brooklyn Dodgers and Philadelphia Phillies . Despite his diminutive stature , he was one of the most accomplished power hitters in the game during the late 1920s and early 1930s . His 1930 season with the Cubs is widely considered one of the most memorable individual single @-@ season hitting performances in baseball history . Highlights included 56 home runs , the National League record for 68 years ; and 191 runs batted in , a mark yet to be surpassed . " For a brief span of a few years " , wrote a sportswriter of the day , " this hammered down little strongman actually rivaled the mighty [ Babe ] Ruth . " 
 While Wilson 's combativeness and excessive alcohol consumption made him one of the most colorful sports personalities of his era , his drinking and fighting undoubtedly contributed to a premature end to his athletic career and , ultimately , his premature demise . He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1979 . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = Early life and minor leagues = = = 
 Lewis Robert Wilson was born April 26 , 1900 , in the Pennsylvania steel mill town of Ellwood City , north of Pittsburgh . His mother , Jennie <unk> , 16 , was an unemployed drifter from Philadelphia ; his father , Robert Wilson , 24 , was a steel worker . His parents never married ; both were heavy drinkers , and in 1907 his mother died of appendicitis at the age of 24 . 
 In 1916 Lewis left school to take a job at a locomotive factory , swinging a sledge hammer for four dollars a week . Although only five feet six inches tall , he weighed 195 pounds with an 18 @-@ inch neck , and feet that fit into size @-@ five @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half shoes . Sportswriter Shirley Povich later observed that he was " built along the lines of a beer keg , and was not wholly unfamiliar with its contents . " While his unusual physique was considered an oddity at the time , his large head , tiny feet , short legs and broad , flat face are now recognized as hallmarks of the Fetal Alcohol Syndrome . 
 In 1921 Wilson moved to Martinsburg , West Virginia , to join the Martinsburg Mountaineers of the Class " D " Blue Ridge League . After breaking his leg while sliding into home plate during his first professional game , he was moved from the catcher 's position to the outfield . In 1922 he met Virginia <unk> , a 34 @-@ year @-@ old office clerk ; they married the following year . In 1923 , playing for the " B " division Portsmouth Truckers , he led the Virginia League in hitting with a .388 batting average . Late in the season , New York Giants manager John McGraw purchased his contract from Portsmouth for $ 10 @,@ 500 . 
 = = = New York Giants = = = 
 Wilson made his major league debut with the Giants on September 29 , 1923 and became the starting left fielder the following season . By mid @-@ July he was ranked second in the National League ( NL ) in hitting . He ended the season with a .295 average , 10 home runs , and 57 runs batted in ( RBIs ) as New York won the NL pennant . In the 1924 World Series he averaged only .233 in a seven @-@ game loss to the Washington Senators . 
 Multiple stories exist to explain the origin of Wilson 's nickname : By one account , a New York newspaper held a nicknaming contest ; the winning entry was " Hack " because he reminded many fans of another stocky athlete , the popular wrestler Georg Hackenschmidt . In another version , McGraw is said to have remarked that Wilson 's physique was reminiscent of a " hack " ( slang for taxicab in that era ) . Giants teammate Bill Cunningham claimed that the nickname was based on Wilson 's resemblance to Hack Miller , an outfielder with the Chicago Cubs . The New York Times printed the first documented usage of " Hack " on June 10 , 1924 . 
 Early in the 1925 season Wilson hit the longest home run on record at Ebbets Field against the Brooklyn Robins , but fell into a slump in May , and was replaced in left field by Irish Meusel . On July 2 he hit two home runs in one inning , tying Ken Williams ' major league record set in 1922 , but his hitting slump continued . In August McGraw told reporters that he had " ... made the mistake of rushing [ Wilson ] along , " and sent him to the Giants ' minor league affiliate , the Toledo Mud Hens of the American Association . At season 's end a front office oversight left him unprotected on the Toledo roster , and the last @-@ place Chicago Cubs acquired him on waivers . " They let go the best outfielder I ever played alongside " , said Giants right fielder Ross Youngs , " and they 're going to regret it . " 
 During the 1925 World Series — between the Senators and the Pittsburgh Pirates — Wilson 's son , Robert , was born . 
 = = = Glory years with the Cubs = = = 
 Wilson regained his form as the Cubs ' center fielder in 1926 and soon became a favorite of Chicago fans . On May 24 he hit the center field scoreboard with one of the longest home runs in Wrigley Field history as the Cubs came from behind to defeat the Boston Braves . Later that evening he made news again when he was arrested during a police raid of a Prohibition @-@ era speakeasy while trying to escape through the rear window , and was fined one dollar . He ended the season with a league @-@ leading 21 home runs along with 36 doubles , 109 RBIs , a .321 batting average , and a .406 on @-@ base percentage . The Cubs improved to fourth place , and Wilson ended the year ranked fifth in voting for the NL 's Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award . 
 Another strong performance followed in 1927 as Wilson once again led the league in home runs . Although the Cubs were in first place heading into the final month of the season , the team faltered and again finished fourth . Wilson posted a .318 average with 30 home runs and 129 RBIs , and led NL outfielders with 400 putouts . He led the NL in home runs for a third consecutive year in 1928 with 31 , along with 120 RBIs and a .313 average as the Cubs improved to third place . 
 Wilson had a combative streak and sometimes initiated fights with opposing players and fans . On June 22 , 1928 , a near @-@ riot broke out in the ninth inning at Wrigley Field against the St. Louis Cardinals when Wilson jumped into the box seats to attack a heckling fan . An estimated 5 @,@ 000 spectators swarmed the field before police could separate the combatants and restore order . The fan sued Wilson for $ 20 @,@ 000 , but a jury ruled in his favor . The following year he took offense at a remark by Cincinnati Reds pitcher Ray Kolp , and – upon reaching first base after hitting a single – he charged into the Reds dugout , punching Kolp several times before they could be separated . Later that evening at the train station , Wilson exchanged words and blows with Cincinnati player Pete Donohue . In late 1929 he signed a contract to fight Art Shires of the Chicago White Sox in a boxing match , but reneged after Cubs president William Veeck , Sr. enlisted Hack 's wife Virginia to dissuade him , and then Shires lost a fight to George Trafton of the Chicago Bears . There was nothing to gain , Wilson said , by fighting a defeated boxer . 
 Wilson 's " penchant for festivities " is also well documented . Biographer Clifton Blue Parker described him as " ... the Roaring ' 20s epitome of a baseball player , primed for an age of American excess ... at a time when baseball was America 's favorite sport . " His love of drinking and partying did not endear him to Cubs owner William Wrigley , who abhorred alcohol consumption . ( Wilson always insisted that he never played drunk ; " hung over , yes ; drunk , no . " ) Manager Joe McCarthy worked hard to shield Wilson from Wrigley , and to keep him on an even keel . " Better than any other manager " , wrote sportswriter Frank Graham , " Joe understood Hack , made allowances for him when he failed , and rewarded him with praise when he did well . Joe could be strict and stern with his players ... but he never was with Hack , and Hack repaid him by playing as he never had before , nor would again . " 
 In 1929 Wilson hit .345 with 39 home runs and a league @-@ record 159 RBIs . He and new teammate Rogers Hornsby ( who also contributed 39 home runs ) led the Cubs to their first NL pennant in eleven years . In the World Series against Connie Mack 's Philadelphia Athletics , Wilson 's <unk> hitting performance was eclipsed by two fielding errors at Shibe Park . Though trailing the Series two games to one , the Cubs were leading by a score of 8 – 0 in the fourth game when the Athletics mounted a 10 @-@ run rally in the seventh inning . Wilson lost two fly balls in the sun ; the second , with two runners on base , led to an inside @-@ the @-@ park home run by Mule Haas as the Athletics won 10 – 8 . After the game , McCarthy reportedly told a boy asking for a souvenir baseball , " Come back tomorrow and stand behind Wilson , and you 'll be able to pick up all the balls you want ! " The Athletics won again the next day to take the Series in five games . 
 = = = = 1930 : The peak = = = = 
 Wilson 's 1930 season , aided by a lively ball wound with special Australian wool , is considered one of the best single @-@ season hitting performances in baseball history . By the middle of July he had accumulated 82 RBIs . In August he hit 13 home runs and 53 RBIs , and by September 15 he had reached 176 RBIs , breaking Lou Gehrig 's major league record established three years earlier . He ended the season with 190 , along with an NL @-@ record 56 home runs , .356 batting average , .454 on @-@ base percentage , and league @-@ leading <unk> slugging percentage . He was unofficially voted the NL 's most " useful " player by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( which did not inaugurate its official MVP award until 1931 ) . 
 In 1999 the Commissioner of Baseball officially increased Wilson 's 1930 RBI total to 191 after a box score analysis by baseball historian Jerome Holtzman revealed that Charlie Grimm had been mistakenly credited with an RBI actually driven home by Wilson during the second game of a doubleheader on July 28 . Wilson 's 191 RBIs remains one of baseball 's most enduring records ; only Gehrig ( 184 ) and Hank Greenberg ( 183 ) ever came close , and there have been no serious challenges in the last 75 years . ( The best recent effort was 165 by Manny Ramirez in 1999 . ) 
 Reds catcher Clyde <unk> asserted that Wilson should have been credited with an additional home run in 1930 as well . " He hit one in Cincinnati one day " , he said , " way up in the seats , hit it so hard that it bounced right back onto the field . The umpire had a bad angle on it and ruled that it had hit the screen and bounced back . I was sitting in the Cincinnati bullpen , and of course , we weren 't going to say anything . But Hack really hit 57 that year . " Wilson 's official total of 56 stood as the NL record until the 1998 season , when it was broken by Sammy Sosa ( 66 ) and Mark McGwire ( 70 ) . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Wilson 's success in the 1930 season served only to fuel his drinking habits , and in 1931 he reported to spring training 20 pounds overweight . In addition , the NL responded to the prodigious offensive statistics of the previous year ( the only season , other than 1894 , in which the league as a whole batted over .300 ) by introducing a heavier ball with raised stitching to allow pitchers to gain a better grip and throw sharper curveballs . Wilson complained that the new Cubs manager , former teammate Rogers Hornsby , did not allow him to " swing away " as much as Joe McCarthy had . He hit his 200th career home run at Ebbets Field on June 18 — only the fourth player ever to do so , behind Ruth , Cy Williams , and Hornsby — but then fell into a protracted slump , and was benched in late May . By late August Wrigley publicly expressed his desire to trade him . On September 6 he was suspended without pay for the remainder of the season after a fight with reporters aboard a train in Cincinnati . He was hitting .261 with only 13 home runs ( his 1930 production during August alone ) at the time . 
 In December 1931 , the Cubs traded Wilson , along with Bud Teachout , to the St. Louis Cardinals for Burleigh Grimes . Less than a month later , the Cardinals sent him to the Brooklyn Dodgers for minor league outfielder Bob Parham and $ 25 @,@ 000 . Wilson hit .297 with 23 home runs and 123 RBIs for Brooklyn in 1932 . He began 1933 with a ninth @-@ inning game @-@ winning pinch @-@ hit inside @-@ the @-@ park grand slam home run at Ebbets Field — the first pinch @-@ hit grand slam in Dodger history , and only the third inside @-@ the @-@ park pinch @-@ hit grand slam in MLB history . By season 's end his offensive totals had dropped substantially , and he was hitting .262 when the Dodgers released him mid @-@ season in 1934 . The Philadelphia Phillies signed him immediately , but after just two hits in 20 at bats he was released again a month later . After a final season with the Albany Senators of the Class " A " New York – Pennsylvania League , Wilson retired at the age of 35 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 In a 12 @-@ year major league career , Wilson played in 1 @,@ 348 games and accumulated 1 @,@ 461 hits in 4 @,@ 760 at @-@ bats for a .307 career batting average and a .395 on @-@ base percentage . He hit 244 home runs and batted in 1 @,@ 063 runs , led the NL in home runs four times , and surpassed 100 RBIs six times . Defensively , he finished his career with a <unk> fielding percentage . 
 = = Life after baseball = = 
 Wilson returned to Martinsburg where he opened a pool hall , but encountered financial problems due to a failed sporting goods business venture , and then a rancorous divorce from Virginia . By 1938 he was working as a bartender near Brooklyn 's Ebbets Field where he sang for drinks , but had to quit when customers became too abusive . A night club venture in suburban Chicago was another financial failure . In 1944 he took a job as a good will ambassador for a professional basketball team in Washington , D.C. , where he lamented that fans remembered his two dropped fly balls in the 1929 World Series far more vividly than his 56 home runs and 191 RBIs in 1930 . Unable to find work in professional baseball , he moved to Baltimore where he worked as a tool checker in an airplane manufacturing plant and later as a laborer for the City of Baltimore . When municipal authorities realized who he was , he was made the manager of a Baltimore public swimming pool . 
 On October 4 , 1948 Wilson was discovered unconscious after a fall in his home . Though the accident did not appear serious at first , pneumonia and other complications developed and he died of internal hemorrhaging on November 23 , 1948 , at the age of 48 . 
 Wilson — once the highest @-@ paid player in the National League — died penniless ; his son , Robert , refused to claim his remains . NL President Ford Frick finally sent money to cover his funeral expenses . His gray burial suit was donated by the undertaker . In marked contrast to Babe Ruth 's funeral , which had been attended by thousands just three months earlier , only a few hundred people were present for Wilson 's services . He was buried in Rosedale Cemetery in the town where he made his professional playing debut , Martinsburg , West Virginia . 
 Ten months later Joe McCarthy organized a second , more complete memorial service , attended by Kiki Cuyler , Charlie Grimm , Nick Altrock and other players from the Cubs and the Martinsburg team ( by then renamed the Blue Sox ) . A granite tombstone was unveiled , with the inscription , " One of Baseball 's Immortals , Lewis R. ( Hack ) Wilson , Rests Here . " 
 One week before his death , Wilson gave an interview to CBS Radio which was reprinted in Chicago newspapers . In 1949 Charlie Grimm , the Cubs ' new manager , posted a framed excerpt from that interview in the Cubs clubhouse , where it remains . It reads , in part : 
 " Talent isn 't enough . You need common sense and good advice . If anyone tries to tell you different , tell them the story of Hack Wilson . ... Kids in and out of baseball who think because they have talent they have the world by the tail . It isn 't so . Kids , don 't be too big to accept advice . Don 't let what happened to me happen to you . " 
 In 1979 Wilson was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee . A Martinsburg street is named Hack Wilson Way in his honor , and the access road to a large city park within his home town , Ellwood City , Pennsylvania , is known as Hack Wilson Drive . 
 = Myrtle Bachelder = 
 Myrtle Claire Bachelder ( March 13 , 1908 – May 22 , 1997 ) was an American chemist and Women 's Army Corps officer , who is noted for her secret work on the Manhattan Project atomic bomb program , and for the development of techniques in the chemistry of metals . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Myrtle C. Bachelder was born on March 13 , 1908 in Orange , Massachusetts . She earned a bachelor of science degree from Middlebury College in 1930 , and became a high school science teacher and athletics coach in South Hadley Falls , Massachusetts . She received her master of education degree from Boston University . 
 = = World War II : the atomic bomb = = 
 During World War II , Bachelder enlisted in the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) in November 1942 , at the Springfield , Massachusetts headquarters . After spending time in training at military bases in several U.S. states , she received orders assigning her to the Company ' D ' WAC Detachment of the Manhattan District , United States Army Corps of Engineers . Her secret assignment was to lead a group of 15 to 20 women from the WAC , stationed in Des Moines , Iowa , to Fort Sill , Oklahoma , and from there to Santa Fe , New Mexico . She and the women under her command arrived at Los Alamos , New Mexico on October 21 , 1943 . 
 " Manhattan " was the code name for the special military division dedicated to developing an atomic weapon . In the clandestine laboratory at the remote Los Alamos desert site , Bachelder was responsible for the analysis of the spectroscopy of uranium isotopes . Since the uranium @-@ 235 isotope is fissile , whereas the uranium @-@ 238 isotope is not , Bachelder 's role in the project was a crucial task : to ensure the purity of the sub @-@ critical material , and therefore the nuclear explosion , of the world 's first atomic bombs . 
 These methods were used during the preparation of plutonium @-@ 239 , the fissile material used in the construction of the atomic bomb for the Trinity nuclear test , on July 16 , 1945 . Analogous methods were used for the uranium weapon , code @-@ named " Little Boy " , which destroyed Hiroshima , Japan on August 6 , 1945 , and for the plutonium bomb which destroyed Nagasaki , Japan on August 9 , 1945 , leading to the Japanese surrender . The secret program was under the general direction of J. Robert Oppenheimer , whom Bachelder described as : 
 A " pencil and paper man " , immersed in physics theory , who was more than a little amazed by the Los Alamos lab machinery . Bachelder recalled Oppenheimer standing in front of her lab 's most important and expensive instrument punching buttons at random ... He asked " What does this do ? " Then he 'd punch another button ... He might have wrecked the machine if he hadn 't finally been persuaded to leave it alone . 
 = = Contribution to post @-@ war developments in nuclear energy = = 
 The conclusion of the Second World War was also the dawning of a new " Atomic Age " , in which the peacetime potential of nuclear energy began to be explored . Bachelder was among the scientists who opposed the May @-@ Johnson Bill of October 1945 , a Congressional bill proposed by the Interim Committee , which would have maintained military control over nuclear research . The bill was defeated in Congress and superseded by the McMahon Atomic Energy Act . In January 1947 , the newly formed Atomic Energy Commission approved the declassification of 270 previously secret documents . These included discoveries related to X @-@ radiation and purification of uranium ores , which had been made by Bachelder during the course of the war effort . At this time , the rarity and importance of Bachelder 's achievements as a woman in science were also acknowledged . 
 = = Scientific research and later career = = 
 After leaving the Army , Bachelder became a research chemist at the University of Chicago , where the first self @-@ sustaining nuclear reaction had been achieved in 1942 . Nobel Laureate James Franck had been Director of the Chemistry Division of the Metallurgical Laboratory during the earlier phases of the Manhattan Project . Bachelder joined the University 's Institute for the Study of Metals ( renamed as the James Franck Institute in 1967 ) , and she conducted further research in <unk> . 
 Among other achievements , Bachelder developed methods for the purification of the rare elements tellurium and indium . Other aspects of her broad scientific expertise found application in the field of marine archaeology , when she determined the chemical composition of brass cannons found in the Aegean Sea on sunken ships . She also made contributions to astrochemistry , when NASA asked her to analyze the chemistry of Moon rocks which had been collected from the Moon 's surface during the Apollo missions from 1969 to 1972 . 
 Bachelder retired from the Franck Institute in 1973 , and was subsequently active as an official of the American Association of Retired Persons ( AARP ) . She died in Chicago on May 22 , 1997 . 
 = = Reflections = = 
 Bachelder believed that her role in the development of the atomic bomb , and the subsequent use of atomic weapons against Japan , had been justified , in order to end the Second World War , and to avoid greater loss of life that would have been entailed , in a U.S. land invasion and extended conflict with Japan . Later in life , during the period of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks , Bachelder stated that , although she supported nuclear arms control : 
 Opponents of nuclear weapons should resist the urge to take the 1940s bomb @-@ building effort out of its proper historical context — " One cannot pull that activity out of that time , set it down in the 1980s , and pass judgement . " 
 = Bobby Kay = 
 Romeo Cormier is a retired Canadian professional wrestler best known by the ring name Bobby Kay . He is a member of the Cormier wrestling family , a group of four brothers who were all successful professional wrestlers . Romeo Cormier competed in Canada and the United States from 1967 to the mid @-@ 1980s . He also worked as a wrestling promoter . After retiring from wrestling , Cormier began performing country music professionally before taking a job with Loblaws . 
 = = Career = = 
 Cormier grew up with eight brothers and four sisters on the family 's farm in what is now Memramcook , New Brunswick . He became interested in professional wrestling because of his older brothers Jean @-@ Louis , Yvon , and Leonce , who competed under the ring names Rudy Kay , The Beast , and Leo Burke , respectively . At age 17 , Yvon took Romeo to Calgary , Alberta to train under Stu Hart . 
 Cormier made his professional debut in 1967 and wrestled in several countries . While touring the world as a competitor , he used several ring names . In Calgary 's Stampede Wrestling , he used the name Norton Jackson . He then took on the moniker Terry Martin while wrestling in Central States Wrestling . He competed primarily as a tag team wrestler , and he won his first title belt in Kansas City on October 31 , 1968 . Teaming with his brother Leonce , who was using the name Tommy Martin , he won the Central States version of the NWA North American Tag Team Championship . The reign lasted for one week before they dropped the title to The Texas Outlaws ( Dick Murdoch and Dusty Rhodes ) . 
 Cormier also competed for the Eastern Sports Association ( ESA ) , which was affiliated with the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) . His brother Jean @-@ Louis , competing as Rudy Kay , was both a booker and wrestler for ESA , and Cormier used his brother 's ring name as the inspiration to become Bobby Kay . In the ESA , the four Cormier brothers often took turns facing the same wrestlers . A heel ( villain ) wrestler would face one brother , then move on to face the rest in succession . Bobby Kay held the ESA International Tag Team Championship several times in the ESA ; his first came when he teamed with brother Leonce ( who was then competing as Leo Burke ) to win the title in mid @-@ 1973 by defeating Fred Sweetan and Mike Dubois . They held the title for about one month before dropping it to Sweetan and Kurt Von Steiger . Kay then teamed with brother Yvon ( who was known as The Beast ) to regain the title . The teams traded the championship back and forth once again over the course of the summer . They lost the title to Sweetan and Jim Dillon in autumn 1973 . After Dillon left the promotion , the championship was vacated ; Kay and The Beast regained it the following year . The reign lasted less than one week before Sweetan and Dubois won the title . Teaming with Burke in June 1974 , Kay had one final reign with the title ; he sustained an injury , however , and Ron Thompson defended the championship in Kay 's place . 
 Later that year , Cormier returned to Kansas , where he won the NWA Central States Heavyweight Championship in December . Cormier later returned to Stampede Wrestling , this time adopting the ring name Bobby Burke to form a tag team with his brother Leo Burke . They defeated The Royal Kangaroos in 1977 to win the Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship . After dropping the title to Mr. Hito and Michel Martel later that year , they did not regain the belts until 1980 , when they defeated Duke Myers and Bobby Bass . 
 Cormier competed in Toronto from 1982 to 1984 under the ring name Terry Kay , a name that he had also used while wrestling in Charlotte , North Carolina . He won the NWA Canadian Television Championship on December 26 , 1982 . He and his brother Leonce bought out Jean @-@ Louis 's stake in the Eastern Sports Association but ran into problems with their partner Al Zinck and television deals , which enabled Atlantic Grand Prix Wrestling ( AGPW ) to gain a stronger foothold in the Maritimes . His final title victory came in AGPW , where he won the company 's North American Tag Team Championship in 1990 while teaming with his brother Leo . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Cormier retired from professional wrestling to spend more time with his wife and two children . He also performed country music as part of the Bobby Kay Band . He taught his longtime friend , former professional wrestling referee Hubert Gallant , to play the guitar . He also made another attempt at promoting wrestling events in such locations as Moncton , New Brunswick and Halifax , Nova Scotia in the mid @-@ 1980s . After arranging exclusive deals to promote shows in specific territories , Cormier had trouble attracting fans after the World Wrestling Federation moved into the same areas . Because the WWF had a larger budget and was able to gain access to arenas with larger seating capacities , Cormier 's promotion was unable to compete . In 2006 , a celebration was held in Memramcook to honor the four wrestling Cormier brothers . Cormier now balances competing in occasional wrestling matches with his job in shipping and receiving for Loblaws . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Atlantic Grand Prix Wrestling 
 AGPW North American Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) — with Leo Burke 
 Central States Wrestling 
 NWA Central States Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA North American Tag Team Championship ( Central States version ) ( 1 time ) — with Tommy Martin 
 Eastern Sports Association 
 ESA International Tag Team Championship ( 5 times ) — with Leo Burke ( 2 ) and The Beast ( 3 ) 
 Maple Leaf Wrestling 
 NWA Canadian Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Stampede Wrestling 
 Stampede Wrestling International Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) — with Leo Burke 
 = Wild Barts Can 't Be Broken = 
 " Wild Barts Can 't Be Broken " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' tenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 17 , 1999 . When Homer , Barney , Lenny , and Carl drunkenly vandalize Springfield Elementary School , it is blamed on the children of Springfield , prompting Chief Wiggum to impose a curfew . The children respond by setting up a pirate radio show in which they reveal the embarrassing secrets of Springfield 's adults . The episode was written by Larry Doyle and directed by Mark Ervin . The concept behind the episode originates from show producer Mike Scully always wanting to do an episode where the children would be subject to a curfew . The episode received an 8 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating , and mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons are at Springfield War Memorial Stadium watching the Springfield Isotopes baseball game . After the first pitch Homer , becomes disappointed by the poor performance of the Isotopes and waits in the car . Six months later , he enters Moe 's Tavern and is informed by Lenny and Carl that the Isotopes are in the playoffs , and have , so far , been playing well . Homer quickly joins in with the fans to support the Isotopes , who end up winning the National League pennant . To celebrate Homer , Lenny , Carl , and Barney go on a drunken binge and accidentally vandalize Springfield Elementary School . 
 The next morning , Homer discovers his car , which is badly damaged , and is oblivious that in reality he and his friends were responsible . Chief Wiggum blindly jumps to the conclusion that the vandalism at the school is the work of kids and immediately enforces a curfew on all of Springfield 's children , prohibiting them from being on the streets after sunset . Bart and Lisa , as well as the other children of Springfield , are annoyed with not being allowed out after sunset . The children soon rally together to rebel and see an old drive @-@ in horror movie which they saw advertised on television , called " The <unk> " , a film recently discovered in a concrete vault after it was deemed too violent . While at the movie , the movie was interrupted as they are caught by Chief Wiggum . As a punishment , the children must clean a police billboard with Wiggum on it . 
 The children then set up a radio show called " We Know All Your Secrets " , in which they expose the secrets of the adults of Springfield like the kids in the movie . The children are tracked down at the billboard by Professor Frink 's machine , and an argument between the children and the adults ensues . Unfortunately , the argument rouses the ire of Grampa and the other senior citizens trying to get some sleep , and they vow to teach both groups a lesson . Their revenge turns out to be enforcing a curfew banning everyone under the age of seventy from the streets after dark , which is a measure that passed by a single vote , due to Homer refusing to cast a ballot . 
 = = Production = = 
 Mike Scully wanted to do an episode where the children of Springfield would be subject to a curfew . He came up with the idea to do a Kids vs. Adults episode , where the children would be blamed for something the adults have done . The name of the baseball announcer , Denis Conroy , was used because that is the name of writer Larry Doyle 's uncle . Dan Castellaneta ad libbed Homer singing " Hitler is a jerk , Mussolini .... " It was added in to the episode only for the purpose of filling time . The Chief Wiggum billboard sketch was inspired by Beaver Cleaver getting stuck in a soup bowl billboard during the " In the Soup " episode of Leave It to Beaver . The music playing when the kids secretly leave their houses to see the movie was written by composer Alf Clausen . 
 The episode 's title is a reference to the movie Wild Hearts Can 't Be Broken . The movie The <unk> is a parody of the 1960 film Village of the Damned . The sequence showing the children taking the equipment to build their radio transmitter is a recreation of a sequence from the short comedy films Our Gang , featuring similar music and a dog , with Milhouse dressed like Our Gang character Alfalfa . The review Marge reads of Talk to the Hand – " The writing snaps , crackles and pops " – was how Variety reviewed the sitcom Just Shoot Me ! when it first aired in 1997 . The musical argument between kids , adults and seniors is a parody of the song " Kids " from the musical Bye Bye Birdie . When Lisa is flipping through the radio channels , President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Infamy Speech can be heard . In the Springfield Elementary School shower @-@ room Homer , Barney , Lenny , and Carl sing a medley of Queen songs consisting of " We Are the Champions " and " We Will Rock You " . When Cyndi Lauper sings " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " it is to the tune of her hit song " Girls Just Want to Have Fun " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Wild Barts Can 't Be Broken " finished tied for 40th in the weekly ratings for the week of January 11 – 17 , 1999 with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 9 . The episode has met with mostly positive reviews . In his review of The Simpsons ' tenth season , James Plath of Dvdtown.com noted " Wild Barts Can 't Be Broken " as " pretty decent " . Peter Brown of If regards " Lard of the Dance " , " Marge Simpson in : Screaming Yellow Honkers " , " Wild Barts Can 't Be Broken " , and " Homer Simpson in : " Kidney Trouble " " as " some of the best episodes of the season " . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote that the episode was " a curious unmemorable episode with a good chunk in the middle . Neither the opening with The Isotopes nor the finale with the rather dire song help this one at all , and frankly , if it wasn 't for the superb parody of Village of the Damned , and the kids ' revenge by revealing their family 's secrets , it 'd sink without trace . " In 2007 , Simon Crerar of The Times listed Lauper 's performance as one of the thirty @-@ three funniest cameos in the history of the show . 
 = Over the Hedge ( DS game ) = 
 Over the Hedge is a platform video game with stealth game elements developed by Vicarious Visions and published by Activision for the Nintendo DS handheld video game console . It was first released in North America , and was later released in Europe . The game is set immediately after the events of the DreamWorks movie Over the Hedge , unlike the console versions which follow the events of the film . Vicarious Visions is responsible for many handheld versions of licensed video games . Publisher Activision has a longstanding business relationship with animation studio DreamWorks and has exclusive global rights to publish games based on DreamWorks animated films . 
 Gameplay involves guiding three playable woodland creatures through suburban houses to collect items and return them to their forest . House inhabitants and traps must be avoided or neutralized to succeed . The game 's plot concerns Gladys Sharp 's attempt to turn what 's left of the animals ' forest into a swimming pool ; the animals try to prevent this by luring endangered species to the forest , making the forest a protected habitat . Over the Hedge received positive and average reviews from the gaming press , as well as gaming website IGN 's ' Best Game No One Played ' award for 2006 . The game was praised for the technical achievement of displaying full 3D on both of the Nintendo DS ' screens , but some reviewers found the gameplay repetitive . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game has been likened to both Tomb Raider and Metal Gear Solid due to the 3D platforming and stealth gameplay respectively . Players guide the forest inhabitants through 20 levels , during which they must infiltrate a series of suburban homes in order to steal a variety of items and destroy construction materials . The items needed to lure endangered animals to the forest must be collected from houses and carried back to the forest one at a time . Each level requires several trips to be completed . Security systems must be avoided or deactivated in order to progress through each level . Household members and their pets must also be avoided , distracted or stunned by a thrown object . For example , a phone card can be used to make a prank call to lure a householder away , catnip can be used to distract cats . 
 Each character has their own unique abilities . Verne has the strength to push and carry large items and can retract into his shell in order to avoid detection , but cannot jump as high or run as swift as the other characters . RJ has average strength and agility . He can climb , lift items and also throw Verne . <unk> is the most agile of the three , running swifter and jumping higher . This enables him to circumvent security more easily . 
 Over the Hedge is presented in full 3D on both of the Nintendo DS ' screens , which is not often seen in a Nintendo DS game . The upper screen displays the game in an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder third person perspective , whereas the touch screen shows an overhead perspective . The lower screen indicates the sight range of enemies and can be used as a touch screen to target enemies to attack . The console 's microphone is used to attract the attention of dogs or to rouse the woodland creatures should they be knocked unconscious . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 A multiplayer mini @-@ game is included and allows two players to compete via the DS ' wireless connection , only one player needs an Over the Hedge game cartridge for two separate DS consoles to play . Stella the skunk is available in this game mode , alongside the three playable characters from the main game . Players navigate a maze to collect food before the timer runs out . The player with the most food wins the game . A most of five pieces of food can be carried at once , these must be carried to a collection area before more food can be picked up . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Over the Hedge is set immediately after the events of the animated film . Gladys Sharp , president of the homeowners ' association , plans to bulldoze the forest in order to build a swimming pool . She has been joined by a new character , the taxidermist . The animals decide to lure endangered species to the forest in order to have it declared a protected habitat , preventing its destruction . The householders have been warned about RJ and company 's intentions , and have created traps from everyday objects to repel the thieves . 
 = = Development = = 
 Unlike the home console versions , the Nintendo DS version was created as a separate game by Vicarious Visions . As well as differing from the other versions , this version was designed as a sequel to the animated film . Vicarious Visions by this point were responsible for bringing many series to the DS , including games in the Tony Hawk and Spider @-@ Man series . During development the team had to work with the handheld system 's limited 3D capabilities , such as " video RAM and software limitations " , techniques they would later discuss at a lecture held during the 2007 Game Developers Conference . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received both positive and average reviews from the gaming press , with an average score of 73 % from both Game Rankings and a 71 from Metacritic . Over the Hedge was awarded IGN 's " Best Game No One Played " award during their 2006 game of the year awards . 
 Several reviewers were impressed by the game 's 3D graphics , considering the graphical limitations of the Nintendo DS . GameZone 's Louis Bedigian commented " Three @-@ dimensional worlds are such a rarity on the DS that you 'll definitely take notice " . In particular , the technical accomplishment of using the DS ' two screens to show gameplay in two different angles and in full 3D was praised . 
 Critics are divided over the game 's difficulty level and target audience . Some found the game too easy for adult players . Nintendo World Report 's Lasse <unk> stated Over the Hedge is not engaging to adults or children due to " the repetitive collect @-@ a @-@ thon nature of the game and the one @-@ dimensional gameplay " . GameZone 's Louis Bedigian had similar reservations , " Players young and old will be turned off by the lack of excitement " . Other reviewers felt the game was suitable for children and adults . Cheat Code Central 's Cole Smith stated " It 's not just for kids . It 's loaded with variety and will engage your mind , not just your reflexes " . <unk> 's Pete Sellers found the game " a well designed adventure that requires patience and planning " . 
 Some reviewers found the gameplay , focused mainly on collecting and returning objects , as repetitive . In his GameSpot review , Frank Provo stated " Games geared toward younger players are typically repetitive , but Over the Hedge for the Nintendo DS sets a new standard for repetition " . He lists one of the negative aspects of the game as " Whole game feels like housecleaning or a real estate tour " . GameZone 's Louis Bedigian also found the game repetitive , saying " .. the game stays far away from anything deep , opting for a simplistic series of missions that redefine the meaning of the word rehash " . 
 = Normandy landings = 
 The Normandy landings ( codenamed Operation Neptune ) were the landing operations on Tuesday , 6 June 1944 ( termed D @-@ Day ) of the Allied invasion of Normandy in Operation Overlord during World War II . The largest seaborne invasion in history , the operation began the liberation of German @-@ occupied northwestern Europe from Nazi control , and contributed to the Allied victory on the Western Front . 
 Planning for the operation began in 1943 . In the months leading up to the invasion , the Allies conducted a substantial military deception , codenamed Operation Bodyguard , to mislead the Germans as to the date and location of the main Allied landings . The weather on D @-@ Day was far from ideal , but postponing would have meant a delay of at least two weeks , as the invasion planners had requirements for the phase of the moon , the tides , and the time of day that meant only a few days in each month were deemed suitable . Adolf Hitler placed German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel in command of German forces and of developing fortifications along the Atlantic Wall in anticipation of an Allied invasion . 
 The amphibious landings were preceded by extensive aerial and naval bombardment and an airborne assault — the landing of 24 @,@ 000 American , British , and Canadian airborne troops shortly after midnight . Allied infantry and armoured divisions began landing on the coast of France at 06 : 30 . The target 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) stretch of the Normandy coast was divided into five sectors : Utah , Omaha , Gold , Juno , and Sword Beach . Strong winds blew the landing craft east of their intended positions , particularly at Utah and Omaha . The men landed under heavy fire from gun emplacements overlooking the beaches , and the shore was mined and covered with obstacles such as wooden stakes , metal tripods , and barbed wire , making the work of the beach @-@ clearing teams difficult and dangerous . Casualties were heaviest at Omaha , with its high cliffs . At Gold , Juno , and Sword , several fortified towns were cleared in house @-@ to @-@ house fighting , and two major gun emplacements at Gold were disabled using specialised tanks . 
 The Allies failed to achieve any of their goals on the first day . Carentan , St. Lô , and Bayeux remained in German hands , and Caen , a major objective , was not captured until 21 July . Only two of the beaches ( Juno and Gold ) were linked on the first day , and all five beachheads were not connected until 12 June ; however , the operation gained a foothold which the Allies gradually expanded over the coming months . German casualties on D @-@ Day were around 1 @,@ 000 men . Allied casualties were at least 10 @,@ 000 , with 4 @,@ 414 confirmed dead . Museums , memorials , and war cemeteries in the area host many visitors each year . 
 = = Background = = 
 Between 27 May and 4 June 1940 , over 338 @,@ 000 troops of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) and the French Army , trapped along the northern coast of France , were evacuated in the Dunkirk evacuation . After the German Army invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 , the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin began pressing for the creation of a second front in western Europe . In late May 1942 the Soviet Union and the United States made a joint announcement that a " ... full understanding was reached with regard to the urgent tasks of creating a second front in Europe in 1942 . " However , Churchill persuaded Roosevelt to postpone the promised invasion as , even with American help , the Allies did not have adequate forces for such a strike . 
 Instead of an immediate return to France , the Western Allies staged offensives in the Mediterranean Theater of Operations , where British troops were already stationed . By mid @-@ 1943 , the campaign in North Africa had been won . The Allies then launched the invasion of Sicily in July 1943 , and later invaded Italy in September 1943 . By then , Soviet forces were on the offensive and had won a major victory at the Battle of Stalingrad . The decision to undertake a cross @-@ channel invasion within the next year was taken at the Trident Conference in Washington in May 1943 . Initial planning was constrained by the number of available landing craft , most of which were already committed in the Mediterranean and Pacific . At the Tehran Conference in November 1943 , Roosevelt and Churchill promised Stalin that they would open the long @-@ delayed second front in May 1944 . 
 Four sites were considered for the landings : Brittany , the Cotentin Peninsula , Normandy , and Pas de Calais . As Brittany and Cotentin are peninsulas , it would have been possible for the Germans to cut off the Allied advance at a relatively narrow isthmus , so these sites were rejected . As the Pas de Calais is the closest point in continental Europe to Britain , the Germans considered it to be the most likely initial landing zone , so it was the most heavily fortified region . But it offered few opportunities for expansion , as the area is bounded by numerous rivers and canals , whereas landings on a broad front in Normandy would permit simultaneous threats against the port of Cherbourg , coastal ports further west in Brittany , and an overland attack towards Paris and eventually into Germany . Normandy was hence chosen as the landing site . The most serious drawback of the Normandy coast — the lack of port facilities — would be overcome through the development of artificial Mulberry harbours . A series of specialised tanks , nicknamed Hobart 's Funnies , were created to deal with conditions expected during the Normandy Campaign , such as scaling sea walls and providing close support on the beach . 
 The Allies planned to launch the invasion on 1 May 1944 . The initial draft of the plan was accepted at the Quebec Conference in August 1943 . General Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed commander of Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) . General Bernard Montgomery was named as commander of the 21st Army Group , which comprised all of the land forces involved in the invasion . On 31 December 1943 , Eisenhower and Montgomery first saw the plan , which proposed amphibious landings by three divisions with two more divisions in support . The two generals immediately insisted that the scale of the initial invasion be expanded to five divisions , with airborne descents by three additional divisions , to allow operations on a wider front and speed up the capture of the port at Cherbourg . The need to acquire or produce extra landing craft for the expanded operation meant that the invasion had to be delayed to June . Eventually , thirty @-@ nine Allied divisions would be committed to the Battle of Normandy : twenty @-@ two American , twelve British , three Canadian , one Polish , and one French , totalling over a million troops all under overall British command . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Operation Overlord was the name assigned to the establishment of a large @-@ scale lodgement on the Continent . The first phase , the amphibious invasion and establishment of a secure foothold , was codenamed Operation Neptune . To gain the air superiority needed to ensure a successful invasion , the Allies undertook a bombing campaign ( codenamed Operation <unk> ) that targeted German aircraft production , fuel supplies , and airfields . Elaborate deceptions , codenamed Operation Bodyguard , were undertaken in the months leading up to the invasion to prevent the Germans from learning the timing and location of the invasion . 
 The landings were to be preceded by airborne landings near Caen on the eastern flank to secure the Orne River bridges and north of Carentan on the western flank . The Americans , assigned to land at Utah Beach and Omaha Beach , were to attempt to capture Carentan and St. Lô the first day , then cut off the Cotentin Peninsula and eventually capture the port facilities at Cherbourg . The British at Sword Beach and Gold Beach and Canadians at Juno Beach would protect the American flank and attempt to establish airfields near Caen . A secure lodgement would be established and an attempt made to hold all territory north of the Avranches @-@ Falaise line within the first three weeks . Montgomery envisaged a ninety @-@ day battle , lasting until all Allied forces reached the Seine . 
 = = Deception plans = = 
 Under the overall umbrella of Operation Bodyguard , the Allies conducted several subsidiary operations designed to mislead the Germans as to the date and location of the Allied landings . Operation Fortitude included Fortitude North , a misinformation campaign using fake radio traffic to lead the Germans into expecting an attack on Norway , and Fortitude South , a major deception involving the creation of a fictitious First United States Army Group under Lieutenant General George S. Patton , supposedly located in Kent and Sussex . Fortitude South was intended to deceive the Germans into believing that the main attack would take place at Calais . Genuine radio messages from 21st Army Group were first routed to Kent via landline and then broadcast , to give Germans the impression that most of the Allied troops were stationed there . Patton was stationed in England until 6 July , thus continuing to deceive the Germans into believing a second attack would take place at Calais . 
 Many of the German radar stations on the French coast were destroyed in preparation for the landings . In addition , on the night before the invasion , a small group of Special Air Service ( SAS ) operators deployed dummy paratroopers over Le Havre and Isigny . These dummies led the Germans to believe that an additional airborne landing had occurred . On that same night , in Operation Taxable , No. 617 Squadron RAF dropped strips of " window " , metal foil that caused a radar return which was mistakenly interpreted by German radar operators as a naval convoy near Le Havre . The illusion was bolstered by a group of small craft towing barrage balloons . A similar deception was undertaken near Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer in the Pas de Calais area by No. 218 Squadron RAF in Operation Glimmer . 
 = = Weather = = 
 The invasion planners determined a set of conditions involving the phase of the moon , the tides , and the time of day that would be satisfied on only a few days in each month . A full moon was desirable , as it would provide illumination for aircraft pilots and have the highest tides . The Allies wanted to schedule the landings for shortly before dawn , midway between low and high tide , with the tide coming in . This would improve the visibility of obstacles on the beach , while minimising the amount of time the men would be exposed in the open . Eisenhower had tentatively selected 5 June as the date for the assault . However , on 4 June , conditions were unsuitable for a landing : high winds and heavy seas made it impossible to launch landing craft , and low clouds would prevent aircraft from finding their targets . 
 Group Captain James Stagg of the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) met Eisenhower on the evening of 4 June . He and his meteorological team predicted that the weather would improve enough for the invasion to proceed on 6 June . The next available dates with the required tidal conditions ( but without the desirable full moon ) would be two weeks later , from 18 to 20 June . Postponement of the invasion would have required recalling men and ships already in position to cross the Channel , and would have increased the chance that the invasion plans would be detected . After much discussion with the other senior commanders , Eisenhower decided that the invasion should go ahead on the 6th . A major storm battered the Normandy coast from 19 to 22 June , which would have made the beach landings impossible . 
 Allied control of the Atlantic meant German meteorologists had less information than the Allies on incoming weather patterns . As the Luftwaffe meteorological centre in Paris was predicting two weeks of stormy weather , many Wehrmacht commanders left their posts to attend war games in Rennes , and men in many units were given leave . Field Marshal Erwin Rommel returned to Germany for his wife 's birthday and to meet Hitler to try to obtain more Panzers . 
 = = German order of battle = = 
 Nazi Germany had at its disposal fifty divisions in France and the Low Countries , with another eighteen stationed in Denmark and Norway . Fifteen divisions were in the process of formation in Germany . Combat losses throughout the war , particularly on the Eastern Front , meant that the Germans no longer had a pool of able young men from which to draw . German soldiers were now on average six years older than their Allied counterparts . Many in the Normandy area were Ostlegionen ( eastern legions ) – conscripts and volunteers from Russia , Mongolia , and elsewhere . They were provided mainly with unreliable captured equipment and lacked motorised transport . Many German units were under strength . 
 German Supreme commander : Adolf Hitler 
 Oberbefehlshaber West ( Supreme Commander West ; OB West ) : Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt 
 ( Panzer Group West : General Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg ) 
 Army Group B : Field Marshal Erwin Rommel 
 7th Army : Generaloberst Friedrich Dollmann 
 LXXXIV Corps under General der Artillerie Erich Marcks 
 = = = Cotentin Peninsula = = = 
 Allied forces attacking Utah Beach faced the following German units stationed on the Cotentin Peninsula : 
 709th Static Infantry Division under Generalleutnant Karl @-@ Wilhelm von <unk> numbered 12 @,@ 320 men , many of them Ostlegionen ( non @-@ German conscripts recruited from Soviet prisoners of war , Georgians , and Poles ) <unk> Grenadier Regiment 
 <unk> Grenadier Regiment 
 919th Grenadier Regiment 
 = = = Grandcamps Sector = = = 
 Americans assaulting Omaha Beach faced the following troops : 
 352nd Infantry Division under Generalleutnant Dietrich Kraiss , a full @-@ strength unit of around 12 @,@ 000 brought in by Rommel on 15 March and reinforced by two additional <unk> Grenadier Regiment 
 915th Grenadier Regiment ( as reserves ) 
 916th Grenadier Regiment 
 726th Infantry Regiment ( from 716th Infantry Division ) 
 352nd Artillery Regiment 
 Allied forces at Gold and Juno faced the following elements of the 352nd Infantry Division : 
 914th Grenadier Regiment 
 915th Grenadier Regiment 
 916th Grenadier Regiment 
 352nd Artillery Regiment 
 = = = Forces around Caen = = = 
 Allied forces attacking Gold , Juno , and Sword Beaches faced the following German units : 
 716th Static Infantry Division under Generalleutnant Wilhelm Richter . At 7 @,@ 000 troops , the division was significantly <unk> Infantry Regiment 
 <unk> Artillery Regiment 
 21st Panzer Division , ( south of Caen ) under Generalmajor Edgar Feuchtinger included 146 tanks and 50 assault guns , plus supporting infantry and <unk> Panzer Regiment 
 125th Panzergrenadier Regiment 
 192nd Panzergrenadier Regiment 
 155th Panzer Artillery Regiment 
 = = Atlantic Wall = = 
 Alarmed by the raids on St Nazaire and Dieppe in 1942 , Hitler had ordered the construction of fortifications all along the Atlantic coast , from Spain to Norway , to protect against an expected Allied invasion . He envisioned 15 @,@ 000 emplacements manned by 300 @,@ 000 troops , but shortages , particularly of concrete and manpower , meant that most of the strongpoints were never built . As it was expected to be the site of the invasion , the Pas de Calais was heavily defended . In the Normandy area , the best fortifications were concentrated at the port facilities at Cherbourg and Saint @-@ Malo . Rommel was assigned to oversee the construction of further fortifications along the expected invasion front , which stretched from the Netherlands to Cherbourg , and was given command of the newly re @-@ formed Army Group B , which included the 7th Army , the 15th Army , and the forces guarding the Netherlands . Reserves for this group included the 2nd , 21st , and 116th Panzer divisions . 
 Rommel believed that the Normandy coast could be a possible landing point for the invasion , so he ordered the construction of extensive defensive works along that shore . In addition to concrete gun emplacements at strategic points along the coast , he ordered wooden stakes , metal tripods , mines , and large anti @-@ tank obstacles to be placed on the beaches to delay the approach of landing craft and impede the movement of tanks . Expecting the Allies to land at high tide so that the infantry would spend less time exposed on the beach , he ordered many of these obstacles to be placed at the high water mark . Tangles of barbed wire , booby traps , and the removal of ground cover made the approach hazardous for infantry . On Rommel 's order , the number of mines along the coast was tripled . The Allied air offensive over Germany had crippled the Luftwaffe and established air supremacy over western Europe , so Rommel knew he could not expect effective air support . The Luftwaffe could muster only 815 aircraft over Normandy in comparison to the Allies ' 9 @,@ 543 . Rommel arranged for booby @-@ trapped stakes known as Rommelspargel ( Rommel 's asparagus ) to be installed in meadows and fields to deter airborne landings . 
 = = Armoured reserves = = 
 Rommel believed that Germany 's best chance was to stop the invasion at the shore . He requested that the mobile reserves , especially tanks , be stationed as close to the coast as possible . Rundstedt , Geyr , and other senior commanders objected . They believed that the invasion could not be stopped on the beaches . Geyr argued for a conventional doctrine : keeping the Panzer formations concentrated in a central position around Paris and Rouen and deploying them only when the main Allied beachhead had been identified . He also noted that , in the Italian Campaign , the armoured units stationed near the coast had been damaged by naval bombardment . Rommel 's opinion was that , because of Allied air supremacy , the large @-@ scale movement of tanks would not be possible once the invasion was under way . Hitler made the final decision , which was to leave three Panzer divisions under Geyr 's command and give Rommel operational control of three more as reserves . Hitler took personal control of four divisions as strategic reserves , not to be used without his direct orders . 
 = = Allied order of battle = = 
 Commander , SHAEF : General Dwight D. Eisenhower 
 Commander , 21st Army Group : General Bernard Montgomery 
 = = = American zones = = = 
 Commander , First Army ( United States ) : Lieutenant General Omar Bradley 
 The First Army contingent totalled approximately 73 @,@ 000 men , including 15 @,@ 600 from the airborne divisions . 
 Utah Beach 
 VII Corps , commanded by Major General J. Lawton Collins 4th Infantry Division : Major General Raymond O. Barton 
 82nd Airborne Division : Major General Matthew Ridgway 
 90th Infantry Division : Brigadier General Jay W. <unk> 
 101st Airborne Division : Major General Maxwell D. Taylor 
 Omaha Beach 
 V Corps , commanded by Major General Leonard T. Gerow , making up 34 @,@ 250 men 1st Infantry Division : Major General Clarence R. Huebner 
 29th Infantry Division : Major General Charles H. Gerhardt 
 = = = British and Canadian zones = = = 
 Commander , Second Army ( Britain and Canada ) : Lieutenant General Sir Miles Dempsey 
 Overall , the Second Army contingent consisted of 83 @,@ 115 men , 61 @,@ 715 of them British . The nominally British air and naval support units included a large number of personnel from Allied nations , including several RAF squadrons manned almost exclusively by overseas air crew . For example , the Australian contribution to the operation included a regular Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) squadron , nine Article XV squadrons , and hundreds of personnel posted to RAF units and RN warships . The RAF supplied two @-@ thirds of the aircraft involved in the invasion . 
 Gold Beach 
 XXX Corps , commanded by Lieutenant General Gerard Bucknall 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division : Major General D.A.H. Graham 
 Juno Beach 
 British I Corps , commanded by Lieutenant General John Crocker 3rd Canadian Division : Major General Rod Keller 
 Sword Beach 
 British I Corps , commanded by Lieutenant General John Crocker 3rd Infantry Division : Major General Tom Rennie 
 6th Airborne Division : Major General R.N. Gale 
 79th Armoured Division : Major General Percy Hobart provided specialised armoured vehicles which supported the landings on all beaches in Second Army 's sector . 
 = = Coordination with the French Resistance = = 
 Through the London @-@ based État @-@ major des Forces Françaises de l <unk> ( French Forces of the Interior ) , the British Special Operations Executive orchestrated a massive campaign of sabotage to be implemented by the French Resistance . The Allies developed four plans for the Resistance to execute on D @-@ Day and the following days : 
 Plan Vert was a 15 @-@ day operation to sabotage the rail system . 
 Plan Bleu dealt with destroying electrical facilities . 
 Plan Tortue was a delaying operation aimed at the enemy forces that would potentially reinforce Axis forces at Normandy . 
 Plan Violet dealt with cutting underground telephone and teleprinter cables . 
 The resistance was alerted to carry out these tasks by messages <unk> transmitted by the BBC 's French service from London . Several hundred of these messages , which might be snatches of poetry , quotations from literature , or random sentences , were regularly transmitted , masking the few that were actually significant . In the weeks preceding the landings , lists of messages and their meanings were distributed to resistance groups . An increase in radio activity on 5 June was correctly interpreted by German intelligence to mean that an invasion was imminent or underway . However , because of the barrage of previous false warnings and misinformation , most units ignored the warning . 
 A 1965 report from the Counter @-@ insurgency Information Analysis Center details the results of the French Resistance 's sabotage efforts : " In the southeast , 52 locomotives were destroyed on 6 June and the railway line cut in more than 500 places . Normandy was isolated as of 7 June . " 
 = = Naval activity = = 
 Naval operations for the invasion were described by historian Correlli Barnett as a " never surpassed masterpiece of planning " . In overall command was British Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay , who had served as Flag officer at Dover during the Dunkirk evacuation four years earlier . He had also been responsible for the naval planning of the invasion of North Africa in 1942 , and one of the two fleets carrying troops for the invasion of Sicily the following year . 
 The invasion fleet was drawn from eight different navies , comprising 6 @,@ 939 vessels : 1 @,@ 213 warships , 4 @,@ 126 landing craft of various types , 736 ancillary craft , and 864 merchant vessels . The majority of the fleet was supplied by the UK , which provided 892 warships and 3 @,@ 261 landing craft . There were 195 @,@ 700 naval personnel involved . The invasion fleet was split into the Western Naval Task Force ( under Admiral Alan G Kirk ) supporting the American sectors and the Eastern Naval Task Force ( under Admiral Sir Philip Vian ) in the British and Canadian sectors . Available to the fleet were five battleships , twenty cruisers , sixty @-@ five destroyers , and two monitors . German ships in the area on D @-@ Day included three torpedo boats , twenty @-@ nine fast attack craft , thirty @-@ six R boats , and thirty @-@ six minesweepers and patrol boats . The Germans also had several U @-@ boats available , and all the approaches had been heavily mined . 
 = = = Naval losses = = = 
 At 05 : 10 , four German torpedo boats reached the Eastern Task Force and launched fifteen torpedoes , sinking the Norwegian destroyer HNoMS <unk> off Sword beach but missing the battleships HMS Warspite and Ramillies . After attacking , the German vessels turned away and fled east into a smoke screen that had been laid by the RAF to shield the fleet from the long @-@ range battery at Le Havre . Allied losses to mines included USS Corry off Utah and USS PC @-@ 1261 , a 173 @-@ foot patrol craft . In addition , many landing craft were lost . 
 = = Bombardment = = 
 Bombing of Normandy began around midnight with over 2 @,@ 200 British , Canadian , and American bombers attacking targets along the coast and further inland . The coastal bombing attack was largely ineffective at Omaha , because low cloud cover made the assigned targets difficult to see . Concerned about inflicting casualties on their own troops , many bombers delayed their attacks too long and failed to hit the beach defences . The Germans had 570 aircraft stationed in Normandy and the Low Countries on D @-@ Day , and another 964 in Germany . 
 Minesweepers began clearing channels for the invasion fleet shortly after midnight and finished just after dawn without encountering the enemy . The Western Task Force included the battleships Arkansas , Nevada , and Texas , plus eight cruisers , twenty @-@ eight destroyers , and one monitor . The Eastern Task Force included the battleships HMS Ramillies and Warspite and the monitor HMS Roberts , twelve cruisers , and thirty @-@ seven destroyers . Naval bombardment of areas behind the beach commenced at 05 : 45 , while it was still dark , with the gunners switching to pre @-@ assigned targets on the beach as soon as it was light enough to see , at 05 : 50 . Since troops were scheduled to land at Utah and Omaha starting at 06 : 30 ( an hour earlier than the British beaches ) , these areas received only about 40 minutes of naval bombardment before the assault troops began to land on the shore . Some of the landing craft had been modified to provide close support fire , and self @-@ propelled amphibious Duplex @-@ Drive tanks ( DD tanks ) , specially designed for the Normandy landings , were to land shortly before the infantry to provide covering fire . However , few arrived in advance of the infantry , and many sank before reaching the shore , especially at Omaha . 
 = = The landings = = 
 = = = Airborne operations = = = 
 The success of the amphibious landings depended on the establishment of a secure lodgement from which to expand the beachhead to allow the buildup of a well @-@ supplied force capable of breaking out . The amphibious forces were especially vulnerable to strong enemy counter @-@ attacks before the buildup of sufficient forces in the beachhead could be accomplished . To slow or eliminate the enemy 's ability to organise and launch counter @-@ attacks during this critical period , airborne operations were used to seize key objectives such as bridges , road crossings , and terrain features , particularly on the eastern and western flanks of the landing areas . The airborne landings some distance behind the beaches were also intended to ease the egress of the amphibious forces off the beaches , and in some cases to neutralise German coastal defence batteries and more quickly expand the area of the beachhead . 
 The US 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions were assigned to objectives west of Utah Beach , where they hoped to capture and control the few narrow causeways through terrain that had been intentionally flooded by the Germans . Reports from Allied intelligence in mid @-@ May of the arrival of the German 91st Infantry Division meant the intended drop zones had to be shifted eastward and to the south . The British 6th Airborne Division , on the eastern flank , was assigned to capture intact the bridges over the Caen Canal and River Orne , destroy five bridges over the Dives 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) to the east , and destroy the Merville Gun Battery overlooking Sword Beach . Free French paratroopers from the British SAS Brigade were assigned to objectives in Brittany from 5 June through August in Operations <unk> , <unk> , and Cooney . 
 BBC war correspondent Robert Barr described the scene as paratroopers prepared to board their aircraft : 
 Their faces were darkened with cocoa ; sheathed knives were strapped to their ankles ; tommy guns strapped to their waists ; bandoliers and hand grenades , coils of rope , pick handles , spades , rubber dinghies hung around them , and a few personal <unk> , like the lad who was taking a newspaper to read on the plane ... There was an easy familiar touch about the way they were getting ready , as though they had done it often before . Well , yes , they had kitted up and climbed aboard often just like this – twenty , thirty , forty times some of them , but it had never been quite like this before . This was the first combat jump for every one of them . 
 = = = = American airborne landings = = = = 
 The American airborne landings began with the arrival of pathfinders at 00 : 15 . Navigation was difficult because of a bank of thick cloud , and as a result only one of the five paratrooper drop zones was accurately marked with radar signals and Aldis lamps . Paratroopers of the US 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions , numbering over 13 @,@ 000 men , were delivered by Douglas C @-@ 47 Skytrains of the IX Troop Carrier Command . To avoid flying over the invasion fleet , the planes arrived from the west over the Cotentin Peninsula and exited over Utah Beach . 
 Paratroops from 101st Airborne were dropped beginning around 01 : 30 , tasked with controlling the causeways behind Utah Beach and destroying road and rail bridges over the Douve River . The C @-@ 47s could not fly in a tight formation because of thick cloud cover , and many paratroopers were dropped far from their intended landing zones . Many planes came in so low that they were under fire from both flak and machine gun fire . Some paratroopers were killed on impact when their parachutes did not have time to open , and others drowned in the flooded fields . Gathering together into fighting units was made difficult by a shortage of radios and by the bocage terrain , with its hedgerows , stone walls , and marshes . Some units did not arrive at their targets until afternoon , by which time several of the causeways had already been cleared by members of the 4th Infantry Division moving up from the beach . 
 Troops of the 82nd Airborne began arriving around 02 : 30 , with the primary objective of capturing two bridges over the River Merderet and destroying two bridges over the Douve . On the east side of the river , 75 per cent of the paratroopers landed in or near their drop zone , and within two hours they captured the important crossroads at Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Église ( the first town liberated in the invasion ) and began working to protect the western flank . Because of the failure of the pathfinders to accurately mark their drop zone , the two regiments dropped on the west side of the Merderet were extremely scattered , with only four per cent landing in the target area . Many landed in nearby swamps , with much loss of life . Paratroopers consolidated into small groups , usually a combination of men of various ranks from different units , and attempted to concentrate on nearby objectives . They captured but failed to hold the Merderet River bridge at La <unk> , and fighting for the crossing continued for several days . 
 Reinforcements arrived by glider around 04 : 00 ( Mission Chicago and Mission Detroit ) , and 21 : 00 ( Mission Keokuk and Mission Elmira ) , bringing additional troops and heavy equipment . Like the paratroopers , many landed far from their drop zones . Even those that landed on target experienced difficulty , with heavy cargo such as Jeeps shifting during landing , crashing through the wooden fuselage , and in some cases crushing personnel on board . 
 After 24 hours , only 2 @,@ 500 men of the 101st and 2 @,@ 000 of the 82nd Airborne were under the control of their divisions , approximately a third of the force dropped . This wide dispersal had the effect of confusing the Germans and fragmenting their response . The 7th Army received notification of the parachute drops at 01 : 20 , but Rundstedt did not initially believe that a major invasion was underway . The destruction of radar stations along the Normandy coast in the week before the invasion meant that the Germans did not detect the approaching fleet until 02 : 00 . 
