 = = = = British and Canadian airborne landings = = = = 
 The first Allied action of D @-@ Day was Operation Deadstick , a glider assault at 00 : 16 at Pegasus Bridge over the Caen Canal and the bridge ( since renamed Horsa Bridge ) over the Orne , half a mile ( 800 metres ) to the east . Both bridges were quickly captured intact , with light casualties , by members of the 5th Parachute Brigade and the 7th ( Light Infantry ) Parachute Battalion . The five bridges over the Dives were destroyed with minimal difficulty by the 3rd Parachute Brigade . Meanwhile , the pathfinders tasked with setting up radar beacons and lights for further paratroopers ( scheduled to begin arriving at 00 : 50 to clear the landing zone north of Ranville ) were blown off course , and had to set up the navigation aids too far east . Many paratroopers , also blown too far east , landed far from their intended drop zones ; some took hours or even days to be reunited with their units . Major General Richard Gale arrived in the third wave of gliders at 03 : 30 , along with equipment , such as antitank guns and jeeps , and more troops to help secure the area from counter @-@ attacks , which were initially staged only by troops in the immediate vicinity of the landings . At 02 : 00 , the commander of the German 716th Infantry Division ordered Feuchtinger to move his 21st Panzer Division into position to counter @-@ attack . However , as the division was part of the armoured reserve , Feuchtinger was obliged to seek clearance from OKW before he could commit his formation . Feuchtinger did not receive orders until nearly 09 : 00 , but in the meantime on his own initiative he put together a battle group ( including tanks ) to fight the British forces east of the Orne . 
 Only 160 men out of the 600 members of the 9th Battalion tasked with eliminating the enemy battery at Merville arrived at the rendezvous point . Lieutenant Colonel Terence Otway , in charge of the operation , decided to proceed regardless , as the emplacement had to be destroyed by 06 : 00 to prevent it firing on the invasion fleet and the troops arriving on Sword Beach . In the Battle of Merville Gun Battery , Allied forces disabled the guns at a cost of 75 casualties . The emplacement was found to contain 75 mm guns rather than the expected 150 mm heavy coastal artillery . 
 With this action , the last of the D @-@ Day goals of the British 6th Airborne Division was achieved . They were reinforced at 12 : 00 by commandos of the 1st Special Service Brigade , who landed on Sword Beach , and by the 6th Airlanding Brigade , who arrived in gliders at 21 : 00 in Operation Mallard . 
 = = = Utah Beach = = = 
 Utah Beach was in the area defended by two battalions of the 919th Grenadier Regiment . Members of the 8th Infantry Regiment of the 4th Infantry Division were the first to land , arriving at 06 : 30 . Their landing craft were pushed to the south by strong currents , and they found themselves about 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @.@ 8 km ) from their intended landing zone . This site turned out to be better , as there was only one strongpoint nearby rather than two , and bombers of IX Bomber Command had bombed the defences from lower than their prescribed altitude , inflicting considerable damage . In addition , the strong currents had washed ashore many of the underwater obstacles . The assistant commander of the 4th Infantry Division , Brigadier General Theodore Roosevelt , Jr . , the first senior officer ashore , made the decision to " start the war from right here " , and ordered further landings to be re @-@ routed . 
 The initial assault battalions were quickly followed by 28 DD tanks and several waves of engineer and demolition teams to remove beach obstacles and clear the area directly behind the beach of obstacles and mines . Gaps were blown in the sea wall to allow quicker access for troops and tanks . Combat teams began to exit the beach at around 09 : 00 , with some infantry wading through the flooded fields rather than travelling on the single road . They skirmished throughout the day with elements of the 919th Grenadier Regiment , who were armed with antitank guns and rifles . The main strongpoint in the area and another 1 @,@ 300 yards ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) to the south were disabled by noon . The 4th Infantry Division did not meet all of their D @-@ Day objectives at Utah Beach , partly because they had arrived too far to the south , but they landed 21 @,@ 000 troops at the cost of only 197 casualties . 
 = = = Pointe du Hoc = = = 
 Pointe du Hoc , a prominent headland situated between Utah and Omaha , was assigned to two hundred men of 2nd Ranger Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel James Rudder . Their task was to scale the 30m ( <unk> ) cliffs with grappling hooks , ropes , and ladders to destroy the coastal gun battery located at the top . The cliffs were defended by the German 352nd Infantry Division and French collaborators firing from above . Allied destroyers Satterlee and Talybont provided fire support . After scaling the cliffs , the Rangers discovered that the guns had already been withdrawn . They located the weapons , unguarded but ready to use , in an orchard some 550 metres ( 600 yd ) south of the point , and disabled them with explosives . 
 The now @-@ isolated Rangers fended off numerous counter @-@ attacks from the German 914th Grenadier Regiment . The men at the point became isolated and some were captured . By dawn on D + 1 , Rudder had only 90 men able to fight . Relief did not arrive until D + 2 , when members of the 743rd Tank Battalion and others arrived . By then , Rudder 's men had run out of ammunition and were using captured German weapons . Several men were killed as a result , because the German weapons made a distinctive noise , and the men were mistaken for the enemy . By the end of the battle , the Rangers casualties were 135 dead and wounded , while German casualties were 50 killed and 40 captured . An unknown number of French collaborators were executed . 
 = = = Omaha Beach = = = 
 Omaha , the most heavily defended beach , was assigned to the 1st Infantry Division and 29th Infantry Division . They faced the 352nd Infantry Division rather than the expected single regiment . Strong currents forced many landing craft east of their intended position or caused them to be delayed . For fear of hitting the landing craft , American bombers delayed releasing their loads and , as a result , most of the beach obstacles at Omaha remained undamaged when the men came ashore . Many of the landing craft ran aground on sandbars and the men had to wade 50 @-@ 100m in water up to their necks while under fire to get to the beach . In spite of the rough seas , DD tanks of two companies of the 741st Tank Battalion were dropped 5 @,@ 000 yards ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) from shore , and 27 of the 32 flooded and sank , with the loss of 33 crew . Some tanks , disabled on the beach , continued to provide covering fire until their ammunition ran out or they were swamped by the rising tide . 
 Casualties were around 2 @,@ 000 , as the men were subjected to fire from the cliffs above . Problems clearing the beach of obstructions led to the beachmaster calling a halt to further landings of vehicles at 08 : 30 . A group of destroyers arrived around this time to provide fire support so landings could resume . Exit from the beach was possible only via five heavily defended gullies , and by late morning barely 600 men had reached the higher ground . By noon , as the artillery fire took its toll and the Germans started to run out of ammunition , the Americans were able to clear some lanes on the beaches . They also started clearing the gullies of enemy defences so that vehicles could move off the beach . The tenuous beachhead was expanded over the following days , and the D @-@ Day objectives for Omaha were accomplished by D + 3 . 
 = = = Gold Beach = = = 
 The first landings on Gold beach were set for 07 : 25 due to the differences in the tide between there and the American beaches . High winds made conditions difficult for the landing craft , and the amphibious DD tanks were released close to shore or directly on the beach instead of further out as planned . Three of the four guns in a large emplacement at the Longues @-@ sur @-@ Mer battery were disabled by direct hits from the cruisers Ajax and Argonaut at 06 : 20 . The fourth gun resumed firing intermittently in the afternoon , and its garrison surrendered on 7 June . Aerial attacks had failed to hit the Le Hamel strongpoint , which had its embrasure facing east to provide enfilade fire along the beach and had a thick concrete wall on the seaward side . Its 75 mm gun continued to do damage until 16 : 00 , when a modified Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers ( AVRE ) tank fired a large petard charge into its rear entrance . A second casemated emplacement at La Rivière containing an 88 mm gun was neutralised by a tank at 07 : 30 . 
 Meanwhile , infantry began clearing the heavily fortified houses along the shore and advanced on targets further inland . The No. 47 ( Royal Marine ) Commando moved toward the small port at Port @-@ en @-@ Bessin and captured it the following day in the Battle of Port @-@ en @-@ Bessin . Company Sergeant Major Stanley Hollis received the only Victoria Cross awarded on D @-@ Day for his actions while attacking two pillboxes at the Mont Fleury high point . On the western flank , the 1st Battalion , Hampshire Regiment captured Arromanches ( future site of Mulberry " B " ) , and contact was made on the eastern flank with the Canadian forces at Juno . Bayeux was not captured the first day due to stiff resistance from the 352nd Infantry Division . Allied casualties at Gold Beach are estimated at 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Juno Beach = = = 
 The landing at Juno was delayed because of choppy seas , and the men arrived ahead of their supporting armour , suffering many casualties while disembarking . Most of the offshore bombardment had missed the German defences . Several exits from the beach were created , but not without difficulty . At Mike Beach on the western flank , a large crater was filled using an abandoned AVRE tank and several rolls of <unk> , which were then covered by a temporary bridge . The tank remained in place until 1972 , when it was removed and restored by members of the Royal Engineers . The beach and nearby streets were clogged with traffic for most of the day , making it difficult to move inland . 
 Major German strongpoints with 75 mm guns , machine @-@ gun nests , concrete fortifications , barbed wire , and mines were located at Courseulles @-@ sur @-@ Mer , St Aubin @-@ sur @-@ Mer , and Bernières @-@ sur @-@ Mer . The towns themselves also had to be cleared in house @-@ to @-@ house fighting . Soldiers on their way to Bény @-@ sur @-@ Mer , 3 miles ( 5 km ) inland , discovered that the road was well covered by machine gun emplacements that had to be outflanked before the advance could proceed . Elements of the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade advanced to within sight of the Carpiquet airfield late in the afternoon , but by this time their supporting armour was low on ammunition so the Canadians dug in for the night . The airfield was not captured until a month later as the area became the scene of fierce fighting . By nightfall , the contiguous Juno and Gold beachheads covered an area 12 miles ( 19 km ) wide and 7 miles ( 10 km ) deep . Casualties at Juno were 961 men . 
 = = = Sword Beach = = = 
 On Sword , 21 of 25 DD tanks of the first wave made it safely ashore to provide cover for the infantry , who began disembarking at 07 : 30 . The beach was heavily mined and peppered with obstacles , making the work of the beach clearing teams difficult and dangerous . In the windy conditions , the tide came in more quickly than expected , so manoeuvring the armour was difficult . The beach quickly became congested . Brigadier Simon Fraser , 15th Lord Lovat and his 1st Special Service Brigade arrived in the second wave , piped ashore by Private Bill Millin , Lovat 's personal piper . Members of No. 4 Commando moved through Ouistreham to attack from the rear a German gun battery on the shore . A concrete observation and control tower at this emplacement had to be bypassed and was not captured until several days later . French forces under Commander Philippe Kieffer ( the first French soldiers to arrive in Normandy ) attacked and cleared the heavily fortified strongpoint at the casino at Riva Bella , with the aid of one of the DD tanks . 
 The ' Morris ' strongpoint near Colleville @-@ sur @-@ Mer was captured after about an hour of fighting . The nearby ' Hillman ' strongpoint , headquarters of the 736th Infantry Regiment , was a large complex defensive work that had come through the morning 's bombardment essentially undamaged . It was not captured until 20 : 15 . The 2nd Battalion , King 's Shropshire Light Infantry began advancing to Caen on foot , coming within a few kilometres of the town , but had to withdraw due to lack of armour support . At 16 : 00 , the 21st Panzer Division mounted a counter @-@ attack between Sword and Juno and nearly succeeded in reaching the Channel . It met stiff resistance from the British 3rd Division and was soon recalled to assist in the area between Caen and Bayeux . Estimates of Allied casualties on Sword Beach are as high as 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Normandy landings were the largest seaborne invasion in history , with nearly 5 @,@ 000 landing and assault craft , 289 escort vessels , and 277 minesweepers participating . Nearly 160 @,@ 000 troops crossed the English Channel on D @-@ Day , with 875 @,@ 000 men disembarking by the end of June . Allied casualties on the first day were at least 10 @,@ 000 , with 4 @,@ 414 confirmed dead . The Germans lost 1 @,@ 000 men . The Allied invasion plans had called for the capture of Carentan , St. Lô , Caen , and Bayeux on the first day , with all the beaches ( other than Utah ) linked with a front line 10 to 16 kilometres ( 6 to 10 mi ) from the beaches ; none of these objectives were achieved . The five bridgeheads were not connected until 12 June , by which time the Allies held a front around 97 kilometres ( 60 mi ) long and 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) deep . Caen , a major objective , was still in German hands at the end of D @-@ Day and would not be completely captured until 21 July . The Germans had ordered French civilians , other than those deemed essential to the war effort , to leave potential combat zones in Normandy . Civilian casualties on D @-@ Day and D + 1 are estimated at 3 @,@ 000 people . 
 Victory in Normandy stemmed from several factors . German preparations along the Atlantic Wall were only partially finished ; shortly before D @-@ Day Rommel reported that construction was only 18 per cent complete in some areas as resources were diverted elsewhere . The deceptions undertaken in Operation Fortitude were successful , leaving the Germans obligated to defend a huge stretch of coastline . The Allies achieved and maintained air supremacy , which meant that the Germans were unable to make observations of the preparations underway in Britain and were unable to interfere via bomber attacks . Transportation infrastructure in France was severely disrupted by Allied bombers and the French Resistance , making it difficult for the Germans to bring up reinforcements and supplies . Some of the opening bombardment was off @-@ target or not concentrated enough to have any impact , but the specialised armour worked well except on Omaha , providing close artillery support for the troops as they disembarked onto the beaches . <unk> and an overly complicated command structure on the part of the German high command were also factors in the Allied success . 
 = = War memorials and tourism = = 
 At Omaha Beach , parts of the Mulberry harbour are still visible , and a few of the beach obstacles remain . A memorial to the American National Guard sits at the location of a former German strongpoint . Pointe du Hoc is little changed from 1944 , with the terrain covered with bomb craters and most of the concrete bunkers still in place . The Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial is nearby , in Colleville @-@ sur @-@ Mer . A museum about the Utah landings is located at Sainte @-@ Marie @-@ du @-@ Mont , and there is one dedicated to the activities of the American airmen at Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Église . Two German military cemeteries are located nearby . 
 Pegasus Bridge , a target of the British 6th Airborne , was the site of some of the earliest action of the Normandy landings . The bridge was replaced in 1994 by one similar in appearance , and the original is now housed on the grounds of a nearby museum complex . Sections of Mulberry Harbour B still sit in the sea at Arromanches , and the well @-@ preserved Longues @-@ sur @-@ Mer battery is nearby . The Juno Beach Centre , opened in 2003 , was funded by the Canadian federal and provincial governments , France , and Canadian veterans . 
 = = Depiction in media = = 
 Band of Brothers ( 2001 miniseries ) 
 Saving Private Ryan ( 1998 film ) 
 The Longest Day ( 1962 film ) 
 = Hold Me Now ( Thompson Twins song ) = 
 " Hold Me Now " is a song by British band the Thompson Twins . Written by the band members , the song was produced by Alex Sadkin and the group 's lead vocalist Tom Bailey . The song is a mid @-@ tempo new wave song that uses a varied instrumentation , including synthesizers , a Marimba , a piano and Latin percussion . It was released in November 1983 as the first single of their fifth studio album , Into the Gap . 
 Released in the United Kingdom in late 1983 , the song peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart in November of that year and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in 1983 , becoming the band 's biggest @-@ selling single , and their first top five in that country . The song was released in the United States in February 1984 and became the band 's highest charting single there , peaking at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 in May , remaining on the chart for 21 weeks . In addition , the song topped Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Play chart for one week in April 1984 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1983 , after the commercial success of their third album Quick Step and Side Kick , the Thompson Twins collaborated again with producer Alex Sadkin to record Into the Gap at Compass Point Studios , in the Bahamas . Bailey and Sadkin co @-@ produced the album including " Hold Me Now " , which according to Bailey " had a very strong idea " behind it and was written very quickly . 
 When they were going to record the song , Bailey said that he was excited , nervous , and " almost over @-@ prepared for it " , he knew exactly what instruments were going on every track ; it took three days to record . Before the release the song was remixed by Sadkin at RAK Studios , in London . About the process Bailey commented : " You know what a great producer is ? It 's someone who takes great ideas and makes them into good records . In our field , great music is a hit record . " The song became the Thompson Twins ' biggest hit in America , but at the same time it pressured the band to produce top @-@ selling music , even if they were not completely comfortable with that , as Alannah Currie stated in an interview with David <unk> of The Spokesman @-@ Review : 
 The biggest trouble that we 've had basically is that the song , " Hold me Now " was a huge hit , it was really big here , it was really big all over the world . Which is great , but it was just an accidental thing . It was just a song that we wrote . But after that then , we got everybody — managers , the record company — on our back to write " Hold me Now , Part 2 " and harassing you to try and find a formula . But we can 't really . We 'll never find a formula for what we did . And that upsets some of them . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hold Me Now " is a pop , new wave and synthpop ballad , performed with a " hypnotic , swaying groove " , that features the sound of a Marimba in the background . The song is composed in the key of D major , with a time signature set in common time , and moves at moderate tempo of 120 beats per minute . Bailey 's vocal range spans more than two and a half octaves , from A3 to F # 6 . 
 While most of the group 's previous songs have a dance @-@ oriented sound , " Hold Me Now " has a mainstream piano @-@ based melody but keeps the prominent bass line and Currie 's Latin percussion of earlier releases . The song is in a verse @-@ chorus form , employing a simple melody . The end chorus , which includes Leeway performing the song 's harmonies , repeats for a full minute and a half , nearly one @-@ third of the song 's full @-@ length . 
 The lyrics describe an impasse in a deteriorating relationship . They consider separating but ultimately resolve their differences . In the chorus the narrator asks his lover to " hold me now [ ... ] stay with me . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Originally " Hold Me Now " received a mixed response from pop music critics . In a review of the group 's album Into The Gap , Parke Puterbaugh , from Rolling Stone magazine , said that the band took a " new and drastic tangent " and that they " have slowed it all down to bring the human factor into clearer focus " , adding that " Hold Me Now " maintains a " hypnotic , swaying groove that suggests reserves of pastoral contentment even in the wake of the storm " . Robert Christgau , in a review for The Village Voice , said that the song " is a classic on chord changes alone , even though Tom Bailey sings it " , adding that nothing else in the album Into The Gap " approaches its heart @-@ tugging mastery " . J.D. Considine , in a review for The Washington Post , commented that the song 's melody adds " accessibility but could easily turn to dreary monotony " . 
 Two decades later , the song received positive reviews from critics . Jose F. Promis from Allmusic commented that " years later [ it ] still sounded as fresh and innocent as when it was first released " . Stewart Mason , also from Allmusic , commented that the song is an unexpected departure from the group 's previous dance @-@ oriented sound , comparing it with Spandau Ballet 's " True " , adding that " Bailey is not actually technically very good , but he 's clearly trying very hard " , and felt that the song " is a bit labored [ ... ] but overall , ' Hold Me Now ' deserved its huge hit status " . Raymond Fiore from Entertainment Weekly said that the song " still sounds good today " and called it " the sound of new wave @-@ pop brilliance " . In 2005 the song ranked # 308 in Blender 's list of the 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born , describing it as " a new wave let 's @-@ stay @-@ together plea " that is " so cornball it works " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Hold Me Now " was directed by Rupert James , produced by Tim Bevan , and edited by Brian Grant and Nick Morris . The video features the Thompson Twins in a set with a blue background . Each member is standing on a platform , singing or playing a different instrument , a guitar or a piano for Bailey , a Marimba or another percussion instrument for Currie , and a bass guitar or congas for Leeway . The video is heavily edited , with frames sliding from the sides , doubling or tripling , split @-@ screen edits , and close @-@ ups of the band while singing or dancing . At the end the background changes from blue to red , and the three members are featured together singing and clapping while the song is fading out . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hold Me Now " was released in the United Kingdom in November 1983 , debuting on the UK Singles Chart at number 31 , peaking at number four , and staying in the chart for 15 weeks . It became the band 's first top five in the country , and their biggest seller earning a gold certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in January 1984 . The song was a moderate hit in Europe , reaching the top 10 in Germany and Ireland , and peaking at 18 in Switzerland . 
 The single was released in North America in February 1984 . In Canada the single entered the RPM singles chart at number 43 , peaking at number three on 28 April 1984 . The Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) certified " Hold Me Now " gold in May 1984 . In the United States the single entered the Billboard Hot 100 on 11 February 1984 at number 73 , peaking at number three on 5 May 1984 , and staying 21 weeks on the chart , becoming the band 's biggest hit in the country . In addition , it topped Billboard 's Hot Dance Club Play chart for a week on 28 April 1984 , becoming the band 's third number @-@ one single on this chart . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 7 " Single ( 1983 ) 
 " Hold Me Now " – 4 : 44 
 " Let Loving Start " – 3 : 43 
 12 " Maxi @-@ Single ( 1983 ) 
 " Hold Me Now " ( Extended version ) – 9 : 54 
 " Let Loving Start " ( Extended version ) – 9 : 09 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Tom Bailey – guitar , lead vocals , piano , keyboards , producer 
 Alannah Currie – percussion , vocals , marimba , drums 
 Joe Leeway – congas , vocals , bass guitar 
 Alex Sadkin – producer 
 Phil Thornalley – audio mixing 
 Adrian Peacock – photography 
 Satori ( from ideas by Alannah Currie ) – design / artwork 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Just a Fool = 
 " Just a Fool " is a duet recorded by American singer songwriters Christina Aguilera and Blake Shelton for Aguilera 's seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It was written by Steve Robson , Claude Kelly and Wayne Hector and was produced by Robson . " Just a Fool " was sent to contemporary hit and hot adult contemporary radio stations in the United States by RCA Records as the second and final single from the album on December 4 , 2012 . The song is a country pop ballad which discusses the pain of a break @-@ up . It is also Aguilera 's first country song . 
 Following its release , " Just a Fool " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who complimented the track 's sound . Commercially , the single peaked at number 71 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 37 on the Canadian Hot 100 . As of April 2015 , the single has sold 802 @,@ 000 digital copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . To promote Lotus and the song , Aguilera and Shelton performed " Just a Fool " on the third season of American television singing contest The Voice on November 19 , 2012 , and on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on December 7 , 2012 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following the release of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , which failed to generate impact on charts worldwide , Aguilera filed for divorce from her husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film , Burlesque and recorded the accompanying soundtrack . She then became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and appeared as a featured artist on Maroon 5 's single " Moves Like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Following these events , Aguilera announced that had plans to begin production of her seventh album , stating that she wanted high quality and " personal " songs for the record . Regarding the creative direction , she revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She further said " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Aguilera continued to say that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . 
 Speaking about her new material during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera said that the recording process for Lotus was taking a while because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . Recorded at Northern Sky Music by Sam Miller , " Just a Fool " was written by Steve Robson , Claude Kelly and Wayne Hector , with production handled by Steve Robson . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills , California , while Shelton 's vocals were recorded at Luminous Sound in Dallas , Texas . The duo 's vocals were recorded by Oscar Ramirez , and Aguilera produced them with Kelly . Robson also carried out programming and keyboards , arranging , and guitars . Following the release of Lotus , " Just a Fool " managed to debut on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , prompting RCA Records to release the song as a single . On December 4 , 2012 , the label sent the track to contemporary hit and hot adult contemporary radio stations in the United States as the second and final single from the album . On February 18 , 2013 , the single was released to adult contemporary radio in the US . 
 = = Development = = 
 Blake Shelton and Christina Aguilera both served as coaches on the NBC 's American reality talent show The Voice and became good friends during production . During an interview , Aguilera said , " He 's my big brother , I 'm the closest to him of all the guys . Blake is just a rockstar ; he 's great . He 's so playful , so fun and down to earth . He 's got a lot of heart " . The whole idea for the duet between Christina and Blake came into being when Christina started a performance with a snippet of his song " Hillbilly Bone " . Blake tweeted he was speechless , and Christina tweeted back , " Now we need to team up for a country duet Blake ! ! I 'm down ! ! " . In an interview with Rolling Stone , Aguilera commented about teaming up with her colleagues , 
 " I 'm one that likes to collaborate . I love feeding off the creative energy , and it only makes me better . I 'm on a continual path both personally and professionally . All @-@ around , it 's my goal to better myself as a person and an artist , and the show is one of those contributing factors and the guys are great friends at this point . It 's fun collaborating with them at this point " . 
 Aguilera also revealed that Shelton " busted his [ butt ] " to " make the time " to record the song with her . On October 16 , 2012 , it was announced that the duet was called " Just a Fool " and the track would be included on Aguilera 's album Lotus ( 2012 ) . According to Steve Robson – the main writer of the song – at first , " Just a Fool " was initially pitched to Pink , but later Adam Lambert recorded a version of the track . Finally , Aguilera and Shelton recorded " Just a Fool " after the song was scrapped from Lambert 's album Trespassing ( 2012 ) " at the last minute " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Just a Fool " was written by Steve Robson , Claude Kelly and Wayne Hector , with production done by Robson . The song is a country pop ballad with elements of pop rock . The track is also Aguilera 's first country song . It lasts for a duration of 4 : 13 ( four minutes and 13 seconds ) . " Just a Fool " was composed in the key of G major , with a moderate slow tempo of 56 beats per minute . Many instruments were featured on the track , including keyboards , guitars and strings . It starts with a simple guitar riff and a toe @-@ tapping mid @-@ tempo drum beat . Chris <unk> of 4Music described the song as a " pop @-@ meets @-@ rock @-@ meets @-@ country " song . Lyrically , " Just a Fool " talks about the pain of a break @-@ up . Aguilera takes the first verse singing about sitting alone in a bar late at night , " Another shot of whisky please bartender , keep it coming till I don 't remember " . At the second verse , Blake sings in his raspy country tones and the two unite for the chorus . Robert Cospey of Digital Spy described the chorus of the track as a " sing @-@ songy " one . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Just a Fool " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . In a track @-@ by @-@ track review , Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote that the song " looks obligatory on paper but fortunately isn 't so bad in reality [ ... ] Truth be told , we suspect there 's a good reason why this has been saved for the back @-@ end of the album " . Chris Younie of 4Music praised the song , writing that " It 's mature , sophisticated and unlike anything else we 've heard on the album . If you want variety , you got it " . Andrew <unk> for Billboard was also positive toward the track , commenting that the song has an " epic " chorus that only increases in volume as the song progresses . In an extremely positive review , Glenn Gamboa of Newsday wrote that Aguilera and Shelton " empty their broken hearts in a magnificently sung breakup song " . She also praised " Just a Fool " as Aguilera 's career signature which should " stand next to ' Beautiful ' " . Mike Wass of Idolator called " Just a Fool " is a " gorgeous " country ballad , while Jon Caramanica of The New York Times described it as a " surprisingly warm duet " and Molly Lambert of Grantland named it " a monster @-@ ballad " . 
 Sarah Godfrey of The Washington Post called it a " straightforward country @-@ pop piece " , while Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic named it " a slow , bluesy closer " . Christina Garibaldi of MTV News praised Shelton 's " smooth " and country vocals on the " <unk> " ballad , which fits nicely with Aguilera 's " booming " ones . Melinda Newman of HitFix analyzed that Aguilera 's voices on " Just a Fool " sounded like former longtime producer Linda Perry as she sings " yeah , yeah , yeah " , but Shelton 's sounds " rose to the occasion " and plays the " perfect partner " . Michael Galluci of PopCrush praised Aguilera 's " great " " throaty rasp " on the track . Jim Farber of New York Daily News provided a mixed review , writing that " [ Shelton ] sings with measured resolve while [ Aguilera ] nearly suffocates him . It 's certainly a powerful approach , but it comes at the cost of communicating genuine soul " . <unk> , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine called it " an out @-@ of @-@ place country @-@ pop duet with Blake Shelton , who feels like a cheap cash @-@ in " , while Annie <unk> for The A.V. Club criticized its " schmaltzy " sound . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The single debuted at number 92 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart during the week of November 18 , 2012 . During the following week , it climbed to number 71 , which became its peak position on the chart . On the Adult Pop Songs chart , " Just a Fool " debuted at number 40 during the week of December 29 , 2012 and peaked at number 28 . On February 25 , 2013 , the single debuted at number 27 on the Adult Contemporary and peaked at number 23 shortly after . The song stayed a total of 12 weeks on the chart . As of April 2015 , " Just a Fool " has sold over 802 @,@ 000 copies in United States becoming Aguilera 's tenth best selling digital single there , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 In Canada , the single peaked at number 37 on the country 's singles chart and remained there for 20 weeks . On the 49th week of 2012 , " Just a Fool " debuted and peaked at number 45 in Slovakia . 
 = = Live performances and cover version = = 
 On November 19 , 2012 , Aguilera and Shelton performed " Just a Fool " for the first time on the third season of The Voice , an American television singing competition on which she is serviced as a coach . Wearing " sharp in dark " , " semi @-@ casual " outfits , the couple sang the first verse at opposite sides of the stage , and then came together onstage and shared the second one . During the performance , Aguilera kept belting to a minimum . The duo ended their singing with a hug . <unk> Ball from Idolator wrote , " Clumsy cross @-@ promotions and hyperbole aside , it was a night of stellar performances , kicked off by Coaches Christina and Blake making the world debut of ' Just a Fool ' " . She continued to praise the performance , commenting , " It was a refreshingly stripped down performance from <unk> – who uncharacteristically took the stage in jeans . Blake , on the other hand , looked a little awkward up there without a guitar and a stool " . 
 On December 7 , 2012 , Aguilera and Shelton performed " Just a Fool " again on The Ellen DeGeneres Show . Sam Lansky from Idolator praised the performance , writing that the performance featured " typically dramatic " vocals and a lot of " spectacular runs " , which helped the duo sound great . During the semi @-@ finals of the twelfth season of American television singing contest American Idol , contestant Paul Jolley chose " Just a Fool " as the song to sing on the show . On May 7 , 2013 , Filipino singer Charice Pempengco also made a cover of the song on the show Kris TV with her girlfriend Alyssa Quijano . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Northern Sky Music . 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , California ( Aguilera 's vocals ) ; Luminous Sound , Dallas , Texas ( Shelton 's vocals ) . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Kanon ( visual novel ) = 
 Kanon ( <unk> ) is a Japanese adult visual novel developed by Key released on June 4 , 1999 for Windows PCs . Key later released versions of Kanon without the erotic content , and the game was ported to the Dreamcast , PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable . The story follows the life of Yuichi Aizawa , a high school student who returns to a city he last visited seven years prior , and he has little recollection of the events from back then . He meets several girls and slowly regains his lost memories . The gameplay in Kanon follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the appeal of the five female main characters by the player character . The game once ranked as the second best @-@ selling PC game sold in Japan , and charted in the national top 50 several more times afterwards . Kanon has sold over 300 @,@ 000 units across several platforms . 
 Following the game 's release , Kanon made several transitions into other media . Two manga series were serialized in Dengeki Daioh and Dragon Age Pure . Comic anthologies , light novels and art books were also published , as were audio dramas and several music albums . Toei Animation produced a 13 @-@ episode anime television series in 2002 and an original video animation ( OVA ) episode in 2003 . Kyoto Animation produced a 24 @-@ episode anime series in 2006 . The 2006 anime was licensed and dubbed in English by ADV Films in 2008 , but the license was given to Funimation after ADV 's closure . The 2006 anime plays on the association between Kanon and the musical term canon by using Pachelbel 's Kanon D @-@ dur , or Canon in D major , as a background piece at certain instances throughout the series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Kanon is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Yuichi Aizawa . Much of its gameplay is spent on reading the story 's narrative and dialogue . Kanon follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 There are five main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . Throughout gameplay , the player is given multiple options to choose from , and text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . After Mai 's scenario is completed , a replay of her route will offer an additional choice to play through Sayuri 's back @-@ story . Jun Maeda , who worked on the scenario for Kanon , commented in March 2001 that the Japanese public may have fallen under the impression that Key makes soothing games because of Kanon 's influence , but Maeda affirmed that there was not one person who worked on Kanon who thought that . 
 In the adult versions of the game , there are scenes with sexual CGs depicting Yuichi and a given heroine having sex . Later , Key released versions of Kanon without the erotic content . The versions that include the adult content have one explicit sex scene in each of the five main story routes , in addition to one fantasy scene . Outside of these , there are two scenes with nudity . Yūichi Suzumoto , a scenario writer who worked on later Key titles , commented that the sex scenes in Kanon are very self @-@ contained , and can be easily removed without altering the story . Maeda remarked that the sex scenes were not written with reproduction in mind . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and themes = = = 
 There are several important locations featured in the Kanon story , though the location names are seldom mentioned explicitly in Key 's works . The events of the story occur during winter , and since it often snows periodically over the course of the entire story , the city is always presented covered in a layer of snow . The shopping district is featured throughout the story when the characters go into town , and especially whenever Ayu appears in the early story . The high school where Yuichi and the other main characters attend , including the school grounds , is shown predominantly in Shiori 's and Mai 's stories , and is otherwise a general setting where Yuichi interacts with other characters . 
 There are recurring themes that appear throughout the story . A music theme is present , as the episode titles from the 2006 – 2007 anime have parts in their titles related to music , such as overture and introit . Miracles play a large part in the story ; Kanon 's plot line and characters are influenced by various instances where miracles occur . The act of promising and keeping promises is found throughout the story . Yuichi eventually makes important promises to the five main girls while at the same time fulfilling past promises he had made with four of them when he used to visit the city as a kid . 
 One of the motifs in the story is amnesia , or memory loss ; three of the main characters — Yuichi , Ayu and Makoto — suffer from amnesia in varying degrees ; this is used as a plot device to advance the story . Another motif deals with the favorite foods of the five main heroines . Newtype USA stated in an article on Kanon that " it 's when the characters are eating something really tasty that they seem most beautiful and alive " , despite the somber setting and overall tone of the series . These five foods of choice are : taiyaki ( Ayu ) , strawberries ( Nayuki ) , <unk> ( Makoto ) , ice cream ( Shiori ) , and <unk> ( Mai ) . 
 = = = Principal characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Yuichi Aizawa , the protagonist of Kanon . He is a cynical 17 @-@ year @-@ old high school student , and is known to play jokes on the girls his age he knows and interacts with throughout the story . Despite this , Yuichi is very loyal and will go to great lengths to please others , even at the expense of his own time and money . He generally has a selfless personality and does not ask much from others in return for what he does for them . Ayu Tsukimiya , the main heroine of Kanon , is a short , strange , and mysterious girl immediately recognizable by her winged backpack , red hair band , and tendency to refer to herself with the masculine first @-@ person pronoun boku ( <unk> ) . She has a fondness for eating taiyaki , and is notorious for her catchphrase , " ugū " ( うぐぅ ) , which she mutters as an expression of various negative emotions such as frustration , pain , and fear . Yuichi 's first cousin Nayuki Minase , another of Kanon 's heroines , has been in love with him since childhood , and must learn how to deal with her feelings , especially with the threat that he may fall in love with one of the other girls . Nayuki talks noticeably slower than those around her , and has constant trouble waking up in the morning except on a few occasions when she is up before Yuichi , much to his surprise . 
 Yuichi is accosted a few days after arriving in the city by Kanon 's third heroine Makoto Sawatari , a young girl who has lost her memories , but despite this she is sure that she holds a grudge against Yuichi from when he last visited the city . Makoto has a mischievous side and constantly plays pranks on Yuichi . She has an affinity towards the spring and once wished that it would stay spring forever . Yuichi coincidentally runs into Shiori Misaka , another heroine and first @-@ year high school student suffering from an unexplained illness since birth . Her affliction has caused her to become very physically weak , and she is almost always absent from school because of it . She tries to be strong in the face of her condition , and gets along well with others , even though she does not know very many people her age due to her condition . The fifth and final heroine in Kanon is Mai Kawasumi , a third @-@ year student of the same high school that Yuichi attends . She has a cold attitude towards almost everyone , but despite this , she is actually a very kind and caring person ; she " punishes " someone who makes a playful joke about her by giving them a light karate chop to the head . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Kanon 's story revolves around a group of five girls whose lives are connected to the same boy . Yuichi Aizawa is a second @-@ year high school student who had visited the city where the story takes place seven years prior to Kanon 's beginning . The story opens on Wednesday January 6 , 1999 when Yuichi arrives in the city and is very detached from it and its inhabitants . Prior to his return , it is decided that he is to stay with his first cousin , Nayuki Minase , and her mother , Akiko . After his long absence , Yuichi has forgotten almost everything except minor details of what happened seven years before and is in need of being reminded of what he left behind . Nayuki initially tries repeatedly to jog his memory , but is unsuccessful . Throughout the story , as he learns about the supernatural undertones of the city , Yuichi is reminded of the events of seven years ago . 
 On the day after Yuichi 's return , he is out with Nayuki who is showing him around city . Nayuki remembers that she has to buy things for dinner , but Yuichi is reluctant to go into the store with her . Moments after Nayuki leaves him waiting on the sidewalk , a strange girl named Ayu Tsukimiya collides with him with little warning . Upon recovering , she drags him away to a nearby café and confesses to inadvertently stealing a bag filled with taiyaki after being accidentally scared away by the salesman before she had a chance to pay . They decide to meet up again another day and Ayu scampers off . A few days after he has been in the city , Yuichi is accosted by a girl named Makoto Sawatari who has lost her memories , though still remembers that she has a grudge against him from when he last visited the city . After she collapses in the street , he takes her home and learns about her situation . Akiko gives her permission to live with them for the time being , which is against Yuichi 's plan to hand her over to the police . 
 Another girl who is connected to Yuichi 's past is Mai Kawasumi who attends his high school as a third @-@ year . She takes it upon herself to fight and defeat demons at night while the school is deserted . Due to this , she is constantly blamed for accidents because she never denies them , being too sincere to say anything and knowing that no one will believe that there are demons in the school . Yuichi coincidentally meets a fifth girl named Shiori Misaka who he gets to know along with the other four heroines in the story . She has suffered from an unexplained affliction since birth which makes her weak to the point of missing school because of it . Yuichi starts to talk with her more after noticing her in the school courtyard one day . It turns out that Shiori stands outside on the school grounds nearly every day because she wants to meet someone dear to her . 
 = = Development = = 
 Most of Kanon 's development staff originally worked for the visual novel publisher Nexton under the brand Tactics . After the release of the brand 's third game One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e , most of Tactics ' staff left Nexton to pursue work in another publishing company where they could have the freedom to produce their next game . Itaru Hinoue , who had previously worked at VisualArt 's once before , introduced Key 's founding members to the president of VisualArt 's , Takahiro Baba . Baba gave the developers the freedom they desired , and they officially transferred to VisualArt 's where they formed Key on July 21 , 1998 and started production on Kanon . The planning for the visual novel was headed by Naoki Hisaya who was also one of two scenario writers with Jun Maeda . Hisaya wrote the scenarios for Ayu , Nayuki and Shiori , while Maeda wrote the routes for Makoto and Mai . Art direction was headed by Key 's artist Itaru Hinoue who worked on the character design and computer graphics . Further computer graphics were split between three people — Dinn , Miracle Mikipon , Shinory — and background art was provided by Torino . The music in the game was composed by OdiakeS , Shinji Orito and Jun Maeda . Kanon was the first and last visual novel developed by Key that two of the main staff — Naoki Hisaya , and OdiakeS — worked on before pursuing a similar line of work in other visual novel studios . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 Kanon was released as an adult game on June 4 , 1999 in limited and regular editions , playable on a Windows PC as a CD @-@ ROM . The limited edition came bundled with the remix album Anemoscope remixing background music tracks featured in the visual novel . Key released an all ages version on January 7 , 2000 for Windows . An updated adult version called the Kanon Standard Edition was released on November 26 , 2004 with added support for Windows 2000 / XP as a DVD @-@ ROM . The Standard Edition incorporates the extra graphics added to the earlier all ages version of the game , and other technical changes such as more save slots . An all ages version of the Standard Edition was released on January 28 , 2005 . An updated all ages version of Kanon compatible for Windows Vista PCs was released by Key on July 31 , 2009 in a box set containing five other Key visual novels called Key 10th Memorial Box . Another all ages updated version compatible for Windows 7 PCs called Kanon Memorial Edition was released on April 30 , 2010 . 
 The first consumer console port of the game was released for the Dreamcast on September 14 , 2000 by NEC Interchannel . A PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) version was released on February 28 , 2002 also by NEC <unk> . The PS2 version was re @-@ released as a " Best " version on December 22 , 2004 . The PS2 version was bundled in a " Key 3 @-@ Part Work Premium Box " package together with the PS2 versions of Air and Clannad released on July 30 , 2009 . An adult version playable as a Blu @-@ ray Disc was released on December 16 , 2011 by <unk> ! BD @-@ Game , a brand of VisualArt 's . 
 A PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) version of the game was released in Japan on February 15 , 2007 by Prototype . The first release of the PSP version came with a special DVD featuring a message from five of the voice actors and a recompiled opening video from the video game version . The five voice actors on the DVD included : Mariko <unk> as Nayuki Minase , Akemi Satō as Shiori Misaka , Mayumi Iizuka as Makoto Sawatari , Yūko <unk> as Akiko Minase , and Tomokazu Sugita as Yuichi Aizawa . Yui Horie as Ayu Tsukimiya voiced the short introduction of the DVD , but was not featured in the contents of the DVD itself . A downloadable version of the PSP release via the PlayStation Store was released by Prototype on October 9 , 2009 . A version playable on FOMA and SoftBank 3G mobile phones was released by Prototype through VisualArt 's Motto in May 2007 . A version playable on Android devices was released on November 30 , 2011 . A version playable on iOS devices was released on April 4 , 2013 . In the original release , there was no voice acting for the characters , but in the later versions produced for the Dreamcast and PS2 , full voice acting was included . The only exception was Yuichi , who was not voiced in either version . However , the PSP release features voice acting for Yuichi , provided by Tomokazu Sugita . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Light novels = = = 
 Five adult light novels written by Mariko Shimizu and published by Paradigm were released in Japan between October 1999 and August 2000 . The cover art and internal illustrations were drawn by Itaru Hinoue , the artist who drew the artwork in the visual novel . The basis for each novel was one of each of the five heroines and had titles that were taken from the musical themes pertaining to each character in the original game . The first two released were Yuki no Shōjo ( <unk> , Girl in the Snow , Nayuki ) and Egao no <unk> ni ( <unk> , Beyond the Smile , Shiori ) in December 1999 . The third was Shōjo no Ori ( <unk> , Girl 's Prison , Mai ) released in April 2000 and the fourth novel was titled The Fox and the Grapes ( Makoto ) , released two months later . The final novel titled Hidamari no Machi ( 日溜りの街 , A Sunny City , Ayu ) was released in August 2000 . Paradigm re @-@ released the five novels in conjunction with VisualArt 's under their VA Bunko imprint , which removed the erotic scenes , starting with Yuki no Shōjo on June 27 , 2009 , and ending with Hidamari no Machi on December 26 , 2009 . To make up for the missing erotic content , Shimizu wrote additional content for each volume . A sixth novel titled <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> , The Girls ' Opinions ) for the supporting character Sayuri Kurata written by Shimizu and illustrated by Zen was released on March 31 , 2011 . 
 = = = Drama CDs and radio shows = = = 
 A set of five drama CDs were released between September 29 , 2000 and April 27 , 2001 , with each volume focusing on a different heroine . A set of five anthology drama CDs were released between December 22 , 2001 and May 25 , 2002 , with each volume again focusing on a different heroine . A radio show to promote the Dreamcast port of Kanon titled Kanon : The Snow Talk Memories Yuki Furu Machi no Monogatari ( Kanon -The snow talks <unk> <unk> ) broadcast 13 episodes between October 6 and December 29 , 2000 . The show , produced by Movic , was hosted by Yukari Tamura and Tomoko Kawakami , the voices Mai Kawasumi and Sayuri Kurata , respectively . A radio drama titled Minase @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) broadcast 53 episodes between October 6 , 2001 and October 5 , 2002 . The show , which was broadcast on TBS Radio and Radio Kansai , was hosted by Yūko <unk> , the voice of Akiko Minase , and narrated by Atsushi <unk> . The voice actors from Kanon were also featured as guests . Five CD compilation volumes containing all of the show 's broadcasts were released between August 30 , 2002 and April 26 , 2003 . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The first Kanon manga illustrated by Petit Morishima was serialized in MediaWorks ' manga magazine Dengeki Daioh between the February 2000 and July 2002 issues . The individual chapters were later collected into two separate tankōbon volumes published by MediaWorks under their Dengeki Comics imprint released in September 2000 and on July 27 , 2002 . There are six chapters in total , three in each volume . Aside from the prologue in volume one and the epilogue in volume two , the other four chapters concern four of the main heroines . From chapters one through four , the main heroines presented are : Shiori Misaka , Makoto Sawatari , Mai Kawasumi and Ayu Tsukimiya . To make up for Nayuki not getting a chapter of her own , the story is altered in that Nayuki is in most of the scenes Yuichi is in . The first manga is different from the visual novel in that Shiori 's , Makoto 's , and Mai 's stories are not told in their entirety . Near the end of each of these girls ' stories were originally intended to give the viewer the remaining answers , but the manga version ends these girls ' stories prematurely . This was due to the manga putting more focus on Ayu 's story . 
 The second manga illustrated by <unk> Shimotsuki , under the main title Kanon : <unk> no Omoi wa Egao no <unk> ni ( Kanon <unk> , Kanon : The Real Feelings of the Other Side of the Smiling Face ) with the subtitle each regret of Kanon , was serialized between volumes two and seven of Fujimi Shobo 's Dragon Age Pure magazine sold between June 29 , 2006 and October 20 , 2007 , respectively . The first volume was released in Japan on April 1 , 2007 and focused on Nayuki 's story . The second volume was released on December 8 , 2007 and focused on the other four heroines . There are nine chapters in total , five in volume one and four in volume two . 
 There have also been many releases of manga anthologies produced by different companies and drawn by a multitude of different artists . The first volume of the earliest anthology series , released by Ichijinsha under the title Kanon Comic Anthology , was released in November 2000 under their DNA Media Comics label . Volumes for this series continued to be released for another two years , ending in December 2002 with the 14th volume ; an additional 15th volume was released later in February 2007 . Ichijinsha also released two more volumes of anthology collections of four @-@ panel comic strips titled Kanon 4 @-@ koma Kings in April and June 2001 . Softgarage released an anthology in a single volume in December 2002 titled Kanon Anthology Comic . In April 2004 , Ohzora released an anthology composed of works based on both Kanon and Air titled Haru <unk> : Kanon & Air . 
 Between June and August 2004 , Ohzora also released five separate volumes of manga based on Kanon drawn by five separate artists . Ohzora later collected some of the previously published manga anthologies into two volumes titled Kanon Anthology Comics Best Selection released in December 2006 and January 2007 . Additionally , Ohzora released another 13 volumes of an anthology series titled Kanon under their Twin Heart Comics label . The now @-@ bankrupt publisher Raporto also released 21 manga anthology volumes titled Kanon under their Raporto Comics label between November 2000 and October 2002 . The last manga anthology , a collection of four @-@ panel comic strips released in a single volume by Enterbrain titled Magi @-@ Cu 4 @-@ koma Kanon , was released in January 2007 under their MC Comics label . Each of the anthology series are written and drawn by an average of 20 people per volume . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The first Kanon anime was produced by the Japanese animation studio Toei Animation and directed by Naoyuki Itō . Thirteen episodes were produced and aired in Japan on Fuji TV between January 31 and March 28 , 2002 . The series also later aired on Kansai TV . Later , a single original video animation ( OVA ) episode titled " Kanon <unk> " was released in March 2003 . The anime series and OVA used the songs " Florescence " and " Flower " for the opening and ending themes , respectively . While it does not appear as the ending theme in the first 12 episodes or in the OVA , the game 's ending theme " Where the Wind Reaches " is used as the ending theme for the series in episode 13 . Additionally , the game 's opening theme " Last regrets " is played near the end of episode 13 during the flashback scene . 
 Starting in 2006 , Kyoto Animation , the animators of another Key game @-@ turned @-@ anime , Air , decided to animate a new adaptation of Kanon . This version , directed by Tatsuya Ishihara , aired between October 5 , 2006 and March 15 , 2007 on BS @-@ i , containing 24 episodes . The series was later rebroadcast on TBS . ADV Films announced on September 21 , 2007 at the Anime Weekend Atlanta anime convention that they have officially licensed the second Kanon anime series . ADV had previously posted a trailer for the series in August 2007 , but was soon taken offline once the news had been spread on the Internet . The first English @-@ dubbed episode was made available via streaming online at Anime News Network between December 23 and December 30 , 2007 . In July 2008 , the licensing rights of the second Kanon anime were transferred from ADV to Funimation Entertainment who continued to produce the series in North America . 
 The second TV Kanon animation features updated animation quality , and uses the same voice acting cast as the first anime , with the exception of Yuichi and Kuze . Unlike the first anime , the actual theme songs from the Kanon game are used for the second anime 's opening theme , ending theme and soundtrack . There is one song featured as an insert song in episode 16 that did not come from the visual novel titled " Last regrets ( X 'mas floor style ) " by Eiko Shimamiya from I 've Sound 's first album Regret . Other songs are used from the arrange albums released over the years , which include Anemoscope , Recollections , Re @-@ feel , and Ma @-@ Na . 
 = = Music = = 
 The visual novel has two main theme songs , the opening theme " Last regrets " , and the ending theme " Kaze no <unk> Basho " ( <unk> , Where the Wind Reaches ) , both sung by Ayana . The lyrics for both songs were written by Jun Maeda , and arranged by Kazuya <unk> of I 've Sound . The five heroines have leitmotifs . Ayu 's theme is " Hidamari no Machi " ( 日溜りの街 , A Sunny City ) ; Nayuki 's theme is " Yuki no Shōjo " ( <unk> , Girl in the Snow ) ; Makoto 's theme is " The Fox and the Grapes " ; Shiori 's theme is " Egao no <unk> ni " ( <unk> , Beyond the Smile ) ; lastly , Mai 's theme is " Shōjo no Ori " ( <unk> , Girls ' Prison ) . 
 The first music album released was Anemoscope which came bundled with the original release of Kanon in June 1999 . The next release was a single , " Last regrets / Place of wind which arrives " , which contained the opening and ending themes plus arranged versions of three background music tracks and a male vocal version of the opening theme . A compilation album containing tracks from the two albums was released in December 2001 called Recollections . The game 's original soundtrack was released in October 2002 containing 22 different tracks along with short versions of the two theme songs . A piano arrange album was released in December 2003 called Re @-@ feel which contained five tracks from Kanon and five from Air . Excluding the first two albums , each of the albums released for the visual novel version were released on Key 's record label Key Sounds Label ; this is due to the first two albums being released before the label was formed . 
 The first anime 's first original soundtrack was released in May 2002 , and a second followed in July 2002 . The first anime 's opening theme is " Florescence " and the ending theme is " Flower " , both sung by Miho Fujiwara ; the maxi single containing the anime 's opening and ending themes was released in June 2002 . An album containing music box arranged tracks of music from the first anime was released in July 2003 called Orgel de Kiku <unk> Shū . The albums released for the first anime were produced by Frontier Works and Movic . A single was released in commemoration for the second anime called " Last regrets / Kaze no <unk> Basho " which contained the game 's original opening and ending themes in original , short , and remixed versions ; the album was produced by Key Sounds Label . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 According to a national ranking of how well bishōjo games sold nationally in Japan , the original Kanon release for Windows achieved its highest rank at number two in the ranking . Three years later in June 2002 , the original release ranked in again at 45 , and then again at 46 the following two weeks . The original release also made the ranking after that at number 41 in early July 2002 . The Kanon Standard Edition premiered at number 16 in the rankings . The Kanon Standard Edition remained on the top 50 list for the next two months , achieving the rankings of 47 and 35 . The all ages version of the Kanon Standard Edition premiered at number 42 on the national ranking , went up to 35 the next month , and did not appear on the rankings after that . The Dreamcast port sold 42 @,@ 379 units in the first week and was the fourth top selling console game in Japan for that week . Kanon has sold over 300 @,@ 000 units across several platforms , not counting the PSP release . 
 Five days before the first PS2 release for Kanon , a PS2 printer called <unk> MPR @-@ 505 went on sale which enabled the user to print out game screens . Kanon was one of the three games supported at launch , the other two being America <unk> Ultra Quiz from DigiCube and Marle de Jigsaw from Nippon Ichi Software . The first PS2 release in 2002 was reviewed by the Japanese video game magazine Famitsu where the game received an overall score of 29 / 40 ( out of the four individual review scores of 7 , 8 , 7 , and 7 ) . Yūichi Suzumoto commented in an interview in March 2001 that he felt the end of Kanon 's story could be summed up as " the prince and princess live happily ever after . The end , " resulting in an ending that does not expand on what could possibly happen afterwards . In the October 2007 issue of Dengeki G 's Magazine , poll results for the 50 best bishōjo games were released . Out of 249 titles , Kanon ranked fifth with 71 votes . 
 Characters from Kanon have appeared in several dōjin games not directly based on the Kanon series such as the Eternal Fighter Zero game by Twilight Frontier where most of the playable characters either came from Kanon or from One : Kagayaku Kisetsu e . The dōjin game Glove on Fight featured at least two Kanon characters : Ayu Tsukimiya and Akiko Minase in a fighting style game along with various other characters taken from other media . The character Ayu Tsukimiya in particular is known to appear in works outside Kanon , such as in strip 67 of the webcomic Megatokyo where Ayu is shown eating taiyaki . 
 The second Kanon anime series was reviewed at Anime News Network where Theron Martin commented how the series is a " formulaic moe <unk> " , and how the moe aspects of the series may make viewers " feel like they 're drowning in a vat of gooey cuteness " . The series is described as being similar to the anime television adaptation of Air , saying " Like Air , the first four episodes can be simply summarized as ' male lead arrives in town and kills time interacting with cute girls . ' Unlike Air , however , these interactions can occasionally be very funny . " Martin also compares Kanon to the anime adaptation of Shuffle ! which is described as " bombing " where Kanon " works " . The reviewer chalks this up to the characters " endear [ ing ] themselves to the viewer ... far better than what Shuffle ! ' s do . " Martin cites the transition between humor and serious content as a defining feature of the series . However , Martin comments how one of the series ' flaws is how it " overplays the mundane <unk> and moe cards at times " causing little to happen with the plot . Yuichi is described as being " too erratic to be fully credible " or easily believable . Despite the series ' drawbacks , Martin still describes the series as " one of the best moe @-@ centric series to date " and lauds Kyoto Animation 's production values making Kanon " one of the prettiest @-@ looking anime series of the past year " . Martin adds another series comparison , citing Kanon as the " polar opposite of <unk> <unk> " , which deals primarily in its action @-@ oriented content . 
 = Taiko = 
 Taiko ( 太鼓 ? ) are a broad range of Japanese percussion instruments . In Japanese , the term refers to any kind of drum , but outside Japan , it is used to refer to any of the various Japanese drums called <unk> ( <unk> , " Japanese drums " ) and to the form of ensemble taiko drumming more specifically called kumi @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " set of drums " ) . The process of constructing taiko varies between manufacturers , and preparation of both the drum body and skin can take several years depending on methodology . 
 Taiko have a mythological origin in Japanese folklore , but historical records suggest that taiko were introduced to Japan through Korean and Chinese cultural influence as early as the 6th century CE . Some taiko are similar to instruments originating from India . Archaeological evidence also supports that taiko were present in Japan during the 6th century in the Kofun period . Their function has varied through history , ranging from communication , military action , theatrical accompaniment , and religious ceremony to both festival and concert performances . In modern times , taiko have also played a central role in social movements for minorities both within and outside Japan . 
 Kumi @-@ daiko performance , characterized by an ensemble playing on different drums , was developed in 1951 through the work of Daihachi Oguchi and has continued with groups such as Kodo . Other performance styles , such as <unk> @-@ daiko , have also emerged from specific communities in Japan . Kumi @-@ daiko performance groups are active not only in Japan , but also in the United States , Australia , Canada , and Brazil . Taiko performance consists of many components in technical rhythm , form , stick grip , clothing , and the particular instrumentation . Ensembles typically use different types of barrel @-@ shaped nagadō @-@ daiko as well as smaller shime @-@ daiko . Many groups accompany the drums with vocals , strings , and woodwind instruments . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The origin of the instruments is unclear , though there have been many suggestions . Historical accounts , of which the earliest date from 588 CE , note that young Japanese men traveled to Korea to study the kakko , a drum that originated in South China . This study and appropriation of Chinese instruments may have influenced the emergence of taiko . Certain court music styles , especially gigaku and gagaku , arrived in Japan through both Korea and China . In both traditions , dancers were accompanied by several instruments that included drums similar to taiko . Certain percussive patterns and terminology in <unk> , an early dance and music style in Japan , in addition to physical features of the kakko , also reflect influence from both China and India on drum use in gagaku performance . 
 Archaeological evidence shows that taiko were used in Japan as early as the 6th century CE , during the latter part of the Kofun period , and were likely used for communication , in festivals , and in other rituals . This evidence was substantiated by the discovery of haniwa statues in the Sawa District of Gunma Prefecture . Two of these figures are depicted playing drums ; one of them , wearing skins , is equipped with a barrel @-@ shaped drum hung from his shoulder and uses a stick to play the drum at hip height . This statue is titled " Man Beating the Taiko " and is considered the oldest evidence of taiko performance in Japan . Similarities between the playing style demonstrated by this haniwa and known music traditions in Korea and China further suggest influences from these regions . 
 The Nihon Shoki , the second oldest book of Japanese classical history , contains a mythological story describing the origin of taiko . The myth tells how Amaterasu , who had sealed herself inside a cave in anger , was beckoned out by an elder goddess Ame @-@ no @-@ Uzume when others had failed . Ame @-@ no @-@ Uzume accomplished this by emptying out a barrel of sake and dancing furiously on top of it . Historians regard her performance as the mythological creation of taiko music . 
 = = = Use in warfare = = = 
 In feudal Japan , taiko were often used to motivate troops , call out orders or announcements , and set a marching pace ; marches were usually set to six paces per beat of the drum . During the 16th @-@ century Warring States period , specific drum calls were used to communicate orders for retreating and advancing . Other rhythms and techniques were detailed in period texts . According to the war chronicle Gunji <unk> , nine sets of five beats would summon an ally to battle , while nine sets of three beats , sped up three or four times , was the call to advance and pursue an enemy . Folklore from the 16th century on the legendary 6th @-@ century Emperor Keitai offers a story that he obtained a large drum from China , which he named <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " front drum " ) . The Emperor was thought to have used it to both encourage his own army and intimidate his enemies . 
 = = = In traditional settings = = = 
 Taiko have been incorporated in Japanese theatre for rhythmic needs , general atmosphere , and in certain settings decoration . In the kabuki play The Tale of Shiroishi and the <unk> Chronicles , scenes in the pleasure quarters are accompanied by taiko to create dramatic tension . Noh theatre also feature taiko where performance consists of highly specific rhythmic patterns . The Konparu ( 金春流 ) school of drumming , for example , contains 65 basic patterns in addition to 25 special patterns ; these patterns are categorized in several classes . Differences between these patterns include changes in tempo , accent , dynamics , pitch , and function in the theatrical performance . Patterns are also often connected together in progressions . 
 Taiko continue to be used in gagaku , a classical music tradition typically performed at the Tokyo Imperial Palace in addition to local temples and shrines . In gagaku , one component of the art form is traditional dance , which is guided in part by the rhythm set by the taiko . Taiko have played an important role in many local festivals across Japan . They are also used to accompany religious ritual music . In kagura , which generically describes music and dances stemming from Shinto practices , taiko frequently appear alongside other performers during local festivals . In Buddhist traditions , taiko are used for ritual dances that are a part of the Bon Festival . Taiko , along with other instruments , are featured atop towers that are adorned with red @-@ and @-@ white cloth and serve to provide rhythms for the dancers who are encircled around the performers . 
 = = = Kumi @-@ daiko = = = 
 In addition to the instruments , the term taiko also refers to the performance itself , and commonly to one style called kumi @-@ daiko , or ensemble @-@ style playing ( as opposed to festival performances , rituals , or theatrical use of the drums ) . Kumi @-@ daiko was developed by Daihachi Oguchi in 1951 . He is considered a master performer and helped transform taiko performance from its roots in traditional settings in festivals and shrines . Oguchi was trained as a jazz musician in Nagano , and at one point , a relative gave him an old piece of written taiko music . Unable to read the traditional and esoteric notation , Oguchi found help to transcribe the piece , and on his own added rhythms and transformed the work to accommodate multiple taiko players on different @-@ sized instruments . Each instrument served a specific purpose that established present @-@ day conventions in kumi @-@ daiko performance . 
 Oguchi 's ensemble , Osuwa Daiko , incorporated these alterations and other drums into their performances . They also devised novel pieces that were intended for non @-@ religious performances . Several other groups emerged in Japan through the 1950s and 1960s . Oedo Sukeroku Daiko was formed in Tokyo in 1959 under Seidō Kobayashi , and has been referred to as the first taiko group who toured professionally . Globally , kumi @-@ daiko performance became more visible during the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo , when it was featured during the Festival of Arts event . 
 Kumi @-@ daiko was also developed through the leadership of Den Tagayasu ( 田耕 , Den Tagayasu ) , who gathered young men who were willing to devote their entire lifestyle to taiko playing and took them to Sado Island for training where Den and his family had settled in 1968 . Den chose the island based on a desire to reinvigorate the folk arts in Japan , particularly taiko ; he became inspired by a drumming tradition unique to Sado called ondeko ( 鬼太鼓 , " demon drumming " in Sado dialect ) that required considerable strength to play well . Den called the group " Za Ondekoza " or Ondekoza for short , and implemented a rigorous set of exercises for its members including long @-@ distance running . In 1975 , Ondekoza was the first taiko group to tour in the United States . Their first performance occurred just after the group finished running the Boston Marathon while wearing their traditional uniforms . In 1981 , some members of Ondekoza split from Den and formed another group called Kodo under the leadership of Eitetsu Hayashi . Kodo continued to use Sado Island for rigorous training and communal living , and went on to popularize taiko through frequent touring and collaborations with other musical performers . Kodo is one of the most recognized taiko groups both in Japan and worldwide . 
 Estimates of the number of taiko groups in Japan vary up to 5000 active in Japan , but more conservative assessments place the number closer to 800 based on membership in the Nippon Taiko Foundation , the largest national organization of taiko groups . Some pieces that have emerged from early kumi @-@ daiko groups that continue to be performed include Yatai @-@ bayashi from Ondekoza , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> , " galloping horse " ) from Osuwa Daiko , and Zoku ( <unk> , " tribe " ) from Kodo . 
 = = Categorization = = 
 Taiko have been developed into a broad range of percussion instruments that are used in both Japanese folk and classical musical traditions . An early classification system based on shape and tension was advanced by Francis Taylor Piggott in 1909 . Taiko are generally classified based on the construction process , or the specific context in which the drum is used , but some are not classified , such as the toy den @-@ den daiko . 
 With few exceptions , taiko have a drum shell with heads on both sides of the body , and a sealed resonating cavity . The head may be fastened to the shell using a number of different systems , such as using ropes . Taiko may be either tunable or non @-@ tunable depending on the system used . 
 Taiko are categorized into three types based on construction process . Byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko are constructed with the drumhead nailed to the body . Shime @-@ daiko are classically constructed with the skin placed over iron or steel rings , which are then tightened with ropes . Contemporary shime @-@ daiko are tensioned using bolts or turnbuckles systems attached to the drum body . Tsuzumi are also rope @-@ tensioned drums , but have a distinct hourglass shape and their skins are made using deerskin . 
 Byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko were historically made only using a single piece of wood ; they continue to be made in this manner , but are also constructed from staves of wood . Larger drums can be made using a single piece of wood , but at a much greater cost due to the difficulty in finding appropriate trees . The preferred wood is the Japanese zelkova or keyaki , but a number of other woods , and even wine barrels , have been used to create taiko . Byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko cannot be tuned . 
 The typical byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko is the nagadō @-@ daiko , an elongated drum that is roughly shaped like a wine barrel . <unk> @-@ daiko are available in a variety of sizes , and their head diameter is traditionally measured in shaku ( units of roughly 30 cm ) . Head diameters range from 1 to 6 shaku ( 30 to 182 cm ; 12 to 72 in ) . Ko @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) are the smallest of these drums and are usually about 1 shaku ( 30 cm ; 12 in ) in diameter . The chū @-@ daiko is a medium @-@ sized nagadō @-@ daiko ranging from 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 8 shaku ( 48 to 85 cm ; 19 to 33 in ) , and weighing about 27 kilograms ( 60 lb ) . Ō @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) vary in size , and are often as large as 6 shaku ( 180 cm ; 72 in ) in diameter . Some ō @-@ daiko are difficult to move due to their size , and therefore permanently remain inside the performance space , such as temple or shrine . Ō @-@ daiko means " large drum " and for a given ensemble , the term refers to their largest drum . The other type of byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko is called a hira @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " flat drum " ) and describes any drum constructed such that the head diameter is greater than the length of the body . 
 Shime @-@ daiko are a set of smaller , roughly @-@ snare drum sized instrument that are tunable . The tensioning system usually consists of hemp cords or rope , but bolt or turnbuckle systems have been used as well . Nagauta shime @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) , sometimes referred to as " taiko " in the context of theater , have thinner heads than other kinds of shime @-@ daiko . The head includes a patch of deerskin is placed in the center , and in performance , drum strokes are generally restricted to this area . The <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) is a heavier type of shime @-@ daiko . They are available in sizes 1 – 5 , and are named according to their number : namitsuke ( 1 ) , <unk> @-@ gakke ( 2 ) , <unk> @-@ gakke ( 3 ) , <unk> @-@ gakke ( 4 ) , and gochō @-@ gakke ( 5 ) . The namitsuke has the thinnest skins and the shortest body in terms of height ; thickness and tension of skins , as well as body height , increase toward the gochō @-@ gakke . The head diameters of all shime @-@ daiko sizes are around 27 cm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) . 
 Okedō @-@ daiko or simply <unk> , are a type of shime @-@ daiko that are stave @-@ constructed using narrower strips of wood , have a tube @-@ shaped frame . Like other shime @-@ daiko , drum heads are attached by metal hoops and fastened by rope or cords . Okedō can be played using the same drumsticks ( called bachi ) as shime @-@ daiko , but can also be hand @-@ played . Okedō come in short- and long @-@ bodied types . 
 Tsuzumi are a class of hourglass @-@ shaped drums . The drum body is shaped on a spool and the inner body carved by hand . Their skins can be made from cowhide , horsehide , or deerskin . While the ō @-@ tsuzumi skins are made from cowhide , ko @-@ tsuzumi are made from horsehide . While some classify tsuzumi as a type of taiko , others have described them as a drum entirely separate from taiko . 
 Taiko can also be categorized by the context in which they are used . The <unk> @-@ daiko , for instance , is constructed in the same manner as other byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko , but is distinguished by an ornamental stand and is used for ceremonial purposes at Buddhist temples . The <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) ( a ko @-@ daiko ) and <unk> @-@ nagadō ( <unk> ) ( a nagadō @-@ daiko with a cigar @-@ shaped body ) are used in sumo and festivals respectively . 
 Several drums , categorized as <unk> , are used in the Japanese theatrical form , gagaku . The lead instrument of the ensemble is the kakko , which is a smaller shime @-@ daiko with heads made of deerskin , and is placed horizontally on a stand during performance . A tsuzumi , called the san @-@ no @-@ tsuzumi is another small drum in gagaku that is placed horizontally and struck with a thin stick . Dadaiko ( <unk> ) are the largest drums of the ensemble , and have heads that are about 127 cm ( 50 in ) in diameter . During performance , the drum is placed on a tall pedestals and surrounded by a rim decoratively painted with flames and adorned with mystical figures such as wyverns . Dadaiko are played while standing , and are usually only played on the downbeat of the music . The <unk> @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " suspended drum " ) is a smaller drum that produces a lower sound , its head measuring about 55 cm ( 22 in ) in diameter . It is used in ensembles that accompany <unk> , a traditional dance performed at the Tokyo Imperial Palace and in religious contexts . Tsuri @-@ daiko are suspended on a small stand , and are played sitting down . Tsuri @-@ daiko performers typically use shorter mallets covered in leather knobs instead of bachi . They can be played simultaneously by two performers ; while one performer plays on the head , another performer uses bachi on the body of the drum . 
 The larger ō @-@ tsuzumi and smaller ko @-@ tsuzumi are used in the opening and dances of Noh theater . Both drums are struck using the fingers ; players can also adjust pitch by manually applying pressure to the ropes on the drum . The color of the cords of these drums also indicates the skill of the musician : Orange and red for amateur players , light blue for performers with expertise , and lilac for masters of the instrument . Nagauta @-@ shime daiko or uta daiko are also featured in Noh performance . 
 Many taiko in Noh are also featured in kabuki performance and are used in a similar manner . In addition to the ō @-@ tsuzumi , ko @-@ tsuzumi , and nagauta @-@ shime daiko , Kabuki performances make use of the larger ō @-@ daiko offstage to help set the atmosphere for different scenes . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = = Process = = = 
 Taiko construction has several stages , including making and shaping of the drum body ( or shell ) , preparing the drum skin , and tuning the skin to the drumhead . Variations in the construction process often occur in the latter two parts of this process . Historically , byō @-@ uchi @-@ daiko were crafted from trunks of the Japanese zelkova tree that were dried out over years , using techniques to prevent splitting . A master carpenter then carved out the rough shape of the drum body with a chisel ; the texture of the wood after carving softened the tone of the drum . In contemporary times , taiko are carved out on a large lathe using wood staves or logs that can be shaped to fit drum bodies of various sizes . Drumheads can be left to air @-@ dry over a period of years , but some companies use large , smoke @-@ filled warehouses to hasten the drying process . After drying is complete , the inside of the drum is worked with a deep @-@ grooved chisel and sanded . Lastly , handles are placed onto the drum . These are used to carry smaller drums and they serve an ornamental purpose for larger drums . 
 The skins or heads of taiko are generally made from cowhide from Holstein cows aged about three or four years . Skins also come from horses , and bull skin is preferred for larger drums . Thinner skins are preferred for smaller taiko , and thicker skins are used for larger ones . On some drumheads , a patch of deer skin placed in the center serves as the target for many strokes during performance . Before fitting it to the drum body the hair is removed from the hide by soaking it in a river or stream for about a month ; winter months are preferred as colder temperatures better facilitate hair removal . To stretch the skin over the drum properly , one process requires the body to be held on a platform with several hydraulic jacks underneath it . The edges of the cowhide are secured to an apparatus below the jacks , and the jacks stretch the skin incrementally to precisely apply tension across the drumhead . Other forms of stretching use rope or cords with wooden dowels or an iron wheel to create appropriate tension . Small tension adjustments can be made during this process using small pieces of bamboo that twist around the ropes . Particularly large drumheads are sometimes stretched by having several workers , clad in stockings , hop rhythmically atop it , forming a circle along the edge . After the skin has dried , tacks , called byō , are added to the appropriate drums to secure it ; chū @-@ daiko require about 300 of them for each side . After the body and skin have been finished , excess hide is cut off and the drum can be stained as needed . 
 = = = Drum makers = = = 
 Several companies specialize in the production of taiko . One such company that created drums exclusively for the Emperor of Japan , Miyamoto <unk> Shoten in Tokyo , has been making taiko since 1861 . The Asano Taiko Corporation is another major taiko @-@ producing organization , and has been producing taiko for over 400 years . The family @-@ owned business started in <unk> , Ishikawa , and , aside from military equipment , made taiko for Noh theater and later expanded to creating instruments for festivals during the Meiji period . Asano currently maintains an entire complex of large buildings referred to as Asano Taiko Village , and the company reports producing up to 8000 drums each year . As of 2012 , there is approximately one major taiko production company in each prefecture of Japan , with some regions having several companies . Of the manufacturers in Naniwa , <unk> <unk> is one of the most successful and is thought to have brought considerable recognition to the community and attracted many drum makers there . Umetsu Daiko , a company that operates in Hakata , has been producing taiko since 1821 . 
 = = Performance = = 
 Taiko performance styles vary widely across groups in terms of the number of performers , repertoire , instrument choices , and stage techniques . Nevertheless , a number of early groups have had broad influence on the tradition . For instance , many pieces developed by Ondekoza and Kodo are considered standard in many taiko groups . 
 = = = Form = = = 
 Kata is a term used to describe the posture and movement associated with taiko performance . The term is used in martial arts in a similar way : for example , both traditions include the idea that the hara is the center of being . Author Sean Bender argues that kata is the primary feature that distinguishes different taiko groups from one another , and is a key factor in judging the quality of performance . For this reason , many practice rooms intended for taiko contain mirrors to provide visual feedback to players . An important part of kata in taiko is keeping the body stabilized while performing , and can be accomplished by keeping a wide , low stance with the legs , with the left knee bent over the toes and keeping the right leg straight . It is important that the hips face the drum and the shoulders are relaxed . Some teachers note a tendency to rely on the upper body while playing , and emphasize the importance of the holistic use of the body during performance . 
 Some groups in Japan , particularly those active in Tokyo , also emphasize the importance of the lively and spirited iki aesthetic . In taiko , it refers to very specific kinds of movement while performing that evoke the sophistication stemming from the mercantile and artisan classes active during the Edo period ( 1603 – 1868 ) . 
 The sticks for playing taiko are called bachi , and are made in various sizes and from different kinds of wood such as white oak , bamboo , and Japanese magnolia . Bachi are also held in a number of different styles . In kumi @-@ daiko , it is common for a player to hold their sticks in a relaxed manner between the V @-@ shape of the index finger and thumb , which points to the player . There are other grips that allow performers to play much more technically difficult rhythms , such as the shime grip , which is similar to a matched grip : the bachi are gripped at the back end , and the fulcrum rests between the performer 's index finger and thumb , while the other fingers remain relaxed and slightly curled around the stick . 
 Performance in some groups is also guided by principles based on Zen Buddhism . For instance , among other concepts , the San Francisco Taiko Dojo is guided by rei ( <unk> ) emphasizing communication , respect , and harmony . The way the bachi are held can also be significant ; for some groups , bachi represent a spiritual link between the body and the sky . Some physical parts of taiko , like the drum body , its skin , and the tacks also hold symbolic significance in Buddhism . 
 = = = Instrumentation = = = 
 Kumi @-@ daiko groups consist primarily of percussive instruments where each of the drums plays a specific role . Of the different kinds of taiko , the most common in groups is the nagadō @-@ daiko . <unk> @-@ daiko are common in taiko groups and represent the main rhythm of the group , whereas shime @-@ daiko set and change tempo . Ō @-@ daiko provide a steady , underlying pulse and serve as a counter @-@ rhythm to the other parts . It is common for performances to begin with a single stroke roll called an <unk> ( <unk> , " wind blowing down from mountains " ) . The player starts slowly , leaving considerable space between strikes , gradually shortening the interval between hits , until the drummer is playing a rapid roll of hits . <unk> are also played as a part of theatrical performance , such as in Noh theater . 
 Drums are not the only instruments played in the ensemble ; other Japanese instruments are also used . Other kinds of percussion instruments include the <unk> ( <unk> ) , a hand @-@ sized gong played with a small mallet . In kabuki , the shamisen , a plucked string instrument , often accompanies taiko during the theatrical performance . Kumi @-@ daiko performances can also feature woodwinds such as the shakuhachi and the shinobue . 
 Voiced calls or shouts called <unk> and kiai are also common in taiko performance . They are used as encouragement to other players or cues for transition or change in dynamics such as an increase in tempo . In contrast , the philosophical concept of ma , which superficially describes the space between drum strikes , is also important in shaping rhythmic phrases and creating appropriate contrast . 
 = = = Clothing = = = 
 There is a wide variety of traditional clothing that players wear during taiko performance . Common in many kumi @-@ daiko groups is the use of the <unk> , a decorative , thin @-@ fabric coat , and traditional headbands called hachimaki . Tabi , <unk> ( <unk> , " loose @-@ fitting pants " ) , and <unk> ( <unk> , " working aprons " ) are also typical . During his time with the group Ondekoza , Eitetsu Hayashi suggested that a loincloth called a fundoshi be worn when performing for French fashion designer Pierre Cardin , who saw Ondekoza perform for him in 1975 . The Japanese group Kodo has sometimes worn fundoshi for its performances . 
 = = Education = = 
 Taiko performance is generally taught orally and through demonstration . Historically , general patterns for taiko were written down , such as in the 1512 encyclopedia called the <unk> , but written scores for taiko pieces are generally unavailable . One reason for the adherence to an oral tradition is that , from group to group , the rhythmic patterns in a given piece are often performed differently . Furthermore , ethnomusicologist William P. Malm observed that Japanese players within a group could not usefully predict one another using written notation , and instead did so through listening . In Japan , printed parts are not used during lessons . 
 Orally , patterns of onomatopoeia called <unk> <unk> are taught from teacher to student that convey the rhythm and timbre of drum strikes for a particular piece . For example , don ( どん ) represents a single strike to the center of the drum , where as do @-@ ko ( <unk> ) represents two successive strikes , first by the right and then the left , and lasts the same amount of time as one don strike . Some taiko pieces , such as Yatai @-@ bayashi , include patterns that are difficult to represent in Western musical notation . The exact words used can also differ from region to region . 
 More recently , Japanese publications have emerged in an attempt to standardize taiko performance . The Nippon Taiko Foundation was formed in 1979 ; its primary goals were to foster good relations among taiko groups in Japan and to both publicize and teach how to perform taiko . Daihachi Oguchi , the leader of the Foundation , wrote Japan Taiko with other teachers in 1994 out of concern that correct form in performance would degrade over time . The instructional publication described the different drums used in kumi @-@ daiko performance , methods of gripping , correct form , and suggestions on instrumentation . The book also contains practice exercises and transcribed pieces from Oguchi 's group , Osuwa Daiko . While there were similar textbooks published before 1994 , this publication had much more visibility due to the Foundation 's scope . 
 The system of fundamentals Japan Taiko put forward was not widely adopted because taiko performance varied substantially across Japan . An updated 2001 publication from the Foundation , called the Nihon Taiko <unk> ( <unk> , " Japan Taiko Textbook " ) , describes regional variations that depart from the main techniques taught in the textbook . The creators of the text maintained that mastering a set of prescribed basics should be compatible with learning local traditions . 
 = = Regional styles = = 
 Aside from kumi @-@ daiko performance , a number of folk traditions that use taiko have been recognized in different regions in Japan . Some of these include ondeko ( 鬼太鼓 , " demon drumming " ) from Sado Island , <unk> @-@ daiko from the town of Kokura , and <unk> @-@ odori from Iwate Prefecture . 
 = = = Eisa = = = 
 A variety of folk dances originating from Okinawa , known collectively as <unk> , often make use of the taiko . Some performers use drums while dancing , and generally speaking , perform in one of two styles : groups on the <unk> Peninsula and on <unk> Island use small , single @-@ sided drums called pāranku ( <unk> ) whereas groups near the city of Okinawa generally use shime @-@ daiko . Use of shime @-@ daiko over pāranku has spread throughout the island , and is considered the dominant style . Small nagadō @-@ daiko , referred to as ō @-@ daiko within the tradition , are also used and are worn in front of the performer . These drum dances are not limited to Okinawa and have appeared in places containing Okinawan communities such as in São Paulo , Hawaii , and large cities on the Japanese mainland . 
 = = = Hachijō @-@ daiko = = = 
 Hachijō @-@ daiko ( <unk> , trans . " Hachijō @-@ style taiko " ) is a taiko tradition originating on the island of Hachijō @-@ jima . Two styles of Hachijō @-@ daiko emerged and have been popularized among residents : an older tradition based on a historical account , and a newer tradition influenced by mainland groups and practiced by the majority of the islanders . 
 The Hachijō @-@ daiko tradition was documented as early as 1849 based on a journal kept by an exile named <unk> Kizan . He mentioned some of its unique features , such as " a taiko is suspended from a tree while women and children gathered around " , and observed that a player used either side of the drum while performing . Illustrations from Kizan 's journal show features of Hachijō @-@ daiko . These illustrations also featured women performing , which is unusual as taiko performance elsewhere during this period was typically reserved for men . Teachers of the tradition have noted that the majority of its performers were women ; one estimate asserts that female performers outnumbered males by three to one . 
 The first style of Hachijō @-@ daiko is thought to descend directly from the style reported by Kizan . This style is called Kumaoji @-@ daiko , named after its creator Okuyama Kumaoji , a central performer of the style . Kumaoji @-@ daiko has two players on a single drum , one of whom , called the shita @-@ byōshi ( <unk> , " lower beat " ) , provides the underlying beat . The other player , called the <unk> @-@ byōshi ( <unk> , " upper beat " ) , builds on this rhythmical foundation with unique and typically improvised rhythms . While there are specific types of underlying rhythms , the accompanying player is free to express an original musical beat . Kumaoji @-@ daiko also features an unusual positioning for taiko : the drums are sometimes suspended from ropes , and historically , sometimes drums were suspended from trees . 
 The contemporary style of Hachijō @-@ daiko is called shin @-@ daiko ( <unk> , " new taiko " ) , which differs from Kumaoji @-@ daiko in multiple ways . For instance , while the lead and accompanying roles are still present , shin @-@ daiko performances use larger drums exclusively on stands . Shin @-@ daiko emphasizes a more powerful sound , and consequently , performers use larger bachi made out of stronger wood . Looser clothing is worn by shin @-@ daiko performers compared to kimono worn by Kumaoji @-@ daiko performers ; the looser clothing in shin @-@ daiko allow performers to adopt more open stances and larger movements with the legs and arms . Rhythms used for the accompanying shita @-@ byōshi role can also differ . One type of rhythm , called <unk> , consists of the following : 
 This rhythm is found in both styles , but is always played faster in shin @-@ daiko . Another type of rhythm , called <unk> , is unique to shin @-@ daiko and also contains a song which is performed in standard Japanese . 
 = = = Miyake @-@ daiko = = = 
 Miyake @-@ daiko ( <unk> , trans . " Miyake @-@ style taiko " ) is a style that has spread amongst groups through Kodo , and is formally known as Miyake @-@ jima Kamitsuki mikoshi @-@ daiko ( <unk> ) . The word <unk> comes from Miyake @-@ jima , part of the Izu Islands , and the word Kamitsuki refers to the village where the tradition came from . Miyake @-@ style taiko came out of performances for Gozu Tennō Sai ( <unk> , " Gozu Tennō Festival " ) — a traditional festival held annually in July on Miyake Island since 1820 honoring the deity Gozu Tennō . In this festival , players perform on taiko while portable shrines are carried around town . The style itself is characterized in a number of ways . A nagadō @-@ daiko is typically set low to the ground and played by two performers , one on each side ; instead of sitting , performers stand and hold a stance that is also very low to the ground , almost to the point of kneeling . 
 = = Outside Japan = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Taiko groups in Australia began forming in the 1990s . The first group , called Ataru Taru Taiko , was formed in 1995 by <unk> Thomas , Harold Gent , and <unk> Kamei . <unk> was later formed by percussionist Ian Cleworth and Riley Lee , a former Ondekoza member , and has been performing in Australia since 1997 . They are known for their work in generating interest in performing taiko among Australian audiences , such as by developing a complete education program with both formal and informal classes , and have a strong fan base . Cleworth and other members of the group have developed several original pieces . 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 The introduction of kumi @-@ daiko performance in Brazil can be traced back to the 1970s and 1980s in São Paulo . <unk> Setsuko founded an eponymous taiko dojo and was Brazil 's first taiko group ; Setsuo Kinoshita later formed the group <unk> Sho . Brazilian groups have combined native and African drumming techniques with taiko performance . One such piece developed by Kinoshita is called Taiko de Samba , which emphasizes both Brazilian and Japanese aesthetics in percussion traditions . Taiko was also popularized in Brazil from 2002 through the work of <unk> Oda , a Japanese native who visited Brazil several times through the Japan International Cooperation Agency . 
 The Brazilian Association of Taiko ( ABT ) suggests that there are about 150 taiko groups in Brazil and that about 10 – 15 % of players are non @-@ Japanese ; Izumo Honda , coordinator of a large annual festival in São Paulo , estimated that about 60 % of all taiko performers in Brazil are women . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Taiko emerged in the United States in the late 1960s . The first group , San Francisco Taiko Dojo , was formed in 1968 by Seiichi Tanaka , a postwar immigrant who studied taiko in Japan and brought the styles and teachings to the US . A year later , a few members of <unk> Buddhist Temple in Los Angeles led by its minister Masao Kodani initiated another group called Kinnara Taiko . San Jose Taiko later formed in 1973 in Japantown , San Jose , under Roy and PJ Hirabayashi . Taiko started to branch out to the eastern US in the late 1970s . This included formation of Denver Taiko in 1976 and Soh Daiko in New York City in 1979 . Many of these early groups lacked the resources to equip each member with a drum and resorted to makeshift percussion materials such as rubber tires or creating taiko out of wine barrels . 
 Japanese @-@ Canadian taiko began in 1979 with Katari Taiko , and was inspired by the San Jose Taiko group . Its early membership was predominantly female . Katari Taiko and future groups were thought to represent an opportunity for younger , third @-@ generation Japanese Canadians to explore their roots , redevelop a sense of ethnic community , and expand taiko into other musical traditions . 
 There are no official counts or estimates of the number of active taiko groups in the United States or Canada , as there is no governing body for taiko groups in either country . Unofficial estimates have been made . In 1989 , there were as many as 30 groups in the US and Canada , seven of which were in California . One estimate suggested that around 120 groups were active in the US and Canada as of 2001 , many of which could be traced to the San Francisco Taiko Dojo ; later estimates in 2005 and 2006 suggested there were about 200 groups in the United States alone . 
 The Cirque du Soleil shows Mystère in Las Vegas and Dralion have featured taiko performance . Taiko performance has also been featured in commercial productions such as the 2005 Mitsubishi Eclipse ad campaign , and in events such as the 2009 Academy Awards and 2011 Grammy Awards . 
 From 2005 to 2006 , the Japanese American National Museum held an exhibition called Big Drum : Taiko in the United States . The exhibition covered several topics related to taiko in the United States , such as the formation of performance groups , their construction using available materials , and social movements . Visitors were able to play smaller drums . 
 = = Related cultural and social movements = = 
 Certain peoples have used taiko to advance social or cultural movements , both within Japan and elsewhere in the world . 
 = = = Gender conventions = = = 
 Taiko performance has frequently been viewed as an art form dominated by men . Historians of taiko argue that its performance comes from masculine traditions . Those who developed ensemble @-@ style taiko in Japan were men , and through the influence of Ondekoza , the ideal taiko player was epitomized in images of the masculine peasant class , particularly through the character <unk> in the 1958 film Rickshaw Man . Masculine roots have also been attributed to perceived capacity for " spectacular bodily performance " where women 's bodies are sometimes judged as unable to meet the physical demands of playing . 
 Before the 1980s , it was uncommon for Japanese women to perform on traditional instruments , including taiko , as their participation had been systematically restricted . In Ondekoza and in the early performances of Kodo , women performed only dance routines either during or between taiko performances . Thereafter , female participation in kumi @-@ daiko started to rise dramatically , and by the 1990s , women equaled and possibly exceeded representation by men . While the proportion of women in taiko has become substantial , some have expressed concern that women still do not perform in the same roles as their male counterparts and that taiko performance continues to be a male @-@ dominated profession . For instance , a member of Kodo was informed by the director of the group 's apprentice program that women were permitted to play , but could only play " as women " . Other women in the apprentice program recognized a gender disparity in performance roles , such as what pieces they were allowed to perform , or in physical terms based on a male standard . 
 Female taiko performance has also served as a response to gendered stereotypes of Japanese women as being quiet , subservient , or a femme fatale . Through performance , some groups believe they are helping to redefine not only the role of women in taiko , but how women are perceived more generally . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Those involved in the construction of taiko are usually considered part of the burakumin , a marginalized minority class in Japanese society , particularly those working with leather or animal skins . Prejudice against this class dates back to the Tokugawa period in terms of legal discrimination and treatment as social outcasts . Although official discrimination ended with the Tokugawa era , the burakumin have continued to face social discrimination , such as scrutiny by employers or in marriage arrangements . Drum makers have used their trade and success as a means to advocate for an end to discriminatory practices against their class . 
 The Taiko Road ( <unk> , " Taiko Road of Human Rights " ) , representing the contributions of burakumin , is found in Naniwa Ward in Osaka , home to a large proportion of burakumin . Among other features , the road contains taiko @-@ shaped benches representing their traditions in taiko manufacturing and leatherworking , and their impact on national culture . The road ends at the Osaka Human Rights Museum , which exhibits the history of systematic discrimination against the burakumin . The road and museum were developed in part due an advocacy campaign led by the Buraku Liberation League and a taiko group of younger performers called Taiko Ikari ( <unk> , " taiko rage " ) . 
 = = = North American sansei = = = 
 Taiko performance was an important part of cultural development by third @-@ generation Japanese residents of in North America , who are called sansei . During World War II , second @-@ generation Japanese residents , called nisei faced internment in the United States and in Canada on the basis of their race . During and after the war , Japanese residents were discouraged from activities such as speaking Japanese or forming ethnic communities . Subsequently , sansei could not engage in Japanese culture and instead were raised to assimilate into more normative activities . There were also prevailing stereotypes of Japanese people , which sansei sought to escape or subvert . During the 1960s in the United States , the Civil Rights Movement influenced sansei to reexamine their heritage by engaging in Japanese culture in their communities ; one such approach was through taiko performance . Groups such as San Jose Taiko were organized to fulfill a need for solidarity and to have a medium to express their experiences as Japanese @-@ Americans . Later generations have adopted taiko in programs or workshops established by sansei ; social scientist Hideyo Konagaya remarks that this attraction to taiko among other Japanese art forms may be due to its accessibility and energetic nature . Konagaya has also argued that the resurgence of taiko in the United States and Japan are differently motivated : in Japan , performance was meant to represent the need to recapture sacred traditions , while in the United States it was meant to be an explicit representation of masculinity and power in Japanese @-@ American men . 
 = = Notable performers and groups = = 
 A number of performers and groups , including several early leaders , have been recognized for their contributions to taiko performance . Daihachi Oguchi was best known for developing kumi @-@ daiko performance . Oguchi founded the first kumi @-@ daiko group called Osuwa Daiko in 1951 , and facilitated the popularization of taiko performance groups in Japan . 
 Seidō Kobayashi is the leader of the Tokyo @-@ based taiko group Oedo Sukeroku Taiko as of December 2014 . Kobayashi founded the group in 1959 and was the first group to tour professionally . Kobayashi is considered a master performer of taiko . He is also known for asserting intellectual control of the group 's performance style , which has had an impact on performance for many groups , particularly in North America . 
 In 1969 , Den Tagayasu ( 田耕 , Den Tagayasu ) founded Ondekoza , a group well known for making taiko performance internationally visible and for its artistic contributions to the tradition . Den was also known for developing a communal living and training facility for Ondekoza on Sado Island in Japan , which had a reputation for its intensity and broad education programs in folklore and music . 
 Performers and groups beyond the early practitioners have also been noted . Eitetsu Hayashi is best known for his solo performance work . Hayashi joined Ondekoza when he was 19 , and after parting from the group helped found Kodo , one of the best known and most influential taiko performance groups in the world . Hayashi soon left the group to begin a solo career and has performed in venues such as Carnegie Hall in 1984 , the first featured taiko performer there . He was awarded the 47th Education Minister 's Art Encouragement Prize , a national award , in 1997 as well as the 8th Award for the Promotion of Traditional Japanese Culture from the Japan Arts Foundation in 2001 . 
 Seiichi Tanaka is the founder of the San Francisco Taiko Dojo and is regarded as the primary developer of taiko performance in the United States . He was a recipient of a 2001 National Heritage Fellowship awarded by the National Endowment for the Arts . 
 Tokyo <unk> has performed worldwide , including at the National Theater of Japan , at the closing ceremonies of the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France , and the 2014 Festival Internacional <unk> in Mexico . The group also appeared in <unk> no Sakura , a film produced by Toei . 
 = = Glossary = = 
 = Protein = 
 Proteins ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) are large biomolecules , or macromolecules , consisting of one or more long chains of amino acid residues . Proteins perform a vast array of functions within organisms , including catalysing metabolic reactions , DNA replication , responding to stimuli , and transporting molecules from one location to another . Proteins differ from one another primarily in their sequence of amino acids , which is dictated by the nucleotide sequence of their genes , and which usually results in protein folding into a specific three @-@ dimensional structure that determines its activity . 
 A linear chain of amino acid residues is called a polypeptide . A protein contains at least one long polypeptide . Short polypeptides , containing less than 20 @-@ 30 residues , are rarely considered to be proteins and are commonly called peptides , or sometimes <unk> . The individual amino acid residues are bonded together by peptide bonds and adjacent amino acid residues . The sequence of amino acid residues in a protein is defined by the sequence of a gene , which is encoded in the genetic code . In general , the genetic code specifies 20 standard amino acids ; however , in certain organisms the genetic code can include selenocysteine and — in certain archaea — pyrrolysine . Shortly after or even during synthesis , the residues in a protein are often chemically modified by post @-@ translational modification , which alters the physical and chemical properties , folding , stability , activity , and ultimately , the function of the proteins . Sometimes proteins have non @-@ peptide groups attached , which can be called prosthetic groups or cofactors . Proteins can also work together to achieve a particular function , and they often associate to form stable protein complexes . 
 Once formed , proteins only exist for a certain period of time and are then degraded and recycled by the cell 's machinery through the process of protein turnover . A protein 's lifespan is measured in terms of its half @-@ life and covers a wide range . They can exist for minutes or years with an average lifespan of 1 – 2 days in mammalian cells . Abnormal and or misfolded proteins are degraded more rapidly either due to being targeted for destruction or due to being unstable . 
 Like other biological macromolecules such as polysaccharides and nucleic acids , proteins are essential parts of organisms and participate in virtually every process within cells . Many proteins are enzymes that catalyse biochemical reactions and are vital to metabolism . Proteins also have structural or mechanical functions , such as actin and myosin in muscle and the proteins in the cytoskeleton , which form a system of scaffolding that maintains cell shape . Other proteins are important in cell signaling , immune responses , cell adhesion , and the cell cycle . In animals , proteins are needed in the diet to provide the essential amino acids that cannot be synthesized . Digestion breaks the proteins down for use in the metabolism . 
 Proteins may be purified from other cellular components using a variety of techniques such as ultracentrifugation , precipitation , electrophoresis , and chromatography ; the advent of genetic engineering has made possible a number of methods to facilitate purification . Methods commonly used to study protein structure and function include immunohistochemistry , site @-@ directed mutagenesis , X @-@ ray crystallography , nuclear magnetic resonance and mass spectrometry . 
 = = Biochemistry = = 
 Most proteins consist of linear polymers built from series of up to 20 different L @-@ α @-@ amino acids . All proteinogenic amino acids possess common structural features , including an α @-@ carbon to which an amino group , a carboxyl group , and a variable side chain are bonded . Only proline differs from this basic structure as it contains an unusual ring to the N @-@ end amine group , which forces the CO – NH amide moiety into a fixed conformation . The side chains of the standard amino acids , detailed in the list of standard amino acids , have a great variety of chemical structures and properties ; it is the combined effect of all of the amino acid side chains in a protein that ultimately determines its three @-@ dimensional structure and its chemical reactivity . The amino acids in a polypeptide chain are linked by peptide bonds . Once linked in the protein chain , an individual amino acid is called a residue , and the linked series of carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen atoms are known as the main chain or protein backbone . 
 The peptide bond has two resonance forms that contribute some double @-@ bond character and inhibit rotation around its axis , so that the alpha carbons are roughly coplanar . The other two dihedral angles in the peptide bond determine the local shape assumed by the protein backbone . The end of the protein with a free carboxyl group is known as the C @-@ terminus or carboxy terminus , whereas the end with a free amino group is known as the N @-@ terminus or amino terminus . The words protein , polypeptide , and peptide are a little ambiguous and can overlap in meaning . Protein is generally used to refer to the complete biological molecule in a stable conformation , whereas peptide is generally reserved for a short amino acid oligomers often lacking a stable three @-@ dimensional structure . However , the boundary between the two is not well defined and usually lies near 20 – 30 residues . <unk> can refer to any single linear chain of amino acids , usually regardless of length , but often implies an absence of a defined conformation . 
 = = = Abundance in cells = = = 
 It has been estimated that average @-@ sized bacteria contain about 2 million proteins per cell ( e.g. E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus ) . Smaller bacteria , such as Mycoplasma or spirochetes contain fewer molecules , namely on the order of 50 @,@ 000 to 1 million . By contrast , eukaryotic cells are larger and thus contain much more protein . For instance , yeast cells were estimated to contain about 50 million proteins and human cells on the order of 1 to 3 billion . Note that bacterial genomes encode about 10 times fewer proteins than humans ( e.g. small bacteria ~ 1 @,@ 000 , E. coli : ~ 4 @,@ 000 , yeast : ~ 6 @,@ 000 , human : ~ 20 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Importantly , the concentration of individual proteins ranges from a few molecules per cell to hundreds of thousands . In fact , about a third of all proteins is not produced in most cells or only induced under certain circumstances . For instance , of the 20 @,@ 000 or so proteins encoded by the human genome only 6 @,@ 000 are detected in <unk> cells . 
 = = Synthesis = = 
 = = = Biosynthesis = = = 
 Proteins are assembled from amino acids using information encoded in genes . Each protein has its own unique amino acid sequence that is specified by the nucleotide sequence of the gene encoding this protein . The genetic code is a set of three @-@ nucleotide sets called codons and each three @-@ nucleotide combination designates an amino acid , for example AUG ( adenine @-@ uracil @-@ guanine ) is the code for methionine . Because DNA contains four nucleotides , the total number of possible codons is 64 ; hence , there is some redundancy in the genetic code , with some amino acids specified by more than one codon . Genes encoded in DNA are first transcribed into pre @-@ messenger RNA ( mRNA ) by proteins such as RNA polymerase . Most organisms then process the pre @-@ mRNA ( also known as a primary transcript ) using various forms of Post @-@ transcriptional modification to form the mature mRNA , which is then used as a template for protein synthesis by the ribosome . In prokaryotes the mRNA may either be used as soon as it is produced , or be bound by a ribosome after having moved away from the nucleoid . In contrast , eukaryotes make mRNA in the cell nucleus and then translocate it across the nuclear membrane into the cytoplasm , where protein synthesis then takes place . The rate of protein synthesis is higher in prokaryotes than eukaryotes and can reach up to 20 amino acids per second . 
 The process of synthesizing a protein from an mRNA template is known as translation . The mRNA is loaded onto the ribosome and is read three nucleotides at a time by matching each codon to its base pairing anticodon located on a transfer RNA molecule , which carries the amino acid corresponding to the codon it recognizes . The enzyme aminoacyl tRNA synthetase " charges " the tRNA molecules with the correct amino acids . The growing polypeptide is often termed the nascent chain . Proteins are always biosynthesized from N @-@ terminus to C @-@ terminus . 
 The size of a synthesized protein can be measured by the number of amino acids it contains and by its total molecular mass , which is normally reported in units of daltons ( synonymous with atomic mass units ) , or the derivative unit <unk> ( kDa ) . Yeast proteins are on average 466 amino acids long and 53 kDa in mass . The largest known proteins are the <unk> , a component of the muscle <unk> , with a molecular mass of almost 3 @,@ 000 kDa and a total length of almost 27 @,@ 000 amino acids . 
 = = = Chemical synthesis = = = 
 Short proteins can also be synthesized chemically by a family of methods known as peptide synthesis , which rely on organic synthesis techniques such as chemical ligation to produce peptides in high yield . Chemical synthesis allows for the introduction of non @-@ natural amino acids into polypeptide chains , such as attachment of fluorescent probes to amino acid side chains . These methods are useful in laboratory biochemistry and cell biology , though generally not for commercial applications . Chemical synthesis is inefficient for polypeptides longer than about 300 amino acids , and the synthesized proteins may not readily assume their native tertiary structure . Most chemical synthesis methods proceed from C @-@ terminus to N @-@ terminus , opposite the biological reaction . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Most proteins fold into unique 3 @-@ dimensional structures . The shape into which a protein naturally folds is known as its native conformation . Although many proteins can fold unassisted , simply through the chemical properties of their amino acids , others require the aid of molecular chaperones to fold into their native states . <unk> often refer to four distinct aspects of a protein 's structure : 
 Primary structure : the amino acid sequence . A protein is a <unk> . 
 Secondary structure : regularly repeating local structures stabilized by hydrogen bonds . The most common examples are the α @-@ helix , β @-@ sheet and turns . Because secondary structures are local , many regions of different secondary structure can be present in the same protein molecule . 
 Tertiary structure : the overall shape of a single protein molecule ; the spatial relationship of the secondary structures to one another . Tertiary structure is generally stabilized by nonlocal interactions , most commonly the formation of a hydrophobic core , but also through salt bridges , hydrogen bonds , disulfide bonds , and even posttranslational modifications . The term " tertiary structure " is often used as synonymous with the term fold . The tertiary structure is what controls the basic function of the protein . 
 Quaternary structure : the structure formed by several protein molecules ( polypeptide chains ) , usually called protein subunits in this context , which function as a single protein complex . 
 Proteins are not entirely rigid molecules . In addition to these levels of structure , proteins may shift between several related structures while they perform their functions . In the context of these functional rearrangements , these tertiary or quaternary structures are usually referred to as " conformations " , and transitions between them are called conformational changes . Such changes are often induced by the binding of a substrate molecule to an enzyme 's active site , or the physical region of the protein that participates in chemical catalysis . In solution proteins also undergo variation in structure through thermal vibration and the collision with other molecules . 
 Proteins can be informally divided into three main classes , which correlate with typical tertiary structures : globular proteins , fibrous proteins , and membrane proteins . Almost all globular proteins are soluble and many are enzymes . <unk> proteins are often structural , such as collagen , the major component of connective tissue , or keratin , the protein component of hair and nails . Membrane proteins often serve as receptors or provide channels for polar or charged molecules to pass through the cell membrane . 
 A special case of intramolecular hydrogen bonds within proteins , poorly shielded from water attack and hence promoting their own dehydration , are called <unk> . 
 = = = Structure determination = = = 
 Discovering the tertiary structure of a protein , or the quaternary structure of its complexes , can provide important clues about how the protein performs its function . Common experimental methods of structure determination include X @-@ ray crystallography and NMR spectroscopy , both of which can produce information at atomic resolution . However , NMR experiments are able to provide information from which a subset of distances between pairs of atoms can be estimated , and the final possible conformations for a protein are determined by solving a distance geometry problem . Dual polarisation interferometry is a quantitative analytical method for measuring the overall protein conformation and conformational changes due to interactions or other stimulus . Circular dichroism is another laboratory technique for determining internal β @-@ sheet / α @-@ helical composition of proteins . <unk> microscopy is used to produce lower @-@ resolution structural information about very large protein complexes , including assembled viruses ; a variant known as electron crystallography can also produce high @-@ resolution information in some cases , especially for two @-@ dimensional crystals of membrane proteins . Solved structures are usually deposited in the Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) , a freely available resource from which structural data about thousands of proteins can be obtained in the form of Cartesian coordinates for each atom in the protein . 
 Many more gene sequences are known than protein structures . Further , the set of solved structures is biased toward proteins that can be easily subjected to the conditions required in X @-@ ray crystallography , one of the major structure determination methods . In particular , globular proteins are comparatively easy to crystallize in preparation for X @-@ ray crystallography . Membrane proteins , by contrast , are difficult to crystallize and are underrepresented in the PDB . Structural genomics initiatives have attempted to remedy these deficiencies by systematically solving representative structures of major fold classes . Protein structure prediction methods attempt to provide a means of generating a plausible structure for proteins whose structures have not been experimentally determined . 
 = = Cellular functions = = 
 Proteins are the chief actors within the cell , said to be carrying out the duties specified by the information encoded in genes . With the exception of certain types of RNA , most other biological molecules are relatively inert elements upon which proteins act . Proteins make up half the dry weight of an Escherichia coli cell , whereas other macromolecules such as DNA and RNA make up only 3 % and 20 % , respectively . The set of proteins expressed in a particular cell or cell type is known as its proteome . 
 The chief characteristic of proteins that also allows their diverse set of functions is their ability to bind other molecules specifically and tightly . The region of the protein responsible for binding another molecule is known as the binding site and is often a depression or " pocket " on the molecular surface . This binding ability is mediated by the tertiary structure of the protein , which defines the binding site pocket , and by the chemical properties of the surrounding amino acids ' side chains . Protein binding can be extraordinarily tight and specific ; for example , the ribonuclease inhibitor protein binds to human <unk> with a sub @-@ <unk> dissociation constant ( < 10 − 15 M ) but does not bind at all to its amphibian homolog <unk> ( > 1 M ) . Extremely minor chemical changes such as the addition of a single methyl group to a binding partner can sometimes suffice to nearly eliminate binding ; for example , the aminoacyl tRNA synthetase specific to the amino acid valine discriminates against the very similar side chain of the amino acid isoleucine . 
 Proteins can bind to other proteins as well as to small @-@ molecule substrates . When proteins bind specifically to other copies of the same molecule , they can <unk> to form fibrils ; this process occurs often in structural proteins that consist of globular monomers that self @-@ associate to form rigid fibers . Protein – protein interactions also regulate enzymatic activity , control progression through the cell cycle , and allow the assembly of large protein complexes that carry out many closely related reactions with a common biological function . Proteins can also bind to , or even be integrated into , cell membranes . The ability of binding partners to induce conformational changes in proteins allows the construction of enormously complex signaling networks . Importantly , as interactions between proteins are reversible , and depend heavily on the availability of different groups of partner proteins to form aggregates that are capable to carry out discrete sets of function , study of the interactions between specific proteins is a key to understand important aspects of cellular function , and ultimately the properties that distinguish particular cell types . 
 = = = Enzymes = = = 
 The best @-@ known role of proteins in the cell is as enzymes , which catalyse chemical reactions . Enzymes are usually highly specific and accelerate only one or a few chemical reactions . Enzymes carry out most of the reactions involved in metabolism , as well as manipulating DNA in processes such as DNA replication , DNA repair , and transcription . Some enzymes act on other proteins to add or remove chemical groups in a process known as posttranslational modification . About 4 @,@ 000 reactions are known to be catalysed by enzymes . The rate acceleration conferred by enzymatic catalysis is often enormous — as much as 1017 @-@ fold increase in rate over the uncatalysed reaction in the case of orotate decarboxylase ( 78 million years without the enzyme , 18 milliseconds with the enzyme ) . 
 The molecules bound and acted upon by enzymes are called substrates . Although enzymes can consist of hundreds of amino acids , it is usually only a small fraction of the residues that come in contact with the substrate , and an even smaller fraction — three to four residues on average — that are directly involved in catalysis . The region of the enzyme that binds the substrate and contains the catalytic residues is known as the active site . 
 <unk> proteins are members of a class of proteins that dictate the stereochemistry of a compound synthesized by other enzymes . 
 = = = Cell signaling and ligand binding = = = 
 Many proteins are involved in the process of cell signaling and signal transduction . Some proteins , such as insulin , are extracellular proteins that transmit a signal from the cell in which they were synthesized to other cells in distant tissues . Others are membrane proteins that act as receptors whose main function is to bind a signaling molecule and induce a biochemical response in the cell . Many receptors have a binding site exposed on the cell surface and an effector domain within the cell , which may have enzymatic activity or may undergo a conformational change detected by other proteins within the cell . 
 Antibodies are protein components of an adaptive immune system whose main function is to bind antigens , or foreign substances in the body , and target them for destruction . Antibodies can be secreted into the extracellular environment or anchored in the membranes of specialized B cells known as plasma cells . Whereas enzymes are limited in their binding affinity for their substrates by the necessity of conducting their reaction , antibodies have no such constraints . An antibody 's binding affinity to its target is extraordinarily high . 
 Many ligand transport proteins bind particular small biomolecules and transport them to other locations in the body of a multicellular organism . These proteins must have a high binding affinity when their ligand is present in high concentrations , but must also release the ligand when it is present at low concentrations in the target tissues . The canonical example of a ligand @-@ binding protein is haemoglobin , which transports oxygen from the lungs to other organs and tissues in all vertebrates and has close homologs in every biological kingdom . Lectins are sugar @-@ binding proteins which are highly specific for their sugar moieties . Lectins typically play a role in biological recognition phenomena involving cells and proteins . Receptors and hormones are highly specific binding proteins . 
 <unk> proteins can also serve as ligand transport proteins that alter the permeability of the cell membrane to small molecules and ions . The membrane alone has a hydrophobic core through which polar or charged molecules cannot diffuse . Membrane proteins contain internal channels that allow such molecules to enter and exit the cell . Many ion channel proteins are specialized to select for only a particular ion ; for example , potassium and sodium channels often discriminate for only one of the two ions . 
 = = = Structural proteins = = = 
 Structural proteins confer stiffness and rigidity to otherwise @-@ fluid biological components . Most structural proteins are fibrous proteins ; for example , collagen and elastin are critical components of connective tissue such as cartilage , and keratin is found in hard or filamentous structures such as hair , nails , feathers , hooves , and some animal shells . Some globular proteins can also play structural functions , for example , actin and tubulin are globular and soluble as monomers , but polymerize to form long , stiff fibers that make up the cytoskeleton , which allows the cell to maintain its shape and size . 
 Other proteins that serve structural functions are motor proteins such as myosin , kinesin , and dynein , which are capable of generating mechanical forces . These proteins are crucial for cellular motility of single celled organisms and the sperm of many multicellular organisms which reproduce sexually . They also generate the forces exerted by contracting muscles and play essential roles in intracellular transport . 
 = = Methods of study = = 
 The activities and structures of proteins may be examined in vitro , in vivo , and in silico . In vitro studies of purified proteins in controlled environments are useful for learning how a protein carries out its function : for example , enzyme kinetics studies explore the chemical mechanism of an enzyme 's catalytic activity and its relative affinity for various possible substrate molecules . By contrast , in vivo experiments can provide information about the physiological role of a protein in the context of a cell or even a whole organism . In silico studies use computational methods to study proteins . 
 = = = Protein purification = = = 
 To perform in vitro analysis , a protein must be purified away from other cellular components . This process usually begins with cell lysis , in which a cell 's membrane is disrupted and its internal contents released into a solution known as a crude lysate . The resulting mixture can be purified using ultracentrifugation , which <unk> the various cellular components into fractions containing soluble proteins ; membrane lipids and proteins ; cellular organelles , and nucleic acids . Precipitation by a method known as salting out can concentrate the proteins from this lysate . Various types of chromatography are then used to isolate the protein or proteins of interest based on properties such as molecular weight , net charge and binding affinity . The level of purification can be monitored using various types of gel electrophoresis if the desired protein 's molecular weight and isoelectric point are known , by spectroscopy if the protein has distinguishable spectroscopic features , or by enzyme assays if the protein has enzymatic activity . Additionally , proteins can be isolated according their charge using <unk> . 
 For natural proteins , a series of purification steps may be necessary to obtain protein sufficiently pure for laboratory applications . To simplify this process , genetic engineering is often used to add chemical features to proteins that make them easier to purify without affecting their structure or activity . Here , a " tag " consisting of a specific amino acid sequence , often a series of histidine residues ( a " His @-@ tag " ) , is attached to one terminus of the protein . As a result , when the lysate is passed over a chromatography column containing nickel , the histidine residues <unk> the nickel and attach to the column while the untagged components of the lysate pass unimpeded . A number of different tags have been developed to help researchers purify specific proteins from complex mixtures . 
 = = = Cellular localization = = = 
 The study of proteins in vivo is often concerned with the synthesis and localization of the protein within the cell . Although many intracellular proteins are synthesized in the cytoplasm and membrane @-@ bound or secreted proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum , the specifics of how proteins are targeted to specific organelles or cellular structures is often unclear . A useful technique for assessing cellular localization uses genetic engineering to express in a cell a fusion protein or chimera consisting of the natural protein of interest linked to a " reporter " such as green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) . The fused protein 's position within the cell can be cleanly and efficiently visualized using microscopy , as shown in the figure opposite . 
 Other methods for elucidating the cellular location of proteins requires the use of known compartmental markers for regions such as the ER , the Golgi , lysosomes or vacuoles , mitochondria , chloroplasts , plasma membrane , etc . With the use of fluorescently tagged versions of these markers or of antibodies to known markers , it becomes much simpler to identify the localization of a protein of interest . For example , indirect immunofluorescence will allow for fluorescence colocalization and demonstration of location . Fluorescent dyes are used to label cellular compartments for a similar purpose . 
 Other possibilities exist , as well . For example , immunohistochemistry usually utilizes an antibody to one or more proteins of interest that are conjugated to enzymes yielding either luminescent or <unk> signals that can be compared between samples , allowing for localization information . Another applicable technique is <unk> in sucrose ( or other material ) gradients using <unk> centrifugation . While this technique does not prove colocalization of a compartment of known density and the protein of interest , it does increase the likelihood , and is more amenable to large @-@ scale studies . 
 Finally , the gold @-@ standard method of cellular localization is <unk> microscopy . This technique also uses an antibody to the protein of interest , along with classical electron microscopy techniques . The sample is prepared for normal electron microscopic examination , and then treated with an antibody to the protein of interest that is conjugated to an extremely electro @-@ dense material , usually gold . This allows for the localization of both ultrastructural details as well as the protein of interest . 
 Through another genetic engineering application known as site @-@ directed mutagenesis , researchers can alter the protein sequence and hence its structure , cellular localization , and susceptibility to regulation . This technique even allows the incorporation of unnatural amino acids into proteins , using modified tRNAs , and may allow the rational design of new proteins with novel properties . 
 = = = Proteomics = = = 
 The total complement of proteins present at a time in a cell or cell type is known as its proteome , and the study of such large @-@ scale data sets defines the field of proteomics , named by analogy to the related field of genomics . Key experimental techniques in proteomics include 2D electrophoresis , which allows the separation of a large number of proteins , mass spectrometry , which allows rapid high @-@ throughput identification of proteins and sequencing of peptides ( most often after in @-@ gel digestion ) , protein microarrays , which allow the detection of the relative levels of a large number of proteins present in a cell , and two @-@ hybrid screening , which allows the systematic exploration of protein – protein interactions . The total complement of biologically possible such interactions is known as the interactome . A systematic attempt to determine the structures of proteins representing every possible fold is known as structural genomics . 
 = = = Bioinformatics = = = 
 A vast array of computational methods have been developed to analyze the structure , function , and evolution of proteins . 
 The development of such tools has been driven by the large amount of genomic and proteomic data available for a variety of organisms , including the human genome . It is simply impossible to study all proteins experimentally , hence only a few are subjected to laboratory experiments while computational tools are used to extrapolate to similar proteins . Such homologous proteins can be efficiently identified in distantly related organisms by sequence alignment . Genome and gene sequences can be searched by a variety of tools for certain properties . Sequence profiling tools can find restriction enzyme sites , open reading frames in nucleotide sequences , and predict secondary structures . Phylogenetic trees can be constructed and evolutionary hypotheses developed using special software like ClustalW regarding the ancestry of modern organisms and the genes they express . The field of bioinformatics is now indispensable for the analysis of genes and proteins . 
 = = = = Structure prediction and simulation = = = = 
 Complementary to the field of structural genomics , protein structure prediction seeks to develop efficient ways to provide plausible models for proteins whose structures have not yet been determined experimentally . The most successful type of structure prediction , known as homology modeling , relies on the existence of a " template " structure with sequence similarity to the protein being modeled ; structural genomics ' goal is to provide sufficient representation in solved structures to model most of those that remain . Although producing accurate models remains a challenge when only distantly related template structures are available , it has been suggested that sequence alignment is the bottleneck in this process , as quite accurate models can be produced if a " perfect " sequence alignment is known . Many structure prediction methods have served to inform the emerging field of protein engineering , in which novel protein folds have already been designed . A more complex computational problem is the prediction of intermolecular interactions , such as in molecular docking and protein – protein interaction prediction . 
 The processes of protein folding and binding can be simulated using such technique as molecular mechanics , in particular , molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo , which increasingly take advantage of parallel and distributed computing ( Folding @ home project ; molecular modeling on GPU ) . The folding of small α @-@ helical protein domains such as the villin headpiece and the HIV accessory protein have been successfully simulated in silico , and hybrid methods that combine standard molecular dynamics with quantum mechanics calculations have allowed exploration of the electronic states of rhodopsins . 
 = = = = Protein disorder and <unk> prediction = = = = 
 Many proteins ( in <unk> ~ 33 % ) contain large unstructured but biologically functional segments and can be classified as intrinsically disordered proteins . Predicting and analysing protein disorder is , therefore , an important part of protein structure characterisation . 
 = = Nutrition = = 
 Most microorganisms and plants can biosynthesize all 20 standard amino acids , while animals ( including humans ) must obtain some of the amino acids from the diet . The amino acids that an organism cannot synthesize on its own are referred to as essential amino acids . Key enzymes that synthesize certain amino acids are not present in animals — such as <unk> , which catalyses the first step in the synthesis of lysine , methionine , and threonine from aspartate . If amino acids are present in the environment , microorganisms can conserve energy by taking up the amino acids from their surroundings and downregulating their biosynthetic pathways . 
 In animals , amino acids are obtained through the consumption of foods containing protein . Ingested proteins are then broken down into amino acids through digestion , which typically involves denaturation of the protein through exposure to acid and hydrolysis by enzymes called proteases . Some ingested amino acids are used for protein biosynthesis , while others are converted to glucose through gluconeogenesis , or fed into the citric acid cycle . This use of protein as a fuel is particularly important under starvation conditions as it allows the body 's own proteins to be used to support life , particularly those found in muscle . Amino acids are also an important dietary source of nitrogen . 
 = = History and etymology = = 
 Proteins were recognized as a distinct class of biological molecules in the eighteenth century by Antoine Fourcroy and others , distinguished by the molecules ' ability to coagulate or <unk> under treatments with heat or acid . Noted examples at the time included albumin from egg whites , blood serum albumin , fibrin , and wheat gluten . 
 Proteins were first described by the Dutch chemist Gerardus Johannes Mulder and named by the Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius in 1838 . Mulder carried out elemental analysis of common proteins and found that nearly all proteins had the same empirical formula , <unk> . He came to the erroneous conclusion that they might be composed of a single type of ( very large ) molecule . The term " protein " to describe these molecules was proposed by Mulder 's associate Berzelius ; protein is derived from the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " primary " , " in the lead " , or " standing in front " , + -in . Mulder went on to identify the products of protein degradation such as the amino acid leucine for which he found a ( nearly correct ) molecular weight of 131 Da . 
 Early nutritional scientists such as the German Carl von Voit believed that protein was the most important nutrient for maintaining the structure of the body , because it was generally believed that " flesh makes flesh . " Karl Heinrich <unk> extended known protein forms with the identification of glutamic acid . At the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station a detailed review of the vegetable proteins was compiled by Thomas Burr Osborne . Working with Lafayette Mendel and applying Liebig 's law of the minimum in feeding laboratory rats , the nutritionally essential amino acids were established . The work was continued and communicated by William Cumming Rose . The understanding of proteins as polypeptides came through the work of Franz Hofmeister and Hermann Emil Fischer . The central role of proteins as enzymes in living organisms was not fully appreciated until 1926 , when James B. Sumner showed that the enzyme urease was in fact a protein . 
 The difficulty in purifying proteins in large quantities made them very difficult for early protein biochemists to study . Hence , early studies focused on proteins that could be purified in large quantities , e.g. , those of blood , egg white , various toxins , and digestive / metabolic enzymes obtained from slaughterhouses . In the 1950s , the Armour Hot Dog Co. purified 1 kg of pure bovine pancreatic ribonuclease A and made it freely available to scientists ; this gesture helped ribonuclease A become a major target for biochemical study for the following decades . 
 Linus Pauling is credited with the successful prediction of regular protein secondary structures based on hydrogen bonding , an idea first put forth by William Astbury in 1933 . Later work by Walter <unk> on denaturation , based partly on previous studies by Kaj Linderstrøm @-@ Lang , contributed an understanding of protein folding and structure mediated by hydrophobic interactions . 
 The first protein to be sequenced was insulin , by Frederick Sanger , in 1949 . Sanger correctly determined the amino acid sequence of insulin , thus conclusively demonstrating that proteins consisted of linear polymers of amino acids rather than branched chains , colloids , or cyclols . He won the Nobel Prize for this achievement in 1958 . 
 The first protein structures to be solved were hemoglobin and myoglobin , by Max Perutz and Sir John Cowdery Kendrew , respectively , in 1958 . As of 2016 , the Protein Data Bank has over 115 @,@ 000 atomic @-@ resolution structures of proteins . In more recent times , cryo @-@ electron microscopy of large macromolecular assemblies and computational protein structure prediction of small protein domains are two methods approaching atomic resolution . 
 = = Textbooks = = 
 = = = Databases and projects = = = 
 The Protein Naming Utility 
 Human Protein Atlas 
 NCBI Entrez Protein database 
 NCBI Protein Structure database 
 Human Protein Reference Database 
 Human <unk> 
 Folding @ Home ( Stanford University ) 
 Comparative <unk> Database curates protein – chemical interactions , as well as gene / protein – disease relationships and chemical @-@ disease relationships . 
 Bioinformatic Harvester A Meta search engine ( 29 databases ) for gene and protein information . 
 Protein Databank in Europe ( see also <unk> , short articles and tutorials on interesting PDB structures ) 
 Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics ( see also Molecule of the Month , presenting short accounts on selected proteins from the PDB ) 
 Proteopedia – Life in 3D : rotatable , zoomable 3D model with wiki annotations for every known protein molecular structure . 
 <unk> the Universal Protein Resource 
 <unk> – Exploring the universe of human proteins : human @-@ centric protein knowledge resource 
 Multi @-@ <unk> Profiling Expression Database : <unk> human and model organism protein / gene knowledge and expression data 
 = = = Tutorials and educational websites = = = 
 " An Introduction to Proteins " from <unk> ( Huntington 's Disease Outreach Project for Education at Stanford ) 
 Proteins : Biogenesis to Degradation – The Virtual Library of Biochemistry and Cell Biology 
 Alphabet of Protein Structures 
 = Meigs Raid = 
 The Meigs Raid ( also known as the Battle of Sag Harbor ) was a military raid by American Continental Army forces , under the command of Connecticut Colonel Return Jonathan Meigs , on a British Loyalist foraging party at Sag Harbor , New York on May 24 , 1777 during the American Revolutionary War . Six Loyalists were killed and 90 captured while the Americans suffered no casualties . The raid was made in response to a successful British raid on Danbury , Connecticut in late April that was opposed by American forces in the Battle of Ridgefield . 
 Organized in New Haven , Connecticut by Brigadier General Samuel Holden Parsons , the expedition crossed Long Island Sound from Guilford on May 23 , dragged whaleboats across the North Fork of Long Island , and raided Sag Harbor early the next morning , destroying boats and supplies . The battle marked the first American victory in the state of New York after New York City and Long Island had fallen in the British campaign for the city in 1776 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The American Revolutionary War was a qualified success for the British in 1776 . After being forced to abandon Boston , they captured New York City , but were unable to hold New Jersey when General George Washington surprised them at Trenton and Princeton . The British consolidated their hold on New York City and Long Island during the winter months of early 1777 , while the Continental Army established a land blockade around the city in New Jersey , southern New York , and southwestern Connecticut . 
 In the spring of 1777 Lieutenant General William Howe launched raiding expeditions against Continental Army and local militia storage depots near the city . A successful raid against Peekskill , New York in March prompted him to organize a more ambitious expedition to raid a depot in Danbury , Connecticut . This expedition , led by the former royal governor of New York , William Tryon , successfully reached Danbury from a landing point in Fairfield , Connecticut on April 26 , and destroyed provisions and supplies . The Connecticut militia had mobilized , and over the next two days skirmished with the British as they marched back to their ships , most notably on April 27 at Ridgefield . General Samuel Holden Parsons , leading Connecticut 's defenses , decided to organize an act of reprisal . 
 An opportunity arose when they learned that a British foraging expedition had landed at Sag Harbor , Long Island . Sag Harbor had been occupied by British troops after the August 1776 Battle of Long Island , and they had established a strong defensive position on Meeting House Hill , with earthwork fortifications and palisades . The town was well @-@ situated for providing supplies to the Royal Navy , which used Gardiner 's Bay as an anchorage while patrolling the eastern end of Long Island Sound . The forage expedition consisted of 12 smaller boats protected by a schooner mounting 12 guns ; the small boats were manned by crews totalling about 40 men . Sag Harbor was at the time garrisoned by 70 men from the Loyalist battalion of Lieutenant Colonel Stephen DeLancey . The detachment was under the command of Captain James Raymond . 
 = = Raid = = 
 Parsons gave command of the expedition to Colonel Return Jonathan Meigs . According to Parsons ' report to General Washington , they assembled a force totalling 234 men at New Haven from several regiments , and rowed in 13 whaleboats from New Haven to Guilford on May 21 . Rough seas and high winds prevented them from crossing for two days ; when they finally left Guilford on the afternoon of May 23 , they were accompanied on the crossing by two armed sloops and one that was unarmed . Only 170 made the crossing to the vicinity of Southold , New York , where they arrived around 6 pm . Meigs learned that most of the British forces in the area had been ordered to march to New York City , and that only the small force of Loyalists was left at Sag Harbor . He had his men portage 11 of the whaleboats across the North Fork to the bay , and launched those boats with 130 men to cross the bay to Sag Harbor . By midnight they had crossed the bay and landed about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from the harbor . Meigs formed his men up and marched to the harbor , arriving about 2 am . 
 Meigs divided his force in two . One detachment stormed the earthworks , while the other went to the harbor , where they destroyed British boats and collected provisions . The land attack was conducted in silence with fixed bayonets and only one shot was said to have been fired . The schooner opened fire on the attackers as they burned the boats , but sources are unclear if the schooner itself was taken and destroyed . Twelve boats were destroyed , and the raiders took 53 prisoners at the earth works and another 37 at the wharf , suffering no casualties in the process . The prisoners were taken back to Connecticut . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Long Island 's Loyalist communities organized their own response to the raid . In May 1779 , nine Loyalists crossed the sound and captured Connecticut militia general Gold Selleck Silliman at his home , and took him back to Long Island . Connecticut Patriots captured a judge on Long Island in November 1779 , who they exchanged for General Silliman in May 1780 . 
 Parsons organized another expedition across Long Island Sound in August 1777 . This one , against a Loyalist outpost at Setauket , was unsuccessful . Colonel Meigs was rewarded by the Second Continental Congress with " an elegant sword " . A stone commemorating the battle was placed on the site on May 23 , 1902 . 
 = Battle of Rowton Heath = 
 The Battle of Rowton Heath , also known as the Battle of Rowton Moor , occurred on 24 September 1645 during the English Civil War . Fought by the Parliamentarians , commanded by Sydnam Poyntz , and the Royalists under the personal command of King Charles I , it was a significant defeat for the Royalists , with heavy losses and Charles prevented from relieving the Siege of Chester . 
 Prior to the battle , Charles had been attempting to link up with the Marquess of Montrose in Scotland following the Royalist defeat in the Battle of Naseby . Although his attempts to do so were unsuccessful , they were disruptive enough that the Committee of Both Kingdoms ordered Sydnam Poyntz to pursue the King with approximately 3 @,@ 000 horse . After Charles was informed that Chester , his only remaining port , was under siege , he marched there with the intent of relieving the defenders , ordering 3 @,@ 000 horse under the command of Marmaduke Langdale to camp outside the city while he and 600 others travelled into Chester itself on 23 September 1645 . The intent was to attack the besieging Parliamentarians from both sides , Charles mistakenly believing that Poyntz had failed to follow them . In fact he was barely 15 miles ( 24 km ) behind , and moved to attack Langdale 's force in the early hours of 24 September . Although Langdale drove Poyntz off , the Parliamentarians besieging Chester sent reinforcements , and Langdale was forced to retreat to Rowton Heath , closer to Chester , and wait for his own reinforcements . This force , under Charles Gerard and Lord Bernard Stewart , was prevented from joining them , and Langdale was instead attacked by both Poyntz 's force and the reinforcement . After being driven off the field and failing in an attempt to regroup at Chester itself , the Royalists retreated as dusk fell . 
 Royalist casualties were high , with 600 killed , including Stewart , and 900 taken prisoner . This defeat prevented Charles from relieving the defenders in Chester , which fell to the Parliamentarians on 3 February 1646 . Charles instead withdrew with approximately 2 @,@ 400 remaining cavalry , most of whom were destroyed by Poyntz 's ambush at Sherburn @-@ in @-@ Elmet on 15 October 1645 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the destruction of King Charles I 's main army at the Battle of Naseby on 14 June 1645 , the First English Civil War tilted decisively in favour of the Parliamentarians . Charles withdrew with his remaining forces to Raglan Castle in Wales , hoping to recruit new soldiers there and travel across the Bristol Channel to link up with George Goring , the only remaining Royalist commander of a significant force . The defeat of Goring at the Battle of Langport on 10 July , along with the subsequent " disintegration " of the new troops in South Wales , led to Charles abandoning this plan . Despite this and the loss of much of Northern England following the Battle of Marston Moor , Charles still had large numbers of soldiers in the West of England , and one of his supporters , the Marquess of Montrose , was winning a string of victories across Scotland . 
 The Royalist force attempted to join up with Montrose in Scotland . In early August , Charles took 2 @,@ 500 soldiers and marched north , being forced to turn back at Doncaster due to the advance of David Leslie and 4 @,@ 000 cavalry . Charles 's troops then made a raid into the Eastern Association , getting as far as Huntington and forcing the Parliamentarians besieging Hereford to withdraw . In response , the Committee of Both Kingdoms ordered Sydnam Poyntz to pursue the King . Evading Poyntz 's forces , Charles again marched north on 18 September , taking 3 @,@ 500 cavalry under William Vaughan and Lord Charles Gerrard as far as the River Wye at <unk> . At this point , a messenger arrived to inform Charles that " part of the outworks of Chester were betrayed to the enemy " , forcing him to change his plans and march towards Chester . 
 Chester had come under siege during December 1644 , with a loose blockade or " <unk> " formed around the town . With Bristol now fallen to the Parliamentarians , Chester was the last port under Royalist control , and crucial due to its links with recruiting efforts in Ireland and North Wales . On 20 September 1645 , a force of 500 horse , 200 dragoons and 700 foot under the command of Michael Jones attacked the Royalist barricades , and with the defenders completely taken by surprise , they fell back to the inner city . On 22 September , Parliamentarian artillery began bombarding the city , and after breaching the walls ( and having a summons to surrender refused by the defenders ) , the Parliamentarians attacked in two places . Both were repulsed , in one case due to the defenders counter @-@ attacking on foot , and in the other due to the inadequate length of the attacker 's scaling ladders preventing them from climbing the wall . Despite this success , the attacking Parliamentarian forces grew in strength while the defenders were weary ; as such , the arrival of Charles and his force on 23 September was met with delight . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Charles 's force consisted of 3 @,@ 500 horse , organised into four brigades , the largest grouping being the 1 @,@ 200 soldiers of the Northern Horse under Sir Marmaduke Langdale . In addition , there was Gerard 's brigade , consisting of 800 men who had served under him in South Wales , Sir William Vaughan 's 1 @,@ 000 @-@ strong brigade , and the 200 members of the Life Guards , Charles 's personal bodyguard , under Lord Bernard Stewart . Although experienced , the troops were depleted in number , and had low morale due to the recent string of defeats . Charles and Gerard evaded the loose Parliamentarian siege around the city , taking 600 men into Chester , while the approximately 3 @,@ 000 remaining cavalry under Langdale crossed the River Dee at Holt and bivouacked at Hatton Heath , five miles to the south of Chester itself . The plan was to trap the besiegers between the two forces , destroying them or forcing them to retreat ; as they numbered only 500 cavalry and 1 @,@ 500 foot , this was considered to be relatively simple . 
 The Royalist plan failed to take into account Poyntz and his 3 @,@ 000 cavalry ; evidently , they assumed he had lost track of them . This assumption was mistaken , and as Charles entered Chester , Poyntz 's soldiers arrived in Whitchurch , approximately 15 miles from Chester . After hearing about the situation , Poyntz promised to advance in the morning " with a considerable body of horse " , which encouraged the Parliamentarians around Chester to continue resisting . One of his messengers was intercepted by Sir Richard Lloyd , however , who immediately sent a message to Charles and Langdale . After a brief Council of War , they resolved that Gerard 's force and the Lifeguards , along with 500 foot , would advance to either join with Langdale or prevent Colonel Jones 's forces linking up with Poyntz . Charles would remain in Chester , and watch the ensuing battle from a tower in Chester 's defences , later known as King Charles ' Tower . 
 = = = Hatton Heath = = = 
 Langdale advanced northwards with 3 @,@ 000 cavalry , and at Miller 's Heath on the morning of 24 September he became aware of Poyntz 's force of 3 @,@ 000 also moving north . Miller 's Heath was mainly made up of unenclosed heath , traversed by the Whitchurch @-@ Chester Road , which was surrounded by hedges . Langdale lined the hedgerows with dragoons and dismounted troopers with carbines , and due to the inaccuracy of Parliamentarian reconnaissance , Poyntz was unaware of Langdale 's presence until the dragoons opened fire on his vanguard at approximately 7 : 00 am . 
 As a result of Poyntz 's lack of preparation , his force was strung out in a column ; because of the boggy ground , they could not easily dismount . In addition , Poyntz had underestimated the strength of the Royalists and tried attacking with those troops immediately available , assuming they would be sufficient to charge and destroy the enemy . In this Poyntz was mistaken . Due to the entanglement of the vanguard with Royalist troops , it was unable to make any significant progress , and it took approximately half an hour of close @-@ quarters fighting in the mouth of the Whitchurch @-@ Chester Road to force the Royalists back . As the Parliamentarians deployed onto the open ground to pursue the Royalists , they were set on by a fresh group of troops and forced to repeat , and with no reinforcements available , Poyntz retreated . On the Parliamentarian side , this skirmish led to the deaths of 20 soldiers , with a number of wounded and between 50 and 60 prisoners . 
 The Royalists , while losing fewer soldiers , were now in a precarious position , since reinforcements from Chester were needed to follow up on the success and defeat Poyntz 's force . As such , Langdale sent Lieutenant Colonel Jeffrey Shakerley to report to Charles , requesting reinforcements . Shakerley arrived in Chester and delivered his message after 15 minutes , but no orders were issued for a further six hours after that . Barratt speculates that one reason could have been the fatigue of the Royalist troops , and another the rivalries amongst the Royalist commanders : Gerard and Digby opposed each other , with other commanders disliking Langdale ; and Charles not being strong enough to stop the disputes . The Parliamentarians , however , did send support : at approximately 2 : 00 pm , the Chester forces dispatched 350 horse and 400 musketeers under Colonels Michael Jones and John Booth to reinforce Poyntz . 
 = = = Rowton Heath = = = 
 The Royalists in Chester saw the Parliamentarian reinforcements under Jones and Booth advance , and sent Shakerley to warn Langdale 's force . After receiving the message , Langdale withdrew nearer to Chester , reforming at Rowton Heath , an entirely open space . At the same time the Royalists in Chester began to move , with Gerard advancing with 500 foot and 500 cavalry . Gerard hoped to attack Jones 's force from the rear , but the Parliamentarians responded by dispatching 200 cavalry and 200 infantry to prevent this . With a shorter distance to travel , this force met Gerard on Hoole Heath , and after a confused engagement in which Lord Bernard Stewart was slain , Gerard 's force was prevented from marching to Langdale 's aid . Instead , Jones and Booth linked up with Poyntz , giving a combined Parliamentarian force of 3 @,@ 000 horse and 500 musketeers against a tired Royalist army of approximately 2 @,@ 500 horse . At approximately 4 : 00 pm Poyntz advanced , covered by the musketeers firing a full volley . 
 Despite Langdale 's attempt to counter @-@ charge , the Royalists were soon outflanked . With the Parliamentarian musketeers firing into the rear of Langdale 's force , the Royalists broke , some escaping via Holt Bridge and others running towards Chester . On Hoole Heath these retreating soldiers met with part of Gerard 's force and made an initially successful counter @-@ attack before being forced back to the walls of Chester . There the retreating cavalry choked up the streets , allowing the Parliamentarian musketeers to fire into the confused mass of horsemen and leading to a rout . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Rowton Heath has been called " a major disaster " for Charles , with casualties estimated at 600 dead and 900 injured , including 50 members of the Life Guard and Lord Bernard . Parliamentarian losses were also heavy , although unknown , and the battle did give Chester some respite . Despite this , Charles withdrew the next day with the remaining 2 @,@ 400 horse , heading to Denbigh Castle before moving on to Newark @-@ on @-@ Trent . With this retreat , Chester was left without additional support , and surrendered to the Parliamentarians on 3 February 1646 . The remaining Royalist cavalry were eventually destroyed in their entirety when Poyntz ambushed them at Sherburn @-@ in @-@ Elmet on 15 October 1645 . 
 = Sejanus = 
 Lucius Aelius <unk> ( 20 BC – October 18 , AD 31 ) , commonly known as Sejanus ( English pronunciation : / <unk> / ) , was an ambitious soldier , friend and confidant of the Roman Emperor Tiberius . An equestrian by birth , Sejanus rose to power as prefect of the Roman imperial bodyguard , known as the Praetorian Guard , of which he was commander from AD 14 until his death in AD 31 . 
 While the Praetorian Guard was formally established under Emperor Augustus , Sejanus introduced a number of reforms which saw the unit evolve beyond a mere bodyguard , into a powerful and influential branch of the government involved in public security , civil administration and ultimately political intercession ; changes which would have a lasting impact on the course of the Principate . 
 During the 20s , Sejanus gradually accumulated power by consolidating his influence over Tiberius and eliminating potential political opponents , including the emperor 's son , Drusus Julius Caesar . When Tiberius withdrew to Capri in 26 , Sejanus was left in control of the administration of the empire . For a time the most influential and feared citizen of Rome , Sejanus suddenly fell from power in 31 , the year his career culminated with the consulship . Amidst suspicions of conspiracy against Tiberius , Sejanus was arrested and executed , along with his followers . 
 = = Family = = 
 Sejanus was born in 20 BC at <unk> , Etruria , into the family of Lucius <unk> Strabo . The <unk> were Romans of the equestrian class ( or knights ) , the lower of the two upper social classes of the Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire . Sejanus ' grandfather maintained relations with senatorial families through his marriage with <unk> , a sister of the wife of Gaius Maecenas , who was one of Emperor Augustus ' most powerful political allies . 
 Strabo married into equally illustrious families . He may have married a daughter of Quintus Aelius Tubero , allying himself with the more prestigious Aelian gens . Lucius <unk> Tubero , who became suffect consul in 18 , was probably his son . Strabo 's last wife was <unk> <unk> , sister of Servius Cornelius Lentulus <unk> ( suffect consul in 10 ) and Publius Cornelius Lentulus Scipio ( suffect consul in 2 ) and perhaps half @-@ sister of Quintus Junius <unk> ( suffect consul in 10 ) . Sejanus could have been a child of this marriage . He was later adopted into the Aelian gens by Gaius Aelius Gallus , and by Roman custom became known as Lucius Aelius <unk> or simply as Sejanus . 
 The adoptive family of Sejanus counted two consuls among their ranks : Quintus Aelius Tubero ( consul in 11 BC ) and Sextus Aelius <unk> ( consul in 4 ) , who was the father of Aelia <unk> , the second wife of the future Emperor Claudius . Sejanus ' uncle , Junius <unk> , distinguished himself as a military commander ; he became proconsul of Africa in 21 and earned triumphal honors by crushing the rebellion of <unk> . 
 According to the ancient historian Tacitus , Sejanus was also a former favourite of the wealthy Marcus <unk> Apicius , whose daughter may have been Sejanus ' first wife Apicata . With Apicata , Sejanus had three children , two sons and one daughter : Strabo , Capito Aelianus and Junilla . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 = = = Praetorian prefect = = = 
 It is likely that Sejanus ' father Strabo came to the attention of Augustus through his father 's connection with Maecenas . Sometime after 2 BC , Strabo was appointed prefect of the Praetorian Guard , one of the two most powerful positions a Roman knight could attain in the Empire . This office he carried on dutifully and without incident until the death of Augustus in 14 . Little is known about the life Sejanus led prior to this date , but according to Tacitus , he accompanied Gaius Caesar , adopted grandson of Augustus , during his campaigns in Armenia in 1 BC . It was upon the accession of Tiberius in 14 , that Sejanus was appointed prefect of the Praetorian Guard as the colleague of his father Strabo , and began his rise to prominence . 
 The Praetorian Guard was an elite unit of the Roman army formed by Augustus in 27 BC , with the specific function to serve as a bodyguard to the emperor and members of the imperial family . Much more than a guard however , the Praetorians also managed the day @-@ to @-@ day care of the city , such as general security and civil administration . Furthermore , their presence served as a constant reminder to the people and the Senate of the substantial armed force which served as the basis for the imperial power . Augustus was careful however to uphold the republican veneer of this regime , and only allowed nine cohorts to be formed ( one fewer than in a normal Roman legion ) , which were inconspicuously scattered across various lodging houses in the city , and commanded by two prefects . 
 When Strabo was assigned to the governorship of Egypt in 15 , Sejanus became the sole commander of the Praetorians and instigated reforms that helped shape the guard into a powerful tool of the principate . In 20 the scattered encampments inside the city were centralized into a single garrison just outside Rome and the number of cohorts was increased from nine to twelve , one of which now held the daily guard at the palace . The practice of joint leadership between two prefects was abandoned , and Sejanus himself appointed the centurions and tribunes . With these changes in effect , Sejanus now commanded the complete loyalty of a force of around 12 @,@ 000 soldiers , all of which were at his immediate disposal . The facade of Augustus was no longer maintained , and Tiberius openly displayed the strength of the guard at parades . 
 = = = Feud with Drusus = = = 
 In his capacity of Praetorian prefect , Sejanus quickly became a trusted advisor to Tiberius . By 23 , he exerted a considerable influence over the decisions of the emperor , who referred to Sejanus as " <unk> <unk> " ( my partner in my toils ) . By this time he had been raised to the rank of praetor , a position which was not normally granted to Romans of the equestrian class . A statue had been erected in his honor in the Theatre of Pompey , and in the Senate , his followers were advanced with public offices and governorships . However this privileged position caused resentment among the senatorial class and the imperial family , in particular earning him the enmity of Drusus Julius Caesar , Tiberius ' son . 
 The history of Sejanus and Drusus dated back to at least 15 AD . That year a mutiny had broken out among legions posted in Pannonia and Germania . While his adopted son Germanicus restored order in Germania , Tiberius ' biological son Drusus was sent to quell the uprising in Pannonia , accompanied by Sejanus and two Praetorian cohorts . In part due to what the soldiers believed to be bad omens , Drusus quickly managed to restore the stability in the army and publicly put the chief instigators to death . The camp was purged of mutineers by the Praetorians and the legions returned to the winter barracks . Despite this success , the following years witnessed a growing animosity between Drusus and Sejanus . 
 Since the accession of Tiberius , Drusus had been systematically groomed as the successor of his father , successfully commanding legions in Illyricum in 18 , and sharing the consulship with Tiberius in 21 . In practice it was still Sejanus who was the second man in the empire and he was ambitious to further expand his power . As early as 20 , Sejanus had sought to solidify his connection with the imperial family , by <unk> his daughter Junilla to the son of Claudius , Claudius Drusus . At the time the girl was only 4 years old but the marriage was prevented , when the boy accidentally died a few days later of asphyxiation . 
 When this failed , it seems Sejanus turned his attention toward eliminating Drusus . By 23 the enmity between the two men had reached a critical point . During an argument Drusus had struck the prefect with his fist , and he openly lamented that " a stranger was invited to assist in the government while the emperor 's son was alive " . With Tiberius already in his sixties , there was a real possibility of Drusus succeeding his father in the near future . To secure his position , Sejanus secretly plotted against Drusus and seduced his wife Livilla . With her as an accomplice , Drusus was slowly poisoned and died of seemingly natural causes on September 13 , 23 . 
 = = = Consolidation of power = = = 
 The loss of his son was a major blow to Tiberius , personally and politically . Over the years he had grown increasingly disillusioned with the position of princeps and by sharing the tribunician powers with Drusus in 22 had prepared to relent some of his responsibilities in favour of his son . With these hopes now dashed , Tiberius left his administration more than ever in the care of Sejanus and looked toward the sons of Germanicus ( Nero Caesar , Drusus Caesar and Caligula ) as possible heirs . 
 Germanicus had died in 19 , in somewhat suspicious circumstances in Syria . Following his death , his wife Agrippina the Elder returned to Rome with their six children and became increasingly involved with a group of senators , who opposed the growing power of Sejanus . Her relations with Tiberius became increasingly fraught , as she made it clear that she believed that he was responsible for the death of Germanicus . The climate was further poisoned by the hatred that Tiberius ' mother Livia Drusilla ( the widow of Augustus ) felt for her , since Agrippina 's ambition , to be the mother of emperors and thus Rome 's first woman , was an open secret . To Sejanus , Agrippina 's sons Nero Caesar , Drusus Caesar and Caligula were a threat to his power . 
 Sejanus again attempted to marry into the Julio @-@ Claudian family . Having divorced Apicata two years earlier , he requested marriage with Drusus 's widow Livilla in 25 , possibly with an eye towards placing himself , as an adopted Julian , in the position of a potential successor . The emperor denied this request , warning Sejanus that he was in danger of overstepping his rank . Alarmed by this sudden denigration , Sejanus changed his plans and began to isolate Tiberius from Rome . By fueling his paranoia towards Agrippina and the Senate , he induced the emperor to withdraw to the countryside of Campania , which he did in 26 and finally to the island of Capri , where he lived until his death in 37 . Guarded by the Praetorians , Sejanus easily controlled all information that passed between Tiberius and the capital . 
 Despite the withdrawal of Tiberius from Rome 's political scene , the presence of Livia seems to have checked Sejanus ' overt power for a time . According to Tacitus , her death in 29 changed all that . Sejanus began a series of purge trials of senators and wealthy equestrians in the city , removing those capable of opposing his power as well as extending the imperial ( and his own ) treasury . Networks of spies and informers brought the victims to trial with false accusations of treason , and many chose suicide over the disgrace of being condemned and executed . Among those who perished were Gaius Asinius Gallus , a prominent senator and opponent of Tiberius who was linked to Agrippina 's faction . Agrippina and two of her sons , Nero and Drusus were arrested and exiled in 30 and later starved to death in suspicious circumstances . Only Caligula , as the last remaining son of Germanicus , managed to survive the purges of Sejanus and that he did by moving to Capri with Tiberius in 31 . 
 = = Downfall = = 
 = = = Denunciation = = = 
 In 31 , despite his equestrian rank , Sejanus shared the consulship with Tiberius in absentia , and finally became betrothed to Livilla . Tiberius had not been seen in Rome since 26 and senators and equestrians courted Sejanus 's favour , as if he were Emperor . His birthday was publicly observed and statues were erected in his honour . With most of the political opposition crushed , Sejanus felt his position was unassailable . As the ancient historian Cassius Dio writes : 
 Sejanus was so great a person by reason both of his excessive haughtiness and of his vast power , that , to put it briefly , he himself seemed to be the emperor and Tiberius a kind of island potentate , inasmuch as the latter spent his time on the island of <unk> . 
 Through years of crafty intrigues and indispensable service to the emperor , Sejanus had worked himself up to become the most powerful man in the Empire . 
 But suddenly , at the end of 31 , he was arrested , summarily executed and his body unceremoniously cast down the Gemonian stairs . What caused his downfall is unclear : ancient historians disagree about the nature of his conspiracy , whether it was Tiberius or Sejanus who struck first and in which order subsequent events occurred . Modern historians consider it unlikely that Sejanus plotted to seize power and if he had planned so at all , rather might have aimed at overthrowing Tiberius to serve as a regent to Tiberius Gemellus , son of Drusus or possibly Gaius Caligula . Unfortunately the relevant section pertaining to this period in the Annals of Tacitus has been lost . According to Josephus , it was Antonia , the mother of Livilla , who finally alerted Tiberius to the growing threat Sejanus posed ( possibly with information provided by <unk> Secundus ) , in a letter she dispatched to Capri in the care of her freedman Pallas . According to Juvenal , a letter was sent from Capri with the orders to execute Sejanus without a trial . 
 Further details concerning Sejanus ' fall are provided by Cassius Dio , writing nearly 200 years later in his Roman History . It appears that , when Tiberius heard to what extent Sejanus had already usurped his authority in Rome , he immediately took steps to remove him from power . However , he realised that an outright condemnation could provoke Sejanus to attempt a coup . Instead , Tiberius addressed a number of contradictory letters to the Senate , some of which praised Sejanus and his friends and some of which denounced them . Tiberius variously announced that he would arrive in Rome the next day or that he was at the point of death . He stepped down as consul , forcing Sejanus to do the same and conferred an honorary priesthood upon Caligula , rekindling popular support for the house of Germanicus . The ensuing confusion was successful in alienating Sejanus from many of his followers . With the intentions of the emperor no longer clear , it was now deemed a safer course of action at Rome to withdraw from overt support to Sejanus , until the matter was clearly settled . 
 When it became clear to Tiberius that support for Sejanus was not as strong as the emperor had feared , his next step was to choose Naevius Sutorius Macro , previously prefect of the vigiles ( Roman police and fire department ) , to replace Sejanus and effect his downfall . On October 18 , 31 , Sejanus was summoned to a Senate meeting by a letter from Tiberius , ostensibly to bestow the tribunician powers upon him . At dawn , he entered the Senate ; but while the letter was being read , Macro assumed control of the Praetorian Guard and members of the vigiles led by <unk> Laco surrounded the building . The senators at first congratulated Sejanus but when the letter , which first digressed into completely unrelated matters , suddenly denounced him and ordered his arrest , he was immediately surrounded and escorted to prison . 
 = = = Execution and aftermath = = = 
 That same evening , the Senate convened at the Temple of Concord and summarily condemned Sejanus to death . He was led from prison and strangled . His body was cast onto the Gemonian stairs , where the crowd tore it to pieces . Riots ensued , in which crowds hunted and killed anyone they could link to Sejanus . The Praetorians also resorted to looting , when they were accused of having conspired with the former prefect . Following the issue of damnatio memoriae by the Senate , his statues were torn down and his name obliterated from all public records . On October 24 , Sejanus ' eldest son Strabo was arrested and executed . Upon learning of his death , Apicata committed suicide ( October 26 ) , after addressing a letter to Tiberius , claiming that Drusus had been poisoned with the complicity of Livilla . The accusations were further corroborated by confessions from Livilla 's slaves , who , under torture , admitted to having administered the poison to Drusus . 
 Enraged upon learning the truth , Tiberius soon ordered more killings . Livilla committed suicide or was starved to death by her mother Antonia Minor . The remaining children of Sejanus , Capito Aelianus and Junilla , were executed in December of that year . According to ancient historians , because there was no precedent for the capital punishment of a virgin , Junilla was raped first , with the rope around her neck . Their bodies were thrown down the Gemonian stairs . At the beginning of the following year , damnatio memoriae was passed on Livilla . 
 Although Rome at first rejoiced at the demise of Sejanus , the city quickly plunged into more extensive trials , as Tiberius persecuted all those who could in any way be tied to the schemes of Sejanus or had courted his friendship . The Senatorial ranks were purged ; the hardest hit were those families with political ties to the Julians . Even the imperial magistracy was not exempted from Tiberius ' wrath . Arrests and executions were now supervised by Naevius Sutorius Macro . The political turmoil would continue until the death of Tiberius in 37 , after which he was succeeded by Caligula . 
 Most historical documentation of Tiberius ' revenge is given from Suetonius and Tacitus ; their portrayal of a tyrannical , vengeful emperor has been challenged by several modern historians . Edward Togo Salmon wrote that , 
 In the whole twenty two years of Tiberius ' reign , not more than fifty @-@ two persons were accused of treason , of whom almost half escaped conviction , while the four innocent people to be condemned fell victims to the excessive zeal of the Senate , not to the Emperor 's tyranny . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Praetorian Guard = = = 
 The reforms of Sejanus , most significantly the founding of the Castra Praetoria , which established the Praetorian Guard as the powerful political force , for which it is primarily known today . Henceforth the Guard was at the disposal of the emperors and the rulers were equally at the mercy of the Praetorians . The reality of this was seen in 31 , when Tiberius was forced to rely upon the vigiles against the soldiers of his own guard . Although the Praetorian Guard proved faithful to the ageing Tiberius , their potential political power had been made clear . 
 The power Sejanus attained in his capacity as prefect proved Maecenas right in his prediction to Augustus , that it was dangerous to allow one man to command the guard . Cassius Dio notes that after Sejanus , no other prefect except Gaius Fulvius Plautianus , who commanded the Guard under Septimius Severus , would rise to such influence . Following his death , the Guard began to play an increasingly ambitious and bloody role in the Empire . They assassinated emperors , bullied their prefects or turned on the people of Rome . In 41 , Caligula was killed by conspirators from the senatorial class and from the Guard . The Praetorians placed Claudius on the throne , daring the Senate to oppose their decision . In the late 1st century , a calculated uprising of Praetorians against Emperor Nerva , led by Casperius Aelianus , forced Nerva to adopt the more popular Trajan as his son and successor . 
 While it is unproven that Sejanus intended to overthrow Tiberius , later prefects of the Guard did aspire to become emperor . Upon the suicide of Emperor Nero in 68 , the Guard prefect Gaius <unk> Sabinus attempted to have himself declared emperor , on the pretence that he was the illegitimate son of Caligula . The attempt failed and Sabinus was killed by his soldiers . In the early 3rd century , Plautianus was executed after a failed conspiracy against Septimius Severus . According to sources , the downfall of Plautianus was largely due to suspicion of Severus ' son Caracalla , who was later murdered and replaced by his Praetorian prefect Marcus <unk> Macrinus . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 With the exception of Velleius Paterculus , ancient historians have universally condemned Sejanus , although accounts differ to which extent Sejanus was manipulated by Tiberius or the other way around . Suetonius <unk> asserts that Sejanus was merely an instrument of Tiberius , to hasten the downfall of Germanicus and his family and that he was quickly disposed of once he ceased to be useful . Tacitus , on the other hand , attributes much of the decline of Tiberius ' rule after 23 to the corrupting influence of Sejanus , although he is generally also harsh on Tiberius . 
 Among the writers who fell victim to the regime of Sejanus and its aftermath , were the historians Aulus <unk> Cordus and Velleius Paterculus and the poet Phaedrus . Cordus was brought to trial in 25 by Sejanus , under accusations of treason . He was charged for having eulogized Marcus Junius Brutus and spoken of Gaius Cassius Longinus as the last of the true Romans and the Senate ordered the burning of his <unk> which was considered an offence under the Lex <unk> His fall is elaborated upon by Seneca the Younger , in his letter to Cordus ' daughter Marcia To Marcia , On Consolation . Seneca tells us that her father most likely incurred Sejanus ' displeasure for criticising him , because he had commissioned a statue of himself . We also know from this source that Cordus starved himself to death . Marcia was instrumental in saving her father 's work , so that it could be published again under Caligula . 
 Phaedrus was suspected of having alluded to Sejanus in his Fables and received some unknown punishment short of death ( Cf . Fables I.1 , <unk> , and <unk> ) . Velleius Paterculus was a historian and contemporary of Sejanus , whose two @-@ volume The Roman History details a history of Rome from the fall of Troy until the death of Livia Augusta in 29 . In his work , he praised Tiberius and Sejanus , even defending the latter 's high position in the government , despite his equestrian rank . How much of Paterculus ' writing is due to genuine admiration , prudence or fear remains an open question but it has been conjectured that he was put to death as a friend of Sejanus . 
 = = = Literary interpretations = = = 
 Sejanus ' fall is depicted in the section in Juvenal 's Satire X on the emptiness of power . This reviews the destruction of his statues after the damnatio memoriae judgment and reflects on the fickleness of public opinion . The dramatist Ben Jonson was to borrow from the poem for some passages in his Sejanus : His Fall . The play is seen as a topical reference to the fall of the former royal favourite , Robert Devereux , 2nd Earl of Essex , executed for treason two years before . Sejanus is also a leading figure in another Roman history play of about this time , the anonymous Tragedy of Claudius Tiberius Nero ( 1607 ) . 
 Making contemporary political points in this way through reinterpretation of distant historical episodes was now common . In 17th century France , the fall of the powerful Cardinal Mazarin was celebrated in a political pamphlet that also drew parallels with the career of Sejanus , L <unk> ou le <unk> d <unk> Sejanus en la personne du Cardinal Mazarin ( Paris , 1642 ) . In England other royal favourites were seen in these terms too . George Villiers , 1st Duke of Buckingham , is the target of an anonymous manuscript Roman tragedy , The Emperor ’ s Favourite . The prudent need for anonymity , is suggested by the arrest of Sir John Eliot , who was sent to the Tower of London for his outspoken criticism of the Duke in the 1626 parliament , comparing him to Sejanus . 
 Following Buckingham ’ s death in 1628 , when it was safer to do so , a translation of a history by Pierre Matthieu was published under the title , The Powerful Favourite , the life of Aelius Sejanus . This was followed in 1634 , by another translation , Sir Thomas Hawkins ’ <unk> Observations upon the Fall of Sejanus , which had originally been titled Della <unk> di <unk> ( Of Changes of Fortune ) by its author , Giovanni Battista <unk> . Later in the century Anthony Ashley Cooper , 1st Earl of Shaftesbury , was the target of the four @-@ page political pamphlet Sejanus , or The popular favourite , now in his solitude , and sufferings , signed with the pseudonym Timothy Tory ( 1681 ) . Referring to the Earl ’ s imprisonment in the Tower on a charge of treason , in this case the story of Sejanus is interpreted as an argument for Absolute monarchy , direct rule without the intermediary of politicians . 
 The name of Sejanus continued to be pressed into political service during the 18th century . The Prime Minister Robert Walpole , was attacked in 1735 in the course of a popular skit , <unk> and country : A play of seven acts ... the whole concluding with the grand masque , call 'd , The downfall of Sejanus . Its authorship is attributed to ' a masquerader ' and in the printed version the masque precedes the play , although it is performed last . This gives the clue of how to take what is to follow and consists of a conversation between Punch and the Hangman , opening with the question ' Is this same Sejanus to go out of the World like a Man , or to die the Death of a mad Dog ? For he has lived like a sad One , from the first Day that the Emperor Tiberius took him into Favour . ' A subtler attack on a later prime minister occurred in 1769 when Jonson 's Sejanus was reissued under the title of The Favourite . This was prefaced with a tongue in cheek dedication to Lord Bute , denying that there can be any comparison between the conduct of Sejanus and that of his lordship . 
 Elsewhere in Europe , there were other dramatic adaptations of the story . They included Jean de Magnon ’ s rhyming tragedy , Sejanus ( 1647 ) and Henri van der Zande 's De dood van <unk> Sejanus of Spiegel voor der <unk> <unk> ( The death of Sejanus , a mirror for the favourites of princes , Amsterdam 1716 ) . Later in England , there was another recycling of Jonson ’ s tragedy , by the Irish actor Francis Gentleman . Abridged and ‘ improved ’ by some additions of his own , he published his Sejanus , a tragedy : as it was intended for the stage ( 1752 ) , when he could not get it acted . Later plays include a 5 @-@ act tragedy by <unk> ( 1875 ) and the privately printed Sejanus : A Tragedy in Five Acts by P. J. A. Chaulk ( 1923 ) 
 A later fictional treatment of the historical episode , appeared as the first story of Edward Maturin 's Sejanus , and Other Roman Tales ( New York 1839 ) . It also figures in Robert Graves ' I , Claudius ( 1934 ) . The novel was given new life when it was adapted for television as I , Claudius in 1976 ; in this Antonia sends the letter of accusation to Tiberius via Claudius , after discovering her daughter is plotting with Sejanus ( Patrick Stewart ) . The Caesars ( 1968 ) was an earlier television series which featured Sejanus . 
 The fact that Pontius Pilate was a nominee of Sejanus and implicated in the latter ’ s anti @-@ Jewish policies , has encouraged the inclusion of Sejanus in novels dealing with the circumstances of Jesus Christ ’ s crucifixion . The first of these was Miles Gerald Keon ’ s Dion and the Sibyls : A Classic Christian Novel , published in London in 1866 and from the Catholic Publication Society in New York in 1872 . Later examples have included Paul L. Maier 's Pontius Pilate ( Grand Rapids MI 1968 ) and Chris <unk> 's The Conspiracy to <unk> Jesus Christ ( Toronto 2012 ) . 
 The aim of some later novels has been to concentrate as much on local colour as on the story . This was true of William Percival Crozier 's historical romance The Fates Are Laughing ( 1945 ) , set during the fall of Sejanus and the reign of Caligula , written by a Classicist with an eye for detail . It is equally true of some recent detective novels set in Roman times . David Wishart 's Sejanus ( London , 1998 ) , features Marcus Corvinus and James Mace 's Empire Betrayed : Tribune <unk> and the Fall of Sejanus ( 2013 ) a military colleague of Sejanus . 
 = = = Biographical sketches = = = 
 Sejanus , biography at <unk> 
 = 2000 Belgian Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Belgian Grand Prix ( formally , the LVIII Foster 's Belgian Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 27 August 2000 at the Circuit de Spa @-@ Francorchamps , Stavelot , Belgium . It was the thirteenth race of the 2000 Formula One season , and the 58th Belgian Grand Prix . The 44 @-@ lap race was won by McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen , who started from the pole position . Michael Schumacher finished second in a Ferrari , and Williams driver Ralf Schumacher was third . 
 The race began behind the safety car , and when the car returned to the pit lane Häkkinen built a comfortable lead over Jarno Trulli . As the track dried and his rivals made pit stops , Häkkinen maintained his lead until a lap @-@ 13 spin gave Michael Schumacher the lead for most of the remainder of the race . By the 34th lap Schumacher 's tyres began to degrade ; he drove off the racing line to cool them , which allowed Häkkinen to close the gap . On lap 41 Häkkinen overtook Michael Schumacher for the lead , lapping BAR driver Ricardo Zonta and maintaining the lead to win . Although Rubens Barrichello set the fastest lap time in the other Ferrari , he was hampered by a poor qualifying performance and retired with a fuel @-@ pressure problem thirteen laps from the finish . 
 Häkkinen 's victory extended his lead in the Drivers ' Championship to six points over Michael Schumacher , with Coulthard a further seven points behind . Barrichello 's retirement dropped him to twenty @-@ five points behind Häkkinen . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren extended their lead to eight points over Ferrari with four races remaining in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams with two drivers each . The teams ( also known as constructors ) were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought four different tyre types to the race : two dry compounds ( soft and medium ) and two wet @-@ weather compounds ( hard and soft ) . The wet @-@ weather tyres were introduced for the race weekend in response to prospective rival tyre supplier Michelin beginning their tyre @-@ development program during the year , resulting in Bridgestone increasing their development rate to research advances . 
 Before the race McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen led the Drivers ' Championship with 64 points , ahead of Michael Schumacher ( 62 points ) and David Coulthard ( 58 ) . Rubens Barrichello was fourth with 49 points , and Giancarlo Fisichella was fifth with 18 . In the Constructors ' Championship McLaren led with 112 points , one point ahead of rival Ferrari . Williams were third with 24 points , while Benetton ( 18 points ) and Jordan ( 12 ) contended for fourth place . McLaren and Ferrari had dominated the championship , winning the previous twelve races . Barrichello and Fisichella had second @-@ place finishes , and Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had finished third . 
 After the Hungarian Grand Prix on 13 August , five teams conducted mid @-@ season testing at the Silverstone Circuit on 15 – 17 August . McLaren test driver Olivier Panis was fastest on the first day , ahead of Frentzen . Williams test driver Bruno Junqueira 's car had a water leak , resulting in repairs which limited his team 's testing time . Panis remained the fastest on the second day . Jos Verstappen 's Arrows car had a sensor failure , limiting his team 's testing time ; the car 's floor had to be removed to install a new sensor . Panis was again fastest on the final day of testing . Ferrari opted to test the suspension and tyres of Michael Schumacher 's car at the Fiorano Circuit . Schumacher later moved to the Mugello Circuit , with Barrichello conducting engine and setup tests , and Ferrari test driver Luca Badoer remained at Fiorano for development work on new car components . Prost opted to test at the Autodromo Nazionale Monza on 17 – 18 August with driver Jean Alesi . Benetton conducted a five @-@ day , one @-@ car test at the Danielson Circuit , with test driver Mark Webber on aerodynamic development for the first four days and Alexander Wurz concentrating on practice starts the last day . 
 In September 1999 the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) released a provisional calendar for the 2000 season , dropping the Circuit de Spa @-@ Francorchamps from the Formula One World Championship due to Belgian tobacco @-@ advertising laws which threatened to cancel the race ; several teams had tobacco sponsorship . The FIA had the revived Dutch Grand Prix at the Circuit Park Zandvoort and the Portuguese Grand Prix at the Autódromo do Estoril as alternatives if the Belgian Grand Prix was cancelled . The dispute was resolved when the Belgian government exempted the race from the advertising law , and it was reinstated at the FIA World Motor Sport Council meeting in Paris on 6 October . Ferrari arrived at the circuit with a lighter , more @-@ powerful version of its Tipo 049 V10 engine with for Saturday 's qualifying session , returning to the development power plant used at the Hungarian Grand Prix . They also had a revised aerodynamic package . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying sessions = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race , two each on Friday and Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour ; the third and fourth sessions , on Saturday morning , lasted 45 minutes each . Conditions were dry for the Friday morning and afternoon practice sessions . Coulthard set the first session 's fastest time with a lap of 1 : 53 @.@ 398 , eight @-@ tenths of a second quicker than Michael Schumacher . Häkkinen had the third @-@ fastest time , with Jarno Trulli , Barrichello and Jacques Villeneuve in the next three positions . The two Benetton drivers were seventh and eighth ( with Wurz ahead of Fisichella ) , and the Williams cars of Ralf Schumacher and Button completed the top ten . Alesi 's Prost had a fuel @-@ pressure problem which prevented him from completing a timed lap , and he was the slowest overall . In the second practice session , due to a slow rear puncture Coulthard 's first @-@ session lap was still the fastest ; Häkkinen had the second @-@ fastest time . Jaguar driver Johnny Herbert changed his car 's balance , improving its performance and finishing third @-@ fastest . Villeneuve moved into fourth after changes to his car 's setup ; Michael Schumacher slipped to fifth , and Wurz finished sixth . Jos Verstappen was seventh @-@ fastest , ahead of Fisichella , Barrichello and Trulli . 
 The weather remained dry for the Saturday @-@ morning practice sessions . Häkkinen set the fastest lap of the third session at 1 : 51 @.@ 043 , quicker than his best on Friday and ahead of Frentzen , Trulli and Ralf Schumacher . Coulthard , who had an engine problem early in the session , was fifth @-@ fastest ( ahead of Button and Michael Schumacher ) . Alesi , Villeneuve and Sauber driver Nick Heidfeld rounded out the top ten . During the final practice session Häkkinen could not improve his time , although he remained the fastest . Button , much happier with his car 's handling , set the second @-@ fastest time . The Jordan drivers were third and fourth , with Trulli ahead of Frentzen . Ralf Schumacher and Coulthard completed the top six . Of the slower drivers , Marc Gené had an anxious moment when his Minardi car shed its engine cover but was able to return to his garage . 
 Saturday afternoon 's qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session the 107 % rule was in effect , requiring each driver to remain within 107 % of the fastest lap time to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry weather , with the ambient temperature 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) and the track temperature 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . Häkkinen clinched his fifth pole position of the season and his third at the circuit , with a time of 1 : 50 @.@ 646 ; although he was optimistic about his race prospects , he was concerned about the start . Häkkinen was joined in the front row of the grid by Trulli , who equalled his best qualifying performance of the season ( at the Monaco Grand Prix ) . Trulli was also optimistic about his chances because of the Jordan team 's strong record at the circuit . Button qualified third , and said he was happy with his starting position . Michael Schumacher secured fourth position , nine @-@ tenths of a second behind Häkkinen , setting a lap time which pushed Häkkinen 's teammate Coulthard into fifth . Coulthard , who had problems with grip , believed that he could have had a faster lap time . Ralf Schumacher secured sixth position after being caught in traffic during his final run , keeping the Williams driver from a quicker lap time . Villeneuve , in seventh , reported oversteering . Frentzen qualified eighth ; his best lap time was disqualified after Coulthard blocked him at the Bus Stop chicane , which caused Frentzen to run onto the grass . Herbert and Barrichello rounded out the top ten drivers , with Barrichello spinning at the chicane during his third run after locking his brakes . Fisichella , eleventh , missed the top ten by three @-@ tenths of a second on his only quick run of the session . Herbert 's teammate , Eddie Irvine , qualified twelfth with tyre @-@ grip problems . He was ahead of Zonta in the slower of the two BARs ( which lost a half @-@ second through Eau Rouge ) , Heidfeld in the faster Prost , Sauber 's Pedro Diniz and Arrows driver Pedro de la Rosa . Alesi qualified 17th , despite spinning at the chicane and triggering a yellow flag . Salo qualified 18th , ahead of Wurz ( who had engine problems and shared the spare Benetton monocoque with Fisichella ) . Verstappen and the two Minardi drivers qualified at the back of the grid , in positions 20 to 22 . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up in wet weather , with lap times slower than the previous days ' practice and qualifying sessions . Häkkinen maintained his good performance , setting a time of 2 : 03 @.@ 392 . Michael Schumacher was the second @-@ fastest driver ; Button was third , two @-@ thousands of a second behind Schumacher . Barrichello completed the top four , three @-@ tenths of a second behind Häkkinen . Giancarlo Fisichella struck the barriers heavily at turn 14 after spinning sideways and was launched into the air , landing upside @-@ down ; the session was suspended while marshals cleared the track of debris . Fisichella sustained a bruised left knee , and was forced to start the race with his team 's spare car . Jacques Villeneuve damaged his car 's rear end in a crash later in the session , but was able to continue . 
 The race began at 14 : 00 local time , with air and track temperatures at 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) ; clouds , but no rain , were predicted for the race . Standing water on the track , causing heavy spray and impairing visibility , meant that the race would start behind the safety car ; all cars except Pedro Diniz ' had wet tyres . Minardi 's Gastón Mazzacane started from the pit lane , since he changed to his team 's spare car after his engine failed during the warm @-@ up . The race began without a formation lap . During the safety @-@ car period , Diniz spun off ; he was passed by Pedro de la Rosa , who received a ten @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty which he served on lap 13 . The safety car entered the pit lane after one lap , and the cars were allowed to overtake after crossing the start @-@ finish line . Häkkinen maintained his lead going into the first corner , followed by Trulli , Button , Michael Schumacher and Coulthard . Herbert ran wide at the first turn , losing ninth place to Barrichello . At the end of the first racing lap , Diniz dropped to the rear of the field . De la Rosa lost 16th position on lap three after running wide at turn 18 , losing two places to Alesi and Verstappen . 
 Häkkinen began to pull away from Trulli . Although Button tried to pass Trulli on the fourth lap at the Bus Stop chicane , he ran wide and lost third position to Michael Schumacher . On that lap , Alesi was the first driver to pit for dry tyres . By the beginning of the fifth lap Häkkinen increased his lead over Trulli to ten seconds , ahead of Michael Schumacher , Button and Coulthard . Button attempted to overtake Trulli around the outside of the Bus Stop chicane , but left the inside open for Schumacher to pass him for third place . Schumacher then took second place from Trulli at La Source . Button attempted to follow Schumacher down the inside , but made contact with the Jordan driver . Trulli was sent into a spin , becoming the first retirement of the race . Button lost two positions to Coulthard and Ralf Schumacher in the incident . On the next lap Michael and Ralf Schumacher were the first leaders to pit for dry tyres , as Alesi began setting faster lap times than the front @-@ runners . Häkkinen made a pit stop from the lead on lap seven , followed by Button , and re @-@ emerged ahead of Coulthard to retain the lead . Coulthard made his pit stop on the following lap , re @-@ emerging in ninth position . 
 All drivers made pit stops by the end of lap nine . The race order was Häkkinen , Michael Schumacher , Ralf Schumacher , Alesi , Button , Villeneuve , Barrichello , Frentzen , Coulthard , Diniz , Herbert , Irvine , Zonta , Salo , Gené , Verstappen , de la Rosa , Heidfeld , Wurz and Mazzacane . During that lap Barrichello overtook Frentzen for seventh , whilst Verstappen and Fisichella collided after the Arrows driver tried to pass the slowing Benetton at the Bus Stop chicane . Verstappen had front @-@ wing damage , and Fisichella later retired with an electrical problem . By the beginning of lap 13 , Michael Schumacher closed his gap from Häkkinen to about 4 @.@ 6 seconds after four consecutive fastest laps . Later in the lap , Häkkinen touched a kerb at Stavelot corner and was sent spinning sideways into the grass ; Michael Schumacher took the lead . Nick Heidfeld was the race 's third retirement when his car developed a mechanical problem during that lap . 
 Alesi , the first front @-@ runner to make a scheduled pit stop on lap 18 , rejoined in tenth . During the next two laps Salo passed Irvine for twelfth , whilst Barrichello made a pit stop from sixth position and came out in eleventh . By lap 22 , Michael Schumacher had increased his lead over Häkkinen to eleven seconds . Ralf Schumacher , ten seconds behind Häkkinen , maintained a six @-@ second gap over teammate Button . Michael Schumacher made a pit stop on that lap , emerging in third position . On lap 23 Barrichello passed Herbert for ninth position , and during the next two laps Villeneuve and Ralf Schumacher made pit stops . Button made a pit stop from fourth position on lap 26 , and Häkkinen one lap later ; Häkkinen was told by his team ( on pit boards ) to speed up to reduce the gap to Michael Schumacher , who had a heavier fuel load . Button dropped to eighth position , and Häkkinen came out behind Michael Schumacher . Frentzen and Coulthard made their pit stops together on lap 28 , with Coulthard emerging ahead of Frentzen . On that lap , Barrichello passed Alesi for sixth position . Barrichello , setting the fastest lap of the race ( 1 : 53 @.@ 803 on lap 30 ) , had consecutive fastest laps before making his second pit stop on lap 31 . However , his car 's fuel pressure dropped and he was pushed by marshals into the pit lane . Barrichello and Alesi ( who had a similar problem ) retired , and Button inherited fourth place . Salo was the final scheduled driver to make a pit stop , on lap 33 . 
 At the end of lap 34 , after all scheduled pit stops , the running order was Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Ralf Schumacher , Button , Coulthard , Frentzen , Villeneuve , Herbert , Salo , Irvine , Diniz , Zonta , Wurz , Gene , Verstappen , de la Rosa and Mazzacane . During that lap Michael Schumacher 's tyres began to degrade , and he ran off the racing line to cool them by driving through water ; Häkkinen gradually closed the gap . Coulthard , fifth , passed Button for fourth position on lap 37 . Häkkinen tried to pass Michael Schumacher for the lead on the 40th lap on the approach to Les Combes ( after drafting behind him on the straightaway ) , but Schumacher blocked him to defend his position . The drivers made contact , with Häkkinen receiving minor damage to his front wing and forced to lift off the throttle . During the following lap , while both drivers were lapping Zonta , Häkkinen moved to the outside lane to pass Schumacher for the lead . He kept the lead for the rest of the race , crossing the finish line on lap 44 for his fourth victory of the season in a time of 1 ' 28 : 14 @.@ 494 — an average speed of 129 @.@ 535 miles per hour ( 208 @.@ 466 km / h ) . Michael Schumacher finished second , 1 @.@ 1 seconds behind Häkkinen and ahead of Ralf Schumacher in third , Coulthard in fourth , Button in fifth place . Frentzen rounded out the point @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Villeneuve , Herbert , Salo , Irvine and Diniz filled the next five positions . Zonta , Wurz , Gené and Verstappen finished a lap behind the leader , with de la Rosa and Mazzacane the last classified finishers . 
 = = = After the race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and at a later press conference . Häkkinen was delighted with his victory : " This was an incredible win . It was a very difficult and unusual situation including my spin which of course was not planned . The kerbs here are very slippery and once you go over one there is not much you can do . I was lucky to keep going and I was able to chase Michael . But the car got better and better . " The driver added that he wanted to review his overtaking manoeuvre to see if Michael Schumacher performed an illegal move . Schumacher said that despite improvements to his car , he was unable to match Häkkinen 's overall pace . He added that he experienced no problems running off @-@ line to cool his tyres , and was happy to run behind backmarkers for straight @-@ line speed assistance during the race 's closing stages . 
 Ralf Schumacher said , " I 'm more than happy ; we have been strong here the whole weekend and my car behaved perfectly . I had a little moment of worry about six laps from the end when the throttle didn 't seem to pick up properly and I thought the engine was going to stop , but it came back and all was well . " Schumacher added that his team was confident of securing third in the Constructors ' Championship ; although he could not match Häkkinen 's pace , he praised the team for his car 's set @-@ up . Coulthard was disappointed with his fourth @-@ place finish , and thought his team 's decision to call him into the pit lane after his competitors cost him the victory ; however , he remained confident about his championship chances . Button was also disappointed to finish fifth : " It was a bad race for me , if not the worst . The car was working well at the start , but when I tried to pass Jarno I went in a bit late . " Trulli refused to criticise Button after the race , believing that the Williams driver made a mistake . Fisichella and Verstappen felt similarly about their lap @-@ nine collision , with Fisichella saying that he " felt sorry " for Verstappen and describing his weekend as " disastrous " . Verstappen said that he struggled with his car 's balance , which resulted in oversteer . He was " happy to go home " , because " it 's not been a good weekend . " Frentzen said that although he was happy to score points , he had hoped for a better finish . 
 The media focused on Häkkinen overtaking Michael Schumacher for the lead on lap 41 , and after the race Häkkinen went to Schumacher in the parc fermé and told him not to make a move like that again . Zonta later said that although he was unaware of Häkkinen 's presence , he saw Schumacher in his mirrors . Derick Allsop of The Independent described the impact the move might have on Häkkinen 's career : " Perhaps , he [ Mika Häkkinen ] will be recognised as a driver worthy of a place in the pantheon of the sport 's heroes . " According to McLaren team principal Ron Dennis , " His overtaking manoeuvre I 'm sure will go down as one of the greatest in Formula One history " , and in February 2001 Häkkinen 's move was chosen by more than 60 Formula One historians as the MasterCard Priceless Moment of the 2000 F1 season . 
 The use of a safety car to start the race had a mixed response within the sport . Coulthard agreed with the FIA 's decision : " I know there will be a debate over it but the fact is I was asked beforehand and I said that , based on the previous years we 've had here , the safest thing is to have a safety @-@ car start " . He added that although the safety @-@ car start eliminated overtaking , it also prevented a major accident . Ralf Schumacher also agreed with the decision to start under safety @-@ car conditions . However , ITV commentator and former driver Martin Brundle felt that the track was not wet enough for a safety car . Journalist Nigel Roebuck said that the length of time under safety @-@ car conditions was inadequate , and raised the possibility of abandoning standing starts . FIA race director Charlie Whiting consulted Coulthard , the drivers ' representative , before making his decision . 
 After the race , Häkkinen remained in the Drivers ' Championship lead with 74 points . Michael Schumacher was second with 68 points , seven points ahead of Coulthard and nineteen ahead of Barrichello . Ralf Schumacher passed Fisichella for fifth place with 20 points , and Frentzen moved ahead of teammate Trulli and Salo . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren maintained their lead with 125 points and Ferrari remained in second with 117 points . Williams increased their lead over Benetton to twelve points , and Jordan remained fifth with 13 points . Given Häkkinen 's increased lead , Michael Schumacher acknowledged that his team lacked speed against McLaren in the season 's four remaining races but remained confident of winning the world championship . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Dhumavati = 
 Dhumavati ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> , literally " the smoky one " ) is one of the Mahavidyas , a group of ten Tantric goddesses . Dhumavati represents the fearsome aspect of Devi , the Hindu Divine Mother . She is often portrayed as an old , ugly widow , and is associated with things considered inauspicious and unattractive in Hinduism , such as the crow and the Chaturmas period . The goddess is often depicted on a horseless chariot or riding a crow , usually in a cremation ground . 
 Dhumavati is said to manifest herself at the time of cosmic dissolution ( pralaya ) and is " the Void " that exists before creation and after dissolution . While Dhumavati is generally associated with only inauspicious qualities , her thousand @-@ name hymn relates her positive aspects as well as her negative ones . She is often called tender @-@ hearted and a bestower of boons . Dhumavati is described as a great teacher , one who reveals ultimate knowledge of the universe , which is beyond the illusory divisions , like auspicious and inauspicious . Her ugly form teaches the devotee to look beyond the superficial , to look inwards and seek the inner truths of life . 
 Dhumavati is described as a giver of siddhis ( supernatural powers ) , a rescuer from all troubles , and a granter of all desires and rewards , including ultimate knowledge and moksha ( salvation ) . Her worship is also prescribed for those who wish to defeat their foes . Dhumavati 's worship is considered ideal for unpaired members of society , such as bachelors , widows , and world renouncers as well as Tantrikas . In her Varanasi temple , however , she transcends her inauspiciousness and acquires the status of a local protective deity . There , even married couples worship her . Although she has very few dedicated temples , her worship by Tantric ritual continues in private in secluded places like cremation grounds and forests . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Dhumavati hardly has an independent existence outside the Mahavidya group . There is no historical mention of her before she is included among the Mahavidyas . As a goddess of poverty , frustration , and despair , Daniélou associates Dhumavati with Nirriti , the goddess of disease and misery , and Alakshmi , the goddess of misfortune and poverty . Kinsley adds another goddess to the list : Jyestha . 
 The Vedic goddess Nirriti is associated with death , decay , bad luck , anger , and need . Hymns emphasize offerings to keep her away . Like Nirriti , Dhumavati is associated with unpromising things and hardship . Jyestha , also an early Hindu goddess , has similarities in iconography with Dhumavati . Like Dhumavati , she is dark , ugly and is associated with the crow . Jyestha is described as being unable to tolerate any auspiciousness . Also like Dhumavati , Jyestha dwells in quarrels , inauspicious places , and has a bad temper . Lakshmana <unk> , the commentator on the <unk> @-@ Tantra , identifies Dhumavati with Jyestha . Both Alakshmi , the sister and antithesis of Lakshmi ( Shri ) , the goddess of wealth , luck and beauty , and Dhumavati are described as old , carrying a broom and having a crow banner . Both symbolize hunger , thirst , need , and poverty . 
 While there are similarities between Dhumavati and the three goddesses , the latter lack significant characteristics of Dhumavati , like her widowhood and a textual emphasis on her ugliness . The names of the three goddesses also do not figure in Dhumavati 's nama stotras ( hymns invoking her many names ) , where such identifications could have been explicitly mentioned . The three also lack the more fierce warrior aspects of Dhumavati as well as her positive aspects in the context of the Mahavidyas . In scholar David Kinsley 's opinion , though the three may be Dhumavati 's antecedents , they are not " the same " as Dhumavati . According to Kinsley , the concept of ten Mahavidyas may not be earlier than the 12th century . 
 = = Legends = = 
 Dhumavati is often named as the seventh Mahavidya . The Guhyatiguhya @-@ Tantra equates Vishnu 's ten avatars with the ten Mahavidyas . The fish incarnation Matsya is described as arising from Dhumavati . A similar list in the Mundamala equates Dhumavati with Vamana . 
 In a story from the Shakta Maha @-@ Bhagavata Purana , which narrates the creation of all the Mahavidyas , Sati , the daughter of Daksha and first wife of god Shiva , feels insulted that she and Shiva are not invited to Daksha 's yagna ( " fire sacrifice " ) and insists on going there , despite Shiva 's protests . After futile attempts to convince Shiva , the enraged Sati transforms into the Mahavidyas , who surround Shiva from the ten cardinal directions . Dhumavati stands in the southeast . Another similar legend replaces Sati with Kali ( the chief Mahavidya ) as the wife of Shiva and origin of the other Mahavidyas . The Devi Bhagavata Purana mentions the Mahavidyas as war @-@ companions and forms of goddess Shakambhari . 
 A legend from the Shaktisamgama @-@ Tantra describes that Sati commits suicide by jumping in Daksha 's yagna and Dhumavati rises with a blackened face from the sad smoke of Sati 's burning body . She is " all that is left of Sati " and is her outraged and insulted avatar . The <unk> @-@ Tantra explains the widowhood of Dhumavati . Once , Sati asked Shiva to give her food . When Shiva declines , the goddess eats him to satisfy her extreme hunger . When Shiva requests her to disgorge him , she obliges . Shiva then rejects her and curses her to assume the form of a widow . Another oral legend tells that Dhumavati was created by the warrior goddess Durga in the battle against demons Shumbha and Nishumbha . Dhumavati 's literal name ( " she who abides in smoke " ) comes from her ability to defeat demons by creating stinging smoke . 
 The <unk> @-@ Tantra version stresses Dhumavati 's destructive aspect and hunger , which is satisfied only when she consumes Shiva , who himself contains or creates the universe . It brings out her inauspicious status as a widow and her self @-@ assertion on her husband . 
 = = Iconography and textual descriptions = = 
 The Dhumavati Tantra describes her as an old and ugly widow . She is thin , tall , unhealthy , and has a pale complexion . She is described as restless and wicked . <unk> with jewellery , she wears old , dirty clothes and has dishevelled hair . Her eyes are fearsome , her nose long and crooked , and some of her long fang @-@ like teeth have fallen out , leaving her smile with gaps . Her ears are ugly and rough ; her breasts hang down . In one of her trembling hands , she holds a winnowing basket , while the other makes a boon @-@ conferring gesture ( varada @-@ mudra ) or knowledge @-@ giving gesture ( <unk> ) . She rides in a horseless chariot bearing an emblem of a crow and a banner . She is astute and crafty , though . Always hungry and thirsty , Dhumavati initiates quarrels and invokes fear . 
 In the <unk> @-@ <unk> , Dhumavati is described as having a black complexion and wearing ornaments made of snakes . Her dress is made of rags taken from cremation grounds . She holds a spear and a skull @-@ cup ( kapala ) in her two hands . The spear is sometimes replaced by a sword . Another description in the same text says Dhumavati is aged with a wrinkled , angry face and cloud @-@ like complexion . Her nose , eyes , and throat resemble a crow 's . She holds a broom , a winnowing fan , a torch , and a club . She is cruel and frowning . Her hair appears dishevelled and she wears the simple clothes of a beggar . Her breasts are dry . Her hair is grey , her teeth crooked and missing , and her clothes old and worn . 
 Sometimes , Dhumavati rides a crow and holds a trident . She may be depicted wearing a garland of severed heads , with red @-@ coloured limbs and matted but dishevelled hair . Sometimes , she carries the buffalo @-@ horn of Yama , the god of death , symbolizing her association with death . 
 Dhumavati has fierce , warlike attributes too . In the Shakta pramoda , she crushes bones in her mouth , creating an awful noise . She also makes the fearful and warlike noises of drums and bells . She wears a garland of skulls , chews the corpses of the demons Chanda and Munda , and drinks a mixture of blood and wine . 
 Though there are standard descriptions of Dhumavati 's form , some relatively recent paintings deviate from it . For example , an 18th @-@ century painting by <unk> depicts Dhumavati sitting on a chariot pulled by two black scavenger birds with curved beaks . The painting follows the usual attributes like the winnowing basket , boon @-@ giving gesture , but also depicts her young and beautiful with full breasts and adorned in gold finery , a stark contrast to her usual form . An early 20th @-@ century painting from Varanasi depicts her riding a crow , holding a trident , a sword , a winnowing fan , and a bowl in her four arms , dark @-@ complexioned , with sagging breasts , wearing white clothes and with cremation flames in the background . She is again adorned in gold finery and wears a gold @-@ hewn lower garment , unusual for a widow 's dress . Another 18th century Nepali manuscript depicts a complete deviation from her traditional descriptions . She is completely nude with high breasts , wears a pearl necklace and headband , stands on a peacock with legs apart , and holds a mirror while looking at her reflection . A ring of fire surrounds her , possibly conveying cremation flames . 
 = = Symbolism and associations = = 
 Vedic scholar Ganapati Muni described the goddess : 
 Dhumavati is always considered a widow , and thus , is the only Mahavidya without a consort . Though associated with Shiva , having eaten him , he has since left her . Having destroyed the male element ( Purusha ) in the universe , she is left with nothing , but she is still Shakti , the female element with latent energy . Dhumavati 's insatiable hunger and thirst is highlighted in many texts , and has been interpreted as the manifestation of her unsatisfied desires . 
 As a widow in a horseless chariot , Dhumavati is portrayed as a woman going nowhere in life and society . She is " all that is unlucky , unattractive and inauspicious " . She appears in the form of the poor , the beggars , the lepers , and the diseased . She dwells in the " wounds of the world " , deserts , ruined houses , poverty , tatters , hunger , thirst , quarrels , mourning of children , in wild and other uncivilized , dangerous places . Widows in general are considered inauspicious , dangerous , and susceptible to possession by evil spirits . As a divine widow , Dhumavati is to be feared . Dhumavati is described as a hag or witch , crafty and quarrelsome ; she represents all the dreaded miseries of life . 
 Alternative paintings show her as young and adorned , as a sexually tempting , eroticised , young , attractive yet inauspicious widow . Her thousand @-@ name hymn says that she gives enjoyment , is completely beautiful and adorned with garlands , clothes , and jewellery . She is also associated with sex in the hymn , which calls her " She Whose Form Is Rati " . Rati literally means " sexual intercourse " and also the name of the Hindu love goddess . She is said to enjoy sexual intercourse , to be present where sexual activity is , and to be occupied with sex . She is said to like liquor ( a forbidden drink ) , to be intoxicated , and to be worshiped by intoxicated people . She also indulges in the Tantric ritual of breaking the five taboos — the Panchamakara , which include consuming wine , meat , fish , parched grain and ritual sex . 
 Dhumavati is a manifestation of the anti @-@ social and inauspicious elements in women and is an antithesis to the goddess Lakshmi . Like Alakshmi , Dhumavati rules over the four months of the rainy season , when even solar light is obscured by the evil water spirit . This coincides with Chaturmas , a period during the year when the god Vishnu sleeps . At that time , darkness rules and the soul loses its usual luster . This period is considered inauspicious , and as such as no auspicious ceremonies like marriage can take place . 
 The presence of the crow , a carrier of death , in her iconography as well as her textual description of having crow @-@ like features associate her with death and inauspiciousness . Another motif in her iconography linking her with death is the presence of a cremation ground and cremation pyres in the background . Her thousand name hymn says that she lives in the cremation ground , sits on a corpse , wears ashes , and blesses those who haunt the grounds . The <unk> @-@ <unk> relates that she wears a dress taken from a corpse . Dhumavati is the embodiment of tamas guna , associated with ignorance and darkness . She likes meat and wine , both tamasic in nature . The <unk> associates her with tamas , when classifying the <unk> based on guna . 
 Dhumavati is often said to appear at the time of Maha @-@ pralaya , the great dissolution of the cosmos and is equated with the dark clouds that rise during Pralaya . Her thousand name hymn also calls her by names meaning " She Whose Form is Pralaya " , " Who Is Occupied with Pralaya " , " Who Creates and Causes Pralaya " and " Who Walks About in Pralaya " . An author says that she stays even after Shiva ( who is Maha @-@ kala ) ( " Great Time " or " Great Death " ) disappears , thus she is " the Power of Time " , and considered to be beyond time and space . Dhumavati represents ultimate destruction , the smoke that rises after the universe is destroyed . 
 The goddess ' name " Dhumavati " means the " smoky one " . She is said not to like offerings burnt in a fire that is not smoky . She likes smoke from incense , offerings , and cremation pyres , as these symbolize destruction . Dhumavati also exists in the form of smoke and roams everywhere at her will . 
 While Dhumavati generally is associated with only inauspicious qualities , her thousand @-@ name hymn tells about her positive aspects , too . She is often called as bestower of boons and tender @-@ hearted . Her hymn says that she lives in the midst of women and is worshipped by them . Her hymn sings of her as the giver of children . 
 As an ancestor or Grandmother spirit , she embodies a great teacher and guide , granting knowledge of the ultimate truth of life and death . Her smoke hides that which is obvious , revealing hidden secrets and truths of " the unknown and the unmanifest " . Frawley says her outer appearance as poverty is deceptive and a mere illusion that hides the inner reality . She is " the good fortune that comes to us in the form of misfortune " . Dhumavati embodies the " power of suffering " . Through the negative aspects that Dhumavati represents rise the virtues of patience , persistence , forgiveness , and detachment . Without the revealing of this negativity of life , it cannot be transcended and the secret truths would remain hidden under the smoky veil of illusion . 
 Dhumavati 's outer inauspicious , fearful form reveals the dangers of considering sensory pleasures as fulfilment @-@ giving . The winnowing basket , used to separate the husk from the grain , symbolizes the need to separate the outer illusory form from the inner reality . Her ugly form teaches the devotee to go beyond the outer deceptive appearances and seek the inner truths of life . 
 Dhumavati is the primordial darkness and ignorance , from which rises the world of illusion . She represents the darkness / ignorance before creation and after decay . This ignorance , which obscures the ultimate reality , is necessary because without the realization of this ignorance , true knowledge can not be achieved . Dhumavati also represents yogic sleep ( <unk> ) , the pre @-@ creation state of consciousness , as well as the primal sleep ( the Void ) in which all creation would dissolve and reach ultimate reality of Brahman . This void is pure consciousness , the cessation of movements of the mind , and silence . Even Dhumavati 's ability to spread disease is also considered positive , as disease punishes the wicked and restores cosmic order . Dhumavati is also associated with the heart or middle region of the body . 
 Dhumavati is sometimes regarded as an older form of Kali , in which she represents timelessness and unmanifest life @-@ force . Another tradition identifies Dhumavati with <unk> @-@ kali , " Kali who lives in the cremation ground . " She is considered a terrible aspect of the Goddess and included among the Kalikula ( " family of Kali " ) goddesses . Dhumavati 's nama stotras ( hymn with names of the deities ) identify her with Parvati , Sati , and glorify her as a slayer of demons . 
 = = Worship = = 
 Though Dhumavati may seem to be a goddess to be avoided due to her inauspiciousness , she is described as tender @-@ hearted and one who gives her devotees whatever they want . In several places , Dhumavati is described as a giver of siddhis ( supernatural powers ) , a rescuer from all troubles and granter of all desires and rewards , including ultimate knowledge and moksha ( salvation ) . Dhumavati 's worship is prescribed to ward off all the negativity that she stands for and to transcend the smoke screen to acquire true knowledge . By worshipping and confronting her , the embodiment of the impure , the inauspicious and outside the fringes of society , one can look beyond the arbitrary dichotomies of society and acquire ultimate knowledge to become spiritually enlightened . 
 Married people , however , are advised not to worship Dhumavati . It is said that her worship creates a feeling of wanting solitude and distaste of worldly things , which is considered as highest characteristics of a spiritual quest . Thus , Dhumavati 's worship is appropriate for world renouncers who roam as lone wanderers and widows who parallel the life of world renouncers . Dhumavati is also described a being partial to single persons and especially partial to widows . Widows are considered the only beings who can withstand her power . 
 The mantra of Dhumavati is " Dhum Dhum Dhumavati Svaha " , containing a repetition of her seed syllable Dhum . This mantra used in the worship of Dhumavati , sometimes with her yantra , is believed to create a protective smoke shielding the devotee from negativity and death . Her worship involves clearing one 's mind of all thoughts and leaving back the known , meditating on the unknown silence beyond , and the Void that Dhumavati represents . 
 The Shaktisamgama Tantra says that Dhumavati can be worshipped for the <unk> ( eradication ) of a person . A worshipper should imagine the world as well as the goddess 's mantra as grey . He should blacken his teeth and wear black clothes and observe regulations , such as eating little , sleeping on the ground , and subduing his senses . In this worship procedure called <unk> ( crow @-@ procedure ) , he should " transform his mind into a crow " by which one can cause harm to a person . Another Tantric text mentions the worshipper should burn a crow in a cremation flame and , while repeating the goddesses ' mantra , spread the ashes in the enemy 's house , which will lead to his destruction . The text further says Dhumavati should be worshipped only by <unk> ( " right @-@ handed path " ) . While the <unk> @-@ tantra says Dhumavati can be worshipped for destructive purposes , Shakta @-@ pramoda relates that her worship is useful to acquire siddhi to destroy one 's foes . 
 Dhumavati 's worship is performed in the night in a cremation ground , bare @-@ bodied with the exception of a loincloth . The fourth lunar day of the dark fortnight ( Krishna Paksha ) is considered the special day to perform her puja ( worship ) . The worshipper should observe a fast and remain silent for a whole day and night . They should also perform a <unk> ( " fire sacrifice " ) , wearing wet clothes and a turban , repeating the goddess ' mantra in a cremation ground , forest , or any lonely place . 
 Dhumavati temples are extremely rare . At a temple in Varanasi , Dhumavati is the main deity . Smaller Dhumavati temples exist in <unk> in Bihar and near the Kamakhya Temple near Guwahati . At the Varanasi temple , which claims to be a Shakti Peetha , Dhumavati 's idol rides a chariot and holds a winnowing fan , a broom , and a pot , while the fourth hand makes the fear @-@ not gesture ( abhaya @-@ mudra ) . The goddess is offered usual offerings like flowers and fruit , but also liquor , <unk> , cigarettes , meat , and sometimes even blood sacrifices . Though traditional devotees of Dhumavati ( world renouncers and Tantrikas ) worship at the Varanasi temple , here the goddess transcends her traditional role as " the inauspicious , dangerous goddess who can be approached only by heroic tantric adepts " . Dhumavati acquires the role of a local guardian deity , or village deity , who protects the locals and even married couples worship her . There is also a temple dedicated to the goddess in <unk> Peeth temple complex , <unk> . 
 = No. 1 Flying Training School RAAF = 
 No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) was a school of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . It was one of the Air Force 's original units , dating back to the service 's formation in 1921 , when it was established at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . By the early 1930s , the school comprised training , fighter , and seaplane components . It was re @-@ formed several times in the ensuing years , initially as No. 1 Service Flying Training School ( No. 1 SFTS ) in 1940 , under the wartime Empire Air Training Scheme . After graduating nearly 3 @,@ 000 pilots , No. 1 SFTS was disbanded in late 1944 , when there was no further requirement to train Australian aircrew for service in Europe . 
 The school was re @-@ established in 1946 as No. 1 FTS at RAAF Station Uranquinty , New South Wales , and transferred to Point Cook the following year . Under a restructure of flying training to cope with the demands of the Korean War and Malayan Emergency , No. 1 FTS was re @-@ formed in 1952 as No. 1 Applied Flying Training School ( No. 1 AFTS ) ; it moved to RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia , in 1958 . For much of this period the school was also responsible for training the RAAF 's air traffic controllers . Its pilot trainees included Army , Navy , and foreign students as well as Air Force personnel . The RAAF 's reorganisation of aircrew training in the early 1950s had led to the formation at Uranquinty of No. 1 Basic Flying Training School ( No. 1 BFTS ) , which transferred to Point Cook in 1958 . In 1969 , No. 1 AFTS was re @-@ formed as No. 2 Flying Training School and No. 1 BFTS was re @-@ formed as No. 1 FTS . Rationalisation of RAAF flying training resulted in the disbandment of No. 1 FTS in 1993 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) was the first unit to be formally established as part of the new Australian Air Force on 31 March 1921 ( the term " Royal " was added in August that year ) . No. 1 FTS was formed from the remnants of Australia 's original military flying unit , Central Flying School , at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . Squadron Leader William Anderson , who was also in charge of the Point Cook base , was No. 1 FTS 's first commanding officer . The school 's initial complement of staff was twelve officers and 67 airmen . 
 In December 1921 , the Australian Air Board prepared to form its first five squadrons and allocate aircraft to each , as well as to the nascent flying school . The plan was for No. 1 FTS to receive twelve Avro 504Ks and four Sopwith Pups , and the squadrons a total of eight Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5s , eight Airco DH.9s , and three Fairey IIIs . Funding problems forced the Air Force to disband the newly raised squadrons on 1 July 1922 and re @-@ form them as flights in a composite squadron under No. 1 FTS . The same month , Flight Lieutenant Frank McNamara , VC , took command of the school . 
 The inaugural flying course commenced in January 1923 . Basic instruction took place on the Avro 504Ks , and more advanced or specialised training on the school 's other aircraft . Fourteen students commenced the year @-@ long course , and twelve graduated . As well as flying , they studied aeronautics , communications , navigation , armament and general military subjects . Squadron Leader Anderson resumed command of No. 1 FTS in 1925 ; the following year he handed over to Wing Commander Adrian Cole , who led the unit until 1929 . The first Citizen Air Force ( active reserve ) pilots ' course ran from December 1925 to March 1926 , 26 of 30 students completing the training . Although 24 accidents occurred , there were no fatalities , leading Cole to remark at the graduation ceremony that the students were either made of India rubber or had learned how to crash " moderately safely " . However , the 1926 Permanent Air Force ( PAF ) cadet course was marred by three fatal accidents . The following year , 29 students graduated — thirteen PAF , nine reserve , and seven destined for exchange with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . In June 1928 , the school 's Avro 504Ks were replaced by de Havilland DH.60 Cirrus Moths ; these were augmented by Gipsy Moths commencing in 1930 . 
 Squadron Leader McNamara resumed command of No. 1 FTS in October 1930 . By then , two sub @-@ units had been raised at Point Cook under the school 's auspices : " Fighter Squadron " , operating Bristol Bulldogs ; and " Seaplane Squadron " , operating Supermarine Southamptons , among other types . As of February 1934 , No. 1 FTS was organised into Training Squadron , operating Moths and Westland Wapitis , Fighter Squadron and Seaplane Squadron . Fighter and Seaplane Squadrons were formally established as units that month , but remained under the control of the flying school and were " really little more than flights " , according to the official history of the pre @-@ war RAAF . As well as participating in training exercises , Fighter Squadron was often employed for aerobatic displays and flag @-@ waving duties . One of No. 1 FTS 's leading instructors during the early 1930s , Flight Lieutenant Frederick Scherger , was also a flight commander in Fighter Squadron . Seaplane Squadron undertook naval co @-@ operation and survey tasks , as well as seaplane training . Fighter Squadron was dissolved in December 1935 when its Bulldogs were transferred to No. 1 Squadron at RAAF Laverton , while Seaplane Squadron continued to function until June 1939 , when it was separated to form the nucleus of No. 10 Squadron . 
 In 1932 , No. 1 FTS started running two courses each year , the first commencing in January and the second in July ; it also ceased graduating non @-@ commissioned officers as pilots , and thus took on a character resembling the other armed services ' cadet colleges , the Royal Australian Naval College and the Royal Military College , Duntroon . The roughly 1 @,@ 200 applications for each flying course competed for around twelve places . Wing Commander Hippolyte De La Rue became commanding officer in early 1933 . The following year , No. 1 FTS commenced regular courses in signals , photography , air observation , and aircraft maintenance . In April 1936 , the school took delivery of its first Avro Cadets , procured as an intermediate trainer to bridge the gap between the Gipsy Moth employed for elementary flying instruction and the Wapiti used for advanced training . De La Rue was succeeded by Wing Commander Frank Lukis in January 1938 . By this time the school was training up to 96 new pilots per year , a small percentage of whom were slated for secondment to the RAF on short @-@ service commissions . Link Trainer simulators were introduced in March 1939 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 RAAF flying training was heavily reorganised soon after the outbreak of World War II , in response to Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . Several elementary flying training schools were formed , to provide basic flight instruction to cadets , while more advanced pilot instruction was to take place at service flying training schools . On 1 May 1940 , No. 1 FTS was re @-@ formed at Point Cook as No. 1 Service Flying Training School ( No. 1 SFTS ) . Its inaugural commanding officer was Group Captain John Summers , who led Fighter Squadron in the early 1930s and had taken over No. 1 FTS in December 1939 . The school 's Instructors ' Training Squadron was detached to become the nucleus of a re @-@ formed Central Flying School , which relocated to Camden , New South Wales , in June . Courses at the service flying training schools consisted of two streams , intermediate and advanced ; the total duration varied during the war as demand for aircrew fluctuated . Initially running for sixteen weeks , the course was cut to ten weeks ( which included 75 hours flying time ) in October 1940 . A year later it was raised to twelve weeks ( including 100 hours flying time ) , and again to sixteen weeks two months later . It continued to increase after this , peaking at 28 weeks in June 1944 . 
 At the time of formation , No. 1 SFTS came under the control of Southern Area Command , headquartered in Melbourne . The school 's complement of 52 aircraft included Wapitis , Cadets , Avro Ansons , Hawker Demons , and a de Havilland Tiger Moth . Group Captain John McCauley served as commanding officer from October 1940 until July 1941 , when he handed over to Wing Commander Roy King , who went on to take charge of Station Headquarters Point Cook in October . As of July , No. 1 SFTS was operating more than 100 aircraft , including Gipsy Moths , de Havilland DH.89 Dragon Rapides , Douglas C @-@ 47 Dakotas , CAC Wirraways and Airspeed Oxfords , the last two being the mainstays . In August 1941 , control of all training units in Victoria passed from Southern Area Command to the newly formed No. 1 Training Group . By September , the school had an establishment of 100 officers and over 2 @,@ 000 airmen , including 300 cadets . It was organised into Intermediate Training Squadron , Advanced Training Squadron , Maintenance Wing , Armament School , and Signal School . Wing Commander Charles Read held command of No. 1 SFTS from October 1943 until its disbandment on 15 September 1944 , by which time almost 3 @,@ 000 pilots had graduated . Among these were Nicky Barr , who became one of Australia 's leading fighter aces in North Africa , and Bill Newton , awarded the Victoria Cross for bombing raids in New Guinea . The RAAF had ordered the school 's closure in August 1944 as part of a general reduction in aircrew training , after being informed by the British Air Ministry that it no longer required EATS graduates for the war in Europe . Significant reserves of trained Commonwealth aircrew had been built up in the UK early in 1944 prior to the invasion of Normandy , but lower @-@ than @-@ anticipated casualties had resulted in an over @-@ supply that by 30 June numbered 3 @,@ 000 Australians . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 On 1 March 1946 , No. 5 Service Flying Training School at RAAF Station Uranquinty , New South Wales , was re @-@ formed as No. 1 FTS , under Southern Area Command . Its complement of aircraft included one Anson , two Tiger Moths , and 55 Wirraways , though the unit was mainly responsible for the maintenance of equipment and little flying was undertaken apart from refresher courses for pilots posting to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan . By 1 September 1947 , No. 1 FTS had transferred to Point Cook , initially as " Flying Training School " , under Wing Commander Read . The RAAF 's first post @-@ war flying training course at the school consisted of 42 students and commenced in February 1948 , finishing in August the following year . Flight grading took place after six months of general military training , at which point students were selected to be trainee pilots or navigators ; the former remained at No. 1 FTS , while the latter transferred to the School of Air Navigation at RAAF Base East Sale . Unlike some other air forces , which placed students into specialised aircraft roles after basic training , the RAAF 's philosophy was to give all pilots essentially the same training from induction to graduation , so they would be able to convert more easily from one aircraft type to another as operational requirements evolved . In September 1949 , Read handed over to Squadron Leader Glen Cooper , who commanded the school until August 1951 . 
 In response to demands for more aircrew to fulfil Australia 's commitments to the Korean War and Malayan Emergency , flying training underwent major changes in 1951 – 52 , the syllabus at No. 1 FTS being split among three separately located units . No. 1 Initial Flying Training School ( No. 1 IFTS ) was raised at RAAF Station Archerfield , Queensland , to impart students with general aeronautical and military knowledge , after which they received their flight grading during twelve hours on Tiger Moths . Graduate pilots of No. 1 IFTS went on to the newly formed No. 1 Basic Flying Training School ( No. 1 BFTS ) at Uranquinty , where they underwent a further 90 hours of aerial instruction that included instrument , formation and night flying , first on Tiger Moths and then on Wirraways . Successful students finally transferred to No. 1 FTS , which was renamed No. 1 Applied Flying Training School ( No. 1 AFTS ) in March 1952 . There they undertook 100 flying hours of advanced weapons and combat training on Wirraways , before graduating as sergeant pilots . RAAF College , formed at Point Cook in 1947 , was to be the Air Force 's primary source of commissioned officers . The Tiger Moths and Wirraways of No. 1 BFTS were subsequently replaced by the CAC Winjeel , first delivered in 1955 . 
 By the time it was re @-@ formed as No. 1 AFTS , the flying school at Point Cook had also been made responsible for training the RAAF 's air traffic controllers ; this role was transferred to Central Flying School at East Sale in December 1956 . Southern Area Command was re @-@ formed as Training Command in September 1953 . On 28 May 1958 , No. 1 AFTS relocated to RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia , where its Wirraways were replaced by de Havilland Vampire jet trainers , which required a runway longer than that at Point Cook . The school 's place at Point Cook was taken by No. 1 BFTS , which transferred from Uranquinty on 19 December . By this time the RAAF had decided to commission all pilots and navigators , who would be selected for these roles upon induction into the service ; navigators therefore went straight to the School of Air Navigation at East Sale , without attending flying training school . On 31 December 1958 , the Flying Training Squadron of RAAF College was disbanded , and the flight instruction component of the four @-@ year cadet course became the responsibility of No. 1 BFTS ( for basic training ) and No. 1 AFTS ( for advanced training ) . Previously , the cadets had used FTS aircraft under RAAF College instructors , but from 1959 their flight training was fully integrated with the FTS system . 
 The demand for trained aircrew , which had lessened in the mid @-@ 1950s , rose again the following decade as a result of the RAAF embarking on a major re @-@ equipment program , and Australia 's increasing involvement in the Vietnam War . The RAAF also had an ongoing commitment to providing flying training to students from the Australian Army and Royal Australian Navy . By adding instructors and increasing the ratio of pupils to instructors , the number of Air Force graduates was progressively raised from 38 in 1963 , to 100 in 1968 . Also in 1968 , Macchi MB @-@ <unk> jet trainers began replacing the Vampires of No. 1 AFTS . The introduction of the Macchi led to a brief flirtation with " all @-@ through " jet training in the Air Force , consisting of 210 hours on this one type of aircraft . The experiment was dropped after two courses as being , in the words of the official historian of the post @-@ war RAAF , " an expensive way of finding out that some pupils lacked the aptitude to become military pilots " ; by 1971 students were receiving 60 hours of basic training on Winjeels at Point Cook , and the <unk> course at Pearce was reduced to 150 hours . On 31 December 1968 , No. 1 AFTS was disbanded at Pearce , re @-@ forming on 1 January 1969 as No. 2 Flying Training School . At the same time , No. 1 BFTS was disbanded at Point Cook and re @-@ formed as No. 1 FTS . 
 The Winjeels of No. 1 FTS were replaced by CT @-@ 4A <unk> in late 1975 . The first CT @-@ 4 pilots ' course of 34 students included six from the Royal Australian Navy and three from Malaysia . By 1977 , the school was organised into Air Training , Ground Training and Maintenance Squadrons . As well as maintaining its own aircraft , it was responsible for technical support of other units at Point Cook . The Queen 's Colour was presented to No. 1 FTS by the Governor @-@ General , Sir Zelman Cowen , in 1981 . In November 1989 , one of the school 's CT @-@ 4s re @-@ created the first trans @-@ Australia flight that had taken place 70 years before , when Captain Henry Wrigley and Sergeant Arthur " Spud " Murphy flew a Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 biplane from Point Cook to Darwin , Northern Territory , between 16 November and 12 December 1919 . 
 A review of undergraduate flying training , commissioned by the Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , Air Marshal Ray Funnell , and aimed at reducing failure rates and improving cost @-@ effectiveness , saw the retirement of the CT @-@ 4s in December 1992 , followed by the closure of No. 1 FTS . The last RAAF flying course completed on 12 June 1992 , and the last Army pilots ' course in December . The school was disbanded on 31 January 1993 , bringing to an end almost 80 years of flying at Point Cook , Australia 's oldest military air base . The occasion was marked by a parading of the Queen 's Colour and a flypast by six CT @-@ 4s in front of the new CAS , Air Marshal Barry Gration . This was followed by a service at the RAAF Chapel of the Holy Trinity overflown by four Winjeels and a Tiger Moth , and later an all @-@ ranks dining @-@ in night . Concurrent with the phase @-@ out of training at No. 1 FTS , British Aerospace was contracted to conduct flight grading at its base in Tamworth , New South Wales . Subsequent all @-@ through flight training on the Pilatus PC @-@ 9 took place at No. 2 FTS , Pearce . In 1998 , British Aerospace was granted a contract to supply tri @-@ service basic flying instruction at the newly formed Australian Defence Force Basic Flying Training School ( <unk> ) in Tamworth , the first course commencing in January 1999 on CT @-@ 4B <unk> , and No. 2 FTS again became responsible for advanced flying training only . <unk> thus became , according to the school 's head of training , " the No. 1 Flying Training School you have when you don 't have a No. 1 Flying Training School " . 
 = Pholiota squarrosa = 
 Pholiota squarrosa , commonly known as the shaggy <unk> , the shaggy Pholiota , or the scaly Pholiota , is a species of mushroom in the Strophariaceae family . Common in North America and Europe , it is often an opportunistic parasite , and has a wide range of hosts among deciduous trees , although it can also infect conifers . It can also live as a saprobe , deriving nutrients from decomposing wood . The mushroom is typically found growing in clusters at the base of trees and stumps . Both the cap and the stem are covered in small , pointed scales that are pointed downward and backward . The crowded gills are yellowish , then later rust @-@ brown . The mushroom has an odor that , depending on the author , has been described as resembling garlic , lemon , radish , onion , or skunk . It has a strong taste , resembling radishes . Once thought to be edible , it is now considered and known to be poisonous , especially if consumed in combination with alcohol . The mushroom contains unique chemicals thought to help it infect plants by neutralizing defensive responses employed by them . The very similar P. squarrosoides differs in having a paler cap that is sticky between the scales , and smaller spores . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described scientifically as Agaricus squarrosus in 1790 by George Christian Edler von Oldenburg <unk> , and later sanctioned under this name by Elias Magnus Fries in his 1821 Systema Mycologicum . It was transferred to the genus Pholiota by the German Paul Kummer . It is the type species of the genus Pholiota . 
 The specific epithet squarrosa is derived from Latin , and means " scurfy " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " scaly Pholiota " , the " shaggy <unk> " , or the " shaggy Pholiota " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Like other Pholiota mushrooms , P. squarrosa has a scaly cap and stem . The cap ranges from 3 to 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter , and depending on its age , can range in shape from bell @-@ shaped to rounded to somewhat flattened . The cap color is yellowish @-@ brown to tawny in older specimens . The scales on the cap are yellowish to tawny , and recurved . 
 The stem is 4 to 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) long by 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) thick , and roughly equal in width throughout . The partial veil that covers the young gills forms a thick , woolly ring on the upper part of the stem . Above the level of the ring , the stem is bare , while below it is scaly like the cap . The gills are covered by a partial veil when young and have a greenish @-@ brown color ; mature gills are rusty brown . They are crowded closely together , attached to the stem ( adnate ) , and usually notched ( sinuate ) . 
 The spore print is cinnamon or rusty brown . The spores are elliptic , smooth @-@ walled , nonamyloid ( not absorbing iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) , and measure 6 @.@ 6 – 8 by 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 4 μm . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , and four @-@ spored , with dimensions of 16 – 25 by 5 – 7 μm . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Fruit bodies have an odor described variously as resembling garlic , radish , lemon , onion , or skunk , and taste like radish . Although some older sources report P. squarrosa as edible , the mushroom has caused several cases of poisoning . The afflicted individuals had consumed alcohol with the mushroom , then experienced vomiting and diarrhea about ten hours later . The toxic effect may be due to the combination of eating the mushrooms and taking alcohol , although the extended time delay between consumption and symptoms suggests the mechanism of toxicity is different than the antabuse @-@ effect experienced from Coprinopsis atramentaria with alcohol . After correct identification , soaking for 2 hours in baking soda , blanching in boiling water for 3 min and subsequent frying of the mushrooms seems to render them a bland but palatable dish with no ill effects ( minus any alcohol of course ) . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Pholiota squarrosa is similar in appearance to species in the genus Armillaria , but the latter produces white spore prints . Another similar mushroom is Pholiota squarrosoides , which can be distinguished microscopically by its smaller spores , and macroscopically by the stickiness of the cap between the scales . P. squarrosoides also lacks the odor of P. squarrosa , and has flesh that is white , not yellow . Leucopholiota decorosa can also be misidentified with P. squarrosa ; it has white , adnexed gills with finely scalloped edges , but it can be distinguished most reliably by its white , nonamyloid spores . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Pholiota squarrosa is thought to be a white rot fungus , which use cellulose as a carbon source , and have the ability to degrade the lignin ( present in wood ) to carbon dioxide to access the cellulose molecule . The fungus can attack a wide variety of deciduous host trees , including sugar maple , red maple , yellow birch , paper birch , American beech , and white ash . It can also attack conifers , like spruce . The fungus is a secondary parasite , in that it attacks trees that have already been weakened from prior injury or infection by bacteria or other fungi . It also functions as a saprobe , and can obtain nutrients by breaking down organic matter in dead wood . 
 P. squarrosa is found in North America and Europe . The North American distribution extends north to Canada , and south to Mexico , where its appearance is restricted to coniferous forests . In the Netherlands , P. squarrosa is one of many mushrooms that can regularly be found fruiting on ancient timber wharves . 
 The fruit bodies are used as a primary food source by the red squirrel Sciurus vulgaris , and have a higher protein content than the other mushrooms typically consumed by this species . Decaying fruit bodies are also used as a food source by fruit flies belonging to the genus Drosophila . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The fruit bodies contain unique chemical compounds that are derived from phenylpropanoids . The compounds , named <unk> and <unk> , inhibit the enzyme xanthine oxidase . <unk> oxidase catalyzes the crystallization of uric acid in the joints , a main cause of gouty arthritis , and inhibitors of this enzyme are being used clinically to reduce this side effect . The natural function of these compounds may be to quench reactive oxygen species produced by plants as a defensive response to fungal infection . 
 = Laserblast = 
 Laserblast is a 1978 American science fiction film about an unhappy teenage loner who discovers an alien laser cannon and goes on a murderous rampage , seeking revenge against those who he feels have wronged him . The low @-@ budget film was directed by Michael Rae and produced by Charles Band , who is widely known for producing B movies . Starring Kim Milford , Cheryl Smith , and Gianni Russo , the film features notable cameo appearances by Keenan Wynn and Roddy McDowall , and marked the screen debut of actor Eddie Deezen . 
 The reptilian alien creatures in the film were works of stop motion animation by animator David W. Allen , marking the first chapter in a decades @-@ long history of collaboration between Allen and Band . The alien spacecraft model featured in Laserblast was designed and built by Greg Jein in two weeks , and the musical score was written in five days by Joel Goldsmith and Richard Band , the first film score for both composers . 
 Laserblast has received overwhelmingly negative reviews and consistently ranks among the Bottom 100 list of films on the Internet Movie Database . Many critical reviews , however , cited Allen 's stop motion animation as one of the film 's only redeeming qualities . A 1988 sequel was planned , but ultimately abandoned due to financial difficulties . Laserblast was featured in the seventh season finale of the comedy television series Mystery Science Theater 3000 , marking the show 's final episode on Comedy Central before the series moved to the Sci @-@ Fi Channel . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A green @-@ skinned man wanders through the desert with a laser cannon attached to his arm . A spaceship lands and two aliens emerge , one of whom shoots the man , which disintegrates his body . The aliens depart on their spaceship , leaving behind the laser cannon and a metallic pendant the man was wearing . 
 Teenager Billy Duncan wakes up in his bed , seemingly disturbed , and learns his mother is leaving for vacation . He goes to visit his girlfriend Kathy , but her deranged grandfather Colonel Farley makes him leave before he can see her . As Billy drives around town , he is harassed by bullies Chuck <unk> and Froggy , and by two police deputies who give him a speeding ticket . Billy wanders into the desert and discovers the laser cannon and pendant . He starts playing with the cannon , pretending to shoot things , then realizes he can fire the weapon while wearing the pendant . Meanwhile , on the alien spacecraft , the two aliens converse with their leader who shows them footage of Billy using the cannon , prompting the aliens to turn their ship around to head back to Earth . Context implies that the two aliens , upon departing Earth , left the cannon and pendant behind under the presumption that no other human would be able to use them as the green @-@ skinned man had , but they have now learned that they were in error . 
 Later that night , Billy and Kathy attend a party where Chuck and Froggy attempt to rape Kathy . When Billy discovers them , a fight breaks out . Later that night , Billy uses the laser cannon to explode Chuck 's car , and Chuck and Froggy barely escape the explosion alive . Government official Tony Craig arrives to investigate both the explosion and the desert where Billy found the cannon . Tony informs the local sheriff that the town must be sealed off . 
 Feeling sick due to an unusual growth on his body , Billy visits Dr. Mellon , who surgically removes a metallic disc from Billy 's chest . Mellon calls the police laboratory technician Mike London to arrange for the disc to be investigated . A green @-@ skinned Billy opens fire on Mellon 's car that evening , killing him in an explosion . The next day , Tony investigates the wreckage and recovers unusual material , which he brings to Mike London , who concludes it is an alien material that cannot be destroyed . 
 The next day , Kathy puts the pendant on Billy 's chest while they are laying together outside . Billy immediately wakes up with green skin and deformed teeth and attacks Kathy , but she escapes . Billy goes on a rampage , shooting random objects with the laser cannon and kills one of the police deputies at a gas station . Law enforcement officials shoot at Billy from an aircraft , but Billy destroys the aircraft with the cannon , and later kills Chuck and Froggy by blowing up their car . 
 While Tony questions Colonel Farley and Kathy about Billy , the two aliens land on Earth and begin searching for Billy . After killing a man and stealing his van , Billy travels into a city where he randomly fires at his surroundings . Kathy and Tony arrive in the city and locate Billy , as the aliens spot Billy from atop a building and shoot him , which kills Billy and destroys the laser cannon . The aliens depart in their spacecraft and Kathy cries over Billy 's corpse . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Laserblast was produced by Charles Band , who is widely known as a writer , producer , and director of B movies . Band described the film as a " revenge story " with a simple premise that he thought would be fun for the audience . It was Band who conceived the title of the film with the hopes that it would grab the attention of audiences . 
 Band said , " Most of the films that I made , that I conceived , that I was very involved with and in some cases directed , definitely started with the title and usually a piece of artwork that made sense . Then I would work back to the script and the story and make the movie . " 
 The script was written by Frank Ray <unk> and Franne Schacht . Elements of the story were inspired by science fiction films , such as Star Wars ( 1977 ) , and Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) , while the characteristics of protagonist Billy Duncan – a disenchanted middle @-@ class teen from a suburban setting – mirror those of James Dean 's character in Rebel Without a Cause ( 1955 ) . 
 Band wanted Laserblast to be a " mini @-@ Star Wars " , and at one point in the film , a disparaging reference is made when Billy fires his laser gun at a Star Wars billboard , resulting in a tremendous explosion . During another scene , a police officer is confronted by a frightened teenager , who the officer dismissed as crazy by saying , " He 's seen Star Wars five times ! " 
 Billy is ignored and abandoned by his mother early in the film , demonstrating the dangers that can result from uncaring parents , one of the major themes of the script . The film also highlights the hypocrisy of police officers , particularly during a scene in which the two deputies smoke marijuana they obtained from teenagers . Commentators have pointed out several inaccuracies and plot @-@ holes in the Laserblast script . John Kenneth Muir raised several of these issues in his book , Horror Films of the 1970s : " How does Kathy 's dad know Craig , the government agent ? Why do the aliens leave behind the rifle and the pendant in the first place ? Why does the weapon turn its owner into a monstrous green @-@ skinned brute ? " Band explained in a 2006 interview that the more Billy uses the gun , " the more it sort of takes over his soul " . Janet Maslin , film critic with The New York Times , pointed out that originally , when Billy wakes up immediately after the aliens kill the man with the laser cannon , it appears that incident was a dream . Later , however , it turns out to have actually happened after all . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kim Milford , who had previously appeared in the original Broadway theatre production of Hair and the first production of The Rocky Horror Show , starred in the leading role of Laserblast , marking his first major motion picture appearance . Cheryl Smith , who later received greater recognition for her appearances in B movies and exploitation films , appeared in the lead female role of Kathy Farley . Smith disliked the role because she felt it was poorly written and that she did not receive enough rehearsal time . Gianni Russo , best known for playing Carlo Rizzi in The Godfather ( 1972 ) , was cast in as government investigator Tony Craig . 
 Laserblast marked the screen debut of Eddie Deezen , who went on to play other archetypal nerd roles in films like Grease ( 1978 ) , which was filmed before Laserblast started production , Grease 2 ( 1982 ) , and Midnight Madness ( 1980 ) . During a 2009 interview , Deezen remembered little about Laserblast , other than that it was a " shoddy production " . Roddy McDowall portrays Dr. Mellon in the film , and his name is misspelled " McDowell " in the end credits . Keenan Wynn , a long @-@ time character actor from a show business family , portrayed Colonel Farley , who provides comic relief as Kathy 's crazed , paranoid delusional grandfather and former military man . The filming for Wynn 's small role was finished in one day . Screenwriter Franne Schacht made a cameo appearance as the sheriff 's secretary in the film . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Laserblast was directed by Michael Rae , marking his only directorial credit . Filming took place over three weekends and was made " for virtually no money " , according to producer Band . The makeup effects in the film , including the gradual discoloration and degeneration of Kim Milford , were handled by makeup artist Steve Neill , who had previously worked with Band on the science fiction film End of the World ( 1977 ) . Neill makes a cameo appearance in Laserblast as the mutated person killed by the aliens in the opening scene . Neill introduced Band to David W. Allen , the film animator who created the stop motion alien creatures in Laserblast . When Band and Neill met , the former was working full @-@ time on his fantasy film The <unk> , which was ultimately never completed . Band had developed an interest and familiarity with animation , particularly the works of Ray Harryhausen , and wanted Allen to animate the reptilian creatures for his film . Although eager to work on The <unk> , Allen said he was not yet " sufficiently mature professionally " to undertake a project of that size , and he felt Laserblast was " something that was more manageable " . Band and Allen would go on to work together on several other films and projects over the next 20 years . 
 The alien creatures were featured in 39 cuts of the film through five scenes . The first scene was in the beginning of the film where the aliens emerge from their spacecraft into the desert to shoot Neill 's character . Two matte set @-@ ups were used for effects , including one used to create the illusion of depth with Neill 's character in the foreground and the aliens in the background . The sequence where Neill 's character shoots the gun out of the hand of one of the aliens was done through wire @-@ supported animation . In the second and third sequences , the two aliens are on board their spaceship , which is a miniature set designed by Dave Carson . The aliens speak with their commander through a monitor in the second sequence , and animations of the commander alien were shot separately and implemented into the scene using a rear projection effect . Both sequences also used rear projection to show footage of Billy and his destruction on Earth . The fourth sequence shows the aliens on Earth , looking at a burnt @-@ out car destroyed by Billy . Footage of the car was rear projected behind the alien models ; however , the projected footage was shot at night and the scene took place between two daytime live @-@ action scenes , thus creating a continuity error in the film . The final scene is the shortest , and features a confrontation between the aliens and Billy . Matting was again used for the sequence where Billy is shot with a gun by one of the aliens from the top of a building . The aliens then fly off in their spaceship at the end of the scene through a cutout animation effect . 
 Randall William Cook , an animator who worked with Allen on the horror film The Crater Lake Monster ( 1977 ) , provided uncredited animation work on Laserblast . Sculptor Jon Berg , who built the alien creature puppets based on Allen 's design , was also uncredited for his work . Allen said in a 1993 article that he and Berg created more shots in the film " than originally bargained for " . Special effects were assisted by Harry Woolman , and laser effects were provided by Paul Gentry . Greg Jein , the special effects model @-@ maker who also worked on The Crater Lake Monster , designed and built the spacecraft featured in Laserblast . Jein had recently completed his work on the Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( 1977 ) when Allen approached him to work on Laserblast , which was the first time Jein designed a project himself . He prepared several concept sketches and , after one was selected , he constructed the 18 @-@ inch model ( 46 cm ) in two weeks . Allen ultimately felt his animation sequences in Laserblast were not properly integrated with the rest of the film . 
 Joel Goldsmith and Richard Band , the brother of film producer Charles Band , composed the music for Laserblast , marking the first film score for both composers . The score was written in five days , and makes heavy use of synthesizer , particularly synthesized brass instruments , as well as electronic music . The music was also used in the Charles Band @-@ produced film Auditions , released the same year , the 1986 science fiction film Robot Holocaust and the 1983 horror film The House on Sorority Row . The company Echo Film Services handled the sound effects . The alien language chatter between the aliens in Laserblast was later used as sound effects in the metal band Static @-@ X 's song " A Dios Alma <unk> " , which is featured in their 2001 album Machine . During several points in the film when something explodes after it is shot by the laser gun , the scene is edited so that multiple shots of the same explosion are shown in succession . This type of editing became a trademark of Charles Band 's films , and was done previously in his 1977 films Crash ! and End of the World . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film was distributed by the Irwin Yablans Company , and released on March 1 , 1978 . Irwin Yablans , who later produced the first three Halloween films , specialized primarily in distributing B movies and low @-@ budget horror films . Laserblast was advertised in conjunction with End of the World , which was released the previous year and still playing theaters . At the time that Laserblast was released , audience interest in science fiction films was particularly high due to the release of Star Wars and the long wait until the release of its sequels , The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) and Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) . 
 Laserblast has received largely negative reviews , and consistently ranks among the Bottom 100 list of films on the Internet Movie Database . A 1978 critique in The Review of the News said , " The only thing eerie about Laserblast is the thought that the people who made this loser are still running around loose . " In the review , Laserblast was described as " an incomprehensible blending " of popular recent films like Star Wars and Close Encounters of the Third Kind , with a script " so disordered we could not be certain that the reels were being run in proper sequence " . It also criticized the props , particularly the laser gun , which they compared to a cereal box prize . A review by Variety magazine said the special effects were decent , but the script " has more holes than the laser @-@ ravaged landscape . " Janet Maslin of The New York Times said Kim Milford 's performance was dull and that the script included plot @-@ holes and inconsistencies . The Los Angeles Times critic Linda Gross said the script lacked " credibility , psychological motivation and narrative cohesiveness " , although she praised Terry Bowen 's cinematography , saying it " effectively captures the ambience of desert small @-@ town life . " It was described as one of the worst films of the year in the book , The Golden Turkey Awards . 
 Literary critic John Kenneth Muir felt the script had many plot @-@ holes left many unanswered questions , and that there was " little effort to forge a coherent story out of the mix " . New York Daily News writer David Bianculli described Laserblast as " numbingly bad " . In The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction Movies , Phil Hardy describes it as " a wholly unimaginative film " , adding , " Even the non @-@ stop series of exploding cars becomes monotonous in the hands of director Rae . " The Time Out Film Guide described Laserblast as a rip @-@ off of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde , and said Billy 's reign of destruction seemed random and senseless rather than driven by plot or characterization . The review called the film " the epitome of what Frank Zappa once <unk> as ' cheapness . ' " The Globe and Mail writer Robert Martin called the script inept , said Steve Neill 's make @-@ up effects were " frightful rather than frightening " , and said Cheryl Smith could " barely talk , let alone act " . Martin also stated the film was pulled from a Toronto theater after showing for one week . 
 Not all reviews were negative . Blockbuster Entertainment gave the film three out of five stars , and film critic Leonard Maltin gave it two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars . In their book about science fiction films , writers James Robert Parish and Michael R. Pitts called Laserblast " an stimulating , unpretentious little film in the same vein as I Was a Teenage Werewolf . Parish and Pitts praised the stop motion animation and the performance of Cheryl Smith . Laserblast was among several films universally considered terrible that film reviewer Michael Adams watched as part of a book about his quest to find the worst film of all time . However , Adams said he enjoyed watching it on a B movie level . Monthly Film Bulletin said that Laserblast was " Band 's first major box @-@ office success on the exploitation circuit " . According to Space.com , Laserblast has achieved cult film status . During a 2005 interview , Charles Band called the film " hilarious " and stated " it had its charm " like many films from its time . He also said that the film would have been made differently and would have had less critical reactions had it been produced with a larger budget . 
 Several critical reviews cited the stop motion animation as one of the film 's only redeeming qualities . Richard Meyers , a novelist who also wrote about science @-@ fiction films , described Laserblast as " basically repetitive and predictable " , but included some redemptive qualities in the animation of Dave Allen and the makeup effects of Steve Neill . Science fiction literary scholar Peter Nicholls called it the worst of Charles Band 's films , calling it " badly scripted , badly paced rubbish , " describing Allen 's " <unk> aliens " as " the only plus " . Likewise , film essayist Dennis Fischer said Allen 's stop motion animation provides the film 's " sole moments of interest " , and <unk> publisher Don Shay called it the film 's " only viable selling points " . In their DVD & Video Guide , Mick Martin and Marsha Porter called it a " dreadful low @-@ budget film with some excellent special effects by David Allen " . Doug Pratt , who criticized the poor acting and dull dialogue , said the special effects and stop motion animation " are well executed , but the sequences without effects are fairly dumb " . The authors of The DVD @-@ Laser Disc Newsletter called the film " a dull and padded revenge @-@ against @-@ bullies tale " , but said the stop motion animation were enjoyable enough that " fans are likely to be pleased with the low @-@ budget film 's positive attributes and willing to ignore the rest " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Laserblast was initially released on home video in 1981 from Media Home Entertainment . It was released on Laserdisc on June 30 , 1993 by Shadow Entertainment , and was re @-@ released on VHS on November 25 , 1997 by Full Moon Entertainment , a distribution company started by Charles Band . It had a second VHS re @-@ release on October 9 , 1998 , by United American Home Video . Laserblast was released on DVD on July 6 , 1999 , again by Full Moon Entertainment . The picture was presented with an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 66 : 1 and a stereophonic sound . The disc included no captions and no special features except for cast profiles and trailers for other Full Moon films . Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , said the visual presentation was better than most films from its time , with fresh colors and only a few speckles , as well as a decent sound transfer . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The original motion picture soundtrack was released as a limited edition CD by <unk> Records on August 1 , 2005 . It consisted of about 46 minutes of music over 25 tracks . SoundtrackNet reviewer Mike Brennan said it was " actually quite enjoyable in parts " , but not the type of music meant to be listened to without the film . Brennan claimed it resembled some of the later and better @-@ known works of Joel Goldsmith , like the scores of Stargate SG @-@ 1 and Stargate Atlantis . Joe <unk> of Film Score Monthly gave the soundtrack one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , claiming that about one @-@ third of the album sounded like " generic rock ' n ' roll cues for a production unable to afford licensing existing songs " . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Band originally planned to produce a sequel called Laserblast II , with production work to begin in August 1986 and a theatrical release expected to follow shortly thereafter . A tagline released for the film read , " The ultimate alien weapon is back . " When plans for the sequel were announced , Atlanta @-@ based film critic Scott Journal wrote , " I am one of the few people in the world who saw the original and , believe me , it did not merit a followup . " However , Charles Band Productions fell into financial difficulties shortly after the production of Laserblast , and the project was eventually scrapped . However , the premise and elements of the abandoned sequel were later used in the 1988 Charles Band film , Deadly Weapon , which , like Laserblast , was about a bullied teenager who finds a powerful weapon and uses it to seek revenge against his enemies . Band continued to make films and eventually formed Empire Pictures . 
 = = Mystery Science Theater 3000 = = 
 Laserblast was featured in the seventh season finale episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 , a comedy television series . In the show , the human character Mike Nelson and his two robot friends , Crow T. Robot and Tom Servo , are trapped in a satellite and forced to watch bad films as part of an ongoing scientific experiment . Laserblast was the sixth episode of the seventh season , which was broadcast on Comedy Central May 18 , 1996 . It marked the final episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 on that network , before the series moved to the Sci @-@ Fi Channel for its eighth season . At the time of broadcast , the MST3K creators did not know the show would eventually be renewed at a different network . Mary Jo <unk> , an actress and writer with the show , felt Laserblast was a particularly bad film : " The lead guy , Kim Somebody , is another sterling example of how filmmaking is not a meritocracy . The fact that this film was even made proves that ' anybody can do it . ' You can find this either inspiring or depressing . " 
 During the riffing of the film , the robot character Crow T. Robot claims the film " was run through a highly technical process called ' tension extraction ' " , and the other robot Tom Servo calls it so dull , " There 's a point where it stops being a movie " . Mike and the robots make particular note of film critic Leonard Maltin 's relatively high two and @-@ a @-@ half star rating of the original film . The episode also makes several references to McDowall 's performances in the Planet of the Apes films , and makes several jokes at the expense of Deezen and his stereotypically nerdy character , at one point dubbing him " heir to the Arnold Stang fortune " . Mike and the robots repeatedly sang " Are You Ready for Some Football ? " whenever Deputy Ungar appeared on screen due to his resemblance to country singer Hank Williams , Jr . 
 The Laserblast episode was included in the 2008 DVD box @-@ set " Mystery Science Theater 3000 : 20th Anniversary Edition " , along with episodes featuring the films First Spaceship on Venus ( 1960 ) , Werewolf ( 1996 ) and Future War ( 1997 ) . They were also made available for instant online streaming through the Internet rental site , Netflix . Dan <unk> of Cinefantastique , wrote , " If you 've never seen Laserblast , this is perfect MST3K viewing ! It typifies everything wrong with the late ' 70s . " During a 2009 interview , Eddie Deezen said he loved the show 's parody of Laserblast . 
 = 174th Infantry Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 174th Infantry Brigade is an infantry brigade of the United States Army based at Fort Drum , New York . A U.S. Army Reserve training unit , the brigade provides operational training readiness for units in the First Army . 
 Tracing its lineage back to the American Civil War , the brigade was deployed for both World War I and World War II . Reorganized and redesignated numerous times , the 174th Infantry Brigade has been a reserve unit of the United States Army for most of its existence , seeing only short stints in the Active Duty forces and a combat role . 
 Reactivated in 2006 as a training unit , the brigade is responsible for preparing other soldiers of the Reserve and National guard for deployment through battle training in maneuvers , equipment , and other details . As such , many personnel in the brigade are instructors who are themselves combat veterans of Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The brigade is a subordinate unit of the First Army . As a separate Reserve brigade , it does not report to a higher division level headquarters , and is a training unit rather than a combat one . 
 The brigade is made up of six battalions . Its Headquarters and Headquarters Detachment is located at Fort Dix , New Jersey . Assigned to the brigade are the 1st Battalion , 314th Infantry Regiment ; the 2nd Battalion ( Logistics Support ) , 313th Regiment ; and the 3rd Battalion ( Field Artillery ) , 314th Regiment ; which are also headquartered at Fort Drum . Additionally , the brigade contains the 2nd Battalion ( Combat Support ) , 310th Regiment ; and 3rd Battalion ( Logistics Support ) , 313th Regiment , which are both headquartered at Fort Devens , Massachusetts . The 3rd Battalion ( Combat Support ) , 309th Regiment , also part of the brigade , is headquartered at Syracuse , New York . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The brigade draws its origins back to the 174th New York Volunteer Infantry Regiment , a unit that served during the American Civil War . The 174th , also called the 5th National Guard , was recruited in New York City under the auspices of the Metropolitan police ; it was organized at Riker 's Island , and there mustered into the U.S. service for three years on 13 November 1862 . The regiment sailed to Louisiana that December . Upon arrival , it was assigned to the 2nd brigade of Major General William Emory 's division . 
 During the preliminary operations against Port Hudson , in the 3rd Brigade , Augur 's division , XIX Corps , it skirmished on the Clinton plank road , was engaged at Plains store , and then took part in the long siege of Port Hudson , during which it sustained a loss of 14 killed , wounded , and missing . 
 After the fall of Port Hudson it engaged Confederate forces at Cox 's plantation , while under command of Maj. George Keating . In the end , the unit lost 54 soldiers , 18 killed , 29 wounded and 7 missing . This was the heaviest loss sustained by any regiment in the action . The remainder of the year was spent by the regiment in post and garrison duty at Baton Rouge , and on 8 February 1864 , the regiment was consolidated with the 162nd New York Infantry . During its independent existence , the unit suffered one officer and 22 enlisted men killed and mortally wounded , and one officer and 59 enlisted men killed from disease and other causes , bringing the total number of casualties suffered to 83 . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The 174th Infantry Brigade was first constituted on 5 August 1917 in the National Army . It was organized on 25 August 1917 at Camp Dix , New Jersey , and assigned to the 87th Division . It never saw combat in World War I , like the other units of the 87th Division , the brigade was used for labor duties and a pool of reinforcements . It received a campaign streamer for World War I without an inscription . After the war , it was demobilized on 23 May 1919 at Camp Dix , New Jersey . 
 Reorganized in December 1921 at Shreveport , Louisiana , the brigade was redesignated on 23 March 1925 as the 174th Brigade . It was again redesignated on 24 August 1936 as the 174th Infantry Brigade . On 13 February 1942 , the unit was converted and redesignated as 3rd platoon , 87th Reconnaissance Troop , still assigned to the 87th Division . This consolidation also occurred to the 173rd Infantry Brigade . That December , the unit was ordered into active military service and reorganized along with the rest of the division at Camp McCain , Mississippi , which became an Infantry division . It was then mechanized the next year . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The 87th Infantry Division arrived in Scotland on 22 October 1944 , and trained in England until the end of November . It landed in France in early December , and moved to Metz , where , on the 8th , it went into action against and took Fort Driant . The troop followed its division as it shifted to the vicinity of Gross <unk> near the Saar @-@ German border on 10 December , and capturing <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 The 87th Division was moving into Germany when Von Rundstedt launched his offensive in the Ardennes . The Division was placed in reserve from 24 December until 28 December , before engaging in the Battle of the Bulge in Belgium on 29 December . In a fluctuating battle , it captured <unk> on 30 December and <unk> on 31 December . On 2 January 1945 , it took <unk> , on 10 January Tillet , and reached the Ourthe by 13 January . On 15 January 1945 , the Division moved to Luxembourg to relieve the 4th Infantry Division along the Sauer and seized <unk> on 23 January . The 87th moved to the vicinity of St. Vith on 28 January , then attacked and captured <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> by the end of the month . After the fall of <unk> on 9 February , the Division went on the defensive until the 26 February , when <unk> and <unk> were taken in night attacks . The 87th crossed the Kyll River on 6 March , took <unk> on 8 March , and after a brief rest , returned to combat on 13 March 1945 , crossing the Moselle on 16 March and clearing Koblenz , on 18 – 19 March . The Division crossed the Rhine on 25 – 26 March and despite strong opposition , consolidated its bridgehead , and secured <unk> and <unk> . On 7 April , it jumped off in an attack which carried it through Thuringia into Saxony . Plauen fell on 17 April , and the Division took up defensive positions on 20 April , about 4 miles from the Czech border . On 6 May 1945 , it took Falkenstein and maintained its positions until VE @-@ day . 
 The 87th Division returned to the United States in July 1945 expecting to be called upon to play a role in the defeat of the Japanese , but the sudden termination of the war in the Pacific while the division was reassembling at Fort Benning changed the future of the 87th . The Division was inactivated on 21 September 1945 . The 87th Reconnaissance Troop was deactivated on the same day . 
 = = = Cold War era = = = 
 The 87th Reconnaissance Troop was reorganized and redesignated in April 1947 as the 87th Mechanized Cavalry Reconnaissance Troop in the reserves . It was then activated the next month at Birmingham , Alabama . At the same time , the Organized Reserves were undergoing a transformation into the Army Reserve . The unit was again reorganized and redesignated in 1949 as the 87th Reconnaissance Company before being inactivated in December 1951 in Birmingham . 
 The unit was once again designated as the 174th Infantry Brigade following a conversion and redesignation in March 1963 . For the next 30 years , the brigade would continue as a Reserve unit in inactive status and would never be called on to participate in any conflicts . In 1997 , the brigade was withdrawn from the Reserve and activated in the Regular Army at Fort Drum , New York , before being inactivated two years later . 
 = = = Training brigade = = = 
 The brigade headquarters were again reactivated on 1 December 2006 at Fort Drum , by reflagging 2nd Brigade , 78th Division ( Training Support ) . It was one of 16 reserve brigades to be activated for the purpose of training . The brigade , which is headquartered at Fort Drum and is subordinate to the First Army Division East , is responsible for early stages of training for other reserve soldiers who have been alerted for deployment . The brigade offers the opportunity for veterans of Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom to use their skills to train new soldiers who will be entering the field of operations in Iraq or Afghanistan . This training includes convoy live @-@ fire training exercises , and techniques in dealing with improvised explosive devices , which are the primary cause of casualties in the operations . 
 During the summer of 2007 , the brigade was mobilized to Fort Dix for training along with the 72nd Field Artillery Brigade from April until September . Soldiers of the 174th Infantry Brigade trained other units in land navigation , area security , urban operations , marksmanship , and live fire exercises . Most of the soldiers being trained were members of the Army National Guard . The brigade received distinctive unit insignia and shoulder sleeve insignia in September 2007 . These items contained allusions to the brigade 's honors during World War I and II , and its history with the 78th Infantry Division . However , as it is subordinate to the First Army , soldiers of the brigade wear that patch on their shoulders instead . Later that month , the brigade was again mobilized to Fort Bragg , North Carolina for another training mission . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 The brigade has never received a unit decoration from the United States military . 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Algeciras Campaign = 
 The Algeciras campaign ( sometimes known as the Battle or Battles of Algeciras ) was an attempt by a French naval squadron from Toulon under Contre @-@ Admiral Charles Linois to join a French and Spanish fleet at Cadiz during June and July 1801 during the French Revolutionary War prior to a planned operation against either Egypt or Portugal . To reach Cadiz , the French squadron had to pass the British naval base at Gibraltar , which housed the squadron tasked with blockading the Spanish port . The British squadron was commanded by Rear @-@ Admiral Sir James Saumarez . After a successful voyage between Toulon and Gibraltar , in which a number of British vessels were captured , the squadron anchored at Algeciras , a fortified port city within sight of Gibraltar across Gibraltar Bay . On 6 July 1801 , Saumarez attacked the anchored squadron , in the First Battle of Algeciras . Although severe damage was inflicted on all three French ships of the line , none could be successfully captured and the British were forced to withdraw without HMS Hannibal , which had grounded and was subsequently seized by the French . 
 In the aftermath of the first battle , both sides set about making urgent repairs and calling up reinforcements . On 9 July a fleet of five Spanish and one French ship of the line and several frigates arrived from Cadiz to safely escort Linois 's squadron to the Spanish port , and the British at Gibraltar redoubled their efforts to restore their squadron to fighting service . In the evening of 12 July the French and Spanish fleet sailed from Algeciras , and the British force followed them , catching the trailing ships in the Second Battle of Algeciras and opening fire at 11 : 20 . A confused night action followed , in which the British ship HMS Superb cut through the disorganised allied rearguard , followed by the rest of Saumarez 's force . In the confusion one French ship was captured , a Spanish frigate sank and two huge 112 @-@ gun Spanish first rates collided and exploded , killing as many as 1 @,@ 700 men . The following morning the French ship Formidable came under attack at the rear of the combined squadron , but successfully drove off pursuit and reached Cadiz safely . 
 Ultimately the French and Spanish fleets were successful in their aim of uniting at Cadiz , albeit after heavy losses , but they were still under blockade and in no position to realise either the Egyptian or Portuguese plans . The two battles , " generally regarded as a single linked battle " , proved decisive in cementing British control of the Mediterranean Sea and condemning the French army in Egypt to defeat , totally unsupported by reinforcements from the French Navy . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 1 August 1798 , a British fleet surprised and almost completely destroyed the French Mediterranean Fleet at the Battle of the Nile in the aftermath of the successful French invasion of Egypt . This immediately reversed the strategic situation in the Mediterranean Sea , eliminating the French fleet based at Toulon as a significant threat and granting the British and their allies in the War of the Second Coalition naval dominance in the region . Over the next three years , British and allied squadrons enforced blockades against all significant French and Spanish naval bases in the region , including Alexandria , Corfu and Malta but particularly the significant harbours at Toulon and Cadiz . This drastically limited the movement of French troops and military materials across the Mediterranean , with the result that Malta and Corfu were captured and the army in Egypt was steadily reduced in size and effectiveness . 
 In January 1801 , in an attempt to increase the size of the French Mediterranean Fleet and to reinforce the beleaguered Egyptian garrison , First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte ordered a squadron of seven ships of the line to sail from Brest on the Atlantic coast to the Mediterranean under Rear @-@ Admiral Honoré Ganteaume . The squadron made three unsuccessful attempts to reach Egypt , eventually retiring to Toulon in late July 1801 . During the final effort , Ganteaume 's squadron sailed from Toulon on 27 April 1801 with instructions to briefly secure local naval supremacy around Elba to allow a <unk> invasion to go ahead , before travelling on into the Eastern Mediterranean . During these operations , Ganteaume discovered that several ships in his force were dangerously undermanned , and therefore decided to consolidate his crews and send three ships of the line , Formidable , Indomptable and Desaix , and the frigate Créole back to Toulon . 
 The presence of this force at Toulon enabled the French to plan a secondary operation using Ganteaume 's new arrivals . A deal had been brokered earlier in the year between Bonaparte and Charles IV of Spain for the Spanish government to provide six ships of the line from the Cadiz fleet to the French Navy . Orders were given that the new squadron at Cadiz was to be joined by the three ships of the line detached from Ganteaume 's squadron , as well as the frigate Muiron under the overall command of Rear @-@ Admiral Charles Linois . This force of nine French ships , accompanied by six promised vessels from the Spanish fleet , was then to fulfil one of two mooted plans : the first was a large scale attack on Lisbon . Portugal and Spain were engaged in the War of the Oranges and Lisbon was a major British trading port : the French admiral Kerguelen had estimated some years earlier that an attack there could seize as much as " 2 millions " of British goods and shipping . The other planned operation , adopted following the end of the War of the Oranges on 2 June , was for the force to resupply Egypt using soldiers stationed at Italian ports . To facilitate the transfer of the Spanish ships to French control , Napoleon ordered Contre @-@ Admiral Pierre Dumanoir le Pelley to sail to Cadiz . Le Pelley arrived at the Spanish port on 13 June in the frigates Libre and Indienne with sailors to begin manning the newly purchased ships and Commodore Julien le Ray to command them . His arrival was noted by the British blockade squadron off Cadiz under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir James Saumarez , a veteran of the Battle of the Nile and one of Lord Nelson 's famous " Band of Brothers " : Le Pelley 's ships were chased by HMS Superb and HMS Venerable , but the French admiral managed to evade his pursuers and reach Cadiz safely . Saumarez had been ordered to Cadiz in May 1801 with orders not only to blockade the Spanish fleet , but also specifically to watch for an attempt by a French squadron to link with the Spanish fleet at Cadiz . 
 = = Linois 's voyage = = 
 Linois sailed from Toulon on 13 June 1801 with three ships of the line and one frigate carrying 1 @,@ 560 soldiers under Brigadier @-@ General Devaux . Ganteaume 's earlier expedition was still in the Eastern Mediterranean , and so the British blockade force under Sir John Borlase Warren detailed to watch Toulon was instead off Malta hoping to intercept Ganteaume on his return . Therefore , the only British ships on hand when Linois emerged from the port were a few frigates , which were easily chased away by the larger warships of the French squadron . Linois 's passage was slow , facing winds from the southwest that delayed his squadron so that by the 30 June they were only off Cape de Gata in the Alboran Sea . On 1 July they were spotted from Gibraltar , although the only warship there was the 14 @-@ gun HMS Calpe under Captain George Dundas which was unable to influence their advance . Instead , Captain Dundas ordered Lieutenant Richard <unk> to take a boat and communicate with the Cadiz blockade force of seven ships of the line , under Saumarez . 
 Linois passed Gibraltar on 3 July and during the night discovered the 14 @-@ gun brig HMS Speedy a short distance ahead . Linois 's squadron had captured a number of merchant vessels during their voyage but this was their first warship , and although it was no match for size , Speedy was an infamous vessel under the command of Captain Lord Cochrane . Cochrane had spent the last year raiding the Spanish coast with great success , taking or destroying more than 50 ships including the celebrated Action of 6 May 1801 in which Cochrane had attacked and captured the far larger Spanish privateer frigate Gamo off Barcelona . Cochrane 's initial belief that the strange ships were Spanish treasure vessels caused him to bring Speedy closer to the ships and by the time he realised his error escape was impossible . Rather than surrender however , Cochrane threw all of his guns and excessive weight overboard and manoeuvered his ship to avoid coming into range of the French broadsides . He then attempted to cut directly between the approaching Formidable and Desaix , the small target avoiding the concentrated fire of the French ships and pulling into open water . At this , Commodore Jean @-@ Anne Christy @-@ Pallière on Desaix swung his ship about and pursued , several shots damaging Speedy 's sails and rigging . As Speedy slowed , Desaix overtook the small brig and fired a full broadside at close range . This was fired as the French ship was on the <unk> and therefore missed the deck entirely and failed to cause a single casualty . It did however tear away the remaining rigging and sails , leaving Speedy unmanageable . Rather than suffer another broadside , Cochrane surrendered his ship and was taken aboard Desaix , where Christy @-@ Pallière acknowledged his brave defence by refusing to accept Cochrane 's surrendered sword with the words " I will not accept the sword of an officer who has for so many hours struggled against impossibility " . From Cochrane , Linois learned of Saumarez 's presence ahead of him and , knowing that his presence would have been reported by the garrison at Gibraltar , his squadron returned eastwards around Cabrita Point and came to anchor at Algeciras , a fortified Spanish port which lay directly opposite and within sight of Gibraltar across the Bay of Gibraltar on the 4 July . 
 Off Cadiz , the squadron under Saumarez was notified of Linois 's arrival by Lieutenant <unk> at 02 : 00 on 5 July and immediately turned back towards Gibraltar , tacking against the wind . The frigate HMS Thames was detached and sent 18 nautical miles ( 33 km ) westwards to the mouth of the Guadalquivir River to collect HMS Superb under Captain Richard Goodwin Keats , which was blockading the river with the small brig HMS Pasley . Keats did follow Saumarez back to Algeciras , and was in distantly in sight when the battle commenced , but on hearing an inaccurate report from an American merchant ship that Linois had escaped the bay and was at sea once more , Keats reasoned that the French must be returning to Toulon and that he would be in a better position returning to the blockade of Cadiz than attempting to join Saumarez 's chase . The lugger HMS Plymouth was also detached to Lisbon with despatches for the Admiralty informing them of Saumarez 's intentions . The British admiral , knowing that Linois was still anchored in the bay , intended to descend on Algeciras immediately but was beset by a series of calm spells that prevented his squadron from doing more than slowly drifting eastwards away from Superb and towards Algeciras . It was not until the morning of 6 July therefore that Saumarez was in a position to attack the anchored French squadron . In anticipation of Saumarez 's arrival , Linois had formed his squadron into a strong defensive position , the three ships of the line anchored in a line north to south across in shallow waters off the mouth of Algeciras harbour , protected by Spanish forts at either extremity and around the town itself , where Murion was anchored in shallower water . Linois led the line himself in Formidable , but despatched parties from the crews of the ships of the line to augment the Spanish defences . 
 = = First Battle of Algeciras = = 
 At 07 : 00 , Saumarez ordered his squadron to advance into the bay without delay and engage the French directly , the attack to be led by Captain Samuel Hood in HMS Venerable . Hood was delayed by light winds however , and the first ship into action was HMS Pompée under Captain Charles Stirling , which attacked the anchored French ships in succession before anchoring close to Formidable . Pompée was followed by HMS Audacious , Saumarez 's flagship HMS Caesar and HMS Hannibal , with Venerable and HMS Spencer participating at a greater distance due to the unreliable wind . By 10 : 00 both squadrons were fully engaged except for Pompée at the head of the British line which had been caught by a current and swung so that the ship 's bow was facing Formidable 's broadside , allowing Linois to rake the British ship . Seeing the danger Stirling was in , Saumarez ordered Captain Solomon Ferris to take Hannibal around the head of the French line and rake Formidable . In the light wind , Ferris took almost an hour to reach the head of the lines , but as he turned inshore , Hannibal grounded on a shoal directly under the guns of the Spanish fort at Torre de Almirante . 
 Saumarez ordered his squadron 's boats to assist Hannibal and Pompée , both of which were trapped under heavy fire and unable to effectively respond . As he did so , Linois ordered his ships to cut their anchor cables and drift into the shallows , away from the becalmed British squadron . Formidable successfully completed the manoeuvre , but both Desaix and Indomptable grounded inshore , where they were exposed to heavy fire from Saumarez 's ships , which had also cut their cables in an effort to close with their opponents . At 13 : 35 however , Saumarez recognised that his squadron was in danger of grounding directly under the fire of the Spanish batteries . With the squadron 's boats either sunk or employed towing Pompée back to Gibraltar , there was no possibility of launching an amphibious operation against the Spanish forts and Saumarez reluctantly called the attack off , the remainder of the squadron retiring to <unk> but leaving the stranded Hannibal in the Bay of Gibraltar . 
 Hannibal had been exposed to the combined French and Spanish fire for four hours , and had lost two masts and more than 140 men killed and wounded . In an effort to preserve the lives of his crew , Ferris ordered his men to shelter below decks , but at 14 : 00 fires broke out on the ship and Ferris , isolated by Saumarez 's withdrawal , surrendered his ship . French boarding parties extinguished the fires and rehung the struck ensign upside down to signify that Hannibal had surrendered . However , in the Royal Navy an inverted flag is a signal of distress , and at least one British ship 's boat was captured while attempting to bring assistance to Ferris before the misunderstanding was realised . 
