 The French victory had come at a heavy cost : more than 160 men were killed and 300 wounded and all three French ships had been severely damaged . Among the dead were the captains of both Formidable and Indomptable , although Linois was unhurt . The Spanish had suffered eleven men killed and five gunboats had been destroyed . The batteries and town had also been badly damaged in the fighting . British losses were also heavy , with more than 130 killed and more than 230 wounded , most of which had been lost on Hannibal and Pompée . In addition to the loss of Hannibal , Pompée was severely damaged and the remainder of the British squadron all required urgent repairs . 
 = = Interlude = = 
 Immediately following the battle , Linois used overland messengers to request the assistance of the Spanish fleet at Cadiz under Admiral Jose de Mazzaredo . Linois and Saumarez also embarked on a program of refitting and repairing their damaged squadrons in preparation for a resumption of the action . At Gibraltar , the wounded were transferred to the naval hospital and the dead buried in the gravesite later to be known as Trafalgar Cemetery . Saumarez ordered that the most damaged of the surviving ships , Pompée and Caesar , be laid up in dock and their crews distributed among the remaining ships to ensure that they could be repaired as rapidly as possible , a situation made necessary in part due to the seizure of many of Gibraltar 's shipwrights in the Bay of Gibraltar when they were sent to aid Hannibal in the last stages of the battle . The entire squadron needed extensive repairs , their requirements met by Captain Alexander Ball , naval commissioner at Gibraltar . Captain Jahleel Brenton of Caesar protested this order and Saumarez permitted him to continue with repairs : Caesar 's crew worked all day and in regular shifts throughout the night for the next week to ensure that when Saumarez sailed again , Caesar sailed with him , the crew having replaced the ship 's damaged masts in just four days . Saumarez also sent a boat under a flag of truce in to Algeciras to arrange for the repatriation under parole of Ferris and his officers . Following a brief correspondence between Linois and the British admiral , the captured British officers , including Ferris and Cochrane , were sent to Gibraltar , later joined by the wounded British sailors captured on Hannibal . Ferris was immediately sent to Britain on HMS Plymouth with despatches , to await the court @-@ martial for the loss of his ship . He and his officers were completely exonerated . 
 Linois also began a programme of refloating and making extensive repairs to his ships , including the captured Hannibal , which he renamed Annibal . Jury masts were set up on the battered hulk , although such extensive repairs were required that when Linois sailed a week later the ship was still only just seaworthy , and was sent back to Algeciras . In Cadiz , despite Spanish hesitation , the messages from Linois coupled with strong representations from le Pelley prompted Mazzaredo to order a squadron to sea on the morning of 9 July , commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Don Juan Joaquin de Moreno and including two very large first rate ships of the line : Real Carlos and San Hermenegildo , each mustering 112 guns . The remainder of the squadron consisted of a 96 @-@ gun Spanish ship , an 80 @-@ gun Spanish ship , a 74 @-@ gun Spanish ship as well as the 74 @-@ gun ship Saint Antoine , which a few days earlier had been the Spanish San Antonio . The first of the purchased ships of the line to be commissioned into the French Navy , Saint Antonine 's crew was drawn from the men brought to Cadiz on the frigates Libre and Indienne , supplemented by a number of Spanish sailors and commanded by Commodore Le Ray . Accompanying the squadron were the frigates Libre , the Spanish Sabina and the French lugger Vautour . 
 The departure of this combined squadron was observed by Captain Keats on Superb , which after returning to Cadiz had retained station off the port with HMS Thames and HMS Pasley . Thames was inshore searching a seized American merchant ship , and witnessed the emergence of the squadron , retreating before four ships of the line that approached the British frigate . Superb was sighted shortly afterwards and also retreated before a ship of the line and two frigates , reconstituting his small squadron in the wake of Moreno 's force . Keats immediately sent Pasley ahead to Gibraltar to warn Saumarez , the brig arriving at 15 : 00 closely followed by the main body of the combined squadron , from which Saint Antoine had detached during the departure from Cadiz and was following behind , shadowed by Superb . Moreno 's squadron anchored in the Bay of Gibraltar , out of reach of the British batteries on Gibraltar and waited there for Linois to complete his repairs , Saint Antoine joining the squadron on the morning of 10 July . Keats then brought his ships into Gibraltar , where efforts to repair the squadron were increased , with the knowledge that Moreno would soon be sailing to Cadiz with Linois squadron . Saumarez , concerned by the size of the combined squadron , sent urgent messages to the Mediterranean Fleet under Lord Keith in the Eastern Mediterranean requesting support in the belief that Moreno would be delayed at least two weeks due to the condition of Linois 's ships . Saumarez was wrong : Moreno planned to convoy the battered squadron the short distance to Cadiz as soon as they were seaworthy . 
 = = Second battle of Algeciras = = 
 On the morning of 12 July the combined French and Spanish squadron put to sea , followed closely by the British squadron . Both sides took most of the day to assemble , hampered by light winds and damaged warships , but at 19 : 00 Moreno gave orders for his squadron to make all sail westwards towards the open ocean and Cadiz . Saumarez followed , but at 20 : 40 , with night drawing in and the wind picking up , he instructed Keats to take Superb , the fastest ship in his squadron , ahead and engage the rearguard of Moreno 's force . At 23 : 20 , Keats discovered the Real Carlos and pulled alongside , firing three broadsides into the Spanish ship that started a severe fire . Superb then pushed on towards Saint Antoine while Real Carlos drifted in darkness and confusion , encountering San Hermenegildo , the Spanish ships mistaking one another for an enemy and opening fire . Real Carlos then drifted into San Hermenegildo , the huge ships tangling together and the fire spreading from one to another until both were blazing wrecks in the darkness . They both exploded at 00 : 15 on 13 July , killing more than 1 @,@ 700 men . At some stage during the night , the independently sailing Spanish frigate Perla sailed through the battle and was fatally damaged in the crossfire , sinking the next morning . 
 Keats meanwhile had engaged and defeated Saint Antoine , forcing the wounded Commodore Julien le Ray to surrender following an action that had lasted just half an hour . Casualties on Saint Antoine were heavy , although Superb had just 15 men wounded . The rest of the British squadron , following up in the darkness , mistook Saint Antoine as being still active , and all fired on the ship as they passed , intending to catch the remainder of Moreno 's squadron as it sailed northwest along the Spanish coastline . At 04 : 00 the Formidable , now under the command of Captain Amable Troude , was seen to the north in Conil Bay near Cape Trafalgar and Saumarez sent Venerable to chase the French ship , Hood accompanied by Thames under Captain <unk> Hollis . At 05 : 15 , Venerable came within range and a close action soon followed , Hood ordering Hollis to bring his ship close to Troude 's stern and open up a raking fire . Formidable had the better of the action however and at 06 : 45 , with casualties mounting , Hood 's mainmast collapsed over the side . 
 Taking advantage of the disability to the British ship , Troude pulled Formidable ahead in light winds , slowly rejoining the main squadron under Moreno , which was holding station off Cadiz harbour . As Formidable moved away , the remaining masts on Venerable collapsed and the ship grounded off Sancti Petri . There was concern in the British squadron that Moreno might counterattack the disabled ship , but the arrival on the horizon of Audacious and Superb persuaded the Spanish admiral to withdraw into Cadiz . Hood was able to refloat Venerable on 13 July and the ship was towed back to Gibraltar with the prize Saint Antoine . Saumarez left three ships to maintain the blockade at Cadiz , returning the situation off the port to that before the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In France the campaign was represented as a victory , as Linois genuine achievements at Algeciras were followed by exaggerated reports of Troude 's defence in Conil Bay in which the second battle was represented as a significant success against a more numerous British force . Troude had shown skill and bravery in the engagement , but his subsequent reputation was largely built on the strength of a report sent to Paris by Dumanoir le Pelley which was based on a letter written by Captain Troude . In the letter , he claimed that he had fought not only Venerable and Thames , but also Caesar and Spencer ( misidentified in the report as Superb ) . Troude stated that he had not only driven all of these ships off , but that he had also completely destroyed Venerable by driving the ship ashore . Troude was subsequently promoted and highly praised , holding a number of important active commands in the French Navy . In Spain , the outcome of the campaign infuriated the Spanish government and contributed to the souring of the Franco @-@ Spanish alliance . The Spanish demanded that the Spanish forces then stationed at Brest on the French Atlantic coast return to Spanish waters , and Spanish pressure on Portugal was relaxed . This weakening of the Franco @-@ Spanish axis was a significant factor in the Treaty of Amiens in early 1802 that brought the French Revolutionary Wars to a close . 
 Saumarez was lauded in Britain , the success of the second action mitigating the initial defeat . He was awarded the thanks of both Houses of Parliament and made a Knight of the Bath with a pension of £ 1 @,@ 200 annually ( the equivalent of £ 82 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) .. Nearly five decades later , the second battle ( although not the first ) was among the actions recognised by the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . The campaign later played a prominent part in the novels Master and Commander by Patrick O 'Brian and Touch and Go by C. Northcote Parkinson . In British histories the campaign is usually considered a single linked battle , with the overall outcome favourable to the British force , despite the failure to prevent Linois from linking with Cadiz and the loss of Hannibal . The severe losses inflicted on the Spanish fleet at Cadiz and the reinstatement of the blockade meant that the French plan to reinforce the army trapped in Egypt was a total failure , the garrison there surrendering in September after a hard @-@ fought campaign against British and Ottoman forces . It also emphasised British dominance at sea by this stage of the war , reiterating that no force could sail from a French or allied port without detection and interception by the Royal Navy . 
 = I Not Stupid Too = 
 I Not Stupid Too ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> Èr ; literally : " Children are not stupid 2 " ) is a 2006 Singaporean satirical comedy film and the sequel to the 2002 film , I Not Stupid . It portrays the lives , struggles and adventures of three Singaporean youths — 15 @-@ year @-@ old Tom , his 8 @-@ year @-@ old brother Jerry and their 15 @-@ year @-@ old friend Chengcai — who have a strained relationship with their parents . The film explores the issue of poor parent @-@ child communication . 
 The director and screenwriter , Jack Neo , was inspired to make the film by a book about appreciating education . The movie was produced by MediaCorp Raintree Pictures on a budget of S $ 1 @.@ 5 million . It stars Jack Neo , Xiang Yun , Huang Yiliang , Shawn Lee , Joshua Ang and Ashley Leong . Filming took place at several Singaporean schools in June 2005 . 
 I Not Stupid Too was released in cinemas on 26 January 2006 , and earned over S $ 4 million in total . The film became the second @-@ highest grossing Singaporean film in history , with only Money No Enough grossing more . At the 2006 Hong Kong Film Awards , it was nominated for Best Asian Film , but lost to Riding Alone for Thousands of Miles . Critical reception was also generally positive , although some criticized the movie as overly preachy . A serialised version of the film was aired later that year . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot revolves around the lives of Tom Yeo ( <unk> Yáng <unk> ; Shawn Lee ) , his younger brother Jerry ( <unk> , Yáng <unk> ; Ashley Leong ) and their friend Lim Chengcai ( <unk> Lín <unk> ; Joshua Ang ) . 15 @-@ year @-@ old Tom is technologically inclined and a talented blogger , while 8 @-@ year @-@ old Jerry enjoys the performing arts and has the lead role in his school concert . Mr. and Mrs. Yeo 's ( Jack Neo and Xiang Yun ) busy schedules give them little time to spend with their children , leading to a strained relationship . With his mother absent , Chengcai was raised by his ex @-@ convict father ( Huang Yiliang ) , whose fighting skills he inherited . 
 During a school check for mobile phones , Tom is caught with a pornographic VCD . As his teacher confiscates it , Chengcai makes a cheeky remark that provokes the teacher into slapping him , leading to an exchange that escalates into a massive scuffle . The principal decides to expel Chengcai , while Tom receives a public caning for his part in the scuffle . Tom and Chengcai join a local street gang ; as their initiation , they are forced to shoplift an iPod . However , they are caught by two conmen with connections to the street gang posing as police detectives , who demand that they pay the fine $ 2000 within two days or be arrested . 
 While tutoring his sons , Mr. Yeo tells them that people will pay $ 500 for an hour of his time . Jerry , who wants his parents to come to his school concert , starts saving money , but he can 't save enough and eventually resorts to stealing . After he is caught , his furious father repeatedly canes him and shouts at him , but forgives him when the boy explains that he wanted $ 500 to " buy " an hour of his father 's time . This prompts Mr. and Mrs. Yeo to read Tom 's blog and realise how unappreciated and alienated their children feel . 
 Unable to raise $ 2000 themselves , Tom and Chengcai rob an old lady of her necklace , but regret their action and try to return it to her . A struggle occurs , and Chengcai bumps into several gangsters , while Tom 's mobile phone falls out of his pocket as he is tackled by vicious vigilantes . The phone hits the ground , accidentally calling Mr. Yeo , who is doing a presentation about 3G phones for a contract worth $ 3 million . He rushes off to the scene and pleads the old lady to give Tom a second chance . When the police arrive , she tells them she made a prank call . Two days later , Mr. Yeo meets the conmen and gives them thousands of dollars of hell money ; the conmen are then arrested by real police officers who have been waiting in ambush close by . Having finally understanding their children , the Yeo parents watch Jerry 's concert , much to his delight . 
 Later , the gangsters whom Chengcai bumped into earlier beat him up . Mr. Lim , who happens to be nearby , tries to protect his son , but suffers head trauma after being pushed down the stairs . He is taken to a hospital , critically injured . On his deathbed , Mr. Lim tells Chengcai that he loves him and that he should pursue his talent for fighting . Witnessing this scene , the principal is touched and allows Chengcai to return to school . The boy eventually becomes an internationally recognised martial artist . 
 = = Production = = 
 After the release of I Not Stupid , a sequel was suggested , but Neo had difficulty finding a suitable topic . His inspiration was a book on appreciation education , a method of teaching developed by Chinese educator Zhou Hong . Through the movie , Neo hoped to capture the culture of Singapore at the turn of the millennium , and to explore the issue of poor parent @-@ child communication . 
 Neo and Rebecca Leow co @-@ wrote the script , which was completed in May 2005 . I Not Stupid Too was produced by MediaCorp Raintree Pictures on a budget of S $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Shanghai Film Studio had agreed to co @-@ produce I Not Stupid Too with Raintree Pictures , but backed out because they found the film too liberal . The production crew included Daniel Yun as executive producer , Chan Pui Yin and Seah Saw Yan as producers , <unk> Lam as cinematographer and Mo Ju Li as sound editor . Besides writing and directing , Neo starred as Mr. Yeo and composed the theme song , which was sung by Hong <unk> . 
 Filming took place at Saint Hilda 's Primary School , Presbyterian High School and other locations during the school holidays in June . Neo hired real gangsters to act in several gangster scenes as he was dissatisfied with the extras . According to him , communicating with the gangsters was difficult , but when he decided to apply the lessons from the movie and praised them for a good take , they reacted well . Several members of the cast also said that I Not Stupid Too inspired them to communicate better with their family members . On 26 January 2006 , distributor United International Pictures released I Not Stupid Too on 36 screens in Singapore . 
 = = Reception = = 
 With earnings of over S $ 1 @.@ 41 million in the first six days , I Not Stupid Too achieved the biggest opening for a Singaporean film . The movie rose to the top of the local box office , beating Jet Li 's Fearless . In total , I Not Stupid Too grossed over S $ 4 million , becoming Singapore ’ s second @-@ highest grossing movie after Money No Enough . The film was then released in Malaysia , where it made <unk> million , and Hong Kong , taking in HK $ 3 @.@ 1 million . Following the success of the two I Not Stupid films , Neo has announced plans to make more sequels , as well as a remake set in China . 
 I Not Stupid Too was well received when it was showcased at the Cannes Film Festival . It was also one of six Singaporean movies screened at the Singapore Season film festival in China . At the 2006 Moscow International Film Festival for Children and Youth , I Not Stupid Too captured the Children 's Jury Award . The film was also nominated for Best Asian Film at the Hong Kong Film Awards , but lost to Riding Alone for Thousands of Miles . 
 Critics praised I Not Stupid Too for its touching portrayal of the problems faced by Singaporean teenagers . According to a review in the South China Morning Post , the movie " presents a candid portrait of Singaporean society at odds with its stereotypically squeaky clean image " . Nie Peng of Shenzhen Daily felt the film " captured the emotional depth and effectively conveyed the underlying theme of generation gaps " , while <unk> reviewer Jolene Tan called it " a good local movie that will have [ viewers ] laughing in stitches and crying at certain points " . However , I Not Stupid Too was also panned for being overly preachy : a reviewer for The Hindu said that the movie " feels like a public service program written by Singapore 's social welfare department " . Geoffrey Eu , a reviewer for The Business Times , commented that it " takes the line that the viewer needs to be clubbed into submission rather than persuaded via a more subtle line of reasoning " . 
 = = Remake = = 
 A Malaysian Remake Film produced by Ahmad <unk> <unk> was released on 2 December 2010 in cinemas in Malaysia nationwide , titled Aku Tak <unk> in Malay language . 
 = The Oath of the Vayuputras = 
 The Oath of the Vayuputras is a 2013 novel by Indian author Amish Tripathi and the final book in his Shiva trilogy . The book was released on 27 February 2013 , through Westland Press and completes the mythical story about an imaginary land Meluha and how its inhabitants were saved by a nomad named Shiva . Starting from where the previous installment left off , Shiva discovers that Somras is the true evil in The Oath of the Vayuputras . Shiva then declares a holy war on those who seek to continue to use it , mainly the Emperors Daksha and Dilipa , who are being controlled by the sage Bhrigu . The battle rages on and Shiva travels to the land of Pariha to consult with Vayuputras , a legendary tribe . By the time he returns , the war has ended with Sati , his wife , being murdered . An enraged Shiva destroys the capital of Meluha and Somras is wiped out of history . The story concludes with Shiva and his associates being popularized as Gods for their deeds and accomplishments . 
 Tripathi had confirmed in September 2011 that he was writing The Oath of the Vayuputras , with Westland announcing the release date as 27 February 2013 . The book was longer than the previous installments of the series and Tripathi clarified that all the loose ends left out in the previous book would be addressed , with the death of certain characters . Following the release of the cover art , it was announced that the publication rights of the books have been bought by both US and UK publisher houses . Like The Immortals of Meluha and The Secret of the Nagas , the book contained innovative marketing techniques , including launching interactive apps , merchandise and a music album titled Vayuputras , containing music inspired by different events in the series . 
 After its release , The Oath of the Vayuputras received positive reviews for the story and characterisation with Business Standard calling Tripathi ' India 's Tolkien ' . However , his continued insistence on using modern , easy English gave way to a negative review by Mint . The book was a commercial success with 350 @,@ 000 copies for pre @-@ order , and an initial print @-@ run of 500 @,@ 000 copies . On the first day of the release itself , the book sold the initial print @-@ run breaking the record for the fastest selling book in India . This prompted Westland to pay Tripathi an advance amount of ₹ 5 crore ( US $ 740 @,@ 000 ) for Tripathi 's next book series . As of June 2015 over 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the Shiva Trilogy have been sold with gross retail sales of over ₹ 60 crore ( US $ 8 @.@ 9 million ) , making it the fastest selling book series in the history of Indian publishing . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 On meeting Brahaspati at the Naga capital of Panchavati , Shiva comes to know about the evil " Somras " , and its ill effects on the people of India . Brahaspati explains that the large amounts of water required to manufacture Somras has resulted in the depletion of the Saraswati River ’ s water . The waste generated in the process of manufacturing the Somras was dumped in the Tsangpo river , which flows through Branga territory as Brahmaputra , and resulted in their disastrous plague . Also the birth of Naga babies was credited to Somras as it results in the multiplication of cells at a very high rate which lead to their deformation and outgrowths . 
 Shiva travels to the hidden city of Ujjain along with his entourage to meet the chief of Vasudev pandits , Gopal . He explains how the Vayuputra council — an ancient tribe left by the previous Mahadev Lord Rudra , dwelling in remote land of Pariha in the West — train a member of their tribe as the Neelkanth when " evil " rises . Shiva comes to the conclusion that it was his uncle <unk> , who turns out to be a former Vayuputra member , trained him as Neelkanth . Seeing that Meluha is the center of manufacturing the Somras , Shiva declares a holy war on the Kingdom and appeals the people to stop using the drink . Parvateshwar decides to join Meluha , since he thinks that it is his duty to defend his motherland ; Anandamayi joins him . Shiva also realizes that Maharishi Bhrigu is the mastermind behind the attack on Panchavati , plotting against him along with the <unk> emperor Dilipa and Daksha . The preparation for the war mobilizes as Branga , Vaishali and Kashi come to Shiva 's aid . He takes the Nagas , the Brangas and the Vasudev elephant corps to attack Meluha , while Kartik and Ganesh attack Ayodhya and successfully prevent them from aiding Meluha . Shiva captures the city of <unk> and makes the citizens imprison the Meluhan army led by <unk> , who believes Shiva to be a fraud . He escapes and persuades Bhrigu and Parvateshwar to attack Sati 's army by a thousand Meluhan troops , and defeat them . 
 Following this defeat , Shiva abandons the plan of invading Meluha and leave for Pariha with Gopal ; they wanted to procure the deadly Brahmastra weapon , to threaten the Meluhans for peace with them . There he meets the chief of Vayuputras , Mithra , who turns out to be his maternal uncle . Mithra convinces the Vayuputras that Shiva is the real Neelkanth and gives him the <unk> which acts on a specific target , rather than annihilating everything like the Brahmastra . Meanwhile , Parvateshwar uses decoy ships to give an impression to Kali that he was going to attack Panchavati . Alarmed , Kali takes the bait and leaves with the finest Naga soldiers in their pursuit . However , she realizes her folly and returns . 
 Daksha plans to assassinate Shiva and sends <unk> to get Egyptian assassins . He frames a peace treaty for Shiva but in his absence , Sati attends the peace conference and finds out the truth . She fights the assassins valiantly , but is killed . The war ends with Sati 's death , but an enraged Shiva decides to use the <unk> to finish Devagiri forever . Parvateshwar , <unk> , Veerini decide to stay back in the city and die with it , but Kartik persuades Bhrigu to remain alive and share his vast knowledge with future generations . Shiva unleashes the astra and ends Devagiri 's history , along with the Somras manufacturing units hidden beneath the city . 
 In the epilogue , Shiva retires to Mount Kailash where he lives the rest of his days peacefully , though missing Sati every day . Ganesh , Kali and Kartik become renowned as Gods for their prowess , all over India . They take revenge for Sati 's death by wiping out the whole clan of the Egyptian assassins . Bhrigu continues teaching and collates his knowledge in a book called Bhrigu Samhita . Sati 's death is not forgotten and she is later renowned as Goddess Shakti , and her ashes are spread throughout India , in places later known as Shakti Peethas ( Seat of Shakti ) . It is revealed that in order to ensure that the Somras is not mass @-@ manufactured again , the course of the Yamuna is turned towards the east , thus drying up the Saraswati River . 
 = = Characters and locations = = 
 Tripathi believes that " Myths are nothing but jumbled memories of a true past . A past buried under mounds of earth and ignorance . " The book has known characters from Hindu texts as well as those born from Tripathi 's imagination , however the characters from the Hinduism do not inherit all of their classical traits . 
 Characters 
 Shiva – The main character in the story . He is a Tibetan immigrant to Meluha and the chief of the Guna tribe . On arriving in Meluha and consuming the Somras ( a potion ) , his throat turns blue making him the Neelkanth of the Meluhan legend , which speaks of the appearance of Neelkanth as a destroyer of evil . The Meluhans end up believing that Shiva would be their saviour . Shiva searches for the source of Evil , and deciding that it is Somras which would destroy India , he declares war to eradicate the drink completely . His deeds and accomplishments in saving India from its dangers makes him the Mahadev ( Great God ) . 
 Sati – A Meluhan princess , she is the daughter of King Daksha . Shiva falls in love with her and marries her . Sati is a skilled swords @-@ woman and is very brave since childhood . She assists Shiva on his journey to destroy Evil , but dies a valiant death while saving her people from a group of assassins . Her death becomes a trigger for the wars to cease . She is later renowned as Goddess Shakti , and her ashes are spread throughout India , in places later known as Shakti Peethas ( Seat of Shakti ) . 
 Kali – Sati 's twin sister who was separated from her after birth , due to their father denouncing her . Kali was born with two extra functioning appendages , hence she was ostracized from society and declared a Naga . A very hot @-@ tempered woman , Kali assists and helps Shiva in his journey to destroy Evil . Kali is later renowned as a Goddess . 
 Ganesh – Sati 's first child , who was declared dead by her father Daksha , as he was born with physical deformities . Ganesh was raised later by Kali , and they created the formidable Naga army . Ganesh becomes an ardent follower of Shiva and Sati , and later comes to be renowned as a God . 
 Kartik – Son of Shiva and Sati , Kartik is a fearsome warrior and gains recognition for his battle skills and strategies . Kartik recognizes the importance of preserving Shiva 's legacy by not destroying everything in Meluha . He later moves to South India and is renowned as a God there . 
 Nandi – A captain in the Meluhan army . A loyal devotee of Shiva , who is often considered for his opinion and suggestions by Shiva . 
 Veer Bhadra – A captain of Shiva 's army and his close childhood friend . He was later renamed as Veer Bhadra , a title earned by once defeating a tiger single <unk> is quick tempered and is husband to Krittika . 
 Krittika — She is the best friend and hand maiden of Sati . She is like a second mother to Kartik and is the wife of Shiva 's best friend Veer <unk> does not have children as she has become infertile due to the adverse effects of Somras . 
 <unk> – The chief Meluhan scientist who becomes Shiva 's good friend . Though he does not believe the legend of the Neelkanth , he believes that Shiva is capable of taking Meluha to its new glory . 
 Daksha – The King of the Meluhans , he wants to be the Emperor of the whole of India , and is bitter towards Shiva for bringing into light his injustices against his own daughter , Sati . 
 Veerini – The Queen of the Meluhans , wife of Emperor Daksha , Veerini is against Daksha 's diabolical schemes to bring down Shiva . 
 Parvateshvar – Head of Meluhan Army and a Suryavanshi , Parvateshvar is a follower of Shiva . However , he is caught in a dilemma when Shiva decides to destroy Meluha for ending the usage of Somras , and ultimately decides to help the country by leading it in the impending war , being bound to his duty as the protector of the country . He is a man of his word and places truth and honour even above God . He is a tall , well @-@ built giant of a man and is husband to Princess Anandamayi . 
 Bhagirath – The prince of Ayodhya , he assists Shiva in his journey to destroy Evil . 
 Anandamayi – The princess of Ayodhya . A strong @-@ willed woman , Anandamayi joins Parvateshwar as he decides to lead Meluha in the war . 
 Ayurvati – The Chief of Medicine , Ayurvati is another intelligent and revered woman , who is capable of curing any disease . She is the first one to realize that Shiva is the " Neelkanth " , their savior . 
 Bhrigu – Bhrigu is a renowned sage of India , who is extremely powerful and malevolent . He believes that the Somras is never Evil , and hence mobilizes the war against Shiva . Held in high @-@ esteem and fear by everyone , Bhrigu realizes the error of his ways after Sati is killed . 
 Dilipa – King of Ayodhya and the father of Bhagirath and <unk> , Dilipa is obsessed about his looks and decaying body , and is black @-@ mailed by Bhrigu in helping him in the impending war against Shiva . 
 Gopal – The chief of the Vasudevs , Gopal assists Shiva throughout his journey from the hidden city of Ujjain , to Pariha , the land of the Vayuputras . 
 Kanakhala – Meluhan prime minister , Kanakhala is shocked at the criminal side and dark revelations about her King Daksha , and never supported him in his misdeeds . When she comes to know about Daksha 's plans to kill Shiva , she stealthily informs Parvateshvar about his plans and commits suicide . 
 <unk> He was a Bandit @-@ Priest purely devoted to Shiva . He is a courageous man and will fight till his last breath for the Lord Neelkanth . 
 <unk> He is a Branga official who is Shiva 's major ally . 
 Races 
 Suryavanshis – The Suryavanshis are followers of Shri Ram and the Solar Calendar and try to lead a life that is as ideal as possible . The Suryavanshis believe in Satya , Dharma , Maan — truth , duty and honor . 
 Chandravanshis – The Chandravanshis are followers of the Lunar Calendar . Traditionally the Chandravanshis and Suryavanshis are enemies . 
 Naga – A cursed race of people who have physical deformities . They are extremely skilled warriors . 
 Vasudevs – The Vasudevs are a secretive group of priests , who wait through the millennia to assist the Neel Kanth in destroying Evil . 
 Vayuputras – The Vayuputras are a secret group of followers left by the previous Mahadev , Lord Rudra . Staying in remote Pariha , the Vayuputras are responsible for the creation of the Neel Kanth , when Evil approaches . 
 Kingdoms 
 Meluha – The empire of the Suryavanshis , also known as the land of pure life . Meluha is based in the areas of the modern Indian provinces of Kashmir , Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Delhi , Haryana , Rajasthan , Gujarat and the whole of Pakistan . It also includes parts of eastern Afghanistan . 
 Swadweep – The empire of the Chandravanshis , also known as the island of the individual . Swadweep comprises the modern Indian provinces of Uttarakhand , Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Jharkhand , West Bengal , Sikkim , Assam , Meghalaya and all of the country of Bangladesh , besides most parts of Nepal and Bhutan . 
 <unk> – The land of the Brangas , situated on the eastern part of India . Shiva travels there with his entourage in search of the recipe for a medicine and to know the truth about the Nagas . 
 Dandak Forest – Located in the modern Indian province of Maharashtra and parts of Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Chhattisgarh , Orissa and Madhya Pradesh , Dandak is a dense and treacherous forest where the Nagas stay , at their capital Panchavati . 
 Ujjain – A circular city situated beside the Chambal River and hidden completely to the outsiders , Ujjain is the home of the Vasudevs . Shiva travels there for counselling and asking their help . 
 Pariha – Situated in far West , Pariha is the home of the Vayuputras . A secluded city formed from the <unk> civilization , Pariha is the birthplace of Lord Rudra . Shiva travels there with Gopal for asking their help . 
 Characters and locations adapted as per the books from the series and from the official website . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Tripathi had initially decided to write a book on philosophy , but was dissuaded by his family members , so he wrote a book on Shiva , one of the Hindu gods . The story was of how a Tibetan tribal chief called Shiva became the fabled savior of the land of Meluha . His adventures nearly 4000 years ago , morphed into the mythical legends of the Hindu God Shiva . Titled The Immortals of Meluha , the book went on to become a huge commercial success , after its release in February 2010 , with film director Karan Johar 's Dharma Productions purchasing the film rights of the book . The success prompted Tripathi to pen a second part of the trilogy , titled The Secret of the Nagas . Following what happens in the life of Shiva , the plotline and the geography of the story was expanded to venture into unknown territories . Tripathi quit his job as a banker while writing the book , dedicating his whole time to the marketing and the promotion of the release . The Secret of the Nagas was also a commercial success , with both the books having crossed a print run of a million copies . These books have continued to top the bestseller lists of Nielsen BookScan , with the gross retail sales being impressive at ₹ 22 crore ( US $ 3 @.@ 3 million ) within two years of publishing . 
 In September 2011 , Tripathi confirmed that from the next month he would start penning the third installment of the trilogy , The Oath of the Vayuputras . In January 2013 , it was revealed that The Oath of the Vayuputras would be released on 27 February of the same year , by Westland Publishing . Tripathi explained that the final version of the book was longer than he had expected it to be , and consisted of 53 chapters , making it twice as long as the other books . During an interview with The Times of India , the author discussed some of the important scenarios being presented in the book . He explained that since Shiva is a mortal in his series , he would have a fitting epilogue in the book , with many of the loose ends of the plot finally being deciphered . Shiva would meet the chief of the <unk> and the Vayuputras in the hidden cities of Ujjain and Pariha . " Some loose ends will be left deliberately open for the readers to interpret . As for losing someone we love ? The Shiva trilogy chronicles a battle against evil . And evil does not go quietly into the night ; instead , it puts up a strong fight against Good . So yes , people will die in Vayuputras , " he concluded . 
 Explaining that he wrote it as per his whim , and not according to the need to have more philosophy or love or war , Tripathi was sure that The Oath of the Vayuputras would have a tragic ending . During an interview with Daily News and Analysis , Tripathi explained that he had purposefully used the modern terms for the different historical locations described in the book , including calling India by its name , rather than its ancient name , <unk> . He did not believe that India could be represented as a political concept in his book , since at the timeline followed in the Shiva trilogy , India was still a cultural concept . Since some of the characters have their mythological names , but do not follow the characteristic traits , Tripathi believed that such development was spontaneous and did not question his writing further . Giving an example , the author said : " When I was writing the first book , I was struggling with the Naga , because I wanted to desperately change his character – that he should be jovial and happy . But he kept ending up as a tormented and troubled a guy who was suffering . And I just had to surrender " 
 The cover art of the book was launched in Mumbai , by Tripathi and Johar in a ceremony , which also saw the presence of Gautam Padmanabhan , CEO of Westland Publishers , and Rashmi Pusalkar , the designer of the cover of The Oath of the Vayuputras . The author added that Pusalkar had managed to merge in many of the symbolic elements represented in the storyline of the book , while maintaining the same visual appeal of the previous releases of the trilogy . He wanted the cover to have a symbolic meaning , portraying Shiva wielding <unk> — the legendary bow of the God according to Mythology — and a burning bush behind him . The increasing brightness of the book covers signified the triumph of good over evil , according to Tripathi . The UK publication rights of the Shiva trilogy , including The Oath of the Vayuputras was purchased by Jo Fletcher Books , with the deal being made by Claire Roberts at Trident Media Group , acting on behalf of the author and the author 's Indian agent , Anuj Bahri of Red Ink Literary Agency . The Oath of the Vayuputras would be released in the United States in summer 2014 . The Oath of the Vayuputras was released in six different languages , namely English ( South Asia ) , English ( UK ) , Hindi , Telugu , Gujarati and Marathi . 
 = = Marketing techniques = = 
 Since both The Immortals of Meluha and The Secret of the Nagas had innovative marketing techniques , Tripathi spoke about similar innovativeness with the release of The Oath of the Vayuputras . One of the marketing strategies included a music album called Vayuputras , an original soundtrack based on the Shiva Trilogy . The idea for the album came from Sangram Surve , CEO of Tripathi 's advertisement agency , Think <unk> . The album had nine songs dedicated to Lord Shiva with several Bollywood singers lending their voices , and was inspired by the different sections and storyline in the books . Titled " Jo Vayuputra Ho " ( " One Who is a Vayuputra " ) , the lead song was composed by musician Taufiq Qureshi and recorded by singer Sonu Nigam . A music video was also developed by Think <unk> team , directed by Amit <unk> and music by Rajeev Sharma . The video was broadcast in popular television channels and across all social media platforms . The concept of the music video was the journey of the three books of the Shiva Trilogy in its five @-@ minute span . Other marketing strategies included launching interactive apps , merchandise and events that would follow the music and book launch . In an interview with Business Standard , Surve explained : 
 " After tasting the stupendous marketing success of , The Secrets of the Nagas , we are very excited to partner with Amish for the launch of The Oath of the Vayuputras . The ' think big ' brief given to us was apt for the launch of the final book ... The challenge was to not just get existing fans of the franchise to buy The Oath of Vayuputras — that would happen anyway — but to expand the reader base . The campaign idea revolved around creating another ' first @-@ of @-@ its @-@ kind ' in book marketing , which this time around turned out to be the production of a world @-@ class music video which is poised at reaching out to the masses through television , in a bid to garner greater awareness about the book . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The book received mixed to positive responses from critics . R Krishna from Daily News and Analysis gave a positive review for the book . He observed that the criticism in the second book regarding bad editing and writing has been polished in The Oath of the Vayuputras . He complimented the fact that philosophical discussions in the book is rightly balanced by action sequences , commending the way in which Sati 's fight with the assassins is described . Krishna concluded that the different characters of the book make it a good reading and a fitting ending to the series . <unk> Dalal from Mid Day praised the urban dialect used by Shiva in the book and felt that Tripathi 's grip on the whole story is steady and has the reader 's undivided attention , ultimately " giving the Trilogy an end it deserves " . Sanjeev Sanyal from Business Standard gave a neutral review saying that although the fast @-@ paced and easy style from the earlier books has been retained , it is evident if one goes back and <unk> the first few pages of The Immortals of Meluha that Tripathi has become much more comfortable and confident of his writing . " Of course , those whose literary tastes have not outgrown Wren and Martin will still find fault with his use of the English language . For the rest of us , it is delightful to see how Tripathi applies simple language to evoke great battle scenes and extraordinary landscapes " . 
 <unk> Khanna from Mint was disappointed with the book and gave a negative review . According to him poor grammar and bad editing of the book marred the possibility of The Oath of the Vayuputras becoming a classic . Adding that the scope of imagination was vast and ambitious , Khanna explained that he " really wanted to like this book . But the laziness in editing and rewriting is evident , and unforgivable ... It seems as though Westland Ltd , knowing that it has a guaranteed best @-@ seller on its hands , has decided to be as lazy as possible when it comes to the actual editing . " The Kolkata Statesman 's <unk> Khurana gave a positive review to the book , saying " Amish has skillfully used Upanishadic , Puranic , Zoroastrian and Buddhist mythological images and their essence in lucid and contemporary language . " The review goes on to say that Tripathi had tried to bring out knowledge from the dogma @-@ box approach and that despite the author 's much criticized " clunky language and sloppy grammar " , the tale reached its goal of attraction the attention towards Mythology and traditions , along with inspiring readers . 
 = = Commercial response = = 
 According to Zee News , before its official release The Oath of the Vayuputras had about 350 @,@ 000 copies for pre @-@ order , with an initial print @-@ run of 500 @,@ 000 copies . On the first day of the release itself , the book sold the initial print @-@ run breaking the record for the fastest selling book in India . This prompted Westland to pay Tripathi an advance amount of ₹ 5 crore ( US $ 740 @,@ 000 ) for the next series that he would pen , even though Tripathi confessed that he did not have any idea regarding the subject that he would pursue for his next endeavor . Padmanabhan clarified that the advance included the book , audio and e @-@ publishing rights for Tripathi 's next series , and was only for the South @-@ Asian region and " It 's the largest advance we 've ever paid , and the largest Indian deal " . Anuj Bahri , who was the first publisher for The Immortals of Meluha , said that the deal could go up to US $ 4 million once they acquire the film , foreign and translation rights for the books . As of June 2015 over 2 @.@ 5 million copies of the Shiva Trilogy have been sold with gross retail sales of over ₹ 60 crore ( US $ 8 @.@ 9 million ) , making it the fastest selling book series in the history of Indian publishing . 
 = HMS Bellerophon ( 1786 ) = 
 HMS Bellerophon was a 74 @-@ gun third @-@ rate ship of the line of the Royal Navy . Launched in 1786 , she served during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , mostly on blockades or convoy escort duties . Known to sailors as the " Billy Ruffian " , she fought in three fleet actions , the Glorious First of June , the Battle of the Nile and the Battle of Trafalgar , and was the ship aboard which Napoleon finally surrendered , ending 22 years of nearly continuous war with France . 
 Built at Frindsbury , Bellerophon was initially laid up in ordinary , briefly being commissioned during the Spanish and Russian Armaments . She entered service with the Channel Fleet on the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , and took part in the Glorious First of June in 1794 , the first of several fleet actions of the wars . Bellerophon narrowly escaped being captured by the French in 1795 , when her squadron was nearly overrun by a powerful French fleet , but the bold actions of the squadron 's commander , Vice @-@ Admiral Sir William Cornwallis , caused the French to retreat . She played a minor role in efforts to intercept a French invasion force bound for Ireland in 1797 , and then joined the Mediterranean Fleet under Sir John Jervis . Detached to reinforce Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson 's fleet in 1798 , she took part in the decisive defeat of a French fleet at the Battle of the Nile . She then returned to England and went out to the West Indies , where she spent the Peace of Amiens on cruises and convoy escort duty between the Caribbean and North America . 
 Bellerophon returned to European waters with the resumption of the wars with France , joining a fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood blockading Cadiz . The reinforced fleet , by then commanded by Horatio Nelson , engaged the combined Franco @-@ Spanish fleet when it emerged from port . At the Battle of Trafalgar on 21 October Bellerophon fought a bitter engagement against Spanish and French ships , sustaining heavy casualties including the death of her captain , John Cooke . After repairs Bellerophon was employed blockading the enemy fleets in the Channel and the North Sea . She plied the waters of the Baltic Sea in 1809 , making attacks on Russian shipping , and by 1810 was off the French coast again , blockading their ports . She went out to North America as a convoy escort between 1813 and 1814 , and in 1815 was assigned to blockade the French Atlantic port of Rochefort . In July 1815 , defeated at Waterloo and finding escape to America barred by the blockading Bellerophon , Napoleon came aboard " the ship that had dogged his steps for twenty years " ( according to maritime historian David Cordingly ) to finally surrender to the British . It was Bellerophon 's last seagoing service . She was paid off and converted to a prison ship in 1815 , and was renamed Captivity in 1824 to free the name for another ship . Moved to Plymouth in 1826 , she continued in service until 1834 , when the last convicts left . The Admiralty ordered her to be sold in 1836 , and she was broken up . 
 Bellerophon 's long and distinguished career has been recorded in literature and folk songs , commemorating the achievements of the " Billy Ruffian " . 
 = = Construction and commissioning = = 
 Bellerophon was ordered from the commercial shipbuilder Edward Greaves and Company , of Frindsbury in Kent , on 11 January 1782 to a modified design originally developed by Surveyor of the Navy Sir Thomas Slade . She was one of ten ships built to the modified Arrogant @-@ class design , originally developed by Slade in 1758 and used to build two ships , HMS Arrogant and HMS Cornwall . The design was resurrected and slightly altered in 1774 , and approved by the Admiralty on 25 August that year . The keel was laid down at Frindsbury in May 1782 . Measuring 168 ft ( 51 m ) on the gundeck and 138 ft ( 42 m ) on the keel , she had a beam of 46 ft 10 @.@ 5 in ( 14 @.@ 288 m ) , measured 1 @,@ 612 78 ⁄ 94 tons burthen and mounted 74 guns . This armament consisted of twenty @-@ eight 32 @-@ pounder guns on her lower gundeck , twenty @-@ eight 18 @-@ pounder guns on the upper gundeck , fourteen 9 @-@ pounder guns on the quarterdeck and four 9 @-@ pounder guns on the forecastle . 
 The ship was named Bellerophon , a decision that had been arrived at by at least April 1782 , when it was entered into the minutes of the Surveyor 's Office . The First Lord of the Admiralty at the time , John Montagu , 4th Earl of Sandwich , had apparently selected the name from <unk> 's Classical Dictionary , which he kept on his desk . The recently ordered 74 @-@ gun ship was thereafter to be named after the Greek warrior Bellerophon who rode the winged horse Pegasus and slew the monster Chimera . The pronunciation proved difficult for the ordinary sailors of the period , and she was widely known by variants , most commonly " Billy Ruffian " or " Billy Ruff 'n " , although " Belly Ruff One " appears in a satirical 1810 print by Thomas Rowlandson , and " <unk> " in the novel Poor Jack by Frederick Marryat . She was decorated with a figurehead of Bellerophon . 
 By the time Bellerophon was launched , there was no pressing need for new warships . The signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1783 brought the American War of Independence to an end while Bellerophon was still under construction . Though Greaves had been contracted to have her ready for launching by April 1784 , she spent another two years on the slipway , probably because the Navy Board ordered construction work to be delayed to allow her timber to be seasoned , a luxury available now that there were no pressing military needs . When the launch came , it was delayed several times , finally taking place during a period of heavy autumn storms in October 1786 . She was launched with little ceremony on 7 October 1786 , by Commissioner Charles Proby , of Chatham Dockyard . She was then towed across the River Medway and anchored off Chatham Dockyard . She was taken into the dry dock there on 7 March 1787 , where her hull was fitted with copper sheathing , and she was fitted for the Ordinary . Her final costs came to £ <unk> paid to Greaves for building her , and a further £ <unk> spent on fitting her for service . 
 Laid up at Chatham during the years of peace , Bellerophon was not commissioned until July 1790 , when the crisis known as the Spanish Armament broke out . As war with Spain threatened , warships lying in ordinary began to be commissioned and fitted for sea . Bellerophon 's first commander , Captain Thomas Pasley , arrived on 19 July and began the process of preparing her for service . After a month spent fitting out the ship with guns , masts , stores and rigging , and recruiting a crew , Pasley gave the orders for his crew to slip the moorings on 16 August , and Bellerophon made her way down the Medway to the fleet anchorage at the Nore . 
 From the Nore , Bellerophon proceeded to the Downs and joined the fleet stationed there . She spent three weeks in the roadstead , exercising her guns , before moving to Spithead . The diplomatic crisis with Spain had largely abated by October 1790 , and Bellerophon was sent to Sheerness in late November . She remained in commission , still under Pasley , during the Russian Armament in 1791 , but when this period of tension also passed without breaking into open war , Bellerophon was sent back to Chatham and paid off there on 9 September 1791 . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , Bellerophon was commissioned in March 1793 , under her former captain , Thomas Pasley . Pasley fitted her for sea and sailed to join the Channel Fleet under Admiral Lord Howe . The Channel Fleet sailed on 14 July , with orders to patrol off Brest in the hope of intercepting and destroying the French fleet based there . While south @-@ west of the Scilly Isles on 18 July , Bellerophon collided with HMS Majestic in gale force winds . Bellerophon lost her bowsprit , foremast and main topmast , and had her figurehead and <unk> smashed , which necessitated putting into Plymouth for repairs . 
 After being repaired , Bellerophon rejoined the Channel Fleet , which by now was patrolling the Western Approaches . She developed a reputation for speed during these duties , and was given the nickname of " The Flying Bellerophon " . In September 1793 Howe assigned her to a flying squadron made up of the fastest ships of the line , and gave Pasley command of the squadron , with the temporary rank of commodore . With Pasley now responsible for a squadron , Bellerophon received a new commander in January 1794 , Captain William Johnstone Hope , with Commodore Pasley continuing to fly his broad pennant aboard her . For the next five months the Channel Fleet patrolled off Ushant and the Brittany coast . 
 = = = Glorious First of June = = = 
 The Channel Fleet played an important role in the closing stages of the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 , when Howe moved out into the Atlantic in the hope of intercepting an approaching French convoy under Admiral Pierre Jean Van <unk> . The main French battlefleet was also known to be at sea , under Admiral Louis Thomas Villaret de Joyeuse . Howe sent Pasley , recently promoted to rear @-@ admiral , and his flying squadron , consisting of Bellerophon and the 74 @-@ gun ships HMS Russell , HMS Thunderer and HMS Marlborough , ahead to scout for French forces . At 6 am on 28 May the attached frigate HMS Phaeton signalled Bellerophon to report a sighting of a strange fleet . Pasley took the squadron south @-@ east to investigate , coming in sight of a large fleet at 9 am , and counting thirty @-@ three ships , of which at least twenty @-@ three appeared to be ships of the line . They were confirmed as French by noon , and Pasley signalled this news back to Howe . Howe ordered a pursuit , and by evening the leading British ships , with Pasley 's flying squadron forming the van , came in contact with the rear @-@ most French . Bellerophon was the first ship to come into action , when the 110 @-@ gun Révolutionnaire dropped back to block her approach . Pasley tacked to close the French ship and began exchanging broadsides . The heavy fire of the larger French ship caused considerable damage , particularly to Bellerophon 's main topmast , and she fought alone until the remainder of the flying squadron and two ships from the main fleet , HMS Audacious and HMS Leviathan , arrived to assist her . The damaged Bellerophon then drifted clear of the action , and as night fell Howe signalled for the fleet to reform in line ahead and wait for morning before resuming the engagement . 
 The action resumed the following morning , with Howe closing on the French and then cutting through their line . Bellerophon followed Howe 's flagship , the 100 @-@ gun HMS Queen Charlotte , and sustained some damage from French fire . Howe isolated several French ships in the rear and pounded them with broadsides , but Villaret de Joyeuse was able to bring his van about to rescue them , and the two fleets parted again at night to reform their battle lines and repair damage . Poor weather on 30 May and 31 May prevented the fleets from making contact , but the following day , 1 June , Howe was able to bring about a decisive action , later known as the Glorious First of June . The British approached in line abreast , with Bellerophon at the end of the line . As they approached , the ships were heavily cannonaded by the French . Pasley was hit in the leg by a cannonball as he stood on the quarterdeck , with Midshipman Matthew Flinders reporting that " our brave admiral lost his leg by an 18 @-@ pounder shot which came in through the <unk> of the quarter @-@ deck – it was in the heat of the action . " When two seamen expressed their sorrow , Pasley replied " Thank you , but never mind my leg : take care of my flag . " He was taken below where the shattered leg was amputated . Captain Hope kept the ship in the engagement , pounding the 74 @-@ gun Éole until the French ship was forced out of the line . Bellerophon had by then lost all three topmasts , and her mainsail and lower shrouds had been cut to pieces . Hope then signalled the frigate HMS Latona to tow the Bellerophon clear of the action . Despite being under heavy fire during the battle , Bellerophon 's casualties were comparatively light , amounting to four men killed and between twenty @-@ seven and thirty wounded . 
 Bellerophon returned with the fleet to England after the battle , where the wounded Pasley left the ship . Bellerophon was taken into Portsmouth Dockyard for repairs , and then resumed her patrols in the Western Approaches with the Channel Fleet . Captain Hope was superseded in late November , and on 1 December 1794 Bellerophon received a new commander , Captain James Cranstoun , 8th Lord Cranstoun . 
 = = = Cornwallis 's Retreat = = = 
 Bellerophon returned to sea in May 1795 after three months anchored in the Solent . She had been at Spithead on 1 May , when the 98 @-@ gun HMS Boyne caught fire and blew up , with Bellerophon rescuing twelve men . Still with the Channel Fleet , she joined a squadron commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Sir William Cornwallis which was patrolling off Ushant . The squadron had arrived on station on 7 June , and the following day captured a convoy of eight French merchants off Belle Île . The squadron remained in the area until 16 June , when a lookout on Bellerophon spotted a large fleet to the east @-@ south @-@ east . This was the Brest fleet , consisting of thirteen ships of the line , two frigates , two brigs and a cutter , under Admiral Villaret de Joyeuse . Heavily outnumbered , Cornwallis ordered a retreat , but the Bellerophon and HMS Brunswick sailed unusually slowly and he found himself being steadily overhauled by the French . Keeping his ships together , Cornwallis ordered Bellerophon to take up position at the head of his line , later explaining that " The Bellerophon I was glad to keep in some measure as a reserve , having reason at first to suppose there would be full occasion for the utmost exertions of us all ... I considered that ship a treasure in store , having heard of her former accomplishments , and observing the spirit manifested by all on board when she passed me , joined to the zeal and activity shewed by Lord Cranstoun during the whole <unk> . " 
 After a full day of pursuit , the leading French ships made an attempt to cut off HMS Mars , trailing in the British rear . Cornwallis dropped back to support Mars , while Captain Robert Stopford of HMS Phaeton began making signals implying a British fleet was in sight . When French lookouts spotted distant topsails , Villaret de Joyeuse decided that Cornwallis 's actions meant that a British fleet was approaching to support him , and called off the pursuit . There was no British fleet in the vicinity ; the topsails were those of a convoy of British merchantmen . 
 = = = Irish waters = = = 
 Bellerophon returned to England in June , before departing to patrol the Western Approaches until September . She entered Portsmouth Dockyard again in October and underwent a refit costing £ 8 @,@ 103 . She resumed patrol and blockade duty in the Western Approaches in January 1796 , at first under Cranstoun , but from April effectively under the acting @-@ captaincy of Lieutenant John Loring . Cranstoun 's replacement , Captain Henry D 'Esterre Darby , arrived to take command in September . Blockade duty continued until early January 1797 , when news reached the fleet that a French expedition had appeared off Ireland . Caught off guard , the Admiralty ordered Bellerophon and a number of other ships to patrol off Bantry Bay . By then the French expedition had been dispersed by bad weather , and after three weeks on patrol , Bellerophon put into Cork where she rendezvoused with the Irish squadron under Admiral Robert Kingsmill . Shortly after her return to Spithead in early March , Bellerophon was given new orders by the Admiralty . She sailed on 17 March , bound for Cadiz to join Sir John Jervis 's Mediterranean Fleet blockading the port . 
 = = = Mediterranean duties = = = 
 Bellerophon rendezvoused with Jervis 's fleet in the Bay of Cadiz on 30 May 1797 . Three days later she was visited for the only time by Horatio Nelson , then a rear @-@ admiral and in command of the inshore squadron of the blockading fleet . Bellerophon was with the fleet in the Bay of Cadiz until October , when Jervis took it to sea to patrol between Cape Trafalgar and Cape St. Vincent . These duties lasted until late May 1798 , when Bellerophon was assigned to a detached squadron under Captain Thomas Troubridge and ordered to rendezvous with and reinforce Nelson 's squadron . Nelson was in the Mediterranean hunting for a large French fleet which had sailed from Toulon carrying troops . 
 The French had embarked on a complex land and naval campaign in the Mediterranean , with the ultimate aim of launching an invasion and occupation of Egypt . The British were aware that the French had amassed a large army , led by General Napoleon Bonaparte , but their destination was unknown . <unk> with Troubridge 's squadron on 7 June , Nelson now had a sufficient force to engage the French , and began to comb the Mediterranean . The search lasted nearly two months , with the British force tracking westwards , and then back east , sometimes missing the French force by days . The French force , after invading and capturing Malta , arrived off Alexandria on 1 July and began landing troops . It was not until 25 July that news reached Nelson , by then at anchor off Sicily , that the French fleet had appeared off Egypt . He took his fleet to sea , and arrived off Alexandria on 1 August , but found the harbour empty . Heading east , he discovered the French fleet , consisting of thirteen ships of the line , four frigates and a number of gunboats , at anchor in Abu Qir Bay . 
 = = = Battle of the Nile = = = 
 It was late on 1 August when the British fleet appeared in the bay , and the French were at anchor in a strong defensive position . The French commander , Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys d 'Aigalliers , did not expect a night attack , but Nelson ordered his ships to form up and attack the head of the French van , taking advantage of a favourable wind which allowed his ships to drift down the line , while preventing the French rear from reinforcing the van and centre . Bellerophon was the eighth ship in the British line , and as the battle began , Darby turned her towards the French centre , eventually coming to anchor at 7 pm . Possibly due to some error on the part of the crew or because the anchor had dragged , Bellerophon came to rest alongside the French flagship , the 120 @-@ gun Orient . 
 Bellerophon now found herself in a desperate position . The much more powerful three @-@ decked Orient fired several broadsides into the Bellerophon , smashing her boats , dismounting guns and cutting rigging . French marines on the higher decks poured volleys of musket fire onto Bellerophon 's exposed upper decks . Between 60 and 70 of her crew were killed or wounded in the first stages of the engagement , including Darby , who was rendered unconscious by a head wound . Command then devolved to the first lieutenant , Lieutenant Daniel . Daniel and the second lieutenant , Lieutenant Lander , were both wounded , but were able to direct the fighting until a shot took away Daniel 's left leg . As he was carried below he was hit by grapeshot and killed outright . The fourth lieutenant , John <unk> , was wounded and was taken below to the surgeon , while the fifth lieutenant , George Joliffe , was killed on the deck . After an hour fighting Orient alone , Bellerophon 's mizzenmast collapsed , followed shortly afterwards by the mainmast . Lieutenant Lander was among those killed in the fall of the mainmast , and command devolved to the third lieutenant , the uninjured Lieutenant Robert Cathcart . Several fires had broken out on both Bellerophon and Orient . According to the Bellerophon 's logbook , at 9pm , when a further fire broke out on the Orient , Cathcart was down below on duty , and the 13 year old Midshipman John Hindmarsh was briefly the senior officer on deck . He ordered the anchor cable cut and the spritsail was hoisted , but put too great a strain on the foremast , which collapsed . Now totally dismasted , Bellerophon began to drift away from the action , her crew fighting fires . As she moved out of the line she received some long range shots from the French Tonnant . 
 As Bellerophon slowly drifted away , she was sighted by the 74 @-@ gun HMS Swiftsure , approaching the centre . It was by now about 9 pm ; in the darkness Swiftsure 's captain , Benjamin Hallowell , was unable to identify the dismasted ship and presumed that she was a damaged French ship attempting to escape . He debated firing into her , but decided to hold fire and press on to the French centre , where he eventually came to anchor astern of Orient , close to Bellerophon 's original position . Darby had by this time recovered sufficiently to resume command , and at his order the battered Bellerophon came to anchor at the east end of the bay , and her crew began making repairs . The battle raged throughout the night , and eventually ended in a decisive victory for the British . The next five days were spent repairing the ship and burying the dead . 49 men were killed and 148 wounded on Bellerophon . Eight more died of their wounds in the following week . 
 = = = Britain and West Indies service = = = 
 After carrying out temporary repairs in Abu Qir Bay , Bellerophon hoisted jury masts and , towing the captured Spartiate with HMS Majestic , sailed to Gibraltar for a refit . When this was completed she returned to Britain , arriving at Spithead on 2 April 1800 , where she paid off and entered the dockyard for a more substantial refit in September . These works amounted to £ 32 @,@ 608 and lasted until August 1801 . She recommissioned on 25 June 1801 under the command of Captain Lord <unk> and sailed in August to rejoin the Channel Fleet , which was blockading Brest . Lord <unk> was superseded by Captain John Loring on 25 November , and Bellerophon continued on the blockade until receiving new orders in early March 1802 . 
 Bellerophon was among five ships ordered to join Admiral John Duckworth 's squadron in the West Indies , and having stored , she sailed from Torbay on 2 March 1802 . By the time of her arrival on 27 March , the Treaty of Amiens had been signed , and Britain and France were at peace . For the next eighteen months Bellerophon took part in cruises in the Jamaica Passage and escorted merchant convoys between Jamaica and Halifax . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 = = = West Indies and return to Britain = = = 
 Bellerophon was in the West Indies when the Napoleonic Wars broke out in May 1803 . Her captain , John Loring , was appointed commodore of the British squadron , which quickly went on the offensive against French shipping in the Blockade of Saint @-@ Domingue . In mid @-@ 1803 , the squadron under Captain Henry William Bayntun , consisting of HMS Bellerophon , Cumberland , Hercule , Elephant , and Vanguard captured the French privateers Poisson Volant and Superieure . The Royal Navy took both into service . The corvette <unk> and a brig were captured in late June , after which the British patrolled off Cap @-@ François . On 24 July the squadron , made up of Bellerophon and the 74 @-@ gun ships HMS Elephant , HMS Theseus and HMS Vanguard , came across two French 74 @-@ gun ships , Duquesne and Duguay @-@ Trouin , and the frigate Guerrière , attempting to escape from Cap @-@ François . The squadron gave chase , and on 25 July overhauled and captured Duquesne after a few shots were fired , while Duguay @-@ Trouin and Guerrière managed to evade their pursuers and escape to France . One man was killed aboard Bellerophon during the pursuit . She remained blockading Cap @-@ François until November , when the French commander of the garrison there , General Rochambeau , approached Loring and requested to be allowed to evacuate his men , which were being besieged by a native Haitian force led by Jean @-@ Jacques Dessalines . To prevent Rochambeau escaping , Loring sent launches from Bellerophon and Elephant into the Caracol Passage where they cut out the French schooner <unk> on 22 – 23 November . The French formally surrendered on 30 November and were allowed to evacuate on three frigates , Surveillante , Clorinde , and Vertu , and a number of smaller ships , and were escorted to Jamaica by the squadron . 
 A particularly severe outbreak of malaria struck the ship in early February 1804 ; 212 members of Bellerophon 's crew fell ill . 17 died aboard the ship , while 100 had to be transferred to a shore @-@ based hospital , where a further 40 died . She was ordered back to Britain in June , escorting a large convoy , and arrived in the Downs on 11 August . She briefly paid off and was taken into Portsmouth Dockyard for a refit , before rejoining the Channel Fleet , still off Brest , and under the command of Admiral Sir William Cornwallis . These duties lasted until early 1805 , with Loring being superseded by Captain John Cooke on 24 April . 
 = = = Approach to Trafalgar = = = 
 In May 1805 a large French fleet under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve escaped from Toulon . Bellerophon was dispatched with a squadron under Vice @-@ Admiral Cuthbert Collingwood to patrol the Straits of Gibraltar . Before they could arrive , Villeneuve had collected Spanish reinforcements under Admiral Federico Gravina , and had sailed into the Atlantic , pursued by Nelson 's Mediterranean Fleet . While Nelson chased Villeneuve around the West Indies without making contact , Collingwood mounted a blockade of Cadiz . His squadron was still there in mid @-@ August when Villeneuve appeared off the port with his fleet . Possessing too few ships to intercept the combined fleet , Collingwood allowed them to enter Cadiz , and then remounted the blockade . He was reinforced with a number of ships over the next few months , with Nelson taking over command on 28 September . 
 = = = Battle of Trafalgar = = = 
 Nelson mounted a loose blockade of the combined fleet , keeping most of his fleet out of sight , but with a line of frigates and larger ships stationed at intervals between himself and Cadiz . On 19 October the combined fleet was observed to be putting to sea , and the signal was passed down the line of ships . William Pryce Cumby , Bellerophon 's first lieutenant , was first in the main fleet to spot the signal , flying from the last ship in the communication link , HMS Mars . The British began to pursue the combined fleet as it made its way towards the Straits of Gibraltar , and came in sight with it on the morning of 21 October . The officer and sailors of Bellerophon prepared for battle , some of the gun crews chalking the words " Victory or Death " on their gun barrels . At 11 am Bellerophon 's signal midshipman , John Franklin , noted that Nelson had hoisted the signal " England expects that every man will do his duty " , and an hour and a half later Bellerophon entered the battle as the fifth ship in Collingwood 's lee column . She was astern of the 80 @-@ gun HMS Tonnant and ahead of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Achille , with the 74 @-@ gun HMS Colossus close by her port side . 
 At 12 : 30 pm , Bellerophon cut through the enemy line , slipping under the stern of the Spanish 74 @-@ gun Monarca and firing two broadsides into her . Moving past the Spanish ship , Bellerophon collided with the French 74 @-@ gun Aigle , hitting Aigle 's port quarter with her starboard bow , and entangling the two ships ' yards . Locked together , they exchanged broadsides at close range , with soldiers aboard Aigle sweeping Bellerophon 's decks with musket fire and grenades . Cumby noticed that the officers were being targeted , and that Cooke 's distinctive epaulettes marked him out . Cumby urged him to take them off , only for Cooke to reply " It is too late now to take them off . I see my situation but I will die like a man . " Bellerophon was now sustaining fire from Aigle and three other ships , the Spanish San Juan Nepomuceno and Bahama , and the French Swiftsure . Bellerophon 's main and mizzenmasts were shot away at 1 pm , and at 1 : 11 pm , Captain Cooke was hit and killed . An eyewitness recorded that 
 He had discharged his pistols very frequently at the enemy , who as often attempted to board , and he had killed a French officer on his own quarterdeck . He was in the act of reloading his pistols ... when he received two musket @-@ balls in the breast . He immediately fell , and upon the quartermaster going up and asking him if he should take him down below , his answer was " No , let me lie quietly one minute . Tell Lieutenant Cumby never to strike . " 
 With Cooke dead , Cumby assumed command . Bellerophon 's decks had largely been cleared by French fire , and boarding parties began to make their way onto the ship . Several French sailors climbed out onto Bellerophon 's spritsail yard , but a Bellerophon crewman released the brace holding the yard , causing them to fall into the sea . French sailors holding onto Bellerophon 's rails had their hands beaten until they were forced to let go . Bellerophon 's ensign had been shot away three times , so infuriating her yeoman of signals , Christopher Beaty , that he took the largest Union Jack he could find and climbed up into the mizzen rigging and hoisted it across the shrouds . The French riflemen on Aigle reportedly held their fire as he did this , in admiration of his bravery . The two ships were so close together that gun crews on their lower decks were fighting hand to hand at the gunports , while grenades lobbed through the ports caused heavy casualties . One grenade thrown into Bellerophon exploded in the gunner 's storeroom , blowing open the door but fortunately blowing closed the door of the magazine . The resulting fire was quickly extinguished , preventing a catastrophic explosion . 
 By 1 : 40 pm , having been under heavy fire for over an hour , Aigle 's crew lowered her gunports and slowly moved away . When the smoke cleared , Cumby noticed that the Spanish Monarca , which Bellerophon had first engaged , had struck her colours . Cumby sent an officer in a boat to take possession of her . Bellerophon 's crew now worked to make repairs and clear away wreckage . She briefly fired her guns again when the van of the combined fleet , led by Rear @-@ Admiral Pierre Dumanoir le Pelley , made a belated attempt to come to the assistance of the centre and rear . The attack was beaten off , and at 5 pm , Bellerophon 's guns ceased firing . At 5 : 30 pm Cumby sent a boat to take possession of the Bahama , which had also struck her colours . By the end of the battle Bellerophon had sustained casualties of 27 men killed and 123 wounded . Among the dead was her captain , the master , John Overton , and midshipman John Simmons . 
 = = = Storm and return = = = 
 For the next seven days , Bellerophon 's crew were occupied in repairing damage , rigging jury masts , and trying to ride out the storm that struck the area immediately after the battle . She put into Gibraltar on 28 October , and underwent emergency repairs to allow her to return to England as an escort for HMS Victory , together with HMS Belleisle . Both Belleisle and Bellerophon required urgent attention , but it was deemed appropriate that they should have the honour of accompanying Nelson 's body back to Britain aboard Victory . Cumby was superseded on 3 November , the day before beginning the voyage home , by Captain Richard Thomas . Thomas was himself superseded the next day however , by Captain Edward Rotheram , who had commanded Collingwood 's flagship , HMS Royal Sovereign , during the battle . 
 The three ships sailed together as far as Start Point , where on 2 December Victory separated to head to Portsmouth , while Bellerophon and Belleisle put into Cawsand Bay . Bellerophon was then taken into Plymouth Dockyard to be repaired , returning to active duty on 26 February , still under Rotheram 's command . Joining the Channel Fleet once more , Bellerophon resumed her usual duties , blockading and patrolling off Ushant and Brest . 
 = = = Baltic Sea = = = 
 Rotheram 's command lasted for two and half years , until he was superseded on 8 June 1808 by Captain Samuel Warren . Warren was ordered to take Bellerophon and join the fleet in the North Sea , blockading the Dutch ports . She formed part of Rear @-@ Admiral Alan Gardner 's squadron . By 1809 the strategic situation in the Baltic had deteriorated after Russia signed the Treaties of Tilsit and began to support France . Bellerophon was ordered to join the fleet stationed in the Baltic under Admiral Sir James Saumarez . Saumarez dispatched Bellerophon and HMS Minotaur north to the Gulf of Finland in June , and on 19 June the two ships came across three suspicious looking luggers , anchored off <unk> . The water was too shallow to allow them to approach the luggers , so a boat party was dispatched under Bellerophon 's Lieutenant Robert <unk> . The British boarded the luggers , but found themselves in a trap , when numerous Russian shore batteries and several gunboats opened fire on them . <unk> promptly ordered the luggers to be burnt , reboarded his men and landed them next to the nearest Russian shore battery . The battery , defended by 100 sailors , was stormed and carried , the British spiked the guns and destroyed the magazine , before returning to the ships with only five men wounded . 
 By July Bellerophon was part of a squadron commanded by Captain Thomas Byam Martin of HMS Implacable . They were off <unk> Point on 7 July when a flotilla of eight Russian gunboats was sighted . A boat party led by Lieutenant Hawkey of Implacable made an attempt to cut @-@ out the vessels that evening . Hawkey was killed in the attempt , but Bellerophon 's Lieutenant Charles Allen took over command , and six of the gunboats were captured , and a seventh destroyed , with 12 craft containing stores for the Russian Army also being taken . Bellerophon made several cruises during the rest of the year , visiting the Åland Islands and Karlskrona , before returning to Britain with a convoy in November 1809 . 
 = = = Blockade duty = = = 
 Bellerophon was briefly refitted in January 1810 , after which she was anchored at the Nore . She then resumed her blockade duties in the North Sea , serving under a succession of commanders . Warren was succeeded by Captain John Halsted on 23 August , and he by Captain Augustus Brine on 5 November . Brine 's command lasted until February 1813 , during which time Bellerophon remained with the North Sea blockading squadron . Captain Edward Hawker arrived to take over command on 11 February 1813 , and preparations were made for Bellerophon to become the flagship of Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Richard Goodwin Keats , the newly appointed Governor of Newfoundland . Bellerophon transported Keats to St. John 's , and then sailed south to Bermuda as a convoy escort . Returning to St John 's in the summer , she captured several American ships , including the 16 @-@ gun privateer Genie . She spent the rest of the year patrolling off Cape Race , before returning to Britain with a convoy in November . 1814 was spent on similar duties : Bellerophon escorted a convoy to St John 's between April and June , and then patrolled off Cape Race until December . She then moved to the Nore , and on 9 April 1815 Hawker was superseded by Captain Frederick Lewis Maitland . 
 In May Bellerophon sailed to Plymouth and joined a squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Henry Hotham , with orders to join the blockade of the French Atlantic ports . Hotham , flying his flag in HMS Superb , sent Maitland in Bellerophon to watch Rochefort , where two frigates , a brig and a corvette were lying in the harbour . Bellerophon spent over a month on this station , patrolling the approaches to the port and intercepting coastal vessels . Meanwhile , Napoleon had been defeated at the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June and on 2 July he arrived in Rochefort . Following the defeat of his armies , and with the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy imminent , Napoleon hoped to be allowed to sail to the United States . News reached Maitland in early July that Napoleon was in Rochefort , and two 20 @-@ gun ships , HMS Myrmidon and HMS Slaney , were sent to reinforce Bellerophon and patrol the other entrances to the port . 
 = = Napoleon 's surrender = = 
 Napoleon was being pressured to leave French soil by the interim French government in Paris . If he delayed , he risked becoming a prisoner of the Bourbons , Prussians or Austrians . The alternative was to surrender to the British and request political asylum . On 10 July Napoleon sent two emissaries , General Anne Jean Marie René Savary and the Comte de Las Cases , out to Bellerophon to meet Maitland and discuss the possibility of allowing Napoleon to travel to the United States . Maitland was under orders to prevent this , and instead offered to take Napoleon on board his ship and transport him and his retinue to Britain . Further discussions and negotiations took place over the next few days , but with his options running out , Napoleon had decided by 13 July to surrender to the British . On 14 July Maitland was given a letter informing him that Napoleon would come out to Bellerophon the following morning to surrender . 
 Napoleon embarked aboard the brig <unk> early in the morning of 15 July , and made his way out to the Bellerophon . As he approached , the 74 @-@ gun Superb , flying Vice @-@ Admiral Hotham 's flag , was sighted approaching . Concerned that the brig might not reach Bellerophon before the Superb arrived , and that consequently Hotham would take over and receive Napoleon himself , Maitland sent Bellerophon 's barge to collect the former Emperor and transfer him to the ship . At some point between 6 and 7 am , the barge pulled alongside Bellerophon and General Henri Gatien Bertrand climbed aboard , followed by Napoleon . The marines came to attention , and Napoleon walked to the quarterdeck , took his hat off to Maitland and in French announced " I am come to throw myself on the protection of your Prince and your laws . " Maitland bowed in response . With the former emperor in custody aboard a British warship , the Napoleonic Wars were finally over . To maritime historian David Cordingly , this moment was Bellerophon 's " crowning glory [ when ] six weeks after the battle of Waterloo , ... Napoleon , trapped in Rochefort , surrendered to the captain of the ship that had dogged his steps for more than twenty years . " 
 = = = Napoleon on Bellerophon = = = 
 Maitland showed Napoleon the great cabin , which he had placed at his disposal , and gave him a tour of his ship . At 10 : 30 am the Superb anchored in the roadstead and Maitland went to make his report . Hotham approved of his arrangements , and agreed that Napoleon should be transported to England aboard the Bellerophon . He came aboard himself to meet the former Emperor , and a grand dinner was held in the great cabin , attended by Napoleon 's retinue and British officers . The following day Napoleon visited Hotham on the Superb , and after his return , Maitland began the voyage to England in company with HMS Myrmidon . A routine was soon developed , with Napoleon usually taking a walk on deck around 5 pm , followed by a formal dinner at 6 pm . The sailors and officers removed their hats and kept their distance when Napoleon came on deck , only talking with him if he invited them to . The routine was broken slightly early in the morning of 23 July , when Napoleon appeared at dawn , as Bellerophon came in sight of Ushant , the last piece of French land visible for the remainder of the journey . He climbed up to the poop deck , attended by a midshipman , and spent the morning watching the coastline slowly recede from view . He was joined by members of his retinue , though he did not speak to any of them . 
 Bellerophon anchored off Brixham on the morning of 24 July , and there Maitland received orders from Admiral Lord Keith to " prevent every person whatever from coming on board the ship you command , except the officers and men who compose her crew . " Despite turning away the shore boats which approached the anchored warship bringing fresh bread and fruit to sell , word eventually leaked out that Napoleon was aboard the ship . The news created a sensation , and large numbers of boats filled with sightseers soon surrounded the ship . Occasionally Napoleon would come out to look at them , but despite entreaties from some people to be allowed on board , Maitland refused to allow any contact between ship and shore . On 26 July Bellerophon received orders to proceed to Plymouth harbour where Lord Keith was anchored aboard his flagship HMS Ville de Paris . Napoleon remained on board Bellerophon and the ship was kept isolated from the throngs of curious sightseers by two guardships , HMS Liffey and HMS Eurotas , anchored close at hand . 
 Bellerophon spent two weeks in Plymouth harbour while the authorities came to a decision about what to do with Napoleon . On 31 July they communicated their decision to the former emperor . Napoleon was to be exiled to the remote island of Saint Helena . He would be allowed to take three officers , his surgeon , and twelve servants . Napoleon , who had hoped to be allowed to settle quietly in Britain , was bitterly disappointed by the news . Bellerophon was not to take him into exile . The Admiralty was concerned that the ageing ship was unsuitable for the long voyage to the South Atlantic , and the 74 @-@ gun HMS Northumberland was selected for the task . On 4 August , Lord Keith ordered Bellerophon to go to sea and await the arrival of HMS Northumberland . On 7 August Napoleon thanked Maitland and his crew for their kindness and hospitality , and left the Bellerophon where he had spent over three weeks without ever landing in England . He boarded Northumberland , which then sailed for Saint Helena . 
 Captain Maitland 's account of the time Napoleon spent on board his ship was published in 1826 . 
 = = Prison hulk and disposal = = 
 Having discharged Napoleon , Bellerophon sailed to Sheerness , and anchored there on 2 September . There she was paid off for the last time , and stripped of her guns and masts . With no further need for many ships following the end of the Napoleonic Wars , Bellerophon joined a number of ships laid up in this manner . A report on 16 October 1815 advised moving a number of convicts previously housed aboard the former HMS Portland into more suitable accommodation . The report suggested that " The class of ship , which I take the liberty of observing as most suitable for this service , would be a seventy @-@ four , of about the same dimensions as the Bellerophon in the river Medway , being of easy draft of water and lofty between decks . " The report was approved and the suggestion acted upon . Bellerophon was taken into Sheerness Dockyard in December 1815 and spent nine months fitting out as a prison ship . 
 The work was completed at a cost of £ 12 @,@ 081 and the prisoners were transferred in January 1817 . Bellerophon generally held around 435 prisoners during her time in this role , although in 1823 changes in legislation resulted in the adult prisoners being transferred out of Bellerophon and the ship instead being used to house boy prisoners , with 320 arriving in early 1824 . In 1824 the decision was taken to rename HMS Waterloo , an 80 @-@ gun ship launched in 1818 , HMS Bellerophon . To free the name , the former HMS Bellerophon was renamed Captivity on 5 October 1824 . She continued as a prison ship for boys until early 1826 , when it was decided that the arrangement of the internal spaces made her unsuitable for workshops . The boys were transferred to another hulk , the former HMS Euryalus , and it was decided to move Captivity to Plymouth . The ship was taken into Sheerness Dockyard in April 1826 , and was fitted out for the journey to Plymouth . She arrived there in June and spent the last eight years of her working existence as a convict hulk in Plymouth . By 1834 the rate of penal transportation had been drastically increased to clear out the old hulks . When the last convicts had left Captivity , she was handed back to the Navy Department , who put her up for sale . 
 The Commissioners for executing the office of Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland gave notice that they would offer several vessels for sale on 21 January 1836 , including Captivity , of 1613 tons , then lying at Plymouth . She sold on that day for £ 4 @,@ 030 . Advertisements in the local Plymouth , Devonport and Stonehouse News in September 1836 announced the auctioning off of her timber . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Some of Bellerophon 's timber was bought at auction by George Bellamy , who had been Bellerophon 's surgeon at the Nile . Bellamy incorporated them into a cottage he was building at Plymstock . Captain Maitland bought part of her figurehead and some of her stern ornaments , later depositing them in the collections of what eventually became the Royal Naval Museum . The National Maritime Museum holds several relics relating to Bellerophon and the people connected with her , including Captain John Cooke 's dirk , sword and pistol , and a trophy presented to Admiral Pasley by Lloyd 's of London . Their collections also contain artefacts relating to her connection with Napoleon , including the couch from Maitland 's cabin , and the skull of a goat which supplied milk for Napoleon and his suite . 
 = = = Bellerophon in art , music and literature = = = 
 The ship and her crew feature or are mentioned in several historical novels set during the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , including several of the Aubrey – Maturin series of novels by Patrick O 'Brian . 
 Bellerophon appears in a number of artworks , including several depicting the ship 's role in Napoleon 's surrender . Sir William Quiller Orchardson painted Napoleon on the Bellerophon , depicting the former emperor standing on the poop deck , watching the French coastline recede as his retinue look on . Sir Charles Lock Eastlake painted a portrait of Napoleon in uniform , standing on Bellerophon 's deck , while John James Chalon produced Scene in Plymouth Sound in August 1815 , a seascape , with Bellerophon surrounded by crowds of people in small boats . Thomas Luny painted a similar scene , showing Bellerophon putting into Torbay to rendezvous with HMS Northumberland . Numerous popular prints and engravings were also produced , depicting moments from Napoleon 's arrival on Bellerophon to surrender , to his final transfer to Northumberland for his voyage into exile . The ship also appears in prints and paintings of the battles she had fought in . She is depicted on the Cadiz blockade with the rest of the inshore squadron in a work by Thomas Buttersworth , and is visible at the Glorious First of June in works by Nicholas Pocock , Cornwallis 's Retreat by William Anderson , and the Battles of the Nile and Trafalgar by Thomas Whitcombe . 
 Bellerophon is mentioned in several verses in a song commemorating Cornwallis 's Retreat in 1795 , which celebrate both Cornwallis ( referred to by sailors ' popular nickname for him , " Billy Blue " ) , and Bellerophon 's fighting record at the Glorious First of June . The folk song " Boney was a Warrior " , about the life of Napoleon , includes a verse celebrating the ship 's links with his ultimate surrender . 
 Boney went a @-@ cruisin <unk> @-@ aye @-@ yah ! 
 Aboard the Billy <unk> <unk> ! 
 = Love American Style ( Dexter ) = 
 " Love American Style " is the fifth episode of the first season of the American television drama series Dexter , which first aired on October 29 , 2006 on Showtime in the United States . The episode was written by Melissa Rosenberg and was directed by Robert Lieberman . In the episode , Dexter Morgan ( Michael C. Hall ) hunts down Jorge Castillo ( José Zúñiga ) , a human trafficker and murderer . His sister , <unk> . Debra Morgan ( Jennifer Carpenter ) , attempts to extract information from a security guard whose limbs were amputated by the " Ice Truck Killer " . 
 The episode was the first to be written by Rosenberg ; it was her first for a cable show , and she finished writing the script five weeks early . Filming took place at numerous locations in and around Miami , Florida and Los Angeles , California . The scenes filmed in Florida were shot in July 2006 and those in California were shot later . " Love American Style " received generally positive reviews from critics and was watched by 6 @.@ 7 million people when it was broadcast by CBS eighteen months after its Showtime premiere . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dexter is called to a crime scene at the abandoned hospital where , last night , the Ice Truck Killer left security guard Tony Tucci ( Brad William Henke ) strapped to a table for Dexter to kill . Instead , Dexter had reported the crime scene and Tucci had been hospitalized after the Killer had amputated his hand and leg . Debra and Sgt. James Doakes ( Erik King ) question Tucci when he wakes up in hospital , but Doakes is unimpressed with Debra 's ways of extracting information from Tucci . He disapproves of her suggestion to blindfold Tucci to help him to remember his encounter with the Killer , but after she confronts him about his attitude toward her , he agrees to blindfold Tucci , who remembers that the Killer used throat lozenges . They return to the crime scene and find a lozenge wrapper , on which forensics expert Vince Masuka ( C.S. Lee ) finds a partial fingerprint . 
 Dexter 's girlfriend Rita Bennett ( Julie Benz ) comforts her upset co @-@ worker , Yelina ( Monique Curnen ) , and learns that Yelina 's fiancé , who was immigrating from Cuba illegally with the help of a coyote , is missing . Rita asks Dexter to look into the problem using his police connections , and he finds a list of subjects from a past police case . He investigates Jorge Castillo , a salvage yard owner , and after Yelina 's fiancé washes up dead on a beach , he discovers that Castillo is murdering the smuggled immigrants who cannot pay for their freedom . Dexter leads Castillo into a trailer in his salvage yard , but as he prepares to kill him , Castillo 's wife Valerie ( Valerie Dillman ) arrives . Dexter realizes that the couple are working together , and decides to kill both Jorge and Valerie in the trailer . After killing them , he dumps their bodies in the ocean and frees their Cuban prisoners , not noticing the person watching him from the trunk of a car in the yard . 
 In flashbacks , a teenage Dexter ( Devon Graye ) learns how to fake joy in a romantic date with a girl from his father Harry ( James Remar ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Love American Style " was written by Melissa Rosenberg and directed by Robert Lieberman . The episode was Rosenberg 's first for the series and her first on a show written for a premium network . Having had over 10 years ' experience in writing for free @-@ to @-@ air commercial networks — which typically have 22 – 26 episodes per season rather than 12 , with a much tighter schedule — she finished writing the script five weeks before it was due for preparation . She said that " There was time to think about storytelling . I never had that on any show ; it 's just wonderful . " 
 Filming took place in both Los Angeles and Miami . The scenes filmed in Miami were shot in July 2006 ; those in Los Angeles were shot later . Scenes at the beach where Yelina talks with Rita and where her fiancé 's body washes up were filmed at South Beach Park in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , north of Miami . A waterfront house on Hibiscus Island in Biscayne Bay , Florida stood in for the Castillos ' home . The abandoned hospital where Dexter and the police find Tucci was filmed at the former Linda Vista Community Hospital in East Los Angeles , and Dexter 's childhood home was filmed at a house in a residential neighborhood of Long Beach , California , where Rita 's house is also filmed . Scenes in the salvage yard were filmed at LA Japanese Auto Parts in Sun Valley , California . The Airstream trailer in which Dexter commits the double murder was brought into the salvage yard for filming externally , but was assembled on a studio sound stage for shooting scenes inside the trailer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Love American Style " attracted 6 @.@ 7 million viewers when broadcast on CBS in March 2008 , 18 months after its original broadcast on Showtime . 
 IGN 's Eric Goldman felt that the episode 's juggling of multiple storylines was " satisfying " , and that the scene in which Dexter prepares to kill Castillo was " terrific " . Though he praised Debra and Doakes ' storyline with Tucci , he wrote that " it was a bit disappointing to then see Deb be a bit too quickly vindicated at the end " . Paula Paige , writing for TV Guide , said that the episode " will go down in cable history as Dexter 's finest [ episode ] to date " . She was pleased with Debra 's character development and the " downright stylish " cinematography , but thought that Jorge and Valerie 's final , passionate words to each other were " too much for me " . Ray Ellis of Blogcritics believed that the episode " takes the series into a more three @-@ dimensional direction " . He described the episode 's subplots and themes as what " make Dexter compelling " , and wrote that Debra 's character reached a more " empathic level " in the episode . TV Squad critic Keith McDuffee praised the increasing complexity of Dexter 's relationship with his father through flashbacks , and thought that Dexter 's voiceovers were " the best thing about this show " . Jeff Lindsay , author of Darkly Dreaming Dexter upon which the show is based , was initially upset with the episode 's plot . In an interview , he said that " I was about to be really unhappy with [ the episode ] . But the twist at the end " , referring to the person watching Dexter from the car trunk , " That was wonderful . " 
 = Weeds ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Weeds " is the eleventh episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on January 24 , 1997 . The episode was written by Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Michael Pattinson . " Weeds " featured guest appearances by Ryan Cutrona , Josh Clark and Terry David Mulligan . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , investigates a series of kidnappings in a gated community , finding that the real danger in the neighborhood comes from within its own walls . 
 " Weeds " was Spotnitz 's writing début for the series , and saw the return of recurring guest star C. C. H. Pounder , whose appearance received some critical appreciation . The episode , which begins with a quote from the Book of Jeremiah , was met with a mixed reception , with reviews complimenting the interesting , but poorly executed plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the gated community of Vista Verde , teenager Josh Comstock is riding his motorcycle , unaware that he is being followed by an unseen man driving a van . He is later stopped by the driver and pacified with a cattle prod . The following morning , Comstock 's mother finds a corpse in his bed — but it is not that of her son . 
 Sheriff Paul Gerlach ( Ryan Cutrona ) seeks the aid of private investigative firm the Millennium Group , who dispatch offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and pathologist Cheryl Andrews ( C. C. H. Pounder ) to help the investigation . Gerlach reveals that the dead boy , Kirk Orlando , had gone missing previously , and feels that Comstock 's kidnapping is his fault , as he did not alert the wider community about Orlando 's disappearance . 
 Orlando 's father comes forward with a piece of evidence — his mailbox had been stuffed with shredded banknotes . That evening , Black and Gerlach visit a town meeting organised by Edward Petey ( Josh Clark ) , where another of the residents , Bob Birckenbuehl ( Terry David Mulligan ) , accuses Gerlach of knowing more than he is letting on . Gerlach tells the assembly that the killer is from the community . 
 Comstock 's parents return home after the meeting to find the number 331 daubed on their son 's bed in blood . The father , Tom Comstock ( Michael Tomlinson ) confides in Black that the number is that of the hotel room he had been using to carry on an extramarital affair , which Black persuades him to come clean about with his wife . 
 Birckenbuehl 's son Charlie is kidnapped from his bedroom , again subdued with a cattle prod . Andrews and Black discover that the boy 's goldfish had been poisoned with whiskey , which they believe to be another message like Comstock 's number . The town 's swimming instructor , Adam Burke ( Brian Taylor ) is interviewed , as he had contact with both missing boys through his coaching . Black discovers that Burke 's son had been killed in a hit @-@ and @-@ run accident ; Black also receives post containing a paint swatch with the number 528 on it , but he is unsure of its meaning .. 
 Tom Comstock comes home the next day to find his son returned , alive but shaken . Black deduces that the paint swatch matches paint used on the vehicle that killed Burke 's son ; he also realizes that the boys are being kidnapped to force their fathers to confess hidden sins — Comstock 's son was returned after he revealed his affair , while Orlando 's son was killed because he kept a crime , involving money , a secret . From there , Black sees that Charlie 's kidnapping means that Birckenbeuhl is the hit @-@ and @-@ run driver . 
 Black convinces Birckenbeuhl to confess publicly to the hit @-@ and @-@ run , in order to have his son returned . Birckenbeuhl does so , but continues to maintain his innocence in private . Charlie is not returned , however ; instead , a cassette is sent to Birckenbuehl by the killer , who explains that since Birckenbeuhl took a life , one must be taken from him in return . Black is able to deduce from the background noise on the tape that Charlie is being held near the local high school 's swimming pool . The boy is rescued , and killer — Edward Petey — is found and arrested . However , the elder Birckenbeuhl is found hanged in his bedroom , having committed suicide in his guilt . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Weeds " is the first of fives episodes of Millennium to be written by Frank Spotnitz , who would go on to write " Sacrament " later in the first season , as well as penning " TEOTWAWKI " , " Antipas " and " Seven and One " in the series ' third season . Spotnitz was a prolific writer for Millennium 's sister show The X @-@ Files , receiving his first writing credit for that series for the episode " End Game " . " Weeds " also marks director Michael Pattinson 's only work for the series . 
 The episode features the second of five appearances by C. C. H. Pounder as Millennium Group pathologist Cheryl Andrews . Pounder had first appeared in the role in the earlier episode " The Judge " , and would go on to make another three appearances across all three seasons . Terry David Mulligan , who played Bob Birckenbuehl , would go on to appear in the third season episode " Collateral Damage " , in an unrelated role ; while Ryan Cutrona , who portrayed the town 's sheriff Paul Gerlach , would later be cast in The X @-@ Files ' ninth season opening episode , " Nothing Important Happened Today " , which was written by Spotnitz and Millennium creator Chris Carter . 
 " Weeds " opens with a quotation from the Book of Jeremiah , one of the Latter Prophets of the Hebrew Bible . Biblical verses were also used at the beginning of other episodes in the series , including the Gospel of Luke in " Blood Relatives " ; the Book of Job in " Wide Open " and " Dead Letters " ; and the Book of Exodus in " Kingdom Come " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Weeds " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on January 24 , 1997 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 6 , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . 
 " Weeds " received mixed reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five , describing it as " a portrait of a community in fear " that " simmers with recrimination and vigilantism " . However , Shearman and Pearson felt that the individual characters lacked personality , as Spotnitz 's script " spends a lot of time introducing figures as potential suspects rather than giving a great deal of depth to any of them " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " Weeds " 3 out of 5 , noting that " something about [ the episode ] just isn 't right " . Gibron felt that it was " one of the weaker episodes in the series , but it also had some of the greatest potential " . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B. Handlen felt that the " black @-@ and @-@ white morality " of " Weeds " , and Millennium as a series , was a negative factor , adding " as always with Millennium , there 's the feeling that the only life worth living is one entirely free from sin , and I can 't say that I buy that " . However , Handlen praised C. C. H. Pounder 's guest role , finding that she " manages to put herself across quite well " despite the difficulty of standing out amidst the series ' sombre tone . 
 = Peregrine falcon = 
 The peregrine falcon ( Falco peregrinus ) , also known as the peregrine , and historically as the duck hawk in North America , is a widespread bird of prey in the family Falconidae . A large , crow @-@ sized falcon , it has a blue @-@ grey back , barred white underparts , and a black head . As is typical of bird @-@ eating raptors , peregrine falcons are sexually dimorphic , females being considerably larger than males . The peregrine is renowned for its speed , reaching over 322 km / h ( 200 mph ) during its characteristic hunting stoop ( high speed dive ) , making it the fastest member of the animal kingdom . According to a National Geographic TV programme , the highest measured speed of a peregrine falcon is 389 km / h ( 242 mph ) . 
 The peregrine 's breeding range includes land regions from the Arctic tundra to the tropics . It can be found nearly everywhere on Earth , except extreme polar regions , very high mountains , and most tropical rainforests ; the only major ice @-@ free landmass from which it is entirely absent is New Zealand . This makes it the world 's most widespread raptor and one of the most widely found bird species . In fact , the only land @-@ based bird species found over a larger geographic area is not always naturally occurring but one widely introduced by humans , the rock pigeon , which in turn now supports many peregrine populations as a prey species . Both the English and scientific names of this species mean " wandering falcon " , referring to the migratory habits of many northern populations . Experts recognize 17 to 19 subspecies which vary in appearance and range ; there is disagreement over whether the distinctive Barbary falcon is represented by two subspecies of Falco peregrinus , or is a separate species , F. pelegrinoides . The two species ' divergence is relatively recent , during the time of the last ice age , therefore the genetic differential between them ( and also the difference in their appearance ) is relatively small . It has been determined that they are only approximately 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 8 % genetically differentiated . 
 While its diet consists almost exclusively of medium @-@ sized birds , the peregrine will occasionally hunt small mammals , small reptiles , or even insects . Reaching sexual maturity at one year , it mates for life and nests in a scrape , normally on cliff edges or , in recent times , on tall human @-@ made structures . The peregrine falcon became an endangered species in many areas because of the widespread use of certain pesticides , especially DDT . Since the ban on DDT from the early 1970s , populations have recovered , supported by large @-@ scale protection of nesting places and releases to the wild . 
 The peregrine falcon is a well respected falconry bird due to its strong hunting ability , high trainability , versatility , and in recent years availability via captive breeding . It is effective on most game bird species from small to large . 
 = = Description = = 
 The peregrine falcon has a body length of 34 to 58 cm ( 13 – 23 in ) and a wingspan from 74 to 120 cm ( 29 – 47 in ) . The male and female have similar markings and plumage , but as in many birds of prey the peregrine falcon displays marked sexual dimorphism in size , with the female measuring up to 30 % larger than the male . Males weigh 330 to 1 @,@ 000 g ( 0 @.@ 73 – 2 @.@ 20 lb ) and the noticeably larger females weigh 700 to 1 @,@ 500 g ( 1 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 3 lb ) . In most subspecies , males weigh less than 700 g ( 1 @.@ 5 lb ) and females weigh more than 800 g ( 1 @.@ 8 lb ) , with cases of females weighing about 50 % more than their male breeding mates not uncommon . The standard linear measurements of peregrines are : the wing chord measures 26 @.@ 5 – 39 cm ( 10 @.@ 4 – 15 @.@ 4 in ) , the tail measures 13 – 19 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) and the tarsus measures 4 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 2 in ) . 
 The back and the long pointed wings of the adult are usually bluish black to slate grey with indistinct darker barring ( see " Subspecies " below ) ; the wingtips are black . The white to rusty underparts are barred with thin clean bands of dark brown or black . The tail , coloured like the back but with thin clean bars , is long , narrow , and rounded at the end with a black tip and a white band at the very end . The top of the head and a " moustache " along the cheeks are black , contrasting sharply with the pale sides of the neck and white throat . The cere is yellow , as are the feet , and the beak and claws are black . The upper beak is notched near the tip , an adaptation which enables falcons to kill prey by severing the spinal column at the neck . The immature bird is much browner with streaked , rather than barred , underparts , and has a pale bluish cere and orbital ring . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 Falco peregrinus was first described under its current binomial name by English ornithologist Marmaduke Tunstall in his 1771 work Ornithologia Britannica . The scientific name Falco peregrinus is a Medieval Latin phrase that was used by Albertus Magnus in 1225 . The specific name taken from the fact that juvenile birds were taken while journeying to their breeding location rather than from the nest , as falcon nests were difficult to get at . The Latin term for falcon , falco , is related to falx , the Latin word meaning sickle , in reference to the silhouette of the falcon 's long , pointed wings in flight . 
 The peregrine falcon belongs to a genus whose lineage includes the <unk> and the prairie falcon ( F. mexicanus ) . This lineage probably diverged from other falcons towards the end of the Late Miocene or in the Early Pliocene , about 5 – 8 million years ago ( mya ) . As the peregrine @-@ <unk> group includes both Old World and North American species , it is likely that the lineage originated in western Eurasia or Africa . Its relationship to other falcons is not clear , as the issue is complicated by widespread hybridization confounding mtDNA sequence analyses . For example , a genetic lineage of the saker falcon ( F. cherrug ) is known which originated from a male saker producing fertile young with a female peregrine ancestor , and the descendants further breeding with sakers . 
 Today , peregrines are regularly paired in captivity with other species such as the lanner falcon ( F. biarmicus ) to produce the " <unk> " , a somewhat popular bird in falconry as it combines the peregrine 's hunting skill with the lanner 's hardiness , or the gyrfalcon to produce large , strikingly coloured birds for the use of falconers . As can be seen , the peregrine is still genetically close to the <unk> , though their lineages diverged in the Late Pliocene ( maybe some 2 @.@ 5 – 2 mya in the <unk> ) . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Numerous subspecies of Falco peregrinus have been described , with 19 accepted by the 1994 Handbook of the Birds of the World , which considers the Barbary falcon of the Canary Islands and coastal north Africa to be two subspecies ( pelegrinoides and babylonicus ) of Falco peregrinus , rather than a distinct species , F. pelegrinoides . The following map shows the general ranges of these 19 subspecies : 
 Falco peregrinus anatum , described by Bonaparte in 1838 , is known as the American peregrine falcon , or " duck hawk " ; its scientific name means " duck peregrine falcon " . At one time , it was partly included in leucogenys . It is mainly found in the Rocky Mountains today . It was formerly common throughout North America between the tundra and northern Mexico , where current reintroduction efforts seek to restore the population . Most mature anatum , except those that breed in more northern areas , winter in their breeding range . Most vagrants that reach western Europe seem to belong to the more northern and strongly migratory tundrius , only considered distinct since 1968 . It is similar to peregrinus but is slightly smaller ; adults are somewhat paler and less patterned below , but juveniles are darker and more patterned below . Males weigh 500 to 700 g ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 lb ) , while females weigh 800 to 1 @,@ 100 g ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 lb ) . It has become extinct in eastern North America , and populations there are hybrids as a result of reintroductions of birds from elsewhere . 
 Falco peregrinus babylonicus , described by P.L. Sclater in 1861 , is found in eastern Iran along the Hindu Kush and Tian Shan to Mongolian Altai ranges . A few birds winter in northern and northwestern India , mainly in dry semi @-@ desert habitats . It is paler than pelegrinoides , and somewhat similar to a small , pale lanner falcon ( Falco biarmicus ) . Males weigh 330 to 400 grams ( 12 to 14 oz ) , while females weigh 513 to 765 grams ( 18 @.@ 1 to 27 @.@ 0 oz ) . 
 Falco peregrinus brookei , described by Sharpe in 1873 , is also known as the Mediterranean peregrine falcon or the Maltese falcon . It includes caucasicus and most specimens of the proposed race <unk> , though others may be pelegrinoides , Barbary falcons ( see also below ) , or perhaps the rare hybrids between these two which might occur around Algeria . They occur from the Iberian Peninsula around the Mediterranean , except in arid regions , to the Caucasus . They are non @-@ migratory . It is smaller than the nominate subspecies , and the underside usually has rusty hue . Males weigh around 445 g ( 0 @.@ 981 lb ) , while females weigh up to 920 g ( 2 @.@ 03 lb ) . 
 Falco peregrinus calidus , described by John Latham in 1790 , was formerly called leucogenys and includes <unk> . It breeds in the Arctic tundra of Eurasia , from Murmansk Oblast to roughly Yana and <unk> Rivers , Siberia . It is completely migratory , and travels south in winter as far as South Asia and sub @-@ Saharan Africa . It is often seen around wetland habitats . It is paler than peregrinus , especially on the crown . Males weigh 588 to 740 g ( 1 @.@ 296 – 1 @.@ 631 lb ) , while females weigh 925 to 1 @,@ 333 g ( 2 @.@ 039 – 2 @.@ 939 lb ) . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Sharpe in 1873 , is also known as the Austral peregrine falcon . It includes <unk> , the pallid falcon , a leucistic morph occurring in southernmost South America , which was long believed to be a distinct species . Its range includes South America from Ecuador through Bolivia , northern Argentina , and Chile to Tierra del Fuego and the Falkland Islands . It is non @-@ migratory . It is similar to nominate , but slightly smaller with a black ear region . The variation <unk> is medium grey above , has little barring below , and has a head pattern like the saker falcon , but the ear region is white . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Sharpe in 1894 , is found from Indonesia to Philippines and south to Papua New Guinea and the nearby Bismarck Archipelago . Its geographical separation from nesiotes requires confirmation . It is non @-@ migratory . It differs from the nominate subspecies in the very dark , dense barring on its underside and its black ear coverts . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Momiyama in 1927 , is found on the Izu and Ogasawara Islands south of Honshū , Japan . It is non @-@ migratory . It is very rare , and may only remain on a single island . It is a dark form , resembling pealei in colour , but darker , especially on tail . 
 Falco peregrinus japonensis , described by Gmelin in 1788 , includes <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , and seems to refer to intergrades with calidus . It is found from northeast Siberia to Kamchatka ( though it is possibly replaced by pealei on the coast there ) and Japan . Northern populations are migratory , while those of Japan are resident . It is similar to peregrinus , but the young are even darker than those of anatum . 
 Falco peregrinus macropus , described by Swainson in 1837 , is the Australian peregrine falcon . It is found in Australia in all regions except the southwest . It is non @-@ migratory . It is similar to brookei in appearance , but is slightly smaller and the ear region is entirely black . The feet are proportionally large . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Ripley and Watson in 1963 , is unusual in having some sexual dichromatism . If the Barbary falcon ( see below ) is considered a distinct species , it is sometimes placed therein . It is found in the Cape Verde Islands , and is non @-@ migratory ; it is endangered with only six to eight pairs surviving . Males have a rufous wash on crown , nape , ears , and back ; underside conspicuously washed pinkish @-@ brown . Females are tinged rich brown overall , especially on the crown and nape . 
 Falco peregrinus minor , first described by Bonaparte in 1850 . It was formerly often <unk> . It is sparsely and patchily distributed throughout much of sub @-@ Saharan Africa and widespread in Southern Africa . It apparently reaches north along the Atlantic coast as far as Morocco . It is non @-@ migratory and dark coloured . This is the smallest subspecies of peregrine , with smaller males weighing as little as approximately 300 g ( 11 oz ) . 
 Falco peregrinus nesiotes , described by Mayr in 1941 , is found in Fiji and probably also Vanuatu and New Caledonia . It is non @-@ migratory . 
 Falco peregrinus pealei , described by Ridgway in 1873 , is also known as Peale 's falcon , and includes <unk> . It is found in the Pacific Northwest of North America , northwards from the Puget Sound along the British Columbia coast ( including the Queen Charlotte Islands ) , along the Gulf of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands to the far eastern Bering Sea coast of Russia , and may also occur on the Kuril Islands and the coasts of Kamchatka . It is non @-@ migratory . It is the largest subspecies , and it looks like an oversized and darker tundrius or like a strongly barred and large anatum . The bill is very wide . Juveniles occasionally have pale crowns . Males weigh 700 to 1 @,@ 000 g ( 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , while females weigh 1 @,@ 000 to 1 @,@ 500 g ( 2 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 3 lb ) . 
 Falco peregrinus pelegrinoides , first described by Temminck in 1829 , is found in the Canary Islands through north Africa and the Near East to Mesopotamia . It is most similar to brookei , but is markedly paler above , with a rusty neck , and is a light buff with reduced barring below . It is smaller than the nominate subspecies ; females weigh around 610 g ( 1 @.@ 34 lb ) . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Sundevall in 1837 , is known as the Indian peregrine falcon , Shaheen falcon , Indian shaheen or shaheen falcon . It was formerly sometimes known as Falco atriceps or Falco shaheen . Its range includes South Asia from Pakistan across India and Bangladesh to Sri Lanka and Southeastern China . In India , the shaheen is reported from all states except Uttar Pradesh , mainly from rocky and hilly regions . The Shaheen is also reported from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal . It has a clutch size of 3 to 4 eggs , with the chicks fledging time of 48 days with an average nesting success of 1 @.@ 32 chicks per nest . In India , apart from nesting on cliffs , it has also been recorded as nesting on man @-@ made structures such as buildings and cellphone transmission towers . A population estimate of 40 breeding pairs in Sri Lanka was made in 1996 . It is non @-@ migratory , and is small and dark , with rufous underparts . In Sri Lanka this species is found to favour the higher hills while the migrant calidus is more often seen along the coast . 
 Falco peregrinus peregrinus , the nominate ( first @-@ named ) subspecies , described by Tunstall in 1771 , breeds over much of temperate Eurasia between the tundra in the north and the Pyrenees , Mediterranean region and <unk> belt in the south . It is mainly non @-@ migratory in Europe , but migratory in Scandinavia and Asia . Males weigh 580 to 750 g ( 1 @.@ 28 – 1 @.@ 65 lb ) , while females weigh 925 to 1 @,@ 300 g ( 2 @.@ 039 – 2 @.@ 866 lb ) . It includes brevirostris , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Hartlaub in 1861 , is found in Madagascar and Comoros . It is non @-@ migratory . 
 Falco peregrinus <unk> , described by Mathews in 1912 , is the Southwest Australian peregrine falcon . It is found in southwest Australia and is non @-@ migratory . 
 Falco peregrinus tundrius , described by C.M. White in 1968 , was at one time included in leucogenys It is found in the Arctic tundra of North America to Greenland , and migrates to wintering grounds in Central and South America . Most vagrants that reach western Europe belong to this subspecies , which was previously united with anatum . It is the New World equivalent to calidus . It is smaller than anatum . It is also paler than anatum ; most have a conspicuous white forehead and white in ear region , but the crown and " moustache " are very dark , unlike in calidus . Juveniles are browner , and less grey , than in calidus , and paler , sometimes almost sandy , than in anatum . Males weigh 500 to 700 g ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 lb ) , while females weigh 800 to 1 @,@ 100 g ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 lb ) . 
 = = = Barbary falcon = = = 
 Two of the subspecies listed above ( Falco peregrinus pelegrinoides and F. p. babylonicus ) are often instead treated together as a distinct species , Falco pelegrinoides ( the Barbary falcon ) , although they were included within F. peregrinus in the 1994 Handbook of the Birds of the World . These birds inhabit arid regions from the Canary Islands along the rim of the Sahara through the Middle East to Central Asia and Mongolia . 
 Barbary falcons have a red neck patch but otherwise differ in appearance from the peregrine proper merely according to Gloger 's Rule , relating pigmentation to environmental humidity . The Barbary falcon has a peculiar way of flying , beating only the outer part of its wings like fulmars sometimes do ; this also occurs in the peregrine , but less often and far less pronounced . The Barbary falcon 's shoulder and pelvis bones are stout by comparison with the peregrine , and its feet are smaller . Barbary falcons breed at different times of year than neighboring peregrine falcon subspecies , but they are capable of interbreeding . There is a 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 7 % genetic distance in the peregrine @-@ Barbary falcon ( " <unk> " ) complex . 
 Another subspecies of Falco peregrinus , <unk> , has also sometimes been treated instead within a separately recognized F. pelegrinoides . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The peregrine falcon lives mostly along mountain ranges , river valleys , coastlines , and increasingly in cities . In mild @-@ winter regions , it is usually a permanent resident , and some individuals , especially adult males , will remain on the breeding territory . Only populations that breed in Arctic climates typically migrate great distances during the northern winter . 
 The peregrine falcon reaches faster speeds than any other animal on the planet when performing the stoop , which involves soaring to a great height and then diving steeply at speeds of over 320 km / h ( 200 mph ) , hitting one wing of its prey so as not to harm itself on impact . The air pressure from such a dive could possibly damage a bird 's lungs , but small bony tubercles on a falcon 's nostrils guide the powerful airflow away from the nostrils , enabling the bird to breathe more easily while diving by reducing the change in air pressure . To protect their eyes , the falcons use their nictitating membranes ( third eyelids ) to spread tears and clear debris from their eyes while maintaining vision . A study testing the flight physics of an " ideal falcon " found a theoretical speed limit at 400 km / h ( 250 mph ) for low altitude flight and 625 km / h ( 388 mph ) for high altitude flight . In 2005 , Ken Franklin recorded a falcon stooping at a top speed of 389 km / h ( 242 mph ) . 
 The life span of peregrine falcons in the wild is up to 15 @.@ 5 years . Mortality in the first year is 59 – 70 % , declining to 25 – 32 % annually in adults . Apart from such anthropogenic threats as collision with human @-@ made objects , the peregrine may be killed by larger hawks and owls . 
 The peregrine falcon is host to a range of parasites and pathogens . It is a vector for <unk> , Newcastle disease virus , <unk> herpesvirus 1 ( and possibly other Herpesviridae ) , and some <unk> and bacterial infections . Endoparasites include Plasmodium <unk> ( usually not causing malaria in the peregrine falcon ) , <unk> trematodes , <unk> <unk> ( nematode ) , and tapeworms . Known peregrine falcon ectoparasites are chewing lice , Ceratophyllus <unk> ( a flea ) , and <unk> flies ( <unk> nigra , <unk> erythrocephala ) . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The peregrine falcon feeds almost exclusively on medium @-@ sized birds such as pigeons and doves , waterfowl , songbirds , and waders . Worldwide , it is estimated that between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 bird species ( up to roughly a fifth of the world 's bird species ) are predated somewhere by these falcons . In North America , prey has varied in size from 3 g ( 0 @.@ 11 oz ) hummingbirds ( <unk> and <unk> ssp . ) to a 3 @.@ 1 kg ( 6 @.@ 8 lb ) sandhill crane ( killed in Alaska by a peregrine in a stoop ) , although most prey taken by peregrines weigh from 20 g ( 0 @.@ 71 oz ) ( i.e. small passerines ) to 1 @,@ 100 g ( 2 @.@ 4 lb ) ( i.e. ducks and gulls ) . The peregrine falcon takes the most diverse range of bird species of any raptor in North America , with more than 300 species having fallen victim to the falcon , including nearly 100 shorebirds . Smaller hawks and owls are regularly predated , mainly smaller falcons such as the American kestrel , merlin and sharp @-@ shinned hawks . In urban areas , the main component of the peregrine 's diet is the rock or feral pigeon , which comprise 80 % or more of the dietary intake for peregrines in some cities . Other common city birds are also taken regularly , including mourning doves , common wood pigeons , common swifts , northern flickers , common starlings , American robins , common blackbirds , and corvids ( such as magpies or carrion , house , and American crows ) . Other than bats taken at night , the peregrine rarely hunts mammals , but will on occasion take small species such as rats , voles , hares , shrews , mice and squirrels . Coastal populations of the large subspecies pealei feed almost exclusively on seabirds . In the Brazilian mangrove swamp of <unk> , a wintering falcon of the subspecies tundrius was observed while successfully hunting a juvenile scarlet ibis . Insects and reptiles make up a small proportion of the diet , which varies greatly depending on what prey is available . 
 The peregrine falcon hunts most often at dawn and dusk , when prey are most active , but also nocturnally in cities , particularly during migration periods when hunting at night may become prevalent . Nocturnal migrants taken by peregrines include species as diverse as yellow @-@ billed cuckoo , black @-@ necked grebe , <unk> rail , and common quail . The peregrine requires open space in order to hunt , and therefore often hunts over open water , marshes , valleys , fields , and tundra , searching for prey either from a high perch or from the air . Large congregations of migrants , especially species that gather in the open like shorebirds , can be quite attractive to hunting peregrines . Once prey is spotted , it begins its stoop , folding back the tail and wings , with feet tucked . Prey is typically struck and captured in mid @-@ air ; the peregrine falcon strikes its prey with a clenched foot , stunning or killing it with the impact , then turns to catch it in mid @-@ air . If its prey is too heavy to carry , a peregrine will drop it to the ground and eat it there . If they miss the initial strike , peregrines will chase their prey in a twisting flight . Although previously thought rare , several cases of peregrines contour @-@ hunting , i.e. using natural contours to surprise and ambush prey on the ground , have been reported and even rare cases of prey being pursued on foot . In addition , peregrines have been documented preying on chicks in nests , from birds such as kittiwakes . Prey is plucked before consumption . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The peregrine falcon is sexually mature at one to three years of age , but in healthy populations they breed after two to three years of age . A pair mates for life and returns to the same nesting spot annually . The courtship flight includes a mix of aerial acrobatics , precise spirals , and steep dives . The male passes prey it has caught to the female in mid @-@ air . To make this possible , the female actually flies upside @-@ down to receive the food from the male 's talons . 
 During the breeding season , the peregrine falcon is territorial ; nesting pairs are usually more than 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) apart , and often much farther , even in areas with large numbers of pairs . The distance between nests ensures sufficient food supply for pairs and their chicks . Within a breeding territory , a pair may have several nesting ledges ; the number used by a pair can vary from one or two up to seven in a 16 @-@ year period . 
 The peregrine falcon nests in a scrape , normally on cliff edges . The female chooses a nest site , where she scrapes a shallow hollow in the loose soil , sand , gravel , or dead vegetation in which to lay eggs . No nest materials are added . Cliff nests are generally located under an overhang , on ledges with vegetation . South @-@ facing sites are favoured . In some regions , as in parts of Australia and on the west coast of northern North America , large tree hollows are used for nesting . Before the demise of most European peregrines , a large population of peregrines in central and western Europe used the disused nests of other large birds . In remote , undisturbed areas such as the Arctic , steep slopes and even low rocks and mounds may be used as nest sites . In many parts of its range , peregrines now also nest regularly on tall buildings or bridges ; these human @-@ made structures used for breeding closely resemble the natural cliff ledges that the peregrine prefers for its nesting locations . 
 The pair defends the chosen nest site against other peregrines , and often against ravens , herons , and gulls , and if ground @-@ nesting , also such mammals as foxes , wolverines , felids , bears , wolves , and mountain lions . Both nests and ( less frequently ) adults are predated by larger @-@ bodied raptorial birds like eagles , large owls , or gyrfalcons . The most serious predators of peregrine nests in North America and Europe are the great horned owl and the Eurasian eagle owl . When reintroductions have been attempted for peregrines , the most serious impediments were these two owls routinely picking off nestlings , fledglings and adults by night . Peregrines defending their nests have managed to kill raptors as large as golden eagles and bald eagles ( both of which they normally avoid as potential predators ) that have come too close to the nest by ambushing them in a full stoop . In one instance , when a snowy owl killed a newly fledged peregrine , the larger owl was in turn killed by a stooping peregrine parent . 
 The date of egg @-@ laying varies according to locality , but is generally from February to March in the Northern Hemisphere , and from July to August in the Southern Hemisphere , although the Australian subspecies macropus may breed as late as November , and equatorial populations may nest anytime between June and December . If the eggs are lost early in the nesting season , the female usually lays another clutch , although this is extremely rare in the Arctic due to the short summer season . Generally three to four eggs , but sometimes as few as one or as many as five , are laid in the scrape . The eggs are white to buff with red or brown markings . They are incubated for 29 to 33 days , mainly by the female , with the male also helping with the incubation of the eggs during the day , but only the female incubating them at night . The average number of young found in nests is 2 @.@ 5 , and the average number that fledge is about 1 @.@ 5 , due to the occasional production of infertile eggs and various natural losses of nestlings . 
 After hatching , the chicks ( called " <unk> " ) are covered with creamy @-@ white down and have disproportionately large feet . The male ( called the " <unk> " ) and the female ( simply called the " falcon " ) both leave the nest to gather prey to feed the young . The hunting territory of the parents can extend a radius of 19 to 24 km ( 12 to 15 mi ) from the nest site . Chicks fledge 42 to 46 days after hatching , and remain dependent on their parents for up to two months . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = Use in falconry = = = 
 The peregrine falcon is a highly admired falconry bird , and has been used in falconry for more than 3 @,@ 000 years , beginning with nomads in central Asia . Its advantages in falconry include not only its athleticism and eagerness to hunt , but an equitable disposition that leads to it being one of the easier falcons to train . The peregrine falcon has the additional advantage of a natural flight style of circling above the falconer ( " waiting on " ) for game to be flushed , and then performing an effective and exciting high speed diving stoop to take the quarry . The speed and energy of the stoop allows the falcon to catch fast flying birds , and to deliver a knock out blow with a fist @-@ like clenched talon against game that may be much larger than itself . Additionally the versatility of the species , with agility allowing capture of smaller birds and a strength and attacking style allowing capture of game much larger than themselves , combined with the wide size range of the many peregrine subspecies , means there is a subspecies suitable to almost any size and type of game bird . This size range , evolved to fit various environments and prey species , is from the larger females of the largest subspecies to the smaller males of the smallest subspecies , approximately five to one ( approximately 1500 g to 300 g ) . The males of smaller and medium @-@ sized subspecies , and the females of the smaller subspecies , excel in the taking of swift and agile small game birds such as dove , quail , and smaller ducks . The females of the larger subspecies are capable of taking large and powerful game birds such as the largest of duck species , pheasant , and grouse . 
 Peregrine falcons handled by falconers are also occasionally used to scare away birds at airports to reduce the risk of bird @-@ plane strikes , improving air @-@ traffic safety . They were also used to intercept homing pigeons during World War II . 
 Peregrine falcons have been successfully bred in captivity , both for falconry and for release back into the wild . Until 2004 nearly all peregrines used for falconry in the US were captive @-@ bred from the progeny of falcons taken before the US Endangered Species Act was enacted and from those few infusions of wild genes available from Canada and special circumstances . Peregrine falcons were removed from the United States ' endangered species list in 1999 . The successful recovery program was aided by the effort and knowledge of falconers – in collaboration with The Peregrine Fund and state and federal agencies – through a technique called hacking . Finally , after years of close work with the US Fish and Wildlife Service , a limited take of wild peregrines was allowed in 2004 , the first wild peregrines taken specifically for falconry in over 30 years . 
 The development of captive breeding methods has led to peregrines being commercially available for falconry use , thus mostly eliminating the need to capture wild birds for support of falconry . The main reason for taking wild peregrines at this point is to maintain healthy genetic diversity in the breeding lines . Hybrids of peregrines and gyrfalcons are also available that can combine the best features of both species to create what many consider to be the ultimate falconry bird for the taking of larger game such as the sage @-@ grouse . These hybrids combine the greater size , strength , and horizontal speed of the gyrfalcon with the natural propensity to stoop and greater warm weather tolerance of the peregrine . 
 = = = Decline due to pesticides = = = 
 The peregrine falcon became an endangered species over much of its range because of the use of organochlorine pesticides , especially DDT , during the 1950s , ' 60s , and ' 70s . Pesticide biomagnification caused organochlorine to build up in the falcons ' fat tissues , reducing the amount of calcium in their eggshells . With thinner shells , fewer falcon eggs survived to hatching . In several parts of the world , such as the eastern United States and Belgium , this species became extirpated ( locally extinct ) as a result . An alternate point of view is that populations in the eastern North America had vanished due to hunting and egg collection . 
 = = = Recovery efforts = = = 
 Peregrine falcon recovery teams breed the species in captivity . The chicks are usually fed through a chute or with a hand puppet mimicking a peregrine 's head , so they cannot see to imprint on the human trainers . Then , when they are old enough , the rearing box is opened , allowing the bird to train its wings . As the fledgling gets stronger , feeding is reduced , forcing the bird to learn to hunt . This procedure is called hacking back to the wild . To release a captive @-@ bred falcon , the bird is placed in a special cage at the top of a tower or cliff ledge for some days or so , allowing it to acclimate itself to its future environment . 
 Worldwide recovery efforts have been remarkably successful . The widespread restriction of DDT use eventually allowed released birds to breed successfully . The peregrine falcon was removed from the U.S. Endangered Species list on August 25 , 1999 . 
 Some controversy has existed over the origins of captive breeding stock used by The Peregrine Fund in the recovery of peregrine falcons throughout the contiguous United States . Several peregrine subspecies were included in the breeding stock , including birds of Eurasian origin . Due to the extirpation of the eastern anatum ( Falco peregrinus anatum ) , the near extirpation of the anatum in the Midwest , and the limited gene pool within North American breeding stock , the inclusion of non @-@ native subspecies was justified to optimize the genetic diversity found within the species as a whole . 
 Since peregrine eggs and chicks are still often targeted by illegal collectors , it is common practice not to publicize unprotected nest locations . 
 = = = Current status = = = 
 Populations of the peregrine falcon have bounced back in most parts of the world . In Britain , there has been a recovery of populations since the crash of the 1960s . This has been greatly assisted by conservation and protection work led by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds . The RSPB has estimated that there are 1 @,@ 402 breeding pairs in the UK . Peregrines now breed in many mountainous and coastal areas , especially in the west and north , and nest in some urban areas , capitalising on the urban feral pigeon populations for food . In Southampton , a nest prevented restoration of mobile telephony services for several months , after Vodafone engineers despatched to repair a faulty transmitter mast discovered a nest in the mast , and were prevented by the Wildlife and Countryside Act , on pain of a possible prison sentence , from proceeding with repairs until the chicks fledged . In many parts of the world peregrine falcons have adapted to urban habitats , nesting on cathedrals , skyscraper window ledges , tower blocks , and the towers of suspension bridges . Many of these nesting birds are encouraged , sometimes gathering media attention and often monitored by cameras . 
 From an ecological perspective , raptor populations in urban areas are highly beneficial . Compared with Europe where pigeon populations have exploded to the point they are both a tourist attraction and a public nuisance . Their faeces are highly acidic causing damage to historic buildings and statues made of soft stone . They nest in bridges where it compiles and damages iron work causing rust and corrosion . In the United States , falcon and other raptors are in numbers high enough to ward off pigeon nest building in major highrises . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Due to its striking hunting technique , the peregrine has often been associated with aggression and martial prowess . Native Americans of the Mississippian culture ( c . 800 – 1500 ) used the peregrine , along with several other birds of prey , in imagery as a symbol of " aerial ( celestial ) power " and buried men of high status in costumes associating to the ferocity of " raptorial " birds . In the late Middle Ages , the Western European nobility that used peregrines for hunting , considered the bird associated with princes in formal hierarchies of birds of prey , just below the gyrfalcon associated with kings . It was considered " a royal bird , more armed by its courage than its claws " . Terminology used by peregrine breeders also used the Old French term <unk> , " of noble birth ; aristocratic " , particularly with the peregrine . 
 The peregrine falcon is the national animal of the United Arab Emirates . Since 1927 , the peregrine falcon has been the official mascot of Bowling Green State University in Bowling Green , Ohio . The 2007 U.S. Idaho state quarter features a peregrine falcon . The peregrine falcon has been designated the official city bird of Chicago . 
 The Peregrine , by J. A. Baker , is widely regarded as one of the best nature books in English written in the twentieth century . Admirers of the book include Robert Macfarlane , Mark Cocker , who regards the book as " one of the most outstanding books on nature in the twentieth century " and Werner Herzog , who called it the " one book I would ask you to read if you want to make films , " and said elsewhere " ... it has prose of the calibre that we have not seen since Joseph Conrad . " In the book , Baker recounts , in diary form , his detailed observations of peregrines ( and their interaction with other birds ) near his home in Chelmsford , Essex , over a single winter from October to April . 
 = Cat 's Eye Nebula = 
 The Cat 's Eye Nebula or NGC 6543 , is a relatively bright planetary nebula in the northern constellation of Draco , which was discovered by William Herschel on February 15 , 1786 . It was notably the first planetary nebula whose spectrum was investigated by the English amateur astronomer William Huggins , demonstrating that planetary nebulae were gaseous and not stellar in nature . Structurally , the object has had high @-@ resolution images by the Hubble Space Telescope revealing knots , jets , bubbles and complex arcs , being illuminated by the central hot planetary nebula nucleus ( PNN ) . It is a well @-@ studied object that has been observed from radio to X @-@ ray wavelengths . 
 = = General information = = 
 NGC 6543 is a high northern declination deep @-@ sky object and is near the apparent position of the North Ecliptic Pole . It has the combined magnitude of 8 @.@ 1 , with high surface brightness . Its small bright inner nebula subtends an average of 16 @.@ 1 arcsec , with the outer prominent condensations about 25 arcsec . Deep images reveal an extended halo about 300 arcsec or 5 arcmin across , that was once ejected by the central progenitor star during its red giant phase . 
 Observations show the bright nebulosity has temperatures between 7000 and 9000 K , whose densities average of about 5000 particles per cubic centimetre . Its outer halo has the higher temperature around <unk> K , but is of much lower density . Velocity of the fast stellar wind is about 1900 km / s , where spectroscopic analysis shows the current rate of mass loss averages 3 @.@ 2 × 10 − 7 solar masses per year , equivalent to twenty trillion tons per second ( 20 Eg / s ) . 
 Surface temperature for the central PNN is about 80000 K , being 10000 times as luminous as the sun . Stellar classification is O7 + [ WR ] – type star Calculations suggest the PNN is over one solar mass , from a theoretical initial 5 solar masses . Radius is about 0 @.@ 65 times the Sun or <unk> km . 
 The Cat 's Eye Nebula , given in some sources , lies about three thousand light @-@ years from Earth . 
 = = Observations = = 
 The Cat 's Eye was the first planetary nebula to be observed with a spectroscope by William Huggins on August 29 , 1864 . Huggins ' observations revealed that the nebula 's spectrum was non @-@ continuous and made of a few bright emission lines , first indication that planetary nebulae consist of tenuous ionised gas . Spectroscopic observations at these wavelengths are used in abundance determinations , while images at these wavelengths have been used to reveal the intricate structure of the nebula . 
 = = = Infrared observations = = = 
 Observations of NGC 6543 at far @-@ infrared wavelengths ( about 60 μm ) reveal the presence of stellar dust at low temperatures . The dust is believed to have formed during the last phases of the progenitor star 's life . It absorbs light from the central star and re @-@ radiates it at infrared wavelengths . The spectrum of the infrared dust emission implies that the dust temperature is about 85 K , while the mass of the dust is estimated at 6 @.@ 4 × 10 − 4 solar masses . 
 Infrared emission also reveals the presence of un @-@ ionised material such as molecular hydrogen ( H2 ) and argon . In many planetary nebulae , molecular emission is greatest at larger distances from the star , where more material is un @-@ ionised , but molecular hydrogen emission in NGC 6543 seems to be bright at the inner edge of its outer halo . This may be due to shock waves exciting the H2 as ejecta moving at different speeds collide . The overall appearance of the Cat 's Eye Nebula in infrared ( wavelengths 2 – 8 μm ) is similar in visible light . 
 = = = Optical and ultraviolet observations = = = 
 The Hubble Space Telescope image produced here is in false colour , designed to highlight regions of high and low ionisation . Three images were taken , in filters isolating the light emitted by singly ionised hydrogen at 656 @.@ 3 nm , singly ionised nitrogen at 658 @.@ 4 nm and doubly ionised oxygen at 500 @.@ 7 nm . The images were combined as red , green and blue channels respectively , although their true colours are red , red and green . The image reveals two " caps " of less ionised material at the edge of the nebula . 
 = = = X @-@ ray observations = = = 
 In 2001 , observations at X @-@ ray wavelengths by the Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory revealed the presence of extremely hot gas within NGC 6543 with the temperature of 1 @.@ 7 × 106 K. The image at the top of this article is a combination of optical images from the Hubble Space Telescope with the Chandra X @-@ ray images . It is thought that the very hot gas results from the violent interaction of a fast stellar wind with material previously ejected . This interaction has hollowed out the inner bubble of the nebula . Chandra observations have also revealed a point source at the position of the central star . The spectrum of this source extends to the hard part of the X @-@ ray spectrum , to 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 0 keV . A star with the photospheric temperature of about 100000 K would not be expected to emit strongly in hard X @-@ rays , and so their presence is something of a mystery . It may suggest the presence of a high temperature accretion disk within a binary star system . The hard X @-@ ray data remain intriguing more than ten years later : the Cat 's Eye was included in a 2012 Chandra survey of 21 central stars of planetary nebulae ( CSPNe ) in the solar neighborhood , which found : " All but one of the X @-@ ray point sources detected at CSPNe display X @-@ ray spectra that are harder than expected from hot ( ~ 100000 K ) central star <unk> , possibly indicating a high frequency of binary companions to CSPNe . Other potential explanations include self @-@ shocking winds or PN mass fallback . " 
 = = Distance = = 
 Planetary nebulae distances like NGC 6543 are generally very inaccurate and not well known . Some recent Hubble Space Telescope observations of NGC 6543 taken several years apart calculates its distance by measuring the angular expansion rate is 3 @.@ 457 milliarcseconds per year . Assuming a line of sight expansion velocity of 16 @.@ 4 km · s − 1 , implies that NGC 6543 's distance is 1001 ± 269 parsecs ( 3 × 1019 m or 3300 light @-@ years ) away from Earth . Several other distance references , like what is quoted in SIMBAD in 2014 <unk> , L. , et al . ( 2008 ) says distance is 1623 parsecs ( 5300 light @-@ years ) . 
 = = Age = = 
 The angular expansion of the nebula can also be used to estimate its age . If it has been expanding at a constant rate of 10 milliarcseconds a year , then it would take 1000 ± 260 years to reach a diameter of 20 arcseconds . This may be an upper limit to the age , because ejected material will be slowed when it encounters material ejected from the star at earlier stages of its evolution , and the interstellar medium . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Like most astronomical objects , NGC 6543 consists mostly of hydrogen and helium , with heavier elements present in small quantities . The exact composition may be determined by spectroscopic studies . Abundances are generally expressed relative to hydrogen , the most abundant element . 
 Different studies generally find varying values for elemental abundances . This is often because <unk> attached to telescopes do not collect all the light from objects being observed , instead gathering light from a slit or small aperture . Therefore , different observations may sample different parts of the nebula . 
 However , results for NGC 6543 broadly agree that , relative to hydrogen , the helium abundance is about 0 @.@ 12 , carbon and nitrogen abundances are both about 3 × 10 − 4 , and the oxygen abundance is about 7 × 10 − 4 . These are fairly typical abundances for planetary nebulae , with the carbon , nitrogen and oxygen abundances all larger than the values found for the sun , due to the effects of nucleosynthesis enriching the star 's atmosphere in heavy elements before it is ejected as a planetary nebula . 
 Deep spectroscopic analysis of NGC 6543 may indicate that the nebula contains a small amount of material which is highly enriched in heavy elements ; this is discussed below . 
 = = Kinematics and morphology = = 
 The Cat 's Eye Nebula is structurally a very complex nebula , and the mechanism or mechanisms that have given rise to its complicated morphology are not well understood . The central bright part of the nebular consists of the inner elongated bubble ( inner ellipse ) filled with hot gas . It in turn is nested into a pair of larger spherical bubbles conjoined together along their waist . The waist is observed as the second larger ellipse lying perpendicular to the bubble with hot gas . 
 The structure of the bright portion of the nebula is primarily caused by the interaction of a fast stellar wind being emitted by the central PNN with the visible material ejected during the formation of the nebula . This interaction causes the emission of X @-@ rays discussed above . The stellar wind , blowing with the velocity as high as 1900 km / s , has ' hollowed out ' the inner bubble of the nebula , and appears to have burst the bubble at both ends . 
 It is also suspected that the central WR : + O7 spectral class PNN star , HD <unk> / BD + 66 1066 / <unk> <unk> of the nebula may be generated by a binary star . The existence of an accretion disk caused by mass transfer between the two components of the system may give rise to polar jets , which would interact with previously ejected material . Over time , the direction of the polar jets would vary due to precession . 
 Outside the bright inner portion of the nebula , there are a series of concentric rings , thought to have been ejected before the formation of the planetary nebula , while the star was on the asymptotic giant branch of the Hertzsprung @-@ Russell diagram . These rings are very evenly spaced , suggesting that the mechanism responsible for their formation ejected them at very regular intervals and at very similar speeds . The total mass of the rings is about 0 @.@ 1 solar masses . The pulsations that formed the rings probably started 15 @,@ 000 years ago and ceased about 1000 years ago , when the formation of the bright central part began ( see above ) . 
 Further out , a large faint halo extends to large distances from the star . The halo again predates the formation of the main nebula . The mass of the halo is estimated as 0 @.@ 26 – 0 @.@ 92 solar masses . 
 = = Cited sources = = 
 = Shonen Jump ( magazine ) = 
 Shonen Jump , officially stylized SHONEN JUMP and abbreviated SJ , is a shōnen manga anthology published in North America by Viz Media . It debuted in November 2002 with the first issue having a January 2003 cover date . Based on Shueisha 's popular Japanese magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump , Shonen Jump is retooled for English readers and the American audience , including changing it from a weekly publication to a monthly one . It features serialized chapters from four manga series , and articles on Japanese language and culture , as well as manga , anime , video games , and figurines . Prior to the magazine 's launch , Viz launched an extensive marketing campaign to promote it and help it succeed where previous manga anthologies published in North America had failed . Shueisha purchased an equity interest in Viz to help fund the venture , and Cartoon Network , Suncoast , and Diamond Distributors became promotional partners in the magazine . 
 In conjunction with the magazine , Viz launched new imprints for releasing media related to the series presented in the magazine , and other shōnen works . This includes two new manga imprints , an anime DVD imprint , a fiction line for releasing light novels , a label for fan and data books , and a label for the release of art books . 
 Targeted towards young adult males , the first issue required three printings to meet consumer demand , with over 300 @,@ 000 copies sold . It was awarded the ICv2 " Comic Product of the Year " award in December 2002 , and has continued to enjoy high sales with a monthly circulation of 215 @,@ 000 in 2008 . Approximately half of its circulation comes from subscriptions rather than store sales . 
 Shonen Jump published its final issue in April 2012 when Viz decided to focus on a weekly digital manga anthology . Weekly Shonen Jump ( initially named Weekly Shonen Jump Alpha ) launched in January 2012 and is still in production . 
 = = History = = 
 In June 2002 , Viz Media ( at the time called " Viz Communications " ) , and Shueisha announced that Viz would begin publishing Shonen Jump , an English spin on Shueisha 's highly popular manga anthology Weekly Shōnen Jump . Cartoon Network , Suncoast , and Diamond Distributors signed on as promotional partners . Though based on Weekly Shōnen Jump , Viz noted that it would not be a " word for word " copy . Rather , Viz would select series for its magazine that it felt were the most appropriate for its American readers . Viz 's version was also set to be monthly , rather than having weekly , to better fit the American comic distribution system . 
 We will be selecting the material most appropriate for the American market . Bear in mind that Shonen Jump has been running since 1968 in Japan . At 500 pages a week , that gives us 884 @,@ 000 pages of material to draw from ! ... Our lead titles are Dragon Ball Z and Yu @-@ Gi @-@ Oh , selected for their already @-@ existing popularity in the US . The remainder of the titles will be a combination of those on the verge of breaking out in this country , and those we feel will especially appeal to the target demographic . 
 Jason Thompson , one of Viz 's manga editors for series including Dragon Ball was selected as the magazine 's first editor @-@ in @-@ chief . Initially , Viz hoped to have the magazine targeted to all age groups , however to allow for greater freedom on content , the decision was made to mark the magazine as being for readers 13 years of age and older . However , with greater attention being focused on manga as it became available in mainstream outlets , some titles were edited for content . Thompson noted that it was a challenge working with some of the artists whose works would appear in the first issue , who worried about excessive alterations . 
 With manga anthologies having met with little success in North America , Viz desired Shonen Jump to have a circulation of 1 million within its first three years . To aid in this goal , Viz launched the magazine with a multimillion @-@ dollar advertising budget , they advertised and distributed the title through mass market outlets rather than just pop culture stores , ensuring the magazine included series already popular with the North American audience due to their airing on Cartoon Network . To help fund the lengthy , expensive marketing campaign developed around Shonen Jump , Shueisha purchased an equity interest in Viz in August 2002 . 
 Unlike with most magazine launches , Viz decided to allow retailers to return the first two issues . This gave retailers a chance to see how well the magazine would sell in markets where manga anthologies were an unknown . Retailers were also given a quantity of free samples , distributed 100 @,@ 000 free samples at Comic Con , and another 100 @,@ 000 were made available to its partner Suncoast . Cartoon Network began providing sample chapters and streaming video content to its Adult Swim website , along with prominent links to Shonen Jump 's official site . 
 The first issue was released November 26 , 2002 , with a January 2003 cover date . It premiered with five series : Dragon Ball Z , Sand Land , Yu @-@ Gi @-@ Oh ! , <unk> Hakusho , and One Piece . With the launch of the magazine considered successful , Thompson was offered an opportunity to intern in Japan with Shueisha 's editors , but declined , due to a lack of interest in the management aspects of the business and a desire to work on his own projects . After six issues had been released , Thompson desired to work on authoring and illustrating his own comic The Stiff . Reflecting back later , he states in an interview with The Comics Journal that " I basically told Viz that I wanted to work part time or I 'd quit . It probably wasn 't a really nice thing to do . " He eventually stepped down as editor @-@ in @-@ chief , being replaced by his former boss Yumi Hoashi . 
 In February 2005 , Viz announced the creation of Shojo Beat , a sister publication of Shonen Jump geared towards female readers . The first issue was released in June 2005 with a July 2005 date cover ; it ran for 47 issues until it was discontinued with the release of the July 2009 issue . In 2006 , Marc Weidenbaum was named as the Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief for both magazines . Weidenbaum remained the magazine 's editor until February 13 , 2009 , when Viz announced that he had left the company ; the magazine 's new editor @-@ in @-@ chief has not been named . 
 As of the June 2011 issue , only 10 issues were published in a year . The magazine is printed at <unk> Printing <unk> Graphics in Owen Sound , Ontario , Canada . 
 In October 2011 , Viz announced that Weekly Shonen Jump Alpha , a weekly digital version of the magazine would be made available to the public beginning on January 30 , 2012 . Viz also released its final Shonen Jump print publication in March of that year after Weekly Shonen Jump Alpha was released . 
 = = Features = = 
 The bulk of each issue of Shonen Jump is composed of chapters from the seven manga titles currently in serialization . Each issue also includes product reviews for anime and manga related games and toys , articles on Japanese language and culture , interviews with manga artists , anime and manga related news , fan related sections such as fan art and letters from readers , and interactive games and trivia sections . Issues also regularly include free premiums , such as rare cards for manga and anime collectible card game adaptations , DVD previews , and video game demo discs . 
 The magazine 's official website includes information on all series released under the " Shonen Jump " label , biographies of the manga artists whose works have been serialized in the magazine , and previews of upcoming issues . Subscribers to the magazine have access to an additional area of the site where they can view preview chapters of manga series in the magazine and being published under the various " Shonen Jump " imprints , download desktop wallpapers , send e @-@ cards , and play games . 
 As with Weekly Shōnen Jump , special edition stand alone issues of Shonen Jump are released several times a year that focus on a manga series . These issues , which are considered collector 's items , include extensive details on the series plot and characters , information on related adaptations of the series , and free premium items , such as full @-@ size posters . Anniversary editions are released yearly , usually featuring higher page counts , color manga pages , and higher end premiums . To celebrate the fifth anniversary of the magazine , Viz also introduced hardback " Collector Editions " of some of the magazine 's most popular series as a part of their main " Shonen Jump " manga imprint . The new editions were larger sized , with color dust jackets and higher quality paper than the normal volumes . They also included several full @-@ color pages not seen in the initial releases . Viz also released Shonen Jump Fifth Anniversary Collector 's Edition , a hardcover book containing chapters from its best selling series , along with various articles and interviews that appeared in the magazine during its first five @-@ year history , a timeline tracking the history of manga , and essays written by editors from Shonen Jump and Weekly Shōnen Jump . 
 = = = Series = = = 
 The premiere issue of Shonen Jump contained chapters from five different manga series , before it was expanded to include chapters from seven series . Fourteen series were featured in the magazine , with seven having ended their runs to be replaced with other series . Only four of those remained in the magazine until all of their chapters had been published . Each title serialized in the magazine is also published in tankōbon volumes under the company 's related " Shonen Jump " and " Shonen Jump Advanced " labels . 
 This is a complete list of all titles to be serialized in Shonen Jump . It does not include previews of titles . The titles that were running in the magazine when it was discontinued are highlighted . 
 = = = Imprints = = = 
 In conjunction with the Shonen Jump anthology , Viz Media has created multiple new imprints in its various divisions . " Shonen Jump " is the primary manga imprint for releasing the tankōbon volumes of the series that have appeared in the magazine , as well as other similar shōnen titles that were serialized in other Jump magazines in Japan . A second manga imprint , " Shonen Jump Advanced " , was launched in April 2005 to target older teenage and young adult readers with more " mature themes . " 
 In October 2005 , Viz expanded the " Shonen Jump " imprint into their home video releases . " Shonen Jump Home Video " offers anime series and original video animations adapted from manga series appearing in Shonen Jump . 
 In 2006 , the " SJ Fiction " imprint , part of the Viz Fiction line , was announced . The imprint is used for light novel releases related to manga series appearing in Shonen Jump . " SJ Profiles " prints fan books , data books , and other similar works for the Shonen Jump series , while art books are released under the " Art of SJ " imprint . 
 = = Circulation and audience = = 
 The initial issue of Shonen Jump sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies , far exceeding Viz 's expected 100 @,@ 000 copies and making it one of the top comic titles in 2002 . The first printing of 250 @,@ 000 copies was sold out before the issue was released , and two additional printings were necessary to fully meet the demand . After the initial launch , the magazine had an average monthly circulation of 190 @,@ 000 , but it quickly grew to 205 @,@ 000 by its first anniversary . The August 2003 issue , which included a demo version of an upcoming Yu @-@ Gi @-@ Oh ! PC game , was the top issue with 540 @,@ 000 copies sold . As of 2008 , the magazine has a circulation of 215 @,@ 000 , with subscriptions constituting 54 % of the copies distributed . 
 Though targeted towards " tween & teen male consumers " , according to Viz Media the magazine enjoys a relatively high number of female and adult readers as well , comprising 36 % and 37 % of its readership , respectively . The Shonen Jump reader has a median age of 16 years , and over half of the audience is between the ages of 13 and 17 . Official measurements by Simmons notes that among minor age readers the female readership is slightly lower and the median age is 12 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Shonen Jump is considered the " most successful and widely read " manga anthology in North America . In addition to the unparalleled circulation numbers , the " Shonen Jump " manga imprint has had consistently high sales , with many of its titles being top sellers . Naruto has been the line 's top seller , accounting for nearly 10 % of all manga sales in North America in 2006 . In December 2002 , the magazine received the ICv2 Award for " Comic Product of the Year " due to its unprecedented sales numbers and its successfully connecting comics to both the television medium and the Yu @-@ Gi @-@ Oh ! collectible card game – one of the top CCG games of the year . In the Society for the Promotion of Japanese Animation Awards from 2009 , Shonen Jump was the winner in the category " Best Publication " . 
 Reviewers of the magazine applauded the selection of series and the various articles included in each issue . In his coverage of the magazine 's debut issue , John Jakala of Anime News Network , compared it to the debut issue of competing work Raijin Comics and was surprised to find himself preferring Shonen Jump , despite it being targeted for a younger age group than Raijin Comics . Calling it an " impressive debut issue " , Jakala predicted that its high quality content and high value for the price would result in the anthology becoming a successful anthology in North America . In succeeding reviews , Jakala stated that Shonen Jump put " American comics to shame " , particularly in terms of the size of the magazine for the price versus the normal size of a similarly priced issue of a regular comic book . He did , however , note that the episodic nature of some of the series included had started to become repetitive after three issues , and that while the articles might appeal to many readers , he himself skipped over them . In addition to praising the value for the dollar , Comic Book Bin 's Leroy Douresseaux felt that each of the chapters included were " a self @-@ sustaining and satisfying tale with a beginning , middle , and end " that , coupled with the character and story summaries included for each series , made it easy for readers to keep up with a series even if they missed an issue . 
 Color me surprised . Largely as a show of support for the anthology format , I signed up for subscriptions for both <unk> <unk> and SHONEN JUMP , but I was sure that I would enjoy the former much more than the latter since RC was promoted as being targeted for an older audience , and since SJ featured series that I associated with young children 's cartoons . Instead , having read both first issues , I find that ( so far ) I much prefer SHONEN JUMP , both in terms of actual story content as well as in terms of the magazine 's production values . 
 = Capitol Limited ( B & O train ) = 
 The Capitol Limited was an American passenger train run by the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad , originally between New York City and Grand Central Station in Chicago , Illinois via Union Station , Washington , D. C. and Pittsburgh . For almost 48 years , it was the B & O 's flagship passenger train , noted for personalized service and innovation . At the time of its discontinuation on May 1 , 1971 , when Amtrak took over most rail passenger service in the U.S. , the Capitol Limited operated between Washington and Chicago . 
 = = History = = 
 The Capitol Limited was inaugurated on May 12 , 1923 , as an all @-@ Pullman sleeping car train running from Pennsylvania Station in New York City to Chicago , via Washington , D. C. Once west of the Pennsy 's Newark station in New Jersey , the train used the Lehigh Valley and Reading Railroad as far as Philadelphia , where it reached B & O 's own rails to Chicago . It was designed to compete against the luxury trains of the rival Pennsylvania Railroad and New York Central Railroad . Although the B & O 's longer route put it at a competitive disadvantage in New York for time @-@ sensitive travelers , the B & O offered such luxuries in the 1920s as onboard secretaries , barbers , <unk> , and valets . The Capitol 's " Martha Washington " <unk> dining cars were particularly noted for their Chesapeake Bay cuisine , served in ornate cars with leaded glass windows , glass chandeliers , and colonial @-@ style furnishings . The Capitol Limited derived much of its passenger traffic from businessmen and government officials travelling between Washington and the midwest . 
 On September 1 , 1926 , the Pennsylvania Railroad terminated its contract with the B & O , which had permitted the latter to use the " Pennsy 's " Hudson River tunnels and Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan . Thereafter , the Capitol Limited , along with all other B & O passenger trains to New York , operated over the Jersey Central 's main line from the connection with the Reading in Bound Brook into its Jersey City terminal , where passengers were then transferred to buses that met the train right on the platform . These buses were ferried across the Hudson River into Manhattan , where they proceeded to various " stations " including the Vanderbilt Hotel , Wanamaker 's , Columbus Circle , and Rockefeller Center , as well as Brooklyn . 
 In 1938 , the B & O dieselized the train after purchasing two sets of the new EA and EB locomotives from General Motors ' Electro Motive Corporation . The B & O was heavily in debt during the Depression and could not afford to buy new equipment , so it rebuilt its old heavyweight passenger cars into streamlined ones when the diesels were introduced in 1938 , making the Capitol Limited the first dieselized streamlined train in the eastern U.S. By September , 1940 , the through sleeping cars operating to New York were all streamlined . For the aesthetic features of the train the B & O turned to renowned industrial designer Otto Kuhler who turned the Cap , as it was affectionately known , into a regal operation complete with a stunning royal blue , silver , and gold pin @-@ striping livery ( a paint scheme that would become one of the all @-@ time classics of the streamliner era ) . 
 = = Route and equipment = = 
 Following the end of World War II , the B & O and the Santa Fe railway launched through sleeping car service between Washington , D.C. and Los Angeles on the Capitol Limited and the Santa Fe 's Chief . In February , 1956 , the Capitol Limited departed Jersey City at 12 : 45 p.m. as train # 5 . As an express , all @-@ Pullman sleeping car train , the Capitol Limited made limited stops along its 991 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 595 km ) route to Chicago . See the table at right for a list of all station stops ( major cities are highlighted in blue and Jersey City bus / ferry connections are in yellow ) . 
 Eastbound , the train departed Chicago at 4 : 30 p.m. as train # 6 . This scheduled departure was timed so that travelers riding western railroads such as the Santa Fe , Chicago and North Western Railway , or the Burlington could readily connect for an eastward journey on B & O 's deluxe train . During the height of train travel in the 1920s , the Capitol Limited occasionally ran in multiple sections , although never as frequently or extensively as the competing Pennsylvania Railroad 's Broadway Limited and New York Central Railroad 's 20th Century Limited . 
 The B & O was the first railroad to introduce air conditioning on its trains , beginning with the Columbian in 1931 , followed by the Capitol Limited on May 22 , 1932 , well ahead of its competitors . This innovation received favorable comment nationwide by the news media . 
 The Capitol Limited received streamlined heavyweight sleeping and dining cars in 1938 . A typical consist included the following : baggage @-@ dormitory , 8 @-@ section 1 @-@ drawing room 1 @-@ compartment sleeping car , dining car , three to four 8 @-@ section 5 @-@ double bedroom sleeping cars , 14 @-@ section sleeping car , two 12 @-@ section 1 @-@ drawing room sleeping cars , and a sleeper @-@ buffet @-@ lounge with a drawing room and three compartments . In 1941 these cars were augmented by several lightweight 10 @-@ roomette 5 @-@ bedroom sleeping cars . 
 By the early 1950s , the B & O had combined through cars for the Capitol Limited , the Columbian ( # 25 ) , and the Ambassador ( # 19 ) into one train between New York and Washington . Beyond Washington , the three trains then operated separately , with several additional Washington – Chicago Pullman sleeping cars added to the Capitol Limited , along with a twin @-@ unit dining car , two Strata @-@ Dome dome cars , club car , and a flat @-@ end observation car . 
 The B & O re @-@ equipped the Capitol Limited with new , streamlined sleeping cars in 1950 and 1954 , including the new duplex @-@ roomette type . The <unk> were named after rivers and lakes along the train 's route , such as " Cacapon " and " Wawasee " . Dome cars " Moonlight Dome " and " Starlight Dome " , having sleeping compartments on their lower levels , were added on January 8 , 1951 . A twin @-@ unit dining car seating 64 passengers at a time was obtained from the New York Central in 1957 . 
 = = Decline and final run = = 
 The Capitol Limited , in common with most name trains in the U.S. by the mid @-@ 1950s , suffered steadily declining patronage as the traveling public abandoned trains in favor of airplanes and the automobile . The B & O gave up on competing with the Pennsylvania Railroad into New York , discontinuing all passenger service north of Baltimore on April 26 , 1958 . Thereafter , the Capitol Limited operated between Washington and Chicago as a through train , with a few cars originating in Baltimore until 1966 . Other B & O passenger trains were combined with the Capitol Limited : the Ambassador to Detroit and the formerly all @-@ coach Columbian to Chicago . The combined train in the early 1960s had as many as 22 cars pulled by five locomotives . 
 To stem the loss of passengers and resulting deficits , the B & O in the early 1960s offered reduced mid @-@ week fares , auto shipment for passengers ( similar in concept to the Auto Train ) , and onboard movies , to attract more passengers . The train was marginally profitable , when mail and express revenue was included . 
 The loss in 1967 of mail and express contracts , which by then accounted for almost 70 percent of total passenger train revenue for the B & O , severely affected the B & O 's passenger service . The Post Office Department 's cancellation of its mail contract for the Capitol Limited and other trains on October 28 , 1967 , was the death knell . Many passenger trains were dropped and the consist of the Capitol Limited was considerably reduced . B & O discontinued all long @-@ distance train service to Baltimore 's Camden Station . Between October , 1966 , and April , 1971 , a connecting RDC operated between Baltimore and Washington , D.C. , as train # 105 . By June , 1969 , two E diesel electric engines pulled a train of : 1 baggage , 1 sleeper ( 10 / 6 ) , 1 diner / lounge , 1 dome coach , and four coaches . 
 With the advent of Amtrak on May 1 , 1971 , the Capitol Limited was discontinued by the B & O , along with all of its other passenger trains ( except for local commuter services ) . For the final run of the old Capitol Limited on April 29 , 1971 , the B & O ran the entire trainset from Baltimore 's Camden Station , including the dome car . The B & O printed special commemorative tickets and returned its bottled Deer Park spring water and B & O 's signature , " all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat " giant salad bowls to the final run 's dining car , some of the Capitol Limited ' s amenities from more prosperous times . A 31 @-@ year veteran dining car waiter on the last run of the Capitol Limited recalled to a Baltimore Sun reporter that , " all the vegetables we served were freshly cooked on board — no frozen or canned food at all . " 
 At its inception , Amtrak did not continue any of the B & O 's former passenger train routes , and the Capitol Limited ended its 48 @-@ year run on the B & O. After a lapse of ten years , Amtrak revived Washington – Chicago service using the same B & O tracks ( now CSX Transportation ) between Washington and Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , for the Amtrak Capitol Limited . 
 = Ian Fleming = 
 Ian Lancaster Fleming ( 28 May 1908 – 12 August 1964 ) was an English author , journalist and naval intelligence officer who is best known for his James Bond series of spy novels . Fleming came from a wealthy family connected to the merchant bank Robert Fleming & Co . , and his father was the Member of Parliament for Henley from 1910 until his death on the Western Front in 1917 . Educated at Eton , Sandhurst and , briefly , the universities of Munich and Geneva , Fleming moved through several jobs before he started writing . 
 While working for Britain 's Naval Intelligence Division during the Second World War , Fleming was involved in planning Operation Goldeneye and in the planning and oversight of two intelligence units , 30 Assault Unit and T @-@ Force . His wartime service and his career as a journalist provided much of the background , detail and depth of the James Bond novels . 
 Fleming wrote his first Bond novel , Casino Royale , in 1952 . It was a success , with three print runs being commissioned to cope with the demand . Eleven Bond novels and two short @-@ story collections followed between 1953 and 1966 . The novels revolved around James Bond , an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service , commonly known as MI6 . Bond was also known by his code number , 007 , and was a commander in the Royal Naval Reserve . The Bond stories rank among the best @-@ selling series of fictional books of all time , having sold over 100 million copies worldwide . Fleming also wrote the children 's story Chitty @-@ Chitty @-@ Bang @-@ Bang and two works of non @-@ fiction . In 2008 , The Times ranked Fleming 14th on its list of " The 50 greatest British writers since 1945 " . 
 Fleming was married to Ann Charteris , who was divorced from the second Viscount Rothermere owing to her affair with the author . Fleming and Charteris had a son , Caspar . Fleming was a heavy smoker and drinker for most of his life and succumbed to heart disease in 1964 at the age of 56 . Two of his James Bond books were published posthumously ; other writers have since produced Bond novels . Fleming 's creation has appeared in film twenty @-@ six times , portrayed by seven actors . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birth and family = = = 
 Ian Fleming was born on 28 May 1908 , at 27 Green Street in the wealthy London district of Mayfair . His mother was Evelyn St Croix Rose , and his father was Valentine Fleming , the Member of Parliament for Henley from 1910 . Fleming was the grandson of the Scottish financier Robert Fleming , who founded the Scottish American Investment Trust and the merchant bank Robert Fleming & Co . In 1914 , with the start of the First World War , Valentine joined " C " Squadron , Queen 's Own Oxfordshire Hussars , and rose to the rank of major . He was killed by German shelling on the Western Front on 20 May 1917 ; Winston Churchill wrote an obituary that appeared in The Times . Because the family owned an estate at <unk> , Valentine 's death was commemorated on the Glenelg War Memorial . 
 Fleming 's elder brother Peter ( 1907 – 1971 ) became a travel writer and married actress Celia Johnson . Peter served with the Grenadier Guards during the Second World War , was later commissioned under Colin Gubbins to help establish the Auxiliary Units , and became involved in behind @-@ the @-@ lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war . 
 Fleming also had two younger brothers , Michael ( 1913 – 1940 ) and Richard ( 1911 – 1977 ) , and a younger maternal half @-@ sister born out of wedlock , cellist Amaryllis Fleming ( 1925 – 1999 ) , whose father was the artist Augustus John . Amaryllis was conceived during a long @-@ term affair between John and Evelyn that started in 1923 , some six years after the death of Valentine . 
 = = = Education and early life = = = 
 In 1914 Fleming attended Durnford School , a preparatory school on the Isle of Purbeck in Dorset . He did not enjoy his time at Durnford ; he suffered unpalatable food , physical hardship and bullying . 
 In 1921 Fleming enrolled at Eton College . Although not a high achiever academically , he excelled at athletics and held the title of Victor Ludorum ( " Winner of the Games " ) for two years between 1925 and 1927 . He also edited a school magazine , The Wyvern . His lifestyle at Eton brought him into conflict with his housemaster , E. V. Slater , who disapproved of Fleming 's attitude , his hair oil , his ownership of a car and his relations with women . Slater persuaded Fleming 's mother to remove him from Eton a term early for a crammer course to gain entry to the Royal Military College at Sandhurst . He spent less than a year there , leaving in 1927 without gaining a commission , after contracting gonorrhea . 
 In 1927 , to prepare Fleming for possible entry into the Foreign Office , his mother sent him to the <unk> in Kitzbühel , Austria , a small private school run by the <unk> disciple and former British spy <unk> Forbes Dennis and his novelist wife , Phyllis <unk> . After improving his language skills there , he studied briefly at Munich University and the University of Geneva . While in Geneva , Fleming began a romance with Monique Panchaud de Bottomes and the couple were briefly engaged in 1931 . His mother disapproved and made him break off the relationship . He applied for entry to the Foreign Office , but failed the examinations . His mother again intervened in his affairs , lobbying Sir Roderick Jones , head of Reuters News Agency , and in October 1931 he was given a position as a sub @-@ editor and journalist for the company . In 1933 Fleming spent time in Moscow , where he covered the Stalinist show trial of six engineers from the British company Metropolitan @-@ Vickers . While there he applied for an interview with Soviet premier Joseph Stalin , and was amazed to receive a personally signed note apologising for not being able to attend . 
 Fleming bowed to family pressure in October 1933 , and went into banking with a position at the financiers Cull & Co . In 1935 he moved to Rowe and Pitman on Bishopsgate as a stockbroker . Fleming was unsuccessful in both roles . Early in 1939 Fleming began an affair with Ann O 'Neill ( née Charteris ) , who was married to the 3rd Baron O 'Neill ; she was also having an affair with Esmond Harmsworth , the heir to Lord Rothermere , owner of the Daily Mail . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In May 1939 Fleming was recruited by Rear Admiral John Godfrey , Director of Naval Intelligence of the Royal Navy , to become his personal assistant . He joined the organisation full @-@ time in August 1939 , with the codename " 17F " , and worked out of Room 39 at The Admiralty . Fleming 's biographer , Andrew Lycett , notes that Fleming had " no obvious qualifications " for the role . As part of his appointment , Fleming was commissioned into the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve in July 1939 , initially as lieutenant , but promoted to commander a few months later . 
 Fleming proved invaluable as Godfrey 's personal assistant and excelled in administration . Godfrey was known as an abrasive character who made enemies within government circles . He frequently used Fleming as a liaison with other sections of the government 's wartime administration , such as the Secret Intelligence Service , the Political Warfare Executive , the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) , the Joint Intelligence Committee and the Prime Minister 's staff . 
 On 29 September 1939 , soon after the start of the war , Godfrey circulated a memorandum that , " bore all the hallmarks of ... Lieutenant Commander Ian Fleming " , according to historian Ben Macintyre . It was called the Trout Memo and compared the deception of an enemy in wartime to fly fishing . The memo contained a number of schemes to be considered for use against the Axis powers to lure U @-@ boats and German surface ships towards minefields . Number 28 on the list was an idea to plant misleading papers on a corpse that would be found by the enemy ; the suggestion is similar to Operation Mincemeat , the successful 1943 plan to conceal the intended invasion of Italy from North Africa , although that idea was developed by Charles <unk> in October 1942 . The recommendation in the Trout Memo was titled : " A <unk> ( not a very nice one ) " , and continued : " The following suggestion is used in a book by Basil Thomson : a corpse dressed as an airman , with despatches in his pockets , could be dropped on the coast , supposedly from a parachute that has failed . I understand there is no difficulty in obtaining corpses at the Naval Hospital , but , of course , it would have to be a fresh one . " 
 In 1940 Fleming and Godfrey contacted Kenneth Mason , Professor of Geography at Oxford University , about the preparation of reports on the geography of countries involved in military operations . These reports were the precursors of the Naval Intelligence Division Geographical Handbook Series produced between 1941 and 1946 . 
 Operation Ruthless , a plan aimed at obtaining details of the Enigma codes used by Nazi Germany 's navy , was instigated by a memo written by Fleming to Godfrey on 12 September 1940 . The idea was to " obtain " a German bomber , man it with a German @-@ speaking crew dressed in Luftwaffe uniforms , and crash it into the English Channel . The crew would then attack their German rescuers and bring their boat and Enigma machine back to England . Much to the annoyance of Alan Turing and Peter <unk> at Bletchley Park , the mission was never carried out . According to Fleming 's niece , Lucy , an official of the Royal Air Force pointed out that if they were to drop a downed Heinkel bomber in the English Channel , it would probably sink rather quickly . 
 Fleming also worked with Colonel " Wild Bill " Donovan , President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's special representative on intelligence co @-@ operation between London and Washington . In May 1941 Fleming accompanied Godfrey to the United States , where he assisted in writing a blueprint for the Office of the Coordinator of Information , the department that turned into the Office of Strategic Services and eventually became the CIA . 
 Admiral Godfrey put Fleming in charge of Operation Goldeneye between 1941 and 1942 ; Goldeneye was a plan to maintain an intelligence framework in Spain in the event of a German takeover of the territory . Fleming 's plan involved maintaining communication with Gibraltar and launching sabotage operations against the Nazis . In 1941 he liaised with Donovan over American involvement in a measure intended to ensure that the Germans did not dominate the seaways . 
 = = = = 30 Assault Unit = = = = 
 In 1942 Fleming formed a unit of commandos , known as No. 30 Commando or 30 Assault Unit ( 30AU ) , composed of specialist intelligence troops . 30AU 's job was to be near the front line of an advance — sometimes in front of it — to seize enemy documents from previously targeted headquarters . The unit was based on a German group headed by Otto Skorzeny , who had undertaken similar activities in the Battle of Crete in May 1941 . The German unit was thought by Fleming to be " one of the most outstanding innovations in German intelligence " . 
 Fleming did not fight in the field with the unit , but selected targets and directed operations from the rear . On its formation the unit was only thirty strong , but it grew to five times that size . The unit was filled with men from other commando units , and trained in unarmed combat , safe @-@ cracking and lock @-@ picking at the SOE facilities . In late 1942 Captain ( later Rear @-@ Admiral ) Edmund <unk> replaced Godfrey as head of the Naval Intelligence Division , and Fleming 's influence in the organisation declined , although he retained control over 30AU . Fleming was unpopular with the unit 's members , who disliked his referring to them as his " Red Indians " . 
 Before the 1944 Normandy landings , most of 30AU 's operations were in the Mediterranean , although it secretly participated in the Dieppe Raid in a failed pinch raid for an Enigma machine and related materials . Because of its successes in Sicily and Italy , 30AU became greatly trusted by naval intelligence . 
 In March 1944 Fleming oversaw the distribution of intelligence to Royal Navy units in preparation for Operation Overlord . He was replaced as head of 30AU on 6 June 1944 , but maintained some involvement . He visited 30AU in the field during and after Overlord , especially following an attack on Cherbourg for which he was concerned that the unit had been incorrectly used as a regular commando force rather than an intelligence @-@ gathering unit . This wasted the men 's specialist skills , risked their safety on operations that did not justify the use of such skilled operatives , and threatened the vital gathering of intelligence . Afterwards , the management of these units was revised . He also followed the unit into Germany after it located , in <unk> Castle , the German naval archives from 1870 . 
 In December 1944 Fleming was posted on an intelligence fact @-@ finding trip to the Far East on behalf of the Director of Naval Intelligence . Much of the trip was spent identifying opportunities for 30AU in the Pacific , although the unit ultimately saw little action because of the Japanese surrender . 
 = = = = T @-@ Force = = = = 
 The success of 30AU led to the August 1944 decision to establish a " Target Force " , which became known as T @-@ Force . The official memorandum , held at The National Archives in London , describes the unit 's primary role : " T @-@ Force = Target Force , to guard and secure documents , persons , equipment , with combat and Intelligence personnel , after capture of large towns , ports etc. in liberated and enemy territory . " 
 Fleming sat on the committee that selected the targets for the T @-@ Force unit , and listed them in the " Black Books " that were issued to the unit 's officers . The infantry component of T @-@ Force was in part made up of the 5th Battalion , King 's Regiment , which supported the Second Army . It was responsible for securing targets of interest for the British military , including nuclear laboratories , gas research centres and individual rocket scientists . The unit 's most notable discoveries came during the advance on the German port of Kiel , in the research centre for German engines used in the V @-@ 2 rocket , Messerschmitt Me 163 fighters and high @-@ speed U @-@ boats . Fleming would later use elements of the activities of T @-@ Force in his writing , particularly in his 1955 Bond novel Moonraker . 
 In 1942 Fleming attended an Anglo @-@ American intelligence summit in Jamaica and , despite the constant heavy rain during his visit , he decided to live on the island once the war was over . His friend Ivar Bryce helped find a plot of land in Saint Mary Parish where , in 1945 , Fleming had a house built , which he named Goldeneye . The name of the house and estate where he wrote his novels has many possible sources . Fleming himself mentioned both his wartime Operation Goldeneye and Carson McCullers ' 1941 novel Reflections in a Golden Eye , which described the use of British naval bases in the Caribbean by the American navy . 
 Fleming was awarded the Danish <unk> in October 1947 for his contribution in assisting Danish officers escaping from Denmark to Britain during the occupation of Denmark . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Upon Fleming 's demobilisation in May 1945 , he became the Foreign Manager in the Kemsley newspaper group , which at the time owned The Sunday Times . In this role he oversaw the paper 's worldwide network of correspondents . His contract allowed him to take three months holiday every winter , which he took in Jamaica . Fleming worked full @-@ time for the paper until December 1959 , but continued to write articles and attend the Tuesday weekly meetings until at least 1961 . 
 After Ann Charteris ' first husband died in the war , she expected to marry Fleming , but he decided to remain a bachelor . On 28 June 1945 , she married the second Viscount Rothermere . Nevertheless , Charteris continued her affair with Fleming , travelling to Jamaica to see him under the pretext of visiting his friend and neighbour Noël Coward . In 1948 she gave birth to Fleming 's daughter , Mary , who was stillborn . Rothermere divorced Charteris in 1951 because of her relationship with Fleming , and the couple married on 24 March 1952 in Jamaica , a few months before their son Caspar was born in August . Both Fleming and Ann had affairs during their marriage , she , most notably , with Hugh Gaitskell , the Leader of the Labour Party and Leader of the Opposition . Fleming had a long @-@ term affair in Jamaica with one of his neighbours , Blanche Blackwell , mother of Chris Blackwell of Island Records . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 Fleming had first mentioned to friends during the war that he wanted to write a spy novel , an ambition he achieved within two months with Casino Royale . He started writing the book at Goldeneye on 17 February 1952 , gaining inspiration from his own experiences and imagination . He claimed afterwards that he wrote the novel to distract himself from his forthcoming wedding to the pregnant Charteris , and called the work his " dreadful oafish opus " . His manuscript was typed in London by Joan Howe ( mother of travel writer Rory MacLean ) , and Fleming 's red @-@ haired secretary at The Times on whom the character Miss Moneypenny was partially based . Clare Blanchard , a former girlfriend , advised him not to publish the book , or at least to do so under a pseudonym . 
 During Casino Royale 's final draft stages , Fleming allowed his friend William Plomer to see a copy , and remarked " so far as I can see the element of suspense is completely absent " . Despite this , Plomer thought the book had sufficient promise and sent a copy to the publishing house Jonathan Cape . At first , they were unenthusiastic about the novel , but Fleming 's brother Peter , whose books they managed , persuaded the company to publish it . On 13 April 1953 Casino Royale was released in the UK in hardcover , priced at 10s 6d , with a cover designed by Fleming . It was a success and three print runs were needed to cope with the demand . 
 The novel centres on the exploits of James Bond , an officer in the Secret Intelligence Service , commonly known as MI6 . Bond was also known by his code number , 007 , and was a commander in the Royal Naval Reserve . Fleming took the name for his character from that of the American ornithologist James Bond , an expert on Caribbean birds and author of the definitive field guide Birds of the West Indies . Fleming , himself a keen birdwatcher , had a copy of Bond 's guide , and later told the ornithologist 's wife , " that this brief , unromantic , Anglo @-@ Saxon and yet very masculine name was just what I needed , and so a second James Bond was born " . In a 1962 interview in The New Yorker , he further explained : " When I wrote the first one in 1953 , I wanted Bond to be an extremely dull , uninteresting man to whom things happened ; I wanted him to be a blunt instrument ... when I was casting around for a name for my protagonist I thought by God , [ James Bond ] is the dullest name I ever heard . " 
 Fleming based his creation on individuals he met during his time in the Naval Intelligence Division , and admitted that Bond " was a compound of all the secret agents and commando types I met during the war " . Among those types were his brother Peter , whom he worshipped , and who had been involved in behind @-@ the @-@ lines operations in Norway and Greece during the war . Fleming envisaged that Bond would resemble the composer , singer and actor Hoagy Carmichael , although others , such as author and historian Ben Macintyre , identify aspects of Fleming 's own looks in his description of Bond . General references in the novels describe Bond as having " dark , rather cruel good looks " . 
 Fleming also modelled aspects of Bond on Conrad O 'Brien @-@ ffrench , a spy whom Fleming had met while skiing in Kitzbühel in the 1930s , Patrick Dalzel @-@ Job , who served with distinction in 30AU during the war , and Bill " Biffy " Dunderdale , station head of MI6 in Paris , who wore cufflinks and handmade suits and was chauffeured around Paris in a Rolls @-@ Royce . Sir Fitzroy Maclean was another possible model for Bond , based on his wartime work behind enemy lines in the Balkans , as was the MI6 double agent Dušan Popov . Fleming also endowed Bond with many of his own traits , including the same golf handicap , his taste for scrambled eggs , his love of gambling , and use of the same brand of toiletries . 
 After the publication of Casino Royale , Fleming used his annual holiday at his house in Jamaica to write another Bond story . Twelve Bond novels and two short @-@ story collections were published between 1953 and 1966 , the last two ( The Man with the Golden Gun and Octopussy and The Living Daylights ) posthumously . Much of the background to the stories came from Fleming 's previous work in the Naval Intelligence Division or from events he knew of from the Cold War . The plot of From Russia , with Love uses a fictional Soviet Spektor decoding machine as a lure to trap Bond ; the Spektor had its roots in the wartime German Enigma machine . The novel 's plot device of spies on the Orient Express was based on the story of Eugene Karp , a US naval attaché and intelligence agent based in Budapest who took the Orient Express from Budapest to Paris in February 1950 , carrying papers about blown US spy networks in the Eastern Bloc . Soviet assassins already on the train drugged the conductor , and Karp 's body was found shortly afterwards in a railway tunnel south of Salzburg . 
 Many of the names used in the Bond works came from people Fleming knew : Scaramanga , the principal villain in The Man with the Golden Gun , was named after a fellow Eton schoolboy with whom Fleming fought ; Goldfinger , from the eponymous novel , was named after British architect Ernő Goldfinger , whose work Fleming abhorred ; Sir Hugo Drax , the antagonist of Moonraker , was named after Fleming 's acquaintance Admiral Sir Reginald Aylmer Ranfurly Plunkett @-@ Ernle @-@ Erle @-@ Drax ; Drax 's assistant , Krebs , bears the same name as Hitler 's last Chief of Staff ; and one of the homosexual villains from Diamonds Are Forever , " Boofy " Kidd , was named after one of Fleming 's close friends — and a relative of his wife — Arthur Gore , 8th Earl of Arran , known as Boofy to his friends . 
 Fleming 's first work of non @-@ fiction , The Diamond Smugglers , was published in 1957 and was partly based on background research for his fourth Bond novel , Diamonds Are Forever . Much of the material had appeared in The Sunday Times and was based on Fleming 's interviews with John Collard , a member of the International Diamond Security Organisation who had previously worked in MI5 . The book received mixed reviews in the UK and US . 
 For the first five books ( Casino Royale , Live and Let Die , Moonraker , Diamonds Are Forever and From Russia , with Love ) Fleming received broadly positive reviews . That began to change in March 1958 when Bernard Bergonzi , in the journal Twentieth Century , attacked Fleming 's work as containing " a strongly marked streak of voyeurism and sado @-@ masochism " and wrote that the books showed " the total lack of any ethical frame of reference " . The article compared Fleming unfavourably with John Buchan and Raymond Chandler on both moral and literary criteria . A month later , Dr. No was published , and Fleming received harsh criticism from a number of reviewers who , in the words of Ben Macintyre , " rounded on Fleming , almost as a pack " . The most strongly worded of the critiques came from Paul Johnson of the New Statesman , who , in his review " Sex , Snobbery and Sadism " , called the novel " without doubt , the nastiest book I have ever read " . Johnson went on to say that " by the time I was a third of the way through , I had to suppress a strong impulse to throw the thing away " . Although Johnson recognised that in Bond there " was a social phenomenon of some importance " , this was seen as a negative element , as the phenomenon concerned " three basic ingredients in Dr No , all unhealthy , all thoroughly English : the sadism of a schoolboy bully , the mechanical , two @-@ dimensional sex @-@ longings of a frustrated adolescent , and the crude , snob @-@ cravings of a suburban adult . " Johnson saw no positives in Dr. No , and said , " Mr Fleming has no literary skill , the construction of the book is chaotic , and entire incidents and situations are inserted , and then forgotten , in a haphazard manner . " 
 Lycett notes that Fleming " went into a personal and creative decline " after marital problems and the attacks on his work . Goldfinger had been written before the publication of Dr. No ; the next book Fleming produced after the criticism was For Your Eyes Only , a collection of short stories derived from outlines written for a television series that did not come to fruition . Lycett noted that , as Fleming was writing the television scripts and the short stories , " Ian 's mood of weariness and self @-@ doubt was beginning to affect his writing " , which can be seen in Bond 's thoughts . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1960 Fleming was commissioned by the Kuwait Oil Company to write a book on the country and its oil industry . The Kuwaiti Government disapproved of the typescript , State of Excitement : Impressions of Kuwait , and it was never published . According to Fleming : " The Oil Company expressed approval of the book but felt it their duty to submit the typescript to members of the Kuwait Government for their approval . The Sheikhs concerned found unpalatable certain mild comments and criticisms and particularly the passages referring to the adventurous past of the country which now wishes to be ' civilised ' in every respect and forget its romantic origins . " 
 Fleming followed the disappointment of For Your Eyes Only with Thunderball , the novelization of a film script on which he had worked with others . The work had started in 1958 when Fleming 's friend Ivar Bryce introduced him to a young Irish writer and director , Kevin McClory , and the three , together with Fleming and Bryce 's friend Ernest Cuneo , worked on a script . In October McClory introduced experienced screenwriter Jack Whittingham to the newly formed team , and by December 1959 McClory and Whittingham sent Fleming a script . Fleming had been having second thoughts on McClory 's involvement and , in January 1960 , explained his intention of delivering the screenplay to MCA , with a recommendation from him and Bryce that McClory act as producer . He additionally told McClory that if MCA rejected the film because of McClory 's involvement , then McClory should either sell himself to MCA , back out of the deal , or file a suit in court . 
 Working at Goldeneye between January and March 1960 , Fleming wrote the novel Thunderball , based on the screenplay written by himself , Whittingham and McClory . In March 1961 McClory read an advance copy , and he and Whittingham immediately petitioned the High Court in London for an injunction to stop publication . After two court actions , the second in November 1961 , Fleming offered McClory a deal , settling out of court . McClory gained the literary and film rights for the screenplay , while Fleming was given the rights to the novel , provided it was acknowledged as " based on a screen treatment by Kevin McClory , Jack Whittingham and the Author " . 
 Fleming 's books had always sold well , but in 1961 sales increased dramatically . On 17 March 1961 , four years after its publication and three years after the heavy criticism of Dr. No , an article in Life listed From Russia , with Love as one of US President John F. Kennedy 's ten favourite books . Kennedy and Fleming had previously met in Washington . This accolade and the associated publicity led to a surge in sales that made Fleming the biggest @-@ selling crime writer in the US . Fleming considered From Russia , with Love to be his best novel , although he admitted , " the great thing is that each one of the books seems to have been a favourite with one or other section of the public and none has yet been completely damned . " 
 In April 1961 , shortly before the second court case on Thunderball , Fleming had a heart attack during a regular weekly meeting at The Sunday Times . While he was convalescing , one of his friends , Duff Dunbar , gave him a copy of Beatrix Potter 's The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin and suggested that he take the time to write up the bedtime story that Fleming used to tell to his son Caspar each evening . Fleming attacked the project with gusto and wrote to his publisher , Michael Howard of Jonathan Cape , joking that " There is not a moment , even on the edge of the tomb , when I am not slaving for you " ; the result was Fleming 's only children 's novel , Chitty @-@ Chitty @-@ Bang @-@ Bang , which was published in October 1964 , two months after his death . 
 In June 1961 Fleming sold a six @-@ month option on the film rights to his published and future James Bond novels and short stories to Harry Saltzman . Saltzman formed the production vehicle Eon Productions along with Albert R. " Cubby " Broccoli , and after an extensive search , they hired Sean Connery on a five @-@ film deal , beginning with Dr. No ( 1962 ) . Connery 's depiction of Bond affected the literary character ; in You Only Live Twice , the first book written after Dr. No was released , Fleming gave Bond a sense of humour that was not present in the previous stories . 
 Fleming 's second non @-@ fiction book was published in November 1963 : Thrilling Cities , a reprint of a series of Sunday Times articles based on Fleming 's impressions of a number of world cities in trips taken during 1959 and 1960 . Approached in 1964 by producer Norman Felton to write a spy series for television , Fleming provided several ideas , including the names of characters Napoleon Solo and April Dancer , for the series The Man from U.N.C.L.E. However , Fleming withdrew from the project following a request from Eon Productions , who were keen to avoid any legal problems that might occur if the project overlapped with the Bond films . 
 In January 1964 Fleming went to Goldeneye for what proved to be his last holiday and wrote the first draft of The Man with the Golden Gun . He was dissatisfied with it and wrote to William Plomer , the copy editor of his novels , asking for it to be rewritten . Fleming became increasingly unhappy with the book and considered rewriting it , but was dissuaded by Plomer , who considered it viable for publication . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Fleming was a heavy smoker and drinker throughout his adult life , and suffered from heart disease . In 1961 , aged 53 , he suffered a heart attack and struggled to recuperate . On 11 August 1964 , while staying at a hotel in Canterbury , Fleming went to the Royal St George 's Golf Club for lunch and later dined at his hotel with friends . The day had been tiring for him , and he collapsed with another heart attack shortly after the meal . Fleming died at age 56 in the early morning of 12 August 1964 — his son Caspar 's twelfth birthday . His last recorded words were an apology to the ambulance drivers for having inconvenienced them , saying " I am sorry to trouble you chaps . I don 't know how you get along so fast with the traffic on the roads these days . " Fleming was buried in the churchyard of <unk> village , near Swindon . 
 Fleming 's last two books , The Man with the Golden Gun and Octopussy and The Living Daylights , were published posthumously . The Man with the Golden Gun was published eight months after Fleming 's death and had not been through the full editing process by Fleming . As a result , the novel was thought by publishing company Jonathan Cape to be thin and " feeble " . The publishers had passed the manuscript to Kingsley Amis to read on holiday , although they did not use his suggestions . Fleming 's biographer Henry Chandler observes that the novel " received polite and rather sad reviews , recognising that the book had effectively been left half @-@ finished , and as such did not represent Fleming at the top of his game " . The final Bond book , containing two short stories , Octopussy and The Living Daylights , was published in Britain on 23 June 1966 . 
 In October 1975 , Fleming 's son Caspar , aged 23 , committed suicide by drug overdose and was buried with his father . Fleming 's widow , Ann , died in 1981 and was buried with her husband and their son . 
 = = Writing = = 
 The author Raymond Benson , who later wrote a series of Bond novels , noted that Fleming 's books fall into two distinct periods along stylistic lines . Those books written between 1953 and 1960 tend to concentrate on " mood , character development , and plot advancement " , while those released between 1961 and 1966 incorporate more detail and imagery . Benson argues that Fleming had become " a master storyteller " by the time he wrote Thunderball in 1961 . 
 Jeremy Black divides the series based on the villains Fleming created , a division supported by fellow academic Christoph Linder . Thus the early books from Casino Royale to For Your Eyes Only are classed as " Cold War stories " , with SMERSH as the antagonists , followed by Blofeld and SPECTRE as Bond 's opponents in the three novels Thunderball , On Her Majesty 's Secret Service and You Only Live Twice , after the thawing of East – West relations . Black and Linder both classify the remaining books — The Man with the Golden Gun , Octopussy and The Living Daylights and The Spy Who Loved Me — as " the later Fleming stories " . 
 = = = Style and technique = = = 
 Fleming said of his work , " while thrillers may not be Literature with a capital L , it is possible to write what I can best describe as ' thrillers designed to be read as literature ' " . He named Raymond Chandler , Dashiell Hammett , Eric Ambler and Graham Greene as influences . William Cook in the New Statesman considered James Bond to be " the culmination of an important but much @-@ maligned tradition in English literature . As a boy , Fleming devoured the Bulldog Drummond tales of Lieutenant Colonel H. C. McNeile ( aka " Sapper " ) and the Richard Hannay stories of John Buchan . His genius was to repackage these antiquated adventures to fit the fashion of postwar Britain ... In Bond , he created a Bulldog Drummond for the jet age . " Umberto Eco considered Mickey Spillane to have been another major influence . 
 In May 1963 Fleming wrote a piece for Books and Bookmen magazine in which he described his approach to writing Bond books : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " Benson identified what he described as the " Fleming Sweep " , the use of " hooks " at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next . The hooks combine with what Anthony Burgess calls " a heightened journalistic style " to produce " a speed of narrative , which hustles the reader past each danger point of mockery " . 
 Umberto Eco analysed Fleming 's works from a <unk> point of view , and identified a series of oppositions within the storylines that provide structure and narrative , including : 
 Eco also noted that the Bond villains tend to come from Central Europe or from Slavic or Mediterranean countries and have a mixed heritage and " complex and obscure origins " . Eco found that the villains were generally asexual or homosexual , inventive , organisationally astute , and wealthy . Black observed the same point : " Fleming did not use class enemies for his villains instead relying on physical distortion or ethnic identity ... Furthermore , in Britain foreign villains used foreign servants and employees ... This racism reflected not only a pronounced theme of interwar adventure writing , such as the novels of Buchan , but also wider literary culture . " Writer Louise Welsh found that the novel Live and Let Die " taps into the paranoia that some sectors of white society were feeling " as the civil rights movements challenged prejudice and inequality . 
 Fleming used well @-@ known brand names and everyday details to support a sense of realism . Kingsley Amis called this " the Fleming effect " , describing it as " the imaginative use of information , whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond 's world ... [ is ] bolted down to some sort of reality , or at least counter @-@ balanced . " 
 = = = Major themes = = = 
 = = = = Britain 's position in the world = = = = 
 The Bond books were written in post @-@ war Britain , when the country was still an imperial power . As the series progressed , the British Empire was in decline ; journalist William Cook observed that " Bond pandered to Britain 's inflated and increasingly insecure self @-@ image , flattering us with the fantasy that Britannia could still punch above her weight . " This decline of British power was referred to in several of the novels ; in From Russia , with Love , it manifested itself in Bond 's conversations with Darko Kerim , when Bond admits that in England , " we don 't show teeth any more — only gums . " The theme is strongest in one of the later books of the series , the 1964 novel You Only Live Twice , in conversations between Bond and the head of Japan 's secret intelligence service , Tiger Tanaka . Fleming was acutely aware of the loss of British prestige in the 1950s and early 60s , particularly during the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation , when he had Tanaka accuse Britain of throwing away the empire " with both hands " . 
 Black points to the defections of four members of MI6 to the Soviet Union as having a major impact on how Britain was viewed in US intelligence circles . The last of the defections was that of Kim Philby in January 1963 , while Fleming was still writing the first draft of You Only Live Twice . The briefing between Bond and M is the first time in the twelve books that Fleming acknowledges the defections . Black contends that the conversation between M and Bond allows Fleming to discuss the decline of Britain , with the defections and the Profumo Affair of 1963 as a backdrop . Two of the defections had taken place shortly before Fleming wrote Casino Royale , and the book can be seen as the writer 's " attempt to reflect the disturbing moral ambiguity of a post @-@ war world that could produce traitors like Burgess and Maclean " , according to Lycett . 
 By the end of the series , in the 1965 novel , The Man with the Golden Gun , Black notes that an independent inquiry was undertaken by the Jamaican judiciary , while the CIA and MI6 were recorded as acting " under the closest liaison and direction of the Jamaican CID " : this was the new world of a non @-@ colonial , independent Jamaica , further underlining the decline of the British Empire . The decline was also reflected in Bond 's use of US equipment and personnel in several novels . Uncertain and shifting geopolitics led Fleming to replace the Russian organisation SMERSH with the international terrorist group SPECTRE in Thunderball , permitting " evil unconstrained by ideology " . Black argues that SPECTRE provides a measure of continuity to the remaining stories in the series . 
 = = = = Effects of the war = = = = 
 A theme throughout the series was the effect of the Second World War . The Times journalist Ben Macintyre considers that Bond was " the ideal antidote to Britain 's postwar austerity , rationing and the looming premonition of lost power " , at a time when coal and many items of food were still rationed . Fleming often used the war as a signal to establish good or evil in characters : in For Your Eyes Only , the villain , Hammerstein , is a former Gestapo officer , while the sympathetic Royal Canadian Mounted Police officer , Colonel Johns , served with the British under Montgomery in the Eighth Army . Similarly , in Moonraker , Drax ( Graf Hugo von der Drache ) is a " megalomaniac German Nazi who masquerades as an English gentleman " , and his assistant , Krebbs , bears the same name as Hitler 's last Chief of Staff . In this , Fleming " exploits another British cultural antipathy of the 1950s . Germans , in the wake of the Second World War , made another easy and obvious target for bad press . " As the series progressed , the threat of a re @-@ emergent Germany was overtaken by concerns about the Cold War , and the novels changed their focus accordingly . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Periodically in the series , the topic of comradeship or friendship arises , with a male ally who works with Bond on his mission . Raymond Benson believes that the relationships Bond has with his allies " add another dimension to Bond 's character , and ultimately , to the thematic continuity of the novels " . In Live and Let Die , agents Quarrel and Leiter represent the importance of male friends and allies , seen especially in Bond 's response to the shark attack on Leiter ; Benson observes that " the loyalty Bond feels towards his friends is as strong as his commitment to his job " . In Dr. No , Quarrel is " an indispensable ally " . Benson sees no evidence of discrimination in their relationship and notes Bond 's genuine remorse and sadness at Quarrel 's death . 
 = = = = The " traitor within " = = = = 
 From the opening novel in the series , the theme of treachery was strong . Bond 's target in Casino Royale , Le Chiffre , was the paymaster of a French communist trade union , and the overtones of a fifth column struck a chord with the largely British readership , as Communist influence in the trade unions had been an issue in the press and parliament , especially after the defections of Burgess and Maclean in 1951 . The " traitor within " theme continued in Live and Let Die and Moonraker . 
 = = = = Good versus evil = = = = 
 Raymond Benson considered the most obvious theme of the series to be good versus evil . This crystallised in Goldfinger with the Saint George motif , which is stated explicitly in the book : " Bond sighed wearily . Once more into the breach , dear friend ! This time it really was St George and the dragon . And St George had better get a move on and do something " ; Black notes that the image of St. George is an English , rather than British personification . 
 = = = = Anglo @-@ American relations = = = = 
 The Bond novels also dealt with the question of Anglo @-@ American relations , reflecting the central role of the US in the defence of the West . In the aftermath of the Second World War , tensions surfaced between a British government trying to retain its empire and the American desire for a capitalist new world order , but Fleming did not focus on this directly , instead creating " an impression of the normality of British imperial rule and action " . Author and journalist Christopher Hitchens observed that " the central paradox of the classic Bond stories is that , although superficially devoted to the Anglo @-@ American war against communism , they are full of contempt and resentment for America and Americans " . Although Fleming was aware of this tension between the two countries , he did not focus on it strongly . Kingsley Amis , in his exploration of Bond in The James Bond Dossier , pointed out that " Leiter , such a nonentity as a piece of characterization ... he , the American , takes orders from Bond , the Britisher , and that Bond is constantly doing better than he " . 
 For three of the novels , Goldfinger , Live and Let Die and Dr. No , it is Bond the British agent who has to sort out what turns out to be an American problem , and Black points out that although it is American assets that are under threat in Dr. No , a British agent and a British warship , HMS Narvik , are sent with British soldiers to the island at the end of the novel to settle the matter . Fleming became increasingly jaundiced about America , and his comments in the penultimate novel You Only Live Twice reflect this ; Bond 's responses to Tanaka 's comments reflect the declining relationship between Britain and America — in sharp contrast to the warm , co @-@ operative relationship between Bond and Leiter in the earlier books . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the late 1950s the author Geoffrey Jenkins had suggested to Fleming that he write a Bond novel set in South Africa , and sent him his own idea for a plot outline which , according to Jenkins , Fleming felt had great potential . After Fleming 's death , Jenkins was commissioned by Bond publishers Glidrose Productions to write a continuation Bond novel , Per Fine Ounce , but it was never published . Starting with Kingsley Amis 's Colonel Sun , under the pseudonym " Robert Markham " in 1968 , several authors have been commissioned to write Bond novels , including Sebastian Faulks , who was asked by Ian Fleming Publications to write a new Bond novel in observance of what would have been Fleming 's 100th birthday in 2008 . 
 During his lifetime Fleming sold thirty million books ; double that number were sold in the two years following his death . In 2008 The Times ranked Fleming fourteenth on its list of " The 50 greatest British writers since 1945 " . In 2002 Ian Fleming Publications announced the launch of the CWA Ian Fleming Steel Dagger award , presented by the Crime Writers ' Association to the best thriller , adventure or spy novel originally published in the UK . 
 The Eon Productions series of Bond films , which started in 1962 with Dr. No , continued after Fleming 's death . Along with two non @-@ Eon produced films , there have been twenty four Eon films , with the most recent , Spectre , released in October 2015 . The Eon Productions series has grossed over $ 6 @.@ 2 billion worldwide , making it the one of the highest grossing film series . 
 The influence of Bond in the cinema and in literature is evident in films and books as diverse as the Austin Powers series , Carry On Spying and the Jason Bourne character . In 2011 Fleming became the first English @-@ language writer to have an international airport named after him : Ian Fleming International Airport , near Oracabessa , Jamaica , was officially opened on 12 January 2011 by Jamaican Prime Minister Bruce Golding and Fleming 's niece , Lucy . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = Biographical films = = 
 Goldeneye : The Secret Life of Ian Fleming , 1989 . A television film starring Charles Dance as Fleming . The film focuses on Fleming 's life during the Second World War , his love life and the writing of James Bond . 
 <unk> : The Secret Life of Ian Fleming , 1990 . A television film starring Jason Connery ( son of Sean ) as Fleming in a Bond @-@ like adventure set during World War II . 
 Ian Fleming : <unk> , 2005 . A television drama @-@ documentary , first broadcast on BBC on 28 August 2005 . Ben Daniels portrayed Fleming . 
 Ian Fleming : Where Bond Began , 2008 . Television documentary about the life of Ian Fleming , broadcast 19 October 2008 by the BBC . Presented by former Bond girl , Joanna Lumley . 
 The film Age of Heroes is based on the exploits of 30 Commando ; James D 'Arcy played Fleming . 
 Fleming : The Man Who Would Be Bond , a BBC America television four @-@ episode mini @-@ series , broadcast in January and February 2014 , starring Dominic Cooper in the title role . 
 = Radioplane RP @-@ 77 = 
 The Radioplane RP @-@ 77 was a small target drone missile , constructed largely of plastic materials , produced by the Radioplane division of the Northrop Corporation . Although the RP @-@ 77D was successfully tested by the United States Army , the decision was made not to procure the aircraft . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 The development of the RP @-@ 77 began in 1955 . Similar in outline to Radioplane 's earlier OQ @-@ 19 , four prototypes of the RP @-@ 77 were constructed , two each of the RP @-@ 77 , powered by a four @-@ cylinder McCulloch piston engine , and of the RP @-@ 77A , powered by a six @-@ cylinder Lycoming engine . Results of flight @-@ testing were insufficient to interest the U.S. Army , however in 1957 a proposal for an improved RP @-@ 77D , powered by a Boeing 502 turboprop , resulted in a contract for the construction of 20 aircraft . 
 The design of the RP @-@ 77D made extensive use of glass @-@ polyester plastic materials . The drone was launched using a rocket @-@ assisted take @-@ off system consisting of four Loki rockets , and was fitted with a radio control apparatus that , with the assistance of radar tracking , allowed the drone to be operated at a considerable distance from its launching point . In addition to equipment typically carried by target drones , the RP @-@ 77D could be equipped with reconnaissance or meteorological sensors , or with air sampling equipment . The RP @-@ 77D utilised the <unk> tracking system , developed by Radioplane , using audio frequency tones for control . Tip tanks allowed for carriage of additional fuel to extend the aircraft 's range , and recovery at the end of the flight was by parachute . 
 An improved version of the RP @-@ 77D was projected , with provision for launching RP @-@ 76 target missiles . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Following its maiden flight in March 1958 , evaluation of the RP @-@ 77D by the U.S. Army took place throughout the remainder of that year , nearly 40 test flights being conducted . Although the test results were generally satisfactory , it was determined that the performance of the aircraft was an insufficient improvement over existing types in service to have the aircraft ordered into production , and the project was cancelled , along with the improved RP @-@ 86 , a dedicated reconnaissance variant . 
 Following the termination of the Army 's evaluation , Radioplane , as a private venture , conducted an improvement program for the RP @-@ 77D , fitting the aircraft with a larger wing , along with other modifications that improved the performance of the drone . However these improvements were insufficient to produce a renewed interest from the Army . 
 = = Variants = = 
 RP @-@ 77 
 Prototype model powered by McCulloch piston engine ; two built . 
 RP @-@ 77A 
 Prototype model powered by Lycoming IMO @-@ 360 piston engine ; two built 
 RP @-@ 77B 
 Proposed version of RP @-@ 77 with turbo @-@ supercharged McCulloch engine , none built . 
 RP @-@ <unk> 
 Proposed version of RP @-@ 77A with turbo @-@ supercharged Lycoming SO @-@ <unk> engine , none built . 
 RP @-@ 77D 
 Production prototype with Boeing 502 turboprop ; twenty built for evaluation . 
 RP @-@ 86 
 Proposed reconnaissance version of RP @-@ 77D ; none built . 
 = = Specifications ( RP @-@ 77D ) = = 
 Data from 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : None 
 Length : 14 ft 10 in ( 4 @.@ 53 m ) 
 Wingspan : 15 ft 3 in ( 4 @.@ 66 m ) 
 Height : 5 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 58 m ) 
 Gross weight : 1 @,@ 050 lb ( 476 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Boeing 502 @-@ 10F turboprop , 285 shp ( 213 kW ) 
 Propellers : 2 @-@ bladed 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 425 mph ( 684 km / h ; 369 kn ) 
 Endurance : One hour at 40 @,@ 000 feet 
 Service ceiling : 47 @,@ 000 ft ( 14 @,@ 326 m ) 
 = Crimewave = 
 Crimewave is a 1986 American comedy film directed by Sam Raimi written by him and the Coen brothers , and starring Louise Lasser , Paul L. Smith , Brion James , Sheree J. Wilson , Edward R. Pressman , Bruce Campbell , and Reed Birney , with Campbell also serving as a producer . Following the commercial success of The Evil Dead ( 1981 ) , Raimi and Campbell decided to collaborate on another project . Joel Coen of the Coen brothers served as one of the editors on The Evil Dead , and worked with Raimi on the screenplay . Production was difficult for several members of the crew , and the production studio , Embassy Pictures , refused to allow Raimi to edit the film . Several arguments broke out during the shoot for the film , because of continued interference by the studio . 
 An unusual slapstick mix of film noir , black comedy and B @-@ movie conventions , the film portrays bizarre situations involving a death row inmate . The film was a box @-@ office flop , and has since fallen into obscurity outside of fans of Campbell and Raimi . Few critics reviewed the film , though the little amount of critical attention it received was mostly negative . Several elements of the film influenced later productions by Raimi , and the failure of Crimewave directly led to the inception of Evil Dead II ( 1987 ) . The film has achieved the status of a minor cult film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Victor Ajax has been sentenced to death , sitting in an electric chair . In a flashback , we learn that Victor once was a promising young technician in the employ of Trend @-@ Odegard Security . Mr. Trend , co @-@ owner of the company , has learned of a plan by his partner to sell the company to Renaldo " The Heel " and responds by hiring two exterminators who promise to " kill all sizes " in order to eliminate Odegard and his plan . When Victor , who has been installing security cameras in Trend 's apartment building , seems about to go back to the store , Trend distracts him with a lecture about " the grand design " and sends Victor on a quest to find his dream girl . 
 The dream girl is found in the form of Nancy , who responds minimally to Vic but is enamored of Renaldo . Victor and several residents of the building , including Mrs. Trend , run afoul of the killers , and a seemingly random series of slapstick murders occur , for all of which Victor is ultimately blamed . Nancy inevitably becomes target and Vic saves her and kills the exterminators after a long comical fight sequence . The flashback ends and Victor is in the electric chair , and awaits his execution while an elaborate race sequence occurs in which Nancy , accompanied by several nuns , drive manically , Nancy at the wheel , to the scene in order to prove his innocence . Before the switch is pulled however , Nancy arrives just in time and clears his name . The movie concludes with their marriage . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 By 1983 , long @-@ time friends Campbell and Raimi had collaborated on several projects together . The duo had just completed the production of Within the Woods and The Evil Dead , the latter of which was a box @-@ office and critical hit . Following his involvement in The Evil Dead , Campbell had difficulty establishing a career as an actor . He appeared on the soap opera Generations , and in several local Detroit commercial ads . Meanwhile , Raimi had been collaborating with the Ethan and Joel Coen on a screenplay . Joel Coen had been one of the editors on The Evil Dead , which led to him befriending Raimi . Joel Coen 's experience editing The Evil Dead inspired him to complete his own film , Blood Simple , which was released to critical acclaim . The script would later develop into Relentless , a narrative about " two crazed killers . " 
 Raimi was not initially optimistic about the talents of the Coen brothers . He recounted that Ethan was " just a statistic accountant at Macy 's at the time . " After reading the Blood Simple script , however , Campbell commented that the screenplay was " great " , comparing it to the work of Alfred Hitchcock . It featured " mild @-@ mannered leading men " who " get caught up in a web of fear , murder and mayhem " , elements that often defined the films directed by Hitchcock . Distributor Irvin Shapiro , who was instrumental in the commercial success of The Evil Dead , did not like the title of Relentless . He suggested putting " X " and " Murder " in the title , believing it would be more enticing to audiences . With Shapiro 's suggestion in mind , Raimi gave the film the tentative title of The XYZ Murders . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Given the commercial success of The Evil Dead , studio financial backing for the new project came quickly . Though Raimi and Campbell did not profit from the film , the studio believed in Raimi , initially allowing the director complete creative control on the project ; however , executives later took control of the production . Raimi and Campbell developed the project with Embassy Pictures ' producer Norman Lear , who supposedly had a " Midas touch " , because of the consistent success he had attained from various television productions . He suggested the title Crimewave , which was ultimately used . 
 Raimi and the studio clashed several times during production . The first disagreement between the director and the executives stemmed from the latter 's insistence on casting a " Hollywood " actor in the lead role instead of Raimi 's long @-@ time collaborator and friend Campbell . In his 2002 autobiography If <unk> Could Kill : Confessions of a B Movie Actor , Campbell commented about how difficult it was working with more established producers ; " jumping into the big time meant dealing with the excruciatingly specific and alternately vague demands of a studio , ... Hollywood executives took an interest in everything . " Campbell was surprised that he had to audition for the lead role , as he did not have to test for The Evil Dead . Campbell and his photographer friend Mike <unk> used a 16 mm film camera and shot a scene to show to the producers . Upon viewing it , the producers asserted that " Campbell will not star in this film " . In retaliation , Raimi lengthened a supporting role and gave it to Campbell : the character of Renaldo " The Heel " . This allowed for Campbell to be present through the production . 
 Raimi budgeted the film at $ 2 @.@ 5 million , an amount the studio greenlit . But the calculations had not taken union fees and regulations into account , making the proposed budgeting and scheduling unrealistic . In addition , the crew were talked into spending three times the allotted money for one shooting location . The shoot quickly went both over budget and over schedule . At that point , the studio stepped in , with executives demanding cuts in the script , budget restrictions , layoffs , and their own supervision of the project . The studio also insisted on reviewing every batch of dailies , criticizing the decision to use cast and crew members ( including Campbell ) as extras in several scenes ( a Raimi trademark known as " <unk> " ) . 
 Even without Embassy 's interference , however , the production was plagued with difficulties . According to Campbell , lead actress Lasser — under the influence of cocaine — fired her make @-@ up artist . She insisted that she apply all her own make @-@ up , despite objections from the cast . She would often show up on set with poorly applied " clown make @-@ up " and messed up hair , oblivious to how she appeared . There were occasions when she outright refused to leave her trailer , to the annoyance of the cast and crew . Production was often affected by " weird " events ; actor Brion James trashed his hotel room in an attempt to " exorcise a ghost from his light fixtures " . 
 At one point , shooting was to take place at a bridge overlooking the Detroit River , which was frozen at the time . The script , however , called for clear and running water , meaning that the crew had to brave dangerously low temperatures and conditions to clear the ice ; finally they blew up the ice with dynamite . At another time , the crew spent a week filming on a Detroit street after dark , directly under a nursing home , with huge wind machines blowing for long hours . One evening a glass bottle with a note in it crashed to the ground from an upper floor . The note inside read , " The noise is keeping me awake all night long and I am getting sick . I am dying because of you . " John Cameron , second assistant director on the film , would later remark , " I see Crimewave as a real turning point in a certain way , because if you survived that experience , nothing in the business could ever be as hard again . " Raimi cited the experience as one of the least favorite moments of his career . 
 = = = Post production = = = 
 In post @-@ production , Embassy 's self @-@ imposed role in making Crimewave was even greater . Although Raimi , Tapert , and Campbell insisted that they had made the film as partners , the studio refused — because of the already ballooning costs — to pay for Campbell to stay in Los Angeles during post @-@ production ( although the executives later compromised ) . The studio replaced Raimi 's music composer , Joseph <unk> , with one of its own choosing . It did the same with the editor , removing Raimi 's influence over the film 's final cut . 
 An argument broke out near the end of the post @-@ production between Campbell and the producers . Campbell argued that he and Raimi had always closely been involved with their own film 's editing , describing the behavior of the producers as " nickel @-@ and @-@ dime @-@ bullshit " . One of the producers replied by calling Campbell an " asshole " , commenting that the crew had gone severely over budget . The difficulty during production left a negative impression on Campbell , who insisted that he wanted to never work with big @-@ budget producers again , insisting that the conduct was " soulless " and " just a business . " Raimi commented negatively about the process too , musing that " it was really wrong . It was such a horrible , horrible , horrible , depressing scene . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After all the editing imposed by the studio , Crimewave still became a box @-@ office flop . Campbell reasoned that " cross @-@ genre " films " send marketing people scurrying under a desk " . According to him , the film was hard to market because it featured elements of horror films , comedies , and dramas . To make matters even more confusing , in France and Italy , the film 's title was changed to Death on the Grill and The Two Craziest Killers in the World respectively . In the United States , the film was only released in Kansas and Alaska , to make the film eligible for HBO broadcasting . Upon release , the film " went down in box @-@ office flames " , with Campbell commenting " it wasn 't released . It escaped ! " The " only good " screening came the Seattle International Film Festival , where the movie was promoted as a novelty film . 
 Along with Raimi and Campbell , film critics were largely dismissive of the film . A writer for Time Out gave a negative review , writing " despite its ambition and a Coen Brothers script credit , Raimi 's second film was a disappointment after his astonishing debut The Evil Dead . " The writer did however compliment some of the set pieces featured in the film , ultimately commenting that only people interested in the early work by Raimi would be interested . Film Junk writer Sean Harley commented that the main appeal of the film is that it was directed and written by notable artists , insisting " based on their impressive filmographies and the cult followings that both have amassed , a collaboration of this magnitude would be a cinematic event like no other . " However , he commented that the film was a disappointment , noting that fans of the films by Raimi could likely enjoy it . He summarized that the film was " not a particularly brilliant movie , and it 's easily one of the weakest projects that any of these great filmmakers have been involved in " , giving it a weak recommendation . 
 Leonard Maltin awarded the film two and a half stars out of four , describing it a " weird , almost incoherent crime story . " Celluloid Dream 's Simon Hill commented that the writing was a disappointment , musing that it did however feature " glimpses of director Raimi would become " . A scene in a dentist office reminded him of a scene from Spider @-@ Man 2 , a film also directed by Raimi . He commented that " even in his small part Campbell is the most memorable character in the film " , also praising the performance of the two exterminators . Campbell also criticized the film , describing it as a " lesson about abject failure " , writing " no matter how you slice it , the film was a dog , and everyone involved can pretty much line up and take forty whacks . As filmmakers , we failed to execute a misguided concept and our studio refused us the benefit of any doubt . " The film has achieved the status of a minor cult film . In one of the few positive notices , MTV writer Adam Rosenberg described the film as " criminally underrated " . Rosenberg disagreed with the consensus about the film , labeling it as a " hard @-@ to @-@ find classic " . Kim Newman also called the film underrated , writing that the film " revels " in its slapstick nature , taking influence from everything from horror comics to The Three Stooges . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The production of the film was a " disaster " according to Campbell , who stated that usually " missteps " like Crimewave lead to the end of a director 's career . Other people involved with the film expressed similar disappointment with the project . Fortunately , Raimi had the studio support to make a sequel to The Evil Dead , which he initially decided to make out of desperation . His career quickly recovered after Evil Dead II was filmed and released in 1987 , and was a box office success . The Coen brothers expressed similar dissatisfaction with the film , and have since directed every one of their screenplays with the exception of the 2012 film Gambit . 
 Raimi and the Coens remained friends , and the duo cast Campbell in some of their films such as The Hudsucker Proxy ( 1994 ) and Intolerable Cruelty ( 2003 ) , the former of which was co @-@ written by Raimi . Elements of Crimewave were re @-@ used by frequent Raimi collaborator Josh Becker for the movie Lunatics : A Love Story , as well as by Raimi himself in Spider @-@ Man and its sequels . In 2010 , a Funny or Die comedy video featuring actors James Franco and Bill Hader paid tribute to Raimi , and in parody of a scene from Spider @-@ Man 2 the actors discussed Crimewave among Raimi 's other films . Collider 's Matt Goldberg stated , " I think this sketch features the first reference to Crimewave ever " . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Shout ! Factory released Crimewave on Blu @-@ ray / DVD Combo Pack on May 14 , 2013 . 
 = Starky 's = 
 Starky 's Restaurant and Bar , or simply Starky 's ( sometimes stylized as <unk> ) , was a gay bar and restaurant in Portland , Oregon 's Kerns neighborhood , in the United States . Established in 1984 , the venue became a fixture in Portland 's gay community before closing in 2015 . It hosted LGBT events and served as a gathering space for leather enthusiasts and the Oregon Bears , among other groups . Starky 's received a generally positive reception and was most known for its Bloody Marys , brunch , and outdoor seating . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 Starky 's , located at <unk> Southeast Stark Street , was a gay bar and restaurant in Portland 's Kerns neighborhood . It was established in 1984 and housed in a building that was constructed in 1935 . Starky 's was known for its patio and outdoor seating , in addition to serving American cuisine , including burgers and steak . Joe <unk> and Greg <unk> purchased the bar in September 2004 . 
 In 2015 , Willamette Week described the establishment as a " <unk> mountain chalet with <unk> food that seems as domestic as Grandpa 's house , with busy Thursday karaoke , ' bottomless ' mimosas at its essential Sunday brunch , and a charmingly dirty @-@ avuncular bartender who seems to have an answer for everything " . Following its closure , the newspaper 's Matthew <unk> called Starky 's a " little mountain chalet " and " friendly little neighborhood bar catering to longtime regulars in the gay community with raucous karaoke , home @-@ style food and a Sunday brunch that offered up bottomless cheap @-@ bubbly mimosas unless you misbehaved " . 
 Beginning in late 2014 , <unk> and <unk> listed the building and business for sale intermittently , and sold Starky 's for $ 1 @.@ 2 million in March 2015 . The duo planned to retire and expressed a willingness to sell the rights to the name and business . The bar and restaurant closed on September 13 , 2015 , after operating for 28 years . The building that housed Starky 's was demolished during November – December 2015 , and was replaced by a three @-@ story apartment building . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Starky 's was a longtime fixture in Portland 's gay community . It served as a gathering space for groups such as Blackout Leather Productions , a nonprofit organization and volunteer group of leather enthusiasts in Oregon and southwest Washington , and the Oregon Bears . Historically , Starky 's sold tickets to Portland Gay Men 's Chorus performances and hosted ( or was as a starting location for ) gay pride events . The venue also hosted special events such as : a 2009 celebration and fundraiser to send eight musicians from the Rose City Gay Freedom Band to perform at Barack Obama 's inauguration , a 2013 PQ Monthly press party , Oregon Bears ' 2013 car wash fundraiser for Our House and other nonprofits , the Red Dress Party , and " Civic Pride " , which was presented by City Club of Portland in June 2014 to commemorate gay pride and LGBT Pride Month . The latter event featured guests from local organizations including : Basic Rights Oregon , Cascade AIDS Project , Equity Foundation , GLSEN Oregon , Oregon Gay and Lesbian Law Association , Oregon Safe Schools and Communities Coalition , PFLAG Portland and the PFLAG Black Chapter , Portland Latino Gay Pride , and Rosetown Ramblers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Starky 's received a generally positive reception and was most known for its Bloody Marys , brunch , and outdoor seating . In 2013 , Jaime Dunkle of the Daily Vanguard , Portland State University 's student newspaper , included Starky 's as one of the " Top 5 Gay Clubs / Bars in Portland , " writing : " For maxing and relaxing : Starky 's is the best outdoor gay bar . Word on the street is that they make a killer Bloody Mary and have a yummy brunch menu . They 're old school and have been in Portland since 1984 . Check it out if you want to get away from the throbbing , meat @-@ market discos . " In 2014 , <unk> contributor Byron Beck included Starky 's in his list of the " Top 12 Gay Clubs in Portland " , writing : " Starky 's is for those who remember that brunch is best served on Sunday with a Bloody Mary . This true original is more restaurant than bar but that doesn 't stop people from coming here for some of the stiffest drinks in town . " In 2015 , Willamette Week contributors included Starky 's in their list of favorite Portland gay bars . 
 = Ki ( Devin Townsend Project album ) = 
 Ki ( / <unk> / KEE ) is the eleventh studio album by Canadian musician Devin Townsend , and the first of six albums in the Devin Townsend Project series . The album was released on May 25 , 2009 , on Townsend 's independent record label HevyDevy Records . 
 Townsend , the founder , songwriter , and frontman of extreme metal band Strapping Young Lad and progressive metal group The Devin Townsend Band , dissolved both bands in 2006 to spend time with his family and avoid the burnout of touring and interviewing . After a period of self @-@ discovery and a year @-@ long break from songwriting , Townsend began work on a four @-@ album series to clarify his identity as a musician . Ki includes themes of self @-@ control and sobriety , and is musically subtler than much of the artist 's previous work , consisting of ambient rock music interlaced with tentative bursts of heavy metal . 
 The album was written , produced , mixed , and co @-@ engineered by Townsend , who also performed guitar and vocals . Townsend assembled a supporting group of Vancouver musicians including blues drummer Duris Maxwell , rock bassist Jean Savoie , keyboardist Dave Young , and guest vocalist Ché Aimee Dorval to play on the album . While some critics found the album uneven , Ki received generally positive reviews for its unexpected musical direction , along with its production , vocal dynamics , and mix of influences . 
 = = Background = = 
 After disbanding his extreme metal band Strapping Young Lad and his progressive metal project The Devin Townsend Band in 2006 , Townsend shaved off his trademark " <unk> " hairstyle and gave up alcohol and marijuana . Townsend found it " disconcerting " that he had difficulty writing music without drugs , and that he had trouble identifying his purpose as a musician . He spent a year producing albums in absence of writing , but found it unrewarding and decided to " pick up the guitar and just write . " This began a period of self @-@ discovery where he learned " how to create without drugs " . 
 Over two years , Townsend wrote over 60 songs , and found that they fit into " four distinct styles " . In March 2009 , Townsend announced his plans for a four @-@ album series called the Devin Townsend Project , with the goal of clarifying his musical identity and being " accountable " for the persona he projects to the public . Ki , the first album of the Devin Townsend Project , is written to " set the stage " for the subsequent albums . The word " ki " represents the Japanese concept of " life force " ( 氣 , " ki " ) . Townsend chose the name as an homage to the 1981 Kitarō album of the same name , which he " loved as a kid " . 
 The project 's concept includes a different group of musicians for each album . For Ki , Townsend chose a group of musicians with whom he had not previously worked . He discovered Duris Maxwell , a blues drummer who has played with such acts as Heart , Jefferson Airplane , and Tommy Chong , in a blues club in northern Canada . Townsend was impressed by his energy and recruited him for Ki . Townsend also chose Jean Savoie , a music store employee who plays in a Beatles cover band , to play bass on the album . Maxwell and Savoie were ideal for the album , Townsend explained , because they had little experience playing heavy music , and had a fresh perspective that fit with Ki 's subtler sound . Townsend also brought back Dave Young , an ambient keyboardist who had played in The Devin Townsend Band , and recruited Vancouver artist Ché Aimee Dorval as a vocalist on several tracks . The album was primarily recorded , produced , and mixed from late 2008 to early 2009 at <unk> and Studio D ; the drums were recorded at Factory Studios in Vancouver . 
 = = Music and lyrical themes = = 
 Townsend channelled his new @-@ found self @-@ control and sobriety into Ki , a " restrained , melodic , and tranquil " album that is " a sharp contrast " to the heavy metal he is known for , while maintaining his " signature sound " . The album features undistorted guitar tones , live takes , no drum triggering , and relatively quiet mastering , with a musical style combining ambient , progressive rock , jazz rock , and psychedelic blues . The album 's recurring musical theme is " tension and release " , a gradual build in intensity which suddenly stops and gives way to " something relaxing " . The album 's musical style has been compared to Porcupine Tree , Chroma Key , and Pink Floyd , with Townsend 's vocals drawing comparisons to Steven Wilson and Steve Hackett . 
 Ki was mixed by Townsend , and features very little compression , in contrast with his usual wall @-@ of @-@ sound production style . Townsend explained that he originally " tried doing the wall @-@ of @-@ sound with it and it just kind of ruined it ... it turned it into a not @-@ so @-@ good Strapping record . " The album deliberately eschews the loudness wars , the recent music industry practice of competitively mastering audio to seem as loud as possible . " I officially pull my hat out of the loudness wars " , Townsend told his mastering engineer . The album 's songs were primarily written in open C tuning , except for " A Monday " , " Trainfire " , and " Disruptr " in open B , " Heaven 's End " and " Winter " in open B ♭ , and " Quiet Riot " in standard tuning . Townsend has cited Second Nature by The Young Gods , Paul Horn , Chants of India by Ravi Shankar , and Ween as influences on the album . 
 Townsend described Ki as both the introduction and the moral to the " larger concept " of the Devin Townsend Project . The album 's lyrical themes explore Townsend 's inner demons , past addictions , self @-@ acceptance , and his " newfound ability to say no . " The album opens with a brief instrumental that leads into " Coast " , a quiet , bass @-@ driven track that sets the stage for the album as a " metaphor for Devin 's newfound restraint . " Townsend described it as " the intro to the story , quiet , dark , haunted and unsure " . The track builds in intensity toward the end with layers of vocals , but rather than exploding into Strapping Young Lad – style metal , fades into " loose , bluesy guitar work " . " Disruptr " has been described as " a coffee @-@ house metal track " , contrasting light instrumentation with heavy metal – style songwriting and vocals in a way that one critic compared to Talking Heads . " Gato " proceeds in a similar vein , but is set apart with backing vocals by Dorval . " Disruptr " and " Gato " continue the musical theme ; each song builds in intensity toward the end but " stops and takes a deep breath " before proceeding . The album then fades into " Terminal " , an atmospheric track with quiet vocals that was co @-@ written by keyboardist Dave Young . 
 Townsend 's restraint reaches a breaking point on " Heaven 's End " , which Jon Wiederhorn of Revolver described as " a groovy pop song that morphs into a violent , acid @-@ drenched nightmare . " It is followed by " Ain 't Never Gonna Win " , a live studio jam by the album 's four musicians which was described by David E. Gehlke of the online magazine Blistering as " trippy " . " Trainfire " , a classic country – style song inspired by Elvis Presley 's cover of " Mystery Train " , addresses Townsend 's former addiction to pornography , which he described as " this crazy , crack cocaine on the internet that nobody wants to talk about . " The song continues the album 's theme of honesty and self @-@ acceptance , both about pornography and musical tastes . Townsend explained the song 's musical style , saying " yes , I like heavy music and am good at making it , but that is not all that I listen to , and that is not all that I want to play . " 
 The album 's climax is found in the title track , described by the artist as " a personal breakthrough " and is initially born out of a Grey Skies demo , " Soft , " previously released on Ass @-@ Sordid Demos II . " Ki " builds into a cyclical progression of arpeggios which Martin Popoff of Brave Words & Bloody Knuckles described as the album 's " <unk> " moment . It leads into " Quiet Riot " , an acoustic version of " Cum On Feel the Noize " with new lyrics . " Quiet Riot " , Townsend explained , " basically sums up the idea that , although I am ' damaged , ' I 'm fine , and have chosen to make my life better . " 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 Ki was released on Townsend 's independent record label HevyDevy Records on May 25 , 2009 , in Canada . It was released May 22 , 2009 , in Germany , May 25 , 2009 , in the rest of Europe , and June 16 , 2009 , in the United States by distributor InsideOut Music . A Japanese release on Marquee / Avalon was released on August 26 , 2009 . When all four albums in the series are completed , Townsend plans to release an eight @-@ disc special edition box set , including a DVD and various bonus material . 
 The album art was created by artist Konrad Palkiewicz , who created the art for Townsend 's ambient album The Hummer ( 2006 ) and directed the video for Strapping Young Lad 's " Almost Again " . The album art was designed to be viewed with a pair of 3 @-@ D glasses . The album cover is an image of " two faces in one " . Though " not authentic " , it is based on Native American and Chinese art . Palkiewicz directed a music video for the song " Coast " , which was released on Townsend 's website on July 28 , 2009 . The InsideOut releases come with an extra lyrics sheet and feature a green slipcase bearing the Devin Townsend Project logo , designed by Travis Smith . 
 = = Sales and critical reception = = 
 Ki reached number 26 on the Finnish Top 40 and number 179 on the French Top 200 , and appeared on the UK Indie and UK Rock charts . It sold 800 copies in its first week of release in the United States , and debuted at number 69 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart . Critical reception of the album was generally positive . Jon Wiederhorn of Revolver said the album is " well worth a listen " and praised the heavier tracks such as " Disruptr " and " Heaven 's End " , saying , " Townsend mostly contains his rage , but he 's at his best when he loses it . " Martin Popoff of Brave Words & Bloody Knuckles found the album to have an " odd identity " , with " all sorts of things going on just under the surface " that rewarded multiple listens . David E. Gehlke of Blistering was less impressed , and found the album inconsistent . Gehlke described " Winter " as " lush and gorgeous " , but felt that the album " fails to hit the mark " at other points , such as " Ain 't Never Gonna Win " and " Trainfire " . Tyler Munro of Sputnikmusic said Ki showed Townsend " at his loosest and most dynamic " , and praised Townsend 's and Dorval 's vocals , but felt the album was held back by musical repetition and its extended guitar jams . Greg Prato of Allmusic gave the album a moderate review , admiring Townsend 's unpredictability but feeling the album was not " the most gripping or groundbreaking album " in Townsend 's collection . Daniel Cairns of Chronicles of Chaos praised Ki as " a difficult , unusual collection of music " that " also might just be Townsend 's best yet . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Devin Townsend except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Devin Townsend – vocals , guitar , fretless bass guitar , ambience , programming , production , mixing , engineering 
 Duris Maxwell – drums 
 Jean Savoie – bass guitar 
 Dave Young – keys , piano , ambience 
 = = = Additional musicians = = = 
 Ché Aimee Dorval – additional vocals 
 Ryan Dahle – additional vocals ( " Gato " ) 
 Bjorn <unk> , Peter , Christopher , Grant , Corey , Jeremy , Ryan – additional vocals 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Adrian <unk> – recording assistance 
 Mike St. Jean – preproduction assistance 
 Brennan Chambers – mixing assistance 
 Sheldon <unk> – recording 
 Ryan Dahle – production , mixing ( " Quiet Riot " ) 
 T @-@ Roy – mastering 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Konrad J. Palkiewicz – visual consulting , layout , artwork 
 Erich Saide – photography 
 Omer Cordell – photography 
 Jeff Cohen – legal , management 
 Mike <unk> – legal , management 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Marcel Pronovost = 
 Joseph René Marcel Pronovost ( June 15 , 1930 – April 26 , 2015 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman and coach . He played in 1 @,@ 206 games over 20 National Hockey League ( NHL ) seasons and for the Detroit Red Wings and Toronto Maple Leafs between 1950 and 1970 . A top defenceman , Pronovost was named to four post @-@ season NHL All @-@ Star Teams and played in 11 All @-@ Star Games . He was a member of four Stanley Cup championships with the Red Wings , the first in 1950 , and won a fifth title with the Maple Leafs in 1967 . Pronovost was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame as a player in 1978 . 
 Pronovost began coaching in 1969 and spent several seasons behind the bench of the junior Hull Olympiques and Windsor Spitfires . He was head coach of the Chicago Cougars in the World Hockey Association 's inaugural season in 1972 – 73 , coached 104 games in the NHL for the Buffalo Sabres between 1977 and 1978 and was briefly an associate coach of the Red Wings . Pronovost worked for the NHL Central Scouting Bureau for five years until 1990 , when he was hired as a scout for the New Jersey Devils , with whom he was a member of three Stanley Cup championships , most recently in 2003 . The 53 @-@ year span between his first championship and the most recent is a Stanley Cup record . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pronovost was born June 15 , 1930 , in the community of Lac @-@ à @-@ la @-@ Tortue , Quebec . He was the third of 12 children , nine boys and three girls , of Leo and Juliette Pronovost . Leo was a construction worker who worked with aluminum and occasionally moved around ; the family settled in the nearby town of Shawinigan Falls by the time Marcel was five years old . 
 Cross @-@ country skiing was Pronovost 's first sport , but he quickly developed a passion for hockey . He began skating at the age of three years and was playing competitive hockey by age five . Pronovost played and studied at College Immaculate Conception Superior School ( CIC ) in Shawinigan Falls where he played centre and left wing . His team won the Quebec provincial midget hockey championship in 1944 – 45 . It was with CIC that Pronovost was discovered by National Hockey League ( NHL ) scouts . The Detroit Red Wings sent scout Marcel Côté to sign Larry and John Wilson at a Quebec tournament . Larry suggested that Côté observe Pronovost . As a result , he was also signed to the Red Wings . 
 Hockey was a significant part of life for the <unk> , and two of Marcel 's brothers followed him to the NHL : Claude was a goaltender who played three games and Jean played nearly 1 @,@ 000 at forward . In his autobiography , A Life in Hockey , Marcel argued that the NHL having only six teams until 1967 prevented some of his other brothers from reaching the league . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 The Red Wings placed Pronovost with the Windsor Spitfires , one of their junior teams in the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) , beginning in 1947 – 48 . The Spitfires were a dominant team that season ; Windsor finished with the best record in the OHA but lost the championship series to the Barrie Flyers after Detroit was forced to recall Windsor 's goaltender , Terry Sawchuk , to one of their minor league teams . Pronovost believed that the Spitfires would have won the league title and gone on to play for the Memorial Cup if they hadn 't lost Sawchuk . At the same time , Pronovost also played for the Detroit Auto Club team in the International Hockey League ( IHL ) . At the time an amateur league , the IHL based most of its teams in Detroit or Windsor and the majority of players were affiliated with the Red Wings . Playing in the two leagues prepared Pronovost for the rigors of an NHL schedule . He played 52 games that season , and 51 in 1948 – 49 . Pronovost permanently moved to defence during his tenure with the Spitfires . 
 Upon starting his professional career in 1949 – 50 , the Red Wings assigned Pronovost to the Omaha Knights of the United States Hockey League ( USHL ) . He appeared in 69 games for the Knights and scored 13 goals and 52 points . Pronovost set a scoring record by a defenceman and was named the USHL 's rookie of the year . He was also named to the First All @-@ Star Team . At 19 years of age , Pronovost was compared to legendary defenceman Eddie Shore and Detroit coach Jack Adams described him as being " one of those guys who comes around once every 20 years " . 
 = = = Detroit Red Wings = = = 
 The Red Wings brought Pronovost to Detroit at the conclusion of his USHL season . Gordie Howe had suffered a serious injury early in Detroit 's 1950 Stanley Cup Playoff series against the Toronto Maple Leafs forcing the team to move Red Kelly to forward and insert Pronovost into the lineup at defence . He made his NHL debut on April 6 , 1950 , in the fifth game of the series . Pronovost appeared in nine playoff games as Detroit eliminated the Maple Leafs then came back from a 3 – 2 series deficit in the final and defeated the New York Rangers in the final two games of the series to win the Stanley Cup . 
 The NHL All @-@ Star Game format of the time had the defending champion face a team of the all @-@ stars formed from the remaining teams . The 1950 All @-@ Star Game was played prior to the start of the 1950 – 51 season and Pronovost played in the contest , a 7 – 1 victory by Detroit . It was the first of 11 All @-@ Star Games which he would ultimately play . The Red Wings had been promoting Pronovost as their next great defenceman , but he suffered a broken cheekbone and a cracked bone in his ankle in separate incidents during the pre @-@ season . Not wanting to let the team down , he tried to play through the injuries but his performance suffered and by December 1950 , the Red Wings demoted him to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Indianapolis Capitals . Pronovost scored 32 points in 34 games with Indianapolis before the Red Wings recalled him back to the NHL . Though he played only a half season with the Capitals , he was named an AHL Second Team All @-@ Star on defence . He finished with seven points in 37 games with Detroit and scored his first NHL goal on February 19 , 1951 , on goaltender Jack <unk> . It was a last @-@ minute goal that salvaged a 2 – 2 tie against the Boston Bruins . 
 The Red Wings again won the Stanley Cup in 1951 – 52 , defeating the Montreal Canadiens in the final . It was Pronovost 's first full season in the NHL ; he appeared in 69 regular season games and eight more in the playoffs . The Red Wings set a record that post @-@ season by winning all eight games played – four by shutout – and the series spawned the Legend of the Octopus . When an octopus was thrown onto the ice near the end of the clinching game ( the eight tentacles meant to represent the eight wins required to win the Stanley Cup at that time ) , Pronovost was the only player willing to pick it up and remove it . He won his third and fourth Stanley Cup championships in 1953 – 54 and 1954 – 55 and played his second and third All @-@ Star Games after each victory . Pronovost 's 34 points in 1954 – 55 were the most of his NHL career . He also played in an ill @-@ fated game in Montreal on March 17 , 1955 , in which fan anger over the NHL 's suspension of Maurice Richard precipitated the Richard Riot . Awarded a forfeit victory in that game , Pronovost and the Red Wings won their final game of the season , also against Montreal , to clinch top spot in the NHL standings for a record seventh consecutive season . 
 By the 1956 – 57 season , Pronovost had gained recognition as being one of the NHL 's top defencemen . The Red Wings named him an alternate captain of the team , a position he held until 1965 . He was named to represent the NHL All @-@ Stars at the 1957 All @-@ Star Game , the first of five consecutive appearances , and was named to the post @-@ season Second All @-@ Star Team in both 1958 and 1959 . Pronovost scored a career high 11 goals in 1958 – 59 and was named to the First All @-@ Star Team in both 1959 – 60 and 1960 – 61 . The Canadiens even fêted him by holding " Marcel Pronovost Night " on March 5 , 1960 , in which he received gifts and was cheered by the opposing Montreal crowd . It was reported as being the first time in NHL history that a team honoured an opposing player . 
 The Red Wings were unable to duplicate the championship success Pronovost enjoyed in his first six seasons . In 1959 , Detroit missed the post @-@ season entirely and Pronovost worked those playoffs as an analyst for Hockey Night in Canada . The team reached , and lost , the Stanley Cup Finals to Chicago in 1961 . Pronovost suffered a broken bone in his ankle that caused him to miss two games of the series and play the remainder in significant pain . Toronto owner Harold Ballard argued that Detroit would have won the series if Pronovost had been healthy . Detroit also lost in the 1963 and 1964 finals , which marked eight appearances in the final for Pronovost . He is also one of four players in NHL history to play in four game 7 's in a Stanley Cup Final . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 Pronovost 's tenure with the Red Wings came to an end on May 20 , 1965 , as he was involved in an eight @-@ player trade . He was dealt to the Maple Leafs , along with Aut Erickson , Larry Jeffrey , Eddie Joyal and Lowell MacDonald in exchange for Andy Bathgate , Billy Harris and Gary Jarrett . Pronovost , who heard about the trade on the radio before being contacted by either team , was shocked at being dealt away from an organization he played with for 18 years . He adjusted quickly and reached a career milestone early in the 1965 – 66 season . Pronovost became the seventh player in NHL history to play 1 @,@ 000 regular season games in a November 28 , 1965 , contest against the Rangers . He also missed 16 games after suffering strained knee ligaments after colliding with Earl <unk> . It was the first of several knee problems that would affect the remainder of Pronovost 's career ; he also missed games early in the 1966 – 67 season due to strained knee ligaments . 
 The 1966 – 67 Maple Leafs had the oldest roster in the NHL and became known as the " Over the Hill Gang " . The team lost ten games in a row at one point , but qualified for the 1967 Stanley Cup playoffs in third place . The Maple Leafs were considered underdogs against both the Chicago Black Hawks in the semi @-@ final and the Canadiens in the final . So much so that organizers at Expo 67 in Montreal built a presentation space for the Stanley Cup in anticipation of victory before the series began . Sports Illustrated writer Pete <unk> called Pronovost the best defenceman of the finals ; he and defensive partner Larry Hillman were on the ice for only one goal against at even strength during the entire post @-@ season . Pronovost also scored a key shorthanded goal in a 4 – 1 win in the fifth game of the series , and Toronto clinched the Stanley Cup with a 3 – 1 win at home in game six . It was also his 134th , and ultimately final , playoff game . At the time , only Red Kelly ( 164 ) and Gordie Howe ( 150 ) had appeared in more . 
 Pronovost appeared in 70 games for the Maple Leafs in 1967 – 68 and recorded 20 points , but he was held to only 34 games the following season . He missed the majority of the season to injury , and it was at that time that Maple Leafs president Conn Stafford Smythe suggested Pronovost should be installed as a player @-@ coach of one of Toronto 's minor league affiliates . He was offered a position with the Tulsa Oilers of the Central Hockey League ( CHL ) , and though initially reluctant to go , the Oilers organization was able to convince Pronovost and his wife to move to the Oklahoma city . He played and coached for much of the year in Tulsa , but was briefly recalled back to Toronto part way through the 1969 – 70 NHL season . He recorded one assist in seven games with Toronto , the last of his NHL career . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Supported by Tulsa 's general manager Ray Miron , who helped him behind the bench , Pronovost appeared in 53 games for the Oilers in 1969 – 70 and coached the team to a 35 – 27 – 10 record . He ended his playing career after appearing in 17 games for Tulsa in 1970 – 71 , and coached two additional seasons for the Oilers before taking his first major league job . The Chicago Cougars of the newly founded World Hockey Association ( WHA ) announced Pronovost had signed a two @-@ year contract to become the franchise 's first head coach on July 6 , 1972 . He lasted only one season in Chicago before being fired as the Cougars posted a 26 – 50 – 2 record in 1972 – 73 . 
 Pronovost returned to coaching in 1975 as he was hired mid @-@ season to take over the Hull Festivals of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) . He remained with Hull , who were renamed the Olympiques , for two seasons before he hired to coach the Buffalo Sabres for the 1977 – 78 NHL season . Pronovost was reluctant to take the job , and did so only following the encouragement of Hull general manager Norm Baril . 
 Among the highlights for Pronovost and the Sabres in his first season was Buffalo 's first regular season victory in franchise history against the Philadelphia Flyers in Philadelphia , on November 10 , 1977 . Buffalo had 15 losses and two ties in its previous 17 visits ( not counting the 1975 Stanley Cup Finals , in which the Sabres won two and lost four ) . The Sabres finished with a 44 – 17 – 19 record and finished second in the Adams Division . They defeated the Rangers in the first round of the playoffs before being eliminated by Philadelphia . However , after the Sabres recorded only eight wins in their first 24 games in 1978 – 79 , the organization fired Pronovost along with general manager Punch Imlach . Pronovost returned to Hull almost immediately , but left the team again in 1979 to become an assistant to head coach Bobby <unk> in Detroit . When <unk> was fired late in the 1979 – 80 season , general manager Ted Lindsay and Pronovost took over as the team 's coaches . Lindsay was the official coach of the team for the final nine games of the season , but Pronovost worked behind the bench as the Red Wings won only two contests and lost seven . Pronovost remained with Detroit as Lindsay 's assistant to begin the 1980 – 81 season , but both were dismissed after Detroit began with a 3 – 14 – 3 record . 
 Returning again to junior hockey , Pronovost was hired as the coach of the Ontario Hockey League 's Windsor Spitfires . The team went 22 – 44 – 4 in 1981 – 82 , while Pronovost described the following season as being a " disaster " . He was given a ten @-@ game suspension for verbally harassing the officials and continuing to coach from the stands after being ejected from a game and was dismissed as Windsor 's coach after the team won only two of its first 15 games . Pronovost 's final season as a coach came in 1984 – 85 when he led the junior C Belle River Canadiens to the franchise 's first league title and a Clarence <unk> Cup win as Ontario provincial champions . 
 = = Scouting career = = 
 Pronovost turned to scouting in 1985 when he joined the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . He already had some experience with the role as one of his duties as coach in Tulsa included searching for talent to improve his team . Pronovost spent five years traveling across North America for the Scouting Bureau . In 1990 , he joined the New Jersey Devils as one of the team 's scouts . The 2013 – 14 NHL season was his 24th with the franchise , during which Pronovost has been a member of three Stanley Cup champions , in 1995 , 2000 and 2003 . New Jersey 's goaltender for all three championships was Martin Brodeur , whom Pronovost helped convince the Devils to select with their first pick in the 1990 NHL Entry Draft . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Known as an offensive defenceman at the outset of his NHL career , Pronovost played an aggressive rushing style that led Red Wings fans to call him " Detroit 's own Flying Frenchman " . He also established a reputation as a physical player who rarely missed time to serious injury . He overcame numerous injuries , including a cracked vertebrae suffered in 1954 . Among his other injuries , he suffered a broken jaw , broke his wrist twice , separated his shoulder and broke his nose 14 times . By age 32 , he had required over 200 stitches to close various cuts and lacerations . Pronovost viewed the injuries as part of the game : " My game is a contact sport . It 's a game of men . I expected to get bounced and get my lumps . I also expected to play in every single game . " 
 2012 marked Pronovost 's 65th year in professional hockey , tying King Clancy for the longest such tenure by anyone in NHL history . His name has been inscribed on the Stanley Cup eight times ; five as a player and three as a scout . The 53 @-@ year span between his first victory in 1950 and most recent in 2003 is a record for the trophy . He published an autobiography in 2012 titled A Life in Hockey that documents his career in the sport . 
 In 1978 , Pronovost was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . He has also been inducted into the Windsor and Essex County Sports Hall of Fame ( 1995 ) , had his uniform number 4 honoured by the Windsor Spitfires in 2005 and in 2012 was inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame . The Detroit Red Wings recognized Pronovost 's contribution to their organization in 2009 by presenting him with a championship ring from their 2009 title season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pronovost adopted Windsor as his home having played or worked close to the city for most of his career . He earned a degree in electrical engineering , and during hockey off @-@ seasons drove a truck and did sales for Molson . He met his first wife , Cindy , while playing with her brother on a softball team in Shawinigan . They were married in 1951 and have three children : Michel , Brigitte and Leo . Cindy died of cancer in 1993 . Pronovost married his second wife , Eva , in 1994 , and he fought his own battle with bladder cancer in 2012 . Pronovost died on April 26 , 2015 , after a brief illness . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = Coaching = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Formula , Vol . 1 = 
 Formula , Vol . 1 is the debut studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Romeo Santos , released on November 8 , 2011 by Sony Music Latin . It is Santos 's first album as a solo artist following the breakup of American bachata group Aventura , of which he was the lead singer . The record contains fifteen tracks , most of which were composed by Santos and co @-@ produced with Ivan <unk> . The album experiments with the sound of bachata and other genres including R & B and flamenco . It features several Anglophone and Hispanophone guest artists including Usher , <unk> , Mario Domm , and Lil Wayne . Recording for the album took place in 2011 at The Castle , Fight Klub , and EMG Studios in New York City . A deluxe edition of the album containing five extra tracks was released exclusively in Walmart retail stores in the United States . 
 In the U.S. , Formula , Vol . 1 peaked at number one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums and Billboard Tropical Albums charts and was the best @-@ selling Latin album of 2012 . It was certified three times platinum ( Latin field ) by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping 300 @,@ 000 copies and had sold 328 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. by February 2014 . It ranked number thirteen , twenty @-@ six , and seventy @-@ seven on the Argentine , Mexican , and Spanish album charts respectively . 
 Santos promoted the record by touring the U.S. , Latin America and Europe . It was generally well received by critics , who praised the production of the bachata tracks although some of the duets — including those with Mario Domm and Mala Rodríguez — were criticized as obvious attempts to appeal outside of the bachata audience . The album earned Santos several accolades , including a Grammy nomination , three Billboard Latin Music Awards , a Billboard Music award , a Lo Nuestro nomination , a Premios Juventud award , and a <unk> Award . Six singles were released from the record , four of which , " You " , " Promise " , " Mi Santa " , and " La Diabla " , reached number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the U.S. 
 = = Background = = 
 Romeo Santos began his career as the lead member of Aventura , an urban bachata infused band . The band rose to popularity in the 2000s , has sold over 1 @.@ 7 million albums in the U.S. , and had the best @-@ selling Latin album of 2009 , The Last . Soon after the band 's separation in early 2011 , Santos signed a record deal with Sony Music Latin and Jive Records to record his debut solo album , Formula , Vol . 1 . According to his manager Johnny Marines , the contract was worth US $ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Santos felt that the record was a continuation of his career rather than a new beginning . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Formula , Vol . 1 contains fifteen tracks , most of which were written by Romeo Santos and co @-@ produced by Ivan <unk> . Santos said that he intended to write more English @-@ language recordings on the album but did not want to stray far from his musical origins . The songs were recorded at The Castle , Fight Klub , and EMG Studios in New York City . 
 The album begins with a skit featuring American comedian George Lopez , in which Santos confesses his " sins " about his fortune and fame to a priest played by Lopez . The first song " La Diabla " ( " She @-@ Devil " ) is a bachata track about a man who regrets making a deal with a she @-@ devil after losing the game of love . The third song , " Que Se <unk> " ( " Let Them Die " ) , attacks the public for their criticism of the age difference between lovers . " Mi Santa " ( " My Saint " ) incorporates elements of bachata and flamenco , and features Spanish guitarist <unk> . 
 " Promise " is a bilingual bachata tune that features American singer Usher and was produced by Rico Love . Santos said the collaboration was his idea , and that Usher enjoyed the duet despite not speaking Spanish . " Debate de 4 " ( " Battle of 4 " ) features Dominican bachata musicians Antony Santos , <unk> Rodríguez , and Luis Vargas , who also feature in a skit preceding the track . " You " is a bilingual bachata record and was the first composition written for the album . 
 " Magia Negra " ( " Black Magic " ) is a mixture of bachata and hip hop music , and features Spanish rapper Mala Rodríguez . " Rival " is a ballad duet with Mario Domm , the lead singer of Mexican band Camila . It was recorded at Ocean Way Recording in Los Angeles . " All Aboard " is a hip hop track featuring American rapper Lil Wayne and produced by Rico Love . Santos said that he approached Wayne after writing the song . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " You " , the first single from the album , was released on May 10 , 2011 . In the US , the song peaked at number ninety @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 and debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs . Santos is the eighth overall artist whose single has debuted at number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart . It also reached number one on the Billboard Tropical Songs charts . " You " was the eighth best @-@ performing Latin single of 2011 . 
 The album 's second single , " Promise " was released on September 2 , 2011 . The song peaked at number eighty @-@ three on the Billboard Hot 100 , became his second number one single on the Hot Latin Songs and Tropical Songs charts , and peaked at number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart . " Promise " received airplay in Mexico , where it ranked at number twenty on the Monitor Latino charts . 
 " Mi Santa " , the album 's third single , was released on January 24 , 2012 . It peaked at number one on the Hot Latin Songs , Latin Pop Songs , and Tropical Songs charts . The fourth single , " All Aboard " , was released on March 8 , 2012 , and peaked at number eight on the Latin Digital Songs chart . 
 The fifth single , " Rival " , was released on March 19 , 2012 , peaking at number forty @-@ two on the Hot Latin Songs and number twenty @-@ two on the Latin Pop Songs charts . In Mexico , " Rival " peaked at number ten on the Monitor Latino charts . The sixth single , " La Diabla " , became the fourth single from the album to reach number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart ; making it the second @-@ most number one singles from an album . Only Spanish singer Enrique Iglesias has had more number one hits from a single album . " La Diabla " also peaked at number two on the Latin Pop Songs and number one on the Tropical Songs chart . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the album , Santos launched a 75 @-@ show The King Stays King tour , which started in New York City on February 11 , 2012 . Santos performed songs from the album and from his time with Aventura . Three men from the audience were selected to perform " Debate de 4 " with Santos . The tour opened with three consecutive shows — two of which sold out — at Madison Square Garden . The concerts at Madison Square Garden were recorded and later released as a live album titled The King Stays King : Sold Out at Madison Square Garden on November 6 , 2012 . By May 2012 , the tour ranked at number five on the Top 20 Concert Tours grossing over US $ 749 @,@ 885 in the country according to Pollstar . 
 On May 31 , 2012 , Santos began a world tour in Venezuela . The tour continued to Chile , Ecuador , Peru , Paraguay , Argentina , . and Colombia . In October 2012 , Santos performed two concerts in Madrid and Barcelona . After his performances in Spain , he performed in Honduras , El Salvador , Guatemala , and the Dominican Republic . Santos announced that he would start the second leg of the tour on February 14 , 2013 , at the José Miguel Agrelot Coliseum in San Juan , Puerto Rico . Two weeks later , Santos performed in Chile and Argentina . The U.S. portion of the tour 's second leg began on March 22 , 2013 , in Newark , New Jersey , and ended on May 3 , 2013 , in Hollywood , Florida . Santos performed the final leg of his tour in Mexico , where he performed six concerts . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Thorn Jurek of Allmusic gave the album a positive review , and called " You " an " easy summertime groove " and " Promise " a " shimmering duet " . He also wrote that Santos 's mix of genres creates " an intoxicating brew . " Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B rating and wrote that Santos ' " solo aspirations include cracking the R & B mainstream " , and that the album " generally sticks to the successful blueprint advertised by [ its ] title . " An editor for Terra Networks gave the album 3 out of 5 stars , noting that while Santos takes risks with the sound and collaborates with other artists from different genres , the bachata tracks sound alike in the production . Peter Margasak of the Chicago Reader wrote a positive review for the album , describing the album as a successful " balancing act between past and present " . He said the production of the album " gives everything vivid colors and gauzy textures " , but that some songs — including the duets " Magia Negra , " with Mala Rodríguez and " Rival " with Mario Domm — were " less @-@ than @-@ convincing detours " , describing the former as a " throbbing EDM " and the latter as " treacly power balladry " . Sarah Godfrey of the Washington Post gave the album a favorable review , admiring Santos for appealing to the Anglophone market without the need to " sell out bachata die @-@ hards " , citing " Promise " as the main example . Godfrey said that Santos retains his style on the duet " All Aboard " , and that the collaborations were " obviously meant to pull in folks who ’ ve never heard of Aventura " . She praised the compositions , including " La Diabla " and " La Bella y Bestia " , which she said are " impossible to resist , whether one understands all of the lyrics or not . " 
 At the 19th Billboard Latin Music Awards , Formula , Vol . 1 was nominated for Album of the Year , Digital Album of the Year , and Tropical Album of the Year . At the 20th Billboard Latin Music Awards , the record received the three aforementioned awards . It was also recognized as the Top Latin Album of the Year at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards and earned a nomination in the same category the following year . At the 2012 Juventud Awards , the album won a " Lo Toco Todo ( I Play Every Song ) " award and a nomination for the promotional tour for the album . At the 55th Grammy Awards , Formula , Vol . 1 received a nomination for Best Tropical Latin Album , which was awarded to Marlow Rosado and La <unk> for his album Retro . At the 25th Lo Nuestro Awards in 2013 , the record was nominated for Tropical Album of the Year , but lost to Phase II by Prince Royce . In the Dominican Republic , the record was awarded Album of the Year at the 2013 <unk> Awards . At the 2013 Mexican Oye ! Awards , it was nominated for Urban Album of the Year by a Soloist or Group . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Formula , Vol . 1 was released worldwide on November 8 , 2011 . As part of a deal with Walmart , a deluxe edition containing five extra tracks — the English version of " Promise " , Spanish and English versions of " <unk> " featuring American rapper Pitbull , " <unk> " , and " Vale la Pena el Placer " — was released for sale exclusively at Walmart outlets . It also contained a DVD containing music videos for " You " and " Promise " . In the U.S. , the album debuted and peaked at number nine on the Billboard 200 chart and debuted at number one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums and the Billboard Tropical Albums charts . 65 @,@ 000 copies were sold in its first week , making it the biggest debut sales for a Latin album since El Cartel : The Big Boss by Daddy Yankee in 2007 . It was at number one for seventeen non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Top Latin Albums chart , and thirty non @-@ consecutive weeks on the Tropical Albums chart . Formula , Vol . 1 was the best @-@ selling Latin and Tropical album of 2012 in the U.S. 
 The RIAA certified the album triple platinum ( Latin field ) for shipping 300 @,@ 000 copies . By February 2014 , Formula Vol . 1 had sold over 328 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S. The album peaked at number thirteen in Argentina and number seventy @-@ seven in Spain and certified gold in Venezuela . In Mexico , it peaked at number twenty @-@ six on the Top 100 Mexico albums chart and was certified gold by AMPROFON . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Anthony " Romeo " Santos , except where noted .. 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Allmusic : 
 = = = Performance credits = = = 
 = = = Technical credits = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Taras Shevchenko Memorial = 
 The Taras Shevchenko Memorial is a bronze statue and stone relief @-@ adorned wall located on the 2200 block of P Street NW in the Dupont Circle neighborhood of Washington , D.C. , United States . It is one of many monuments in Washington , D.C. which honor foreign heroes who symbolize freedom in their native countries . The memorial honors Taras Shevchenko ( 1814 – 1861 ) , a Ukrainian poet and artist who influenced the development of modern Ukrainian literature . 
 The committee to build the memorial included former U.S. President Harry S. Truman as the honorary head . Opposition to the memorial 's installation was led by The Washington Post . It was dedicated in 1964 , the 150th anniversary of Shevchenko 's birth . Dignitaries at the dedication ceremony included prominent Ukrainian Americans , former U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower , members of the U.S. Congress , and Hollywood actors . 
 Sculpted by Leo Mol , the statue is one of two Ukrainian monuments in the nation 's capital . The second , a memorial to the Ukrainian victims of the 1932 – 1933 famine , was completed in 2015 . The Taras Shevchenko Memorial and surrounding park are maintained by the U.S. federal government . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In addition to its numerous memorials and monuments which pay homage to famous Americans , Washington , D.C. is home to many artworks honoring foreign heroes . Examples in Dupont Circle include memorials honoring Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi of India , Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk of Czechoslovakia , and Lajos Kossuth of Hungary . The idea of a U.S. monument honoring Shevchenko began with the American Shevchenko Society , founded in 1898 . Although the group 's efforts never came to fruition , Ukrainian Americans continued to pursue the goal . A turning point was when Professor Ivan <unk> wrote an article in Svoboda titled " In Favor of a Shevchenko Monument in Washington , D.C. " , asking for support from the Shevchenko Scientific Society and Ukrainian Congress Committee of America ( UCCA ) . Thousands of Ukrainian Americans sent letters to members of Congress while Lev Dobriansky , a Ukrainian American economist and anti @-@ communism activist , became a prominent advocate and lobbyist for erecting a monument honoring Shevchenko . The activists eventually gained the support of Senator Jacob K. Javits of New York and Representative Alvin Morell Bentley of Michigan . Javits said " Taras Shevchenko was a bard of freedom ... It is fitting that the statue of such a national hero , who taught the American ideals of patriotism and service to man , should stand in the capital of the U.S. " and Bentley stated , " In erecting a statue of Taras Shevchenko in Washington the United States will give full expression to its understanding and appreciation of Taras Shevchenko and all that he means to the brave and noble Ukrainian people . " 
 In April 1960 , while a bill authorizing the erection of the statue was circulating through the House of Representatives , officials from the National Park Service and Interior Department lodged a complaint to the House Administration committee about the number of monuments being built in Washington , D.C. The bill was subsequently postponed . The resolution was later unanimously approved by the House of Representatives in June followed by the Senate in August . On September 13 , 1960 , U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed Public Law 86 @-@ 749 , authorizing the erection of the Shevchenko monument . The resolution stated in part : 
 Whereas throughout Eastern Europe , in the last century and this , the name and works of Taras Shevchenko brilliantly reflected the aspirations of man for personal liberty and national independence ; and 
 Whereas Shevchenko , the poet laureate of Ukraine , was greatly inspired by our great American tradition to fight against the imperialist and colonial occupation of his native land ; and 
 Whereas in many parts of the free world observances of the Shevchenko centennial will be held during 1961 in honor of this immortal champion of liberty ; and 
 Whereas in our moral capacity as free men in an independent Nation it <unk> us to symbolize tangibly the inseparable spiritual ties bound in the writings of Shevchenko between our country and the forty million Ukraine nation : ... 
 In September 1960 , UCCA president Dobriansky assisted with establishing the Taras Shevchenko Memorial Committee of America , Inc . It was headed by Dobriansky , president of the General Council of Shevchenko societies Roman Smal @-@ Stocky , and Ukrainian Free Academy of Sciences in the U.S.A. president George <unk> , with former U.S. President Harry S. Truman serving as an honorary head . Later that year a design competition was announced with one of the requirements being " the public at large to see the poet depicted in his youth . " Seventeen sculpture designs were submitted and on July 14 , 1962 , the committee unanimously chose the one by Leonid <unk> ( Leo Mol ) , a Ukrainian Canadian who would go on to sculpt works in several countries depicting Shevchenko . Mol was paid $ 1 @,@ 500 for winning the competition while two second place artists were each paid $ 1 @,@ 000 , and two third place artists paid $ 750 each . The total cost of the memorial was around $ 250 @,@ 000 , which was paid for by the UCCA and donations made by over 50 @,@ 000 people , mostly Ukrainian @-@ Americans . The design and layout of the memorial site was approved by the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts in April 1963 . The site was designed by architect Radoslav <unk> and the contractor was the M. Cain Company . The stonework was provided by the Jones Brother Company while the carving was completed by Vincent <unk> . 
