 Francis Guinan as Rupert 
 Tamia as Sheri Silver 
 Jeremy <unk> as Ashton 
 Bo Svenson as Captain Pollard 
 Enrique <unk> as Alejandro 
 Glenn Plummer as Maurice 
 Kimmy Robertson as Liza 
 Joe Morton ( uncredited cameo ) as Lieutenant McMahon , or " Mac " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 Speed was released in June 1994 , starring Keanu Reeves and Sandra Bullock , and dealt with the story of a runaway bus armed with a bomb that would explode if it dropped under 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . The film was a success , grossing almost $ 350 million worldwide , and holds a 93 % " fresh " rating at review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 60 critic reviews . De Bont felt the film was a " one @-@ time story " with no sequel potential , and its studio , 20th Century Fox , made no obligations for the actors to appear in a follow @-@ up film . However , Speed had such positive word @-@ of @-@ mouth prior to its release that Fox began to discuss plans for a sequel . After its initial box office success within the first week of release , plans for a sequel to Speed were officially announced , and Fox mentioned the possibility of the sequel beginning with Reeves and Bullock 's characters being married . De Bont was contractually obligated to direct Speed 2 , and was paid a reported $ 5 – 6 million salary for the sequel . Fox expected Reeves and Bullock to reprise their roles without obligation , and negotiations with the actors began later that year . 
 Hundreds of ideas for a sequel were submitted to de Bont , all of which he turned down in favor of his own idea , based on a recurring nightmare he experienced about a cruise ship crashing into an island . Speed screenwriter Graham Yost had an idea for a film involving a boat , with a Vietnam War @-@ era vessel loaded with weapons that would explode if its ammunition came in contact with water . He also had an idea for a story about a plane that has to fly through the Andes mountains , but cannot ascend above 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) . Neither Yost nor Speed producer Mark Gordon were asked to participate in the sequel , although Yost received a " characters created by " credit and Gordon was credited as executive producer for Speed 2 . Randall McCormick was hired to write the sequel in 1994 and received a story credit along with de Bont . McCormick and Jeff Nathanson collectively wrote the screenplay , working back from the idea based on de Bont 's nightmare , while writers Kevin <unk> and Greg Chabot provided additional uncredited work to the screenplay . Prior to production , details about the film were kept secret , and de Bont refused to confirm rumors about the film taking place on a ship , although he did state that the sequel would be " funnier " . Speed 2 star Jason Patric said that details were kept secret because " people do tend to steal other people 's ideas " , but said the sequel is a " very complex movie " and would have " bigger sequences " . 
 De Bont produced Speed 2 with his company Blue Tulip Productions and producer Steve Perry . Producer Michael <unk> later joined the project during production in late 1996 , after joining Blue Tulip as de Bont 's partner . While Speed was produced for $ 30 million , the sequel was green @-@ lit at " just under $ 100 million " due to the larger production and higher cast salaries . The director began working on the pre @-@ production prior to the release of his previous film , Twister ( 1996 ) . He started location scouting in the Caribbean in May 1996 , and chose Saint Martin as the primary filming location because he felt it was unlikely to be subjected to a hurricane , as it was struck by a hurricane the previous year for the first time in 100 years . De Bont wanted a cruise liner that was luxurious enough to possibly have millions of dollars of jewelry aboard and that was sleek enough for the film 's poster . He learned about the Seabourn Legend in a hotel brochure , and chose the ship for the film after visiting ships from other cruise lines . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Bullock agreed to star in the sequel to get financial backing for the drama film Hope Floats ( 1998 ) , and was paid a reported $ 11 – $ 12 @.@ 5 million to reprise her role as Annie . Reeves was offered $ 12 million to reprise his role as Jack Traven , but turned it down as he did not like the script and was financially secure from the success of Speed . Having recently starred in the action film Chain Reaction ( 1996 ) , Reeves felt he was not " ready to mentally and physically " star in another action film . He instead chose to star in the horror film The Devil 's Advocate ( 1997 ) , which was filmed at the same time as Speed 2 , and subsequently toured with his band , <unk> . He said that Fox was " furious " with his decision and released " propaganda " against him , claiming that he turned down the role to tour with his band , which Reeves stated had nothing to do with his decision . De Bont said that the character in the sequel was not specific to Reeves and could be played by any young actor , as long as he could have chemistry with Bullock . 
 Many actors were considered to replace Reeves in Speed 2 , including Jon Bon Jovi , Patrick Muldoon , Johnathon <unk> , Christian Slater , and Billy Zane . Matthew McConaughey was the first to be considered , suggested by Bullock after starring with him in the film A Time to Kill ( 1996 ) . After McConaughey passed up the role to star in Contact ( 1997 ) , Bullock suggested Jason Patric , with whom she had wanted to work since seeing his performance in After Dark , My Sweet ( 1990 ) . De Bont was skeptical of featuring a relatively unknown actor such as Patric , but was reminded by the studio that Bullock and Reeves were also relatively unknown prior to Speed . He chose Patric based on his role in Sleepers ( 1996 ) . Patric was paid a reported $ 4 @.@ 5 – $ 8 million for his role in Speed 2 and also used his salary to finance a 1998 drama , Your Friends & Neighbors . After accepting the role , Patric stated that he never saw Speed or had any intentions of seeing it , and Reeves said he was looking forward to seeing Patric star in the sequel . After Reeves declined to appear in Speed 2 , the screenplay was rewritten to remove his character from the story , which de Bont wanted to deal with early in the film . His absence is explained in the first scene , where Annie talks about how her relationship with Jack did not work out , and mentions her current relationship with Alex ( Patric ) , before his character is introduced in the film . 
 Gary Oldman turned down the role of the villain , Geiger , and instead chose to star as another villain in Air Force One ( 1997 ) . Willem Dafoe was cast as Geiger after Dafoe wanted to star in a " big movie " and once again play a villain . De Bont cast Kiwi actor Temuera Morrison as Juliano based on his role in Once Were Warriors ( 1994 ) . Despite not liking the script , Brian McCardie accepted the role as Merced as his agents assured him it would be good for his acting career . 
 Comedian Royale Watkins was hired by de Bont for the part of Dante after discovering Watkins performing at a comedy club . Glenn Plummer was cast as a character named Maurice whose boat gets hijacked by Alex , reprising his role from Speed as a Jaguar owner whose car gets hijacked by Jack . To add comic relief , de Bont cast comedian Tim Conway as Annie 's driving instructor , and hoped it would be a comeback role for Conway . Singer Tamia was cast as Sheri , an entertainer on the ship , because de Bont wanted a singer who could also act . She did not plan on doing any film acting that early in her career , as she had yet to release her debut album , but said the part was " too perfect for [ her ] to resist " . Joe Morton reprised his role from Speed as SWAT lieutenant " Mac " in an uncredited cameo appearance in the beginning of the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography took place from September 23 , 1996 , to late February 1997 . The film 's opening scene with the driving test and the motorcycle chase was filmed in Elysian Park , Los Angeles . During a motorcycle stunt on a Ducati 916 on the second day of filming , Patric flew off the bike 30 feet ( 9 m ) into the air , and Bullock said the incident was so dangerous that Patric " should be dead " . Stunt coordinator Dick <unk> was very impressed with Patric 's physical stunts in the film , and said that Patric " is so physical he probably could be one of the top stunt men in the world " . Patric 's stunts included being dragged by a seaplane through the water , jumping onto collapsing buildings , and scuba diving while pulled by a moving ship . He was also required to tread water for multiple hours at a time . De Bont said the most frightening incident was when a stunt woman was hit in the face by a boat cable and required reconstructive surgery . De Bont persuaded Bullock , Patric , and Dafoe to perform most of their own stunts , as opposed to using stunt doubles , so the scenes would appear more realistic . The three starring actors were also required to get in physical shape and engage in physical exercise sessions before and during filming . Bullock had to overcome her fear of water that she developed after almost drowning at age 14 , while learning to surf . While filming in the middle of the ocean , Bullock was smacked into the ship several times and was saved by Patric from decapitation by the ship 's rudder . Bullock and Patric also had a scene filmed in an underwater tank where they had to kiss underwater with Bullock 's hands tied together . Navy SEALs with scuba gear were present inside the tank during shooting , as the actors had to hold their breath during the scene . According to Bullock , she performed all of her own stunts " except for a quarter of one stunt " ; her stunt double worked for only three days during production . 
 Film crews moved to West Palm Beach and Miami , Florida in July 1996 with the anticipation of shooting in each location for several weeks later that year . However , due to scheduling issues with Patric , production did not take place in West Palm Beach and only filmed in Miami for " just a few days " . The Miami production took place in a gymnasium and a boat hangar at Dinner Key in the Coconut Grove neighborhood of Miami , which were rented by Fox . After spending over $ 55 @,@ 000 in repairs to both facilities , Fox refused to pay the $ 35 @,@ 000 in rental fees to the City of Miami . The city sued for the rent since Fox did not seek approval for the repairs , and a compromise was reached when the city credited some of the repair costs , resulting in Fox paying around $ 26 @,@ 000 for the rent . 
 Production later moved to the Seabourn Legend , and the crew lived aboard it for six weeks . During filming , the ship provided accommodations for the film 's cast and crew , and housed the makeup and wardrobe departments . The Seabourn Legend 's captain and other crew members appear as extras the film . The evacuation sequence was among the first scenes filmed on the ship , and was shot in Key West , Florida . Several days after shooting began , the National Hurricane Center issued an alert for Hurricane Lili , which was predicted to be headed towards the Florida Keys . Shooting the evacuation scene was put on hold , and the ship was forced to sail to safe waters . The producers rearranged the shooting schedule and shot additional scenes on the ship 's bridge while sailing towards Cuba . As Hurricane Lili approached Cuba , the ship 's violent movements caused seasickness among those on board . The ship was again forced to relocate , sailed from Cuba towards the Gulf of Mexico , and returned to the Keys three days later . The filming of the evacuation sequence continued and took place over the next two weeks . Approximately 30 hoses and the ship 's fire sprinkler system were used to simulate heavy rainfall in the scene . De Bont said that during shooting , he learned to " never film a boat from a stationary point of view " . To make the ship appear faster , all exterior shots of the ship were filmed from a moving vehicle . Following the production at sea , de Bont said that filming on water " was 100 percent more difficult than [ he ] imagined " . 
 For the climatic scene where the ship crashes into an island , de Bont wanted to create and destroy an actual town . He opted against miniature scale models and computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) because he wanted the scene to be real for both the actors and the audience viewing the film . Additionally , creating the entire scene in CGI was deemed too expensive and would have cost around $ 500 million . Production designer Joseph Nemec III designed a set in Marigot , Saint Martin that extended the town 's architecture , which included 35 buildings and was built in six months for $ 5 million . Despite de Bont 's reason for choosing Saint Martin for filming , a hurricane struck the town and destroyed the set during construction , which had to be rebuilt with hurricane @-@ proof buildings . Before destroying the town for the film , some of the buildings on the set were used as production offices . To stand in for the Seabourn Legend during the finale , two mock @-@ ups were constructed in Florida and towed to Saint Martin . The first mock @-@ up , dubbed the " bridge ship " , was a reconstruction of the bow and bridge built atop the hull of the Sturgeon Atlantic cargo ship . 60 short tons ( 54 t ) of steel were used to construct the bridge ship mock @-@ up , which was 18 percent smaller than the original . The bridge ship was used in the first part of the finale when the cruise ship is crashing into boats in the harbor prior to hitting the island . A cargo ship was used for the scene because the actual Seabourn Legend could not navigate in the harbor 's shallow waters . The second mock @-@ up was a full @-@ scale replica of the Seabourn Legend 's bow , known as the " rail ship " . The rail ship was 150 feet ( 46 m ) , about one @-@ third the length of the Seabourn Legend , and weighed 300 short tons ( 270 t ) . A 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot long ( 300 m ) rail was built 60 feet ( 18 m ) underwater , and the rail ship was placed on top and sat on 50 wheels . 
 Filming the finale scene with the rail ship was initially delayed because it could not be hoisted onto the track due to large waves caused by the hurricane . The scene was filmed using 14 cameras , with the rail ship traveling 50 feet ( 15 m ) at a time into the set , with debris from the destruction cleared between each take . The ship was powered by four diesel engines and pulled by a large chain at a speed of 18 miles per hour ( 29 km / h ) . The three planned collisions in the scene were aided by explosives and hydraulics to ensure the set 's structures collapsed precisely . Concrete was also removed from the buildings and replaced with sand @-@ coated balsa wood so the buildings would " crumble " more effectively after being hit by the rail ship . In the scene 's final shot , the ship had to stop within a 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) area , and was completely successful on the first take . The five @-@ minute scene cost $ 25 million to produce , roughly one quarter of the film 's entire budget , and set records as both the largest and the most expensive stunt ever filmed . The remaining two @-@ thirds of the ship was added into the film during post @-@ production by Industrial Light & Magic using computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) . 
 Following production in Saint Martin , filming moved to The Bahamas to shoot the underwater shots in the scene where Alex swims underneath the ship to try to jam the propeller . A location in the Tongue of the Ocean off the coast of New Providence was chosen for filming due to the clarity of the water . The scene was filmed underneath a propeller @-@ less barge , and the barge 's hull was designed to resemble that of the Seabourn Legend . A propeller was later added into the scene using CGI during post @-@ production . To provide a sense of velocity to the scene , the barge was towed by tugboats at one and a half knots . The production crew did not have a winch system available for the underwater shoot as depicted in the scene , so a pulley system was created by feeding Patric a rope that was attached to the axle of a car that drove along the barge . After reviewing the dailies from shooting , de Bont was unhappy with the footage because the water was so clear that " it looked like a swimming pool " . The scene was later reshot with divers above the camera dusting the area in front of the lens with sediment to alter the clarity of the footage . 
 Interiors of the ship were filmed at Sony Pictures Studios and Warren Entertainment in Culver City and Valencia , California , respectively . Full @-@ scale replicas of the ship 's atrium , cabins , and engine rooms were constructed at the soundstages where production took place for over a month . The scene where Alex rescues Drew while the ship is being flooded was filmed by camera operators wearing wet suits inside a tank at Sony Pictures Studios . The set inside the tank was constructed with plywood and included a hydraulic lift that gave the effect that the water level was rising . Part of the seaplane scene was filmed outdoors in Valencia . The seaplane was suspended from a crane , with its engines and fuel tanks removed to ease its lift , and large fans were used to simulate wind . The outdoor shoot was filmed in one day for a brief , " one- or two @-@ second " shot in the film , according to Nemec . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = = Soundtrack = = = = 
 To go along with the film 's Caribbean setting , the soundtrack consists of mostly reggae music . De Bont also wanted musicians to appear in the film as entertainers on the cruise ship . A cameo appearance for reggae band UB40 was written into the script after the filmmakers heard a demo of their song " Tell Me Is It True " , and wanted them to perform it in the film . Brazilian singer Carlinhos Brown was also chosen to be featured as a performer on the ship because de Bont wanted music that was " lively " and felt that Brown 's music was " full of energy " . Tamia worked with de Bont and musician Quincy Jones to choose a song for her character to perform in the film , and selected " Make Tonight Beautiful " , which was written by Diane Warren . 
 The Speed 2 : Cruise Control soundtrack was released by Virgin Records on May 20 , 1997 , about one month before the film 's release . The soundtrack album featured 12 songs , all of which were featured in the film , and five of the songs were distributed to radio stations for promotion . In addition to UB40 and Brown , the album features reggae music from Jimmy Cliff , Common Sense , Maxi Priest , Shaggy , <unk> , and Betty Wright . Shaggy wanted to feature his cover of the Erma Franklin song " Piece of My Heart " ; however , because the song was being using in an upcoming Janis Joplin biopic , he instead featured his song " My Dream " . Priest was assigned to cover a song in his style for the soundtrack after contributing to the soundtrack for Jungle 2 Jungle ( 1997 ) , and Common Sense 's appearance on the soundtrack led to a recording contract with Virgin the following year . Speed 2 score composer Mark Mancina wrote a dance @-@ rage track for the soundtrack based on the score , which was produced by Japanese musician Tetsuya " TK " Komuro , who made his debut in the United States performing the track , called " Speed TK Re @-@ mix " . 
 = = = = Score = = = = 
 Mancina wrote the film score for Speed 2 after previously composing the scores for Speed and Twister . He started composing the music on March 1 , 1997 , and it was later recorded at the end of April . He began by creating themes and melodies , then working them into the film where he felt they would fit . The score includes a reworking of the 20th Century Fox fanfare , in which the final chord is sustained and " slithers down " into the opening theme , while the studio logo fades into a traveling shot of the ocean on screen . Originally , the studio was hesitant to feature an altered version of the fanfare , but allowed the alteration after being convinced by de Bont and hearing it performed by an orchestra . 
 Specific action cues were scored on the piano down to each second of film . Noting how the film was set in the Caribbean and had a different , slower pace than Speed , Mancina gave the score a " Jamaican / Latin feel " by incorporating reggae music in between action sequences . The reggae music was written to give the feel of being on vacation and serve as a love theme for the characters . Some of the themes from Speed were included in the score between sections of the newly written material . He wrote new themes for Annie and Alex because he felt the original themes written for Reeves ' character would not work well with Patric . After viewing the scene where Geiger attaches leeches to his body to cleanse his blood , Mancina felt the scene was " so gross " that he wrote a " slimy theme " for the character , which is distinctively different from the rest of the music . He mixed the score at the same time the film was being edited , which caused the music to be constantly re @-@ edited into the film . During the scoring of Speed 2 , Mancina said in an interview that keeping up with the editing of the film was the " hardest thing [ he had ] ever done " . 
 Over 100 minutes of score are present in Speed 2 , more than Mancina wrote for Speed and Twister combined . After the score was written , Mancina created a demo of the entire score on a synthesizer to play for de Bont . While the score for Speed only used strings , French horns , and percussion , Speed 2 used a wider variety of instruments including trombones , large woodwinds , bass clarinets , and contrabassoons . Mancina , himself , played a nylon string guitar on several cues . The reggae music featured a band with steel drums , in addition to Cuban drums and Latin percussion . De Bont wanted 16 steel drum players , but due to the lack of players available , Mancina used eight drums which were double @-@ tracked . The orchestra had 96 players , which was significantly larger than the orchestra of 63 players that performed the score for Speed . Music was recorded on an Electro @-@ Voice microphone that allowed the music to be recorded directly to a computer without the need for equalization or compression , due to the microphone 's high clarity . 
 Mancina 's score was initially not released on CD to avoid competition with sales of the soundtrack album . De Bont made a deal with Virgin Records that the score could not be released until at least six months after the release of the soundtrack . An official release of the score was not made until 13 years after the film 's release . La @-@ La Land Records released the Speed 2 : Cruise Control Original Motion Picture Score on June 15 , 2010 , as a limited edition of 3000 units . The album features 70 minutes of music across 14 tracks , and according to La @-@ La Land , it also features a " notable amount of music " that was not used in the film , due to the film 's constant re @-@ edits prior to its release date . Daniel Schweiger of Film Music Magazine said that Mancina 's score was " arguably a better one than Speed " , praising the album 's " thrilling themes " , " epic orchestrations " , and " Jamaican @-@ style grooves " . Filmtracks.com gave the release four out of five stars , saying the album was " perhaps [ La @-@ La Land 's ] finest offering of a previously unreleased score " , although it also stated that " [ s ] ome of the action and suspense material in the latter half of the score becomes a bit generic . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film was and continues to be widely regarded as a travesty in filmmaking and it received many scathing reviews both upon its release and in subsequent years . Rotten Tomatoes reported a 3 % approval score with an average score of 3 @.@ 4 / 10 based on 68 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Speed 2 falls far short of its predecessor , thanks to laughable dialogue , thin characterization , unsurprisingly familiar plot devices , and action sequences that fail to generate any excitement . " Website Metacritic rated the film " generally unfavorable " based on 22 reviews , with an average score of 23 / 100 . Time said that Patric 's character was " fundamentally uninteresting " , but blamed de Bont and the screenwriters for " not providing their actors with stuff to act " . Many critics stated that a major issue with the film was the lack of thrill due to the setting of the slow @-@ moving ship . Entertainment Weekly heavily criticized the lack of story and said the film is " as slow @-@ moving as a garbage scow " . According to the Los Angeles Times , even children who saw the film felt it was strange that it took place on a ship " not capable of going more than a few knots per hour [ sic ] " , and claimed that Speed was " much more logical " . 
 It is also considered to be one of the worst film sequels of all time , and many publications have placed Speed 2 on lists of the worst film sequels . Complex ranked the film first on a list of " The 50 Worst Sequels of All Time " , calling it " one of the worst ' event ' movies ever conceived " , while praising Reeves ' choice to not return for the sequel , and referring to Patric as " wooden and woefully miscast " . In 2010 , New York film critic David Edelstein featured an article on Speed 2 that described it as the " Worst Sequel of All " , mainly due to the film 's explanation for the absence of Reeves ' character . In addition to being ranked among the worst sequels , Empire ranked the film at number 24 on a list of " The 50 Worst Movies Ever " . 
 Bullock has since regretted starring in the film , and stated that the script was to blame for the negative reception of the film . She stated she had doubts about its success during production and " knew it was going to be a big flop " once she saw the final product . Patric also admitted " it wasn 't a good movie " and said that its lack of success was due to de Bont 's directing , while praising Bullock and the rest of the film 's crew . Mark Gordon and Graham Yost stated they felt " bitter and happy " after initially not being asked to be involved in Speed 2 , then seeing how the film was unsuccessful . 
 Despite the overwhelming negative reviews , the film did receive some positive feedback . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times and Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune both gave Speed 2 three out of four stars , and wrote the film 's only two positive reviews , respectively , on Rotten Tomatoes . On their film review TV series Siskel & Ebert , they collectively gave Speed 2 a positive rating of " Two Thumbs Up " , calling it a " truly rousing ocean liner adventure story " , although Ebert criticized Bullock 's more limited role in the sequel while Patric " stole all the action sequences " . Since his original review , Ebert claimed that he enjoyed Speed 2 more than Bullock , and wrote an article in 2013 that his favorable review of the film " inspired more disbelief " than any other he had written and was frequently cited as an example of him being a poor film critic . At the Conference on World Affairs in 1999 , Ebert spoke about the difficulty of making films such as Speed 2 and defended his review by offering a " Speed 3 " contest for anyone to create a five @-@ minute short film that takes place on something that cannot stop moving . 
 Speed 2 was listed on About.com 's " Top 9 Cruise Ship or Ocean Liner Movies " , which said it had " [ g ] ood shots of the ship and a spectacular ending " , but also described the plot as " lame " . The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution , Los Angeles Daily News , and The Sacramento Bee all gave favorable reviews , while stating that the film was not as good as Speed . Empire Magazine 's Andrew Collins gave the film a 3 / 5 stars , while commenting " ... top @-@ billed Sandra Bullock , formerly an accidental heroine , is insultingly sidelined here to boyfriend 's little helper and hostage @-@ in @-@ waiting . Patric is the film 's actual <unk> legend , and a watchable one , but the pair 's gooey relationship sorely lacks Speed 's thrown @-@ together dynamic . " 
 = = = Release and box office = = = 
 Speed 2 : Cruise Control premiered at the Cineplex Odeon in Century City , Los Angeles on June 9 , 1997 , and was released into theaters on June 13 . The release date was rescheduled twice — originally set for July 2 and pushed up to June 6 to avoid competition with Men in Black and Titanic ( which was then scheduled for July ) , then moved back one week to avoid competition with Con Air . 
 During its opening weekend , Speed 2 was shown on 2 @,@ 615 screens and grossed $ 16 @.@ 2 million . Despite its negative reviews , it ranked at number one in the box office , grossing just $ 500 @,@ 000 more than Con Air in second place . Box office sales for Speed 2 dropped 54 percent the following weekend , grossing only $ 7 @.@ 8 million and ranking at number five . 
 The film grossed only $ 48 million in the United States , and had a total gross of $ 164 @.@ 5 million worldwide . Moviefone and Time have both ranked the film among the biggest box office bombs of all time . 
 = = = Razzie Awards = = = 
 The film received eight Razzie Award nominations out of 12 possible categories at the 18th Golden Raspberry Awards , and had the second @-@ highest number that year following Batman and Robin ( 1997 ) , which had 11 nominations . Speed 2 won the award for " Worst Re @-@ Make or Sequel " , but lost the award for " Worst Picture " to The Postman ( 1997 ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Speed 2 : Cruise Control has been referenced and parodied in pop culture . A 1998 episode of the British sitcom Father Ted titled " Speed 3 " involves a bomb planted on a milk float that will explode if the float travels under 4 mph ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . While the plot is a parody of Speed , writers Graham Linehan and Arthur Mathews got the idea for the episode after asking themselves if it was possible to come up with a " worse idea for a sequel than Speed 2 " . The Simpsons episode " Bye Bye Nerdie " ( 2001 ) features a scene on a racing school bus where character Milhouse Van Houten says " It 's like Speed 2 , only with a bus instead of a boat ! " The Family Guy episode " Blind Ambition " ( 2005 ) includes a parody of the film 's finale where a cruise ship crashes into a pier and through a city before stopping in the middle of an airport . 
 = Montreal Laboratory = 
 The Montreal Laboratory in Montreal , Quebec , Canada , was established by the National Research Council of Canada during World War II to undertake nuclear research in collaboration with the United Kingdom , and to absorb some of the scientists and work of the Tube Alloys nuclear project in Britain . 
 After the Fall of France , a small number of French scientists escaped to Britain with their stock of heavy water . They were temporarily installed in the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge , where they made progress on the design of a nuclear reactor . The Maud Committee was uncertain as to whether this was relevant to the main task of Tube Alloys , that of building an atomic bomb , although there remained a possibility that a reactor could be used to breed plutonium , which might be used in one . It therefore recommended that they be relocated to America , and co @-@ located with the American Manhattan Project 's reactor effort . Due to American concerns about security ( as many of the scientists were foreign nationals ) and patent claims by the French scientists and Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) , it was decided to relocate them to Canada instead . 
 The Canadian government agreed to the proposal , and the Montreal Laboratory was established in a house belonging to McGill University . It moved to permanent accommodation at the Université de Montréal in March 1943 . The first eight laboratory staff arrived in Montreal at the end of 1942 . These were Bertrand Goldschmidt and Pierre Auger from France , George Placzek from Czechoslovakia , S. G. Bauer from Switzerland , Friedrich Paneth and Hans von Halban from Austria , and R. E. Newell and F. R. Jackson from Britain . The Canadian contingent included George Volkoff , Bernice Weldon Sargent and George Laurence , and promising young Canadian scientists such as J. Carson Mark , Phil Wallace and Leo <unk> . 
 Although Canada was a major source of uranium ore and heavy water , these were controlled by the Americans . Anglo @-@ American cooperation broke down , denying the Montreal Laboratory scientists access to the materials they needed to build a reactor . In 1943 , the Quebec Agreement merged Tube Alloys with the American Manhattan Project . The Americans agreed to help build the reactor . Scientists who were not British subjects would leave , and John Cockcroft became the new Director of the Montreal Laboratory in May 1944 . The Chalk River Laboratories opened in 1944 , and the Montreal Laboratory was closed in July 1946 . Two reactors were eventually built at Chalk River . The small ZEEP went critical on 5 September 1945 , and the larger NRX on 21 July 1947 . NRX was for a time the most powerful research reactor in the world . 
 = = Early nuclear research in Canada = = 
 Canada has a long history of involvement with nuclear research , dating back to the pioneering work of Ernest Rutherford at McGill University in 1899 . In 1940 , George Laurence of the National Research Council ( NRC ) began experiments in Ottawa to measure neutron capture and nuclear fission in uranium in order to demonstrate the feasibility of a nuclear reactor . For the purpose , he obtained 450 kilograms ( 990 lb ) of uranium dioxide in paper bags obtained from the Eldorado Mine at Port Radium in the Northwest Territories . For a neutron moderator , he used carbon in the form of petroleum coke . This was placed with the bags of uranium oxide in a large wooden bin lined with paraffin wax , another neutron moderator . A neutron source was added , and a Geiger counter used to measure radioactivity . 
 The experiments continued in 1942 , but were ultimately unsuccessful ; the problems posed by impurities in the coke and uranium oxide had not been fully appreciated , and as a result too many neutrons were captured . But Laurence 's efforts attracted some attention , and in the summer of 1940 he was visited by R. H. Fowler , the British scientific liaison officer in Canada . This was followed by a visit from John Cockcroft of the British Tizard Mission to the United States in the autumn . They brought news of the similar research being carried out under the supervision of the Maud Committee in Britain and the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) in the United States . 
 Fowler became the channel of communication between the NDRC and its counterparts in Britain and Canada . Through him , Laurence obtained an introduction to Lyman J. Briggs , the chairman of the NDRC 's S @-@ 1 Uranium Committee , who supplied copies of American studies . On returning to England , Cockcroft arranged through Lord Melchett for Laurence to receive a $ 5 @,@ 000 grant to continue his research . This payment was made by Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) through a Canadian subsidiary . It had the desired side effect of impressing the Canadian authorities with the importance of Laurence 's work . 
 = = French connection = = 
 Laurence had chosen to use carbon instead of heavy water because it was cheaper and more readily available . A team of scientists in France that included Hans von Halban , Lew Kowarski , and Francis Perrin had been conducting similar experiments since 1939 . By 1940 , they had decided to use heavy water as a moderator , and through the French Minister of Armament obtained about 185 kilograms ( 408 lb ) from the Norsk Hydro hydroelectric station at Vemork in Norway . After the Fall of France , they had escaped to Britain with their stock of heavy water . They were temporarily installed in the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge , but , believing that Britain would soon fall as well , were eager to relocate to the United States or Canada . 
 Canada was an alternative source of heavy water . Cominco had been involved in heavy water research since 1934 , and produced it at its smelting plant in Trail , British Columbia . On 26 February 1941 , the NRC inquired about its ability to produce heavy water . This was followed on 23 July 1941 by letter from Hugh Taylor , a British @-@ born scientist working at Princeton University , on behalf of the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) . Taylor offered a NDRC contract to produce 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) , for which the NDRC was prepared to pay $ 5 per pound for low @-@ grade and $ 10 for high @-@ grade heavy water . At the time it was selling for up to $ 1 @,@ 130 a pound . 
 Cominco 's president , Selwyn G. Blaylock , was cautious . There might be no post @-@ war demand for heavy water , and the patent on the process was held by Albert Edgar Knowles , so a profit @-@ sharing agreement would be required . In response , Taylor offered up $ 20 @,@ 000 for plant modifications . There the matter rested until 6 December 1941 , when Blaylock had a meeting with the British physicist G. I. Higson , who informed him that Taylor had become discouraged with Cominco , and had decided to find an another source of heavy water . Blaylock invited Taylor to visit Trail , which he did from 5 to 8 January 1942 . The two soon found common ground . Blaylock agreed to produce heavy water at Trail , and quickly secured approval from the Chairman of the Board , Sir Edward Beatty . A contract was signed on 1 August 1942 . The heavy water project became known as the P @-@ 9 Project in October 1942 . 
 The French scientists made good progress on the design of an aqueous homogeneous reactor , but there were doubts that their work was relevant to the main task of the British Tube Alloys project , that of building an atomic bomb , and resources were tightly controlled in wartime Britain . There was a possibility that a reactor could be used to breed plutonium , but its use in a bomb seemed a remote possibility . The Maud Committee therefore felt that they should relocate to America . It made sense to pool resources , and America had advantages , notably proximity to materials such as heavy water . American scientists such as Henry D. Smyth , Harold Urey and Hugh Taylor urged that the Cambridge team be sent to America . On the other hand , American officials had concerns about security , since only one of the six senior scientists in the Cambridge group was British , and about French patent claims . These included patents on controlling nuclear chain reactions , enriching uranium , and using deuterium as a neutron moderator . There were also two patent applications in conjunction with Egon Bretscher and Norman Feather on the production and use of plutonium . George Thomson , the chairman of the Maud Committee , suggested a compromise : relocating the team to Canada . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 The next step was to broach the matter with the Canadians . The Lord President , Sir John Anderson , as the minister responsible for Tube Alloys , wrote to the British High Commissioner to Canada , Malcolm MacDonald , who had been involved in Tube Alloys negotiations with Canada regarding the Eldorado 's uranium mine at Port Radium and its refinery in Port Hope , Ontario . On 19 February 1942 , MacDonald , Thomson and Wallace Akers , the Director of Tube Alloys , met with C. J. Mackenzie , the president of the NRC , who enthusiastically supported the proposal . The following day he took them to see C. D. Howe , the Minister of Munitions and Supply . 
 Howe cabled Anderson expressing the Canadian government 's agreement in principle , but requesting a more detailed appraisal of the cost of the proposed laboratory . Sir John Anderson replied that he envisaged a laboratory with about 30 scientists and 25 laboratory assistants , of whom 22 scientists and 6 laboratory assistants would be sent from Britain . The estimated running cost was £ 60 @,@ 000 per annum . He agreed that the costs and salaries would be divided between the British and Canadian governments , but the British share would come from a billion dollar war gift from Canada . The Canadians found this acceptable . Howe and Mackenzie then travelled to London to finalise arrangements for the laboratory 's governance . It was agreed that it would be run by a Policy Committee consisting of Howe and MacDonald and be administered by and funded through the NRC , with research directed by a Technical Committee chaired by Halban . 
 The Canadians decided that the new laboratory should be located in Montreal , where housing accommodation was easier to find than in wartime Ottawa . They hoped to have everything ready by 1 January 1943 , but negotiations for laboratory space fell through . A search then commenced for an alternative location . Bertrand Goldschmidt , a French scientist who was already in Canada , ran into Henri <unk> , a French biologist who had been president of the Centre national de la recherche scientifique before the Fall of France , when he had escaped to Canada . <unk> suggested that they acquire some unused wings of a new building at the Université de Montréal , where he was now teaching . These had been earmarked for a medical school , but had never been equipped due to a lack of funds . The 200 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 200 sq ft ) space was acquired , but considerable work was required to convert it into a laboratory , and it could not be made ready before mid @-@ February 1943 . Ernest Cormier , the university architect , drew up the plans . 
 The first eight staff arrived in Montreal at the end of 1942 . These were Goldschmidt and Pierre Auger from France , George Placzek from Czechoslovakia , S. G. Bauer from Switzerland , Friedrich Paneth and Halban from Austria , and R.E. Newell and F.R. Jackson from Britain . The Battle of the Atlantic was still raging , and men and equipment , which travelled separately , were at risk from German U @-@ boats . The scientists occupied a house at 3470 Simpson Street in downtown Montreal that belonged to McGill University . This soon became so crowded that bathrooms were used for offices , with the bath tubs used to store papers and books . They were relieved to move to the more spacious accommodation at the Université de Montréal in March . The laboratory grew to over 300 staff , about half of whom were Canadians recruited by Laurence . 
 Placzek became head of the theoretical physics division . Kowarski was designated to be the head of the experimental physics division , but there was a personality clash with Halban , and Kowarski did not wish to accept what he saw as a subordinate position under Halban . At this point , many other scientists said that they would not go without Kowarski , but Sir Edward Appleton , the permanent secretary of the British Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , of which the Tube Alloys was a part , managed to persuade them to go . Kowarski remained at Cambridge , where he worked for James Chadwick . Auger assumed the position instead . Paneth became head of the chemistry division . Two other scientists that had escaped from France joined the laboratory : the French chemist Jules <unk> , who had been working for Free France at Cambridge , and Bruno Pontecorvo , an Italian scientist who had worked with Enrico Fermi in Italy before the war . 
 For the Canadian contingent , Laurence and Mackenzie set out to recruit some top nuclear physicists , of whom there were few in Canada . The first was George Volkoff at the University of British Columbia , who had worked with Robert Oppenheimer on the physics of neutron stars . He also tried to recruit Harry Thode from McMaster University , but found that Harold Urey from the Manhattan Project 's SAM Laboratories was also interested in Thode 's expertise in testing heavy water with mass spectrography , and had made a more attractive offer . A compromise was reached whereby Thode did work for the Montreal Laboratory , but remained at McMaster University . Promising young Canadian scientists were also recruited , including J. Carson Mark , Phil Wallace and Leo <unk> . 
 = = Research = = 
 The Montreal Laboratory investigated multiple avenues of reactor development . One was a homogeneous reactor , in which a uranium compound was dissolved in heavy water to form a slurry , or a " mayonnaise " as the Montreal team called it . This offered various advantages for cooling , control and the ability to draw off plutonium that was produced . Paneth , Goldschmidt and others experimented with methods of preparing such a uranium compound , but none could be found with the required density . They considered using enriched uranium , but it was unavailable . Attention then turned to a heterogeneous reactor , in which a lattice of uranium metal rods were immersed in heavy water . While much less heavy water would be required , there was a danger that the water would decompose into deuterium and oxygen — a potentially explosive combination . There was great interest in breeder reactors , which could breed plutonium from uranium or uranium @-@ 233 from thorium , as it was believed that uranium was scarce . A process was devised for separating the uranium from thorium . 
 To build a working nuclear reactor , the Montreal Laboratory depended on the Americans for heavy water from Trail , which was under American contract , but this was not forthcoming . An American request for Halban to come to New York to discuss heavy water with Fermi and Urey was turned down by the British , and the Americans brought cooperation to a standstill . By June 1943 work at the Montreal Lab had come to a halt . Morale was low and the Canadian Government proposed cancelling the project . The British government seriously considered going it alone on developing nuclear weapons , despite the cost and the expected length of the project . In August 1943 , the Prime Minister of Canada , Mackenzie King , hosted the Quebec Conference , at which Winston Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt came together , and agreed to resume cooperation . The Quebec Agreement , subsumed Tube Alloys into the Manhattan Project . It established the Combined Policy Committee to control the Manhattan Project , on which Canada was represented by Howe . 
 While some aspects of cooperation resumed quickly , it took longer to finalize the details with respect to the Montreal Laboratory . Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr ( the director of the Manhattan Project ) , Chadwick ( now the head of the British Mission to the Manhattan Project ) , and Mackenzie negotiated recommendations , which were approved by the Combined Policy Committee on 13 April 1944 . A final agreement was spelt out on 20 May 1944 . Under it , the Americans would assist with the construction of a heavy water reactor in Canada , and would provide technical assistance with matters such as corrosion and the effects of radiation on materials . They would not provide details about plutonium or plutonium chemistry , although irradiated uranium slugs would be made available for the British to work it out for themselves . The Americans had already built their own heavy water reactor , Chicago Pile @-@ 3 , which went critical in May 1944 . The September 1944 Hyde Park Agreement extended both commercial and military cooperation into the post @-@ war period . 
 Hans von Halban had proved to be an unfortunate choice as he was a poor administrator , and did not work well with Mackenzie or the NRC . The Americans saw him as a security risk , and objected to the French atomic patents claimed by the Paris Group ( in association with ICI ) . In April 1944 a Combined Policy Committee meeting at Washington agreed that Canada would build a heavy water reactor . Scientists who were not British subjects would leave , and Cockcroft became the new Director of the Montreal Laboratory in May 1944 . <unk> <unk> became Assistant Director and head of the Chemistry division when Paneth left . Volkoff eventually succeeded Placzek as head of the Theoretical Physics division . Halban remained as head of the nuclear physics division . 
 After the Liberation of Paris in August 1944 , the French scientists wanted to go home . Auger had already returned to London to join the French Scientific Mission in April 1944 . Halban returned on a visit to London and Paris in November 1944 , where he saw Frédéric Joliot @-@ Curie for the first time since leaving France . While he maintained that he did not divulge any nuclear secrets to his previous boss ( although he had discussed patent rights ) , Halban was not allowed to work or to leave North America for a year , although he left the Montreal Laboratory in April 1945 . In 1946 he settled in England . B. W. Sargent then became Head of the nuclear physics division . Cockcroft arranged for Goldschmidt , <unk> and Kowarski to remain until June 1945 , later extended until the end of 1945 . Goldschmidt was willing to stay longer , and Cockcroft wanted to keep him , but Groves insisted that he should go , and , in the interest of Allied harmony , he did . All the French scientists had left by January 1946 . 
 On 24 August 1944 , the decision was taken to build a small reactor in order to test the group 's calculations relating to such matters as lattice dimensions , sheathing materials , and control rods , before proceeding with the full @-@ scale NRX reactor . With Halban gone , Kowarski joined the Laboratory , and was given responsibility for the small reactor , which he named ZEEP , for Zero Energy Experimental Pile . He was assisted in the design by Charles Watson @-@ Munro from New Zealand , and George Klein and Don <unk> from Canada . Building reactors in downtown Montreal was out of the question ; the Canadians selected , and Groves approved , a site at Chalk River , Ontario , on the south bank of the Ottawa River some 110 miles ( 180 km ) northwest of Ottawa . 
 The Americans fully supported the reactor project with information and visits . Groves loaned the Montreal Laboratory 19 short tons ( 17 t ) of heavy water and 5 short tons ( 4 @.@ 5 t ) of pure uranium metal for the reactor , and samples of pure and irradiated uranium and thorium to develop the extraction process . The irradiated materials came from the Manhattan Project 's X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at the Clinton Engineer Works at Oak Ridge , Tennessee . Some 10 short tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) of machined pure uranium rods was sold outright to Canada . He also supplied instruments , drawings and technical information , provided expertise from American scientists , and opened a liaison office in Montreal headed by Major H. S. Benbow . The American physicist William Weldon Watson from the Metallurgical Laboratory and chemist John R. Huffman from the SAM Laboratories were assigned to it . They were succeeded by George Weil in November 1945 . Benbow was succeeded by Major P. Firmin in December 1945 , who in turn was replaced by Colonel A. W. Nielson in February 1946 . 
 The Chalk River Laboratories opened in 1944 , and the Montreal Laboratory was closed in July 1946 . ZEEP went critical on 5 September 1945 , becoming the first operating nuclear reactor outside the United States . Using 5 short tons ( 4 @.@ 5 t ) of heavy water and 3 @.@ 5 short tons ( 3 @.@ 2 t ) of uranium metal , it could operate continuously at 3 @.@ 5 W , or for brief periods at 30 to 50 W. The larger NRX followed on 21 July 1947 . With five times the neutron flux of any other reactor , it was the most powerful research reactor in the world . Originally designed in July 1944 with an output of 8 MW , the power was raised to 10 MW through design changes such as replacing uranium rods clad in stainless steel and cooled by heavy water with aluminium @-@ clad rods cooled by light water . 
 By the end of 1946 , the Montreal Laboratory was estimated to have cost US $ 22 @,@ 232 @,@ 000 , excluding the cost of the heavy water . The NRX reactor provided Britain , the United States and Canada with a source of fissile plutonium and uranium @-@ 233 . It also provided a means of efficiently producing medical isotopes like phosphorus @-@ 32 , research facilities that for a time were superior to those in the United States , and a wealth of technical information related to reactor design and operation . With the passage of the Canadian Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , the responsibility for the Chalk River Laboratories passed to the Atomic Energy Control Board . 
 = = Atomic spies = = 
 On 5 September 1945 , Igor Gouzenko , a cypher clerk at the Soviet Union 's embassy in Ottawa , and his family defected to Canada . He brought with him copies of cables detailing Soviet intelligence ( GRU ) espionage activities in Canada . Agents included Alan Nunn May , who secretly supplied tiny samples of uranium @-@ 233 and uranium @-@ 235 to GRU agent Pavel <unk> in July 1945 ; Fred Rose , a member of parliament ; and NRC scientists Israel Halperin , Edward <unk> and Durnford Smith . Pontecorvo , who defected to the Soviet Union in 1950 , has long been suspected of having been involved in espionage . No evidence that he was a Soviet agent has ever been established , but the GRU obtained samples of uranium and blueprints of the NRX , for which Nunn May could not have been the source , and Pontecorvo remains the prime suspect . When the spy ring became public knowledge in February 1946 , the Americans became more cautious about sharing information with Britain and Canada . 
 = = Cooperation ends = = 
 The Montreal Laboratory had been a fruitful and successful international venture , although the Canadians had on occasion been resentful of British actions that were perceived as high @-@ handed and insensitive . One such action came in November 1945 when the British suddenly announced that Cockcroft had been appointed the head of the new Atomic Energy Research Establishment without any prior consultation and at a time when the NRX reactor was still under construction . Cockcroft did not depart Canada until September 1946 , but it was a sure sign of waning British interest in collaboration with Canada . The British suggested he be replaced by the British physicist Bennett Lewis , who was eventually appointed , but only after the Canadian @-@ born Walter Zinn turned the job down . 
 Anglo @-@ American cooperation did not long survive the war . Roosevelt died on 12 April 1945 , and the Hyde Park Agreement was not binding on subsequent administrations . The Special Relationship between Britain and the United States " became very much less special " . The British government had trusted that America would share nuclear technology , which the British saw as a joint discovery . On 9 November 1945 , Mackenzie King and the British Prime Minister , Clement Attlee , went to Washington , D.C. , to confer with President Harry Truman about future cooperation in nuclear weapons and nuclear power . The three leaders agreed that there would be full and effective cooperation , but British hopes for a resumption of cooperation on nuclear weapons were disappointed . The Americans soon made it clear that cooperation was restricted to basic scientific research . 
 At the Combined Policy Committee meeting in February 1946 , without prior consultation with Canada , the British announced their intention to build a graphite @-@ moderated nuclear reactor in the United Kingdom . An outraged Howe told Lester B. Pearson to inform the Committee that nuclear cooperation between Britain and Canada was at an end . The Canadians had been given what they deemed assurances that the Chalk River Laboratories would be a joint enterprise , and regarded the British decision as a breach of faith . Anglo @-@ American cooperation largely ended in April 1946 when Truman declared that the United States would not assist Britain in the design , construction or operation of a plutonium production reactor . The Americans agreed that such a facility should be built in Canada , but the British were not willing to be dependent on Canada for the supply of fissile material . 
 = Tropical Storm Lidia ( 1981 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Lidia was a deadly , destructive tropical cyclone that occurred during the 1981 Pacific hurricane season . It resulted in more casualties and caused greater damage than Hurricane Norma , which took place later that season . On October 6 , a tropical depression formed and strengthened into a tropical storm six hours later . Lidia brushed the Gulf of California coast of Baja California Sur and made landfall just south of Los Mochis in Sinaloa on October 8 . Tropical Storm Lidia rapidly weakened and dissipated the same day . Lidia killed at least 73 people and caused at least $ 80 million ( 1981 USD ) which is equivalent to $ 193 million ( 2010 USD ) in damage . It inflicted heavy rain and flooding throughout parts of northwestern Mexico , especially Sinaloa . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical depression formed on October 6 while located 210 mi ( 340 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . Ahead of a southwesterly flow over Mexico and a front , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Lidia at 0000 UTC October 7 . Lidia moved generally north , and reached its maximum windspeed of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Despite encountering warm sea surface temperatures , which are generally favorable for intensification , Lidia slowly weakened as it moved towards southern Baja California . The tropical cyclone passed over the southern tip of the Baja California Peninsula on 1700 UTC October 7 ; at the time of the landfall Lidia was located about 67 mi ( 108 km ) northwest of Cabo San Lucas . Two hours later , Lidia entered the Gulf of California , and turned to the northeast . Lidia made landfall on the shores of Sinaloa about 23 mi ( 37 km ) south of Los Mochis on October 8 , with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . At 0600 UTC , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ended advisories as the tropical cyclone dissipated inland about 17 mi ( 27 km ) northeast of that same place . The remnants of Lidia continued their northeast track , moving over Mexico , and ultimately emerging into the Southern United States , spurring a new frontal wave . 
 = = Impact and Aftermath = = 
 Tropical Storm Lidia caused flash flooding , with highest point point maxima was 20 @.@ 59 inches ( 523 mm ) at El <unk> and <unk> in Sinaloa . Heavy rainfall sent water down a dry river bed in Pericos , killing 40 people , mostly children . In the village <unk> , ( or perhaps Pericos ) six soldiers died while attempting to save peasants from the flooding . In the northern part of Sinaloa , 42 were confirmed killed and 76 were missing . Around Los Mochis , four people were killed . About 800 houses were also destroyed in that town . In Culiacán , eleven people were killed . Losses to cattle , crops , and fishing vessels were more than $ 80 million ( 1981 USD ) , equivalent to $ 193 million ( 2010 USD ) . 
 Electricity was cut off to two settlements , <unk> and Guasave . Telephone service was also cut off to Culiacán . Heavy rain caused flooding that cut off seven towns in Sinaloa from the outside world . It also contaminated the water supply in Culiacán , leaving many without clean drinking water . Almost a hundred villages were flooded , as were two dams . The Rio Fuerte burst its banks and flooded sixty settlements . It also forced evacuations , which were enforced by the Mexican Army . Mexican Federal Highway 15 was closed due to the storm , as was the Pacific Railroad . The highway was reopened shortly after the storm passed . The total death toll from Tropical Storm Lidia was determined to exceed 73 . This was enough to make it the deadliest tropical cyclone of its season , which mostly occurred in rural areas . A few days later , Hurricane Norma struck similar areas as Lidia , also causing devastation . 
 The remnants of Lidia brought moisture to extreme southeastern Arizona . 
 During the aftermath of the storm , food and clothing was brought to towns isolated by the storm . In Culiacán , churches , schools , and a baseball stadium served as temporary shelters for displaced persons . Rescue workers also searched for bodies of victims of both Lidia and the subsequent Hurricane Norma , which hit the same area a few days later . Due to the damage wrought by both Lidia and Norma , the Governor of Sinaloa , Antonio Toledo Corro , declared his state a disaster area . He also asked the Mexican Federal Government for aid . 
 = Federation of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent = 
 The federation of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent was the 1910 amalgamation of the six Potteries towns of Burslem , Tunstall , Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent , Hanley , Fenton and Longton into the single county borough of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . An anomaly in the history of English local government , this was the first union of its type and the only such event to take place until the 1960s . The 1910 federation was the culmination of a process of urban growth and municipal change that started in the early 19th century . 
 Little interaction between the separate settlements occurred until the 18th century when the pottery industry began to expand rapidly . By the early 19th century , initial steps had been made to ensure greater co @-@ operation between the Potteries towns over the issue of law and order . The county plan of 1888 made the first attempts to form the six towns into one county borough , following an act of Parliament that restructured the county system and created the administrative county of Staffordshire . Wishing to remain independent , the Potteries towns discussed uniting to form a separate county , the Staffordshire Potteries . When it became apparent that such a move would fail , the proposal was revised to one of uniting the six towns into one county borough . This plan failed after Hanley Corporation and Stoke Corporation could not agree on the location of the future administrative centre . Instead , only Hanley gained county borough status because the other towns did not meet the criteria for such designation . 
 The first federation attempt was made in 1900 with a resurrection of the county plan . In 1902 , Hanley Council led attempts to form an expanded county borough , but disagreement over the complex financial issues of rates , assets and loans caused Fenton to pull out , quickly followed by Burslem and Stoke , and the proposal was abandoned in 1903 . The second and final federation process , between 1905 and 1910 , was instigated by Longton Town Council with support from Stoke and Hanley and opposition from Fenton , Tunstall and Burslem . Issues again arose over the financial settlement and discussions continued during the progress of the Federation Bill through Parliament . The bill was passed in the House of Commons and was still under debate in the House of Lords when the six towns announced that they had come to an agreement . Passed in December 1908 , the act came into force on 31 March 1910 . The new Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent was a county borough from then until 1974 . In addition , city status was granted to Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent by King George V on 1 July 1925 . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the early part of the 19th century the six towns that eventually became Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent — Burslem , Tunstall , Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent , Hanley , Fenton and Longton — were all established settlements . Despite occupying only a small geographic area and all based around the pottery industry , there was little political or social co @-@ operation between them . 
 Prior to the 19th century , local government remained largely based on the parochial and manorial systems in use since the Middle Ages . In the Potteries towns this led to each of the townships having varying forms of government . Tunstall was parochially within Wolstanton and <unk> part of Tunstall manor ; Burslem , although <unk> a part of Tunstall manor , parochially was part of Burslem parish . It was through these failing regimes , such as the 1813 lapse of the manorial court of Tunstall , that the long process towards federation began . 
 The earliest changes were seen in Hanley and Burslem when in 1813 the Hanley Market Act ( 53 Geo . 3 <unk> ) gave statutory control of Hanley market to a board of trustees outside manorial control . In 1825 the Hanley and Shelton Improvement Act ( 6 Geo . 4 <unk> ) and the Burslem Markets , Lighting and Police Act ( 6 Geo . 4 @.@ <unk> ) , for Hanley and Burslem respectively , gave a board of commissioners control over policing and lighting along with the ability to levy rates for these purposes . Important steps as they were , none were directed towards any form of co @-@ operation between Burslem , Hanley or any other of the Potteries towns . 
 = = Early proposals for co @-@ operation = = 
 The first tentative step towards co @-@ operation was taken in 1817 , when a meeting in Hanley mooted " future joint public meetings called by the head constables of the various settlements to be held in Hanley " . This was the first instance of a call for greater law and order in the Potteries , although there seemed to be little interest in other forms of co @-@ operation . 
 Apart from the establishment of the boards of commissioners in Hanley and Burslem , no further changes occurred until the 1830s when passing of the Reform Act 1832 ( 2 & 3 Will . IV. <unk> ) sparked renewed interest in incorporation . The act created the parliamentary borough of Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent , which would elect two members to Parliament . Together with Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent itself , the parliamentary borough also comprised Hanley , Shelton , Lane End , Fenton , Burslem , Tunstall , Rushton Grange , and the hamlet of Sneyd . The significance of the act was that for the first time and for one important reason only , through the election of Members of Parliament , the townships of the Potteries effectively became one . Shortly after the Reform Act came into effect , a Municipal Corporations Bill was introduced which proposed that the new parliamentary boroughs should be granted charters of incorporation . The bill failed with the prorogation of that Parliament , while the Potteries were excluded from the reforms of the later Municipal Corporations Act 1835 ( 5 & 6 Wm . IV. <unk> ) . Interest in incorporation was sufficient for several meetings on the subject to take place ; the Staffordshire Advertiser reported after one meeting in Burslem that incorporation would lead to one town having undue influence over the others , a theme that was to recur for many years . The same meeting revisited a topic raised pre – 1820 , the promotion of law and order in the Potteries , and called for the appointment of a stipendiary magistrate . 
 Only two years later the people of Fenton voted in favour of incorporation of the borough , while further meetings in Stoke and Burslem came out against incorporation but reiterated calls for the appointment of a stipendiary magistrate . Later the same year , a further call for better policing was made at a meeting chaired by the Duke of Sutherland . These calls were heard and in 1839 two acts of Parliament were passed , the Staffordshire Potteries Stipendiary Justice Act ( 2 & 3 Vict. <unk> ) and the Staffordshire Potteries Improvement and Police Act ( 2 & 3 Vict. <unk> ) . This legislation created boards of commissioners with the same powers given to Hanley and Burslem by the 1825 acts . Following these amendments to local policing and justice , the discussion of co @-@ operation and federation between the various townships was subdued for several decades . 
 = = County plan of 1888 = = 
 Changes in local government between 1840 and 1888 saw the end of the parochial and manorial systems . The townships of Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent , <unk> and <unk> were formed into the borough of Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent in 1874 while Longton and Lane End became the borough of Longton in 1865 . Hanley and Shelton became the borough of Hanley in 1857 and Burslem became a borough in 1878 . In Tunstall ( 1855 ) and Fenton ( 1873 ) , the boards of commissioners were superseded by local boards of health . 
 Introduction of the Local Government Bill in March 1888 caused much debate in the Potteries about the position of the towns under the proposed council structure . The bill proposed the creation of county councils across England and Wales and the granting of county borough status to towns with a population exceeding 100 @,@ 000 . County borough status would allow such places to govern themselves independently of the county council . 
 Consensus in the Potteries was against coming under the control of Staffordshire County Council and the idea developed of the Potteries seeking to become a county in their own right . Accordingly , a proposal was submitted to the Local Government Board on 2 July 1888 for the creation of a county of the Staffordshire Potteries . However , on 9 July 1888 it was proposed to amend the bill to reduce the population requirement for county borough status from 100 @,@ 000 to only 50 @,@ 000 , which if adopted would allow Hanley to become a county borough in its own right , and the rest of the towns would come under the control of Staffordshire . On 13 July 1888 Captain Heathcote , MP for Staffordshire North West , moved an amendment to the bill that " [ t ] he district of the Staffordshire Potteries , comprising the municipal boroughs of Hanley , Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent , Longton , and Burslem , the urban sanitary district of the Fenton Local Board of Health , and the urban sanitary district of the Tunstall Local Board of Health , the six towns comprising the Pottery District should be formed into a county " . In response , the President of the Local Government Board , Charles Ritchie , proposed the matter be resolved by way of a provisional order bill in the next parliamentary session and that he would undertake to introduce such a bill . William Woodall , MP for Hanley , supported the amendment but accepted Ritchie 's assurance . However , he was also bound to protect Hanley 's interests and moved that Hanley be added to the proposed list of county boroughs under the Local Government bill , but would surrender that right if all of the Potteries were to become a county borough or county in their own right . Ritchie re @-@ iterated his hope that the matter could be resolved by way of provisional order bill and with that both amendments were withdrawn . 
 The bill received Royal Assent on 13 August 1888 with Hanley listed among those places to be granted county borough status . The corporation of Hanley vacillated for several months as to how best to proceed , then in February 1889 opted for Hanley to take its county borough status , effectively killing both the county proposal and the county borough proposal . Why Hanley corporation made such a decision is not recorded , but it was reported in the Staffordshire Sentinel of 5 February 1901 that it was because Stoke Corporation insisted that the administrative centre of the new county be in Stoke , not Hanley , and this was something that Hanley could not agree too . 
 The following year Longton Town Council proposed the formation of a county borough comprising Stoke , Fenton and Longton but the proposal came to nothing . 
 = = First federation proposal 1900 – 1903 = = 
 In December 1900 , Stoke Town Council proposed a meeting with " a view to federal action " and issued invitations to the boroughs of Hanley , Stoke , Newcastle @-@ under @-@ Lyme , Longton , and Burslem , the urban districts of Fenton , Tunstall , Audley , Kidsgrove , and Smallthorne , the rural districts of Stoke and Wolstanton . The parishes of Milton , Chell , Goldenhill , Chesterton , and Silverdale were also invited . The meeting took place in February 1901 and resolved " that it was desirable in the interests of North Staffordshire to form a federation of local authorities " , thereby indicating a preference for implementation the county plan . Legal opinion sought suggested that the county plan was unlikely to succeed and that a more viable proposition would be to expand the county borough of Hanley to include the other Potteries towns . Accordingly , in March 1902 , representatives of the four boroughs and two urban districts met and agreed unanimously that " the principle of federation of the Pottery towns by the constitution of a county borough should be adopted , subject to the resolutions passed by each authority for the preservation of their respective interests . " 
 Hanley council made a formal proposal in 1902 to the Local Government Board for the expansion of the County Borough of Hanley to include not only Stoke , Burslem , Longton , Fenton and Tunstall but also Smallthorne Urban District , Wolstanton Rural District , and the parishes of Milton , Goldenhill , Chell , Trentham , Stoke Rural , <unk> and Stone . Only Longton council supported the idea as concurrently , Sir Hugh Owen , a former secretary to the Local Government Board , presented the six towns committee with a scheme of financial adjustment . Under this proposal , the net assets of each town would be calculated by deducting outstanding debts and liabilities from the values of its various properties . The proportion each town needed to contribute to the overall value of the county borough was then to be calculated . If the value of the net assets to be contributed by a town was less than the proportion calculated as due from that town towards the overall sum , then that town would need to set a higher general rate to be paid by the ratepayers of that town . Conversely , towns contributing a value of net assets greater than their proportion of the overall sum would be able to set a lower general rate . While five of the towns awaited a report from Alderman Frederick Geen of Stoke on the implications of the Owen proposal , Fenton immediately decided that it would impose undue financial hardship on the ratepayers of the district as the net assets of the district would show a deficiency and therefore a higher rate would have to be set . Fenton district council could not accept such a move and withdrew from all discussions on federation forthwith . Geen 's July 1903 report increased opposition to the idea of federation while a poll of ratepayers in Burslem came out strongly against federation . Burslem council then withdrew from the scheme to be followed shortly afterwards by Stoke . Faced by such strong opposition , Hanley council felt compelled to withdraw its submission to the Local Government Board bringing the first attempt at federation in the twentieth century to an unsuccessful conclusion . 
 = = Second federation proposal 1905 – 1910 = = 
 At a conference of local authorities held in 1905 , delegates from Longton again raised the issue of confederation but their proposal was not well received . Undaunted , they amended their suggestion to : " On the grounds of sanitation , education , and other matters of common interest it is desirable that the parliamentary borough of Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent should be formed into one municipal borough on some equitable basis , and that the other authorities concerned be invited to take the subject into their consideration " At that time , the parliamentary borough of Stoke @-@ upon @-@ Trent meant Longton , Stoke and Fenton . While Stoke town council were in favour , the voters of Fenton were not and voted overwhelmingly against the proposal . 
 Despite this setback , Longton and Stoke submitted their proposal to the Local Government Board in early 1907 . A local inquiry was held soon afterwards in Stoke , which reported back quickly and in April 1907 informed both Stoke and Longton councils that the proposed scheme was not sufficiently comprehensive and suggested holding another conference between the six towns to discuss a more complete proposal . The meeting took place in July and was addressed by John Burns , president of the Local Government Board , who called for a number of local conferences to agree a scheme for federation of all six towns . 
 These were duly held everywhere except Tunstall , where the council refused to participate . Fenton council made it clear that it would not back any proposal that did not have the support of its electorate . In Burslem , a high turnout of 74 per cent of voters delivered a vote of 3 : 2 against federation . The Staffordshire Advertiser described the events surrounding this poll as " unprecedented " with both proponents and opponents — chiefly the Association for Promoting the Federation of the Pottery Towns and the Burslem Anti @-@ Federation League — making every effort to ensure their supporters voted . An indication of the strength of feeling and interest in the proposal is that the events surrounding the federation proposal were used as a background setting by the author Arnold Bennett in his contemporary ( 1908 ) novel The Old Wives ' Tale . With Fenton , Tunstall and Burslem all opposing federation it was left to Hanley , Stoke and Longton to submit proposals to the Local Government Board . The Local Government Board ruled that only the submission made by Longton met the statutory and other formal requirements and that it alone would form the basis of the subsequent local inquiry , held in January 1908 . 
 Before the inquiry opened , a poll was conducted in Tunstall where ratepayers of the town showed themselves to be in favour of federation . As the council itself had voted against federation , it decided not to oppose or support federation but instead to achieve the best deal it could for the town . The three @-@ day inquiry opened on 8 January 1908 and was chaired by Major Norton , an officer of the Local Government Board . Norton 's appointment itself caused controversy with the delegation from Burslem walking out on the first day protesting that Norton had already declared himself in favour of federation . The walkout did not disrupt the hearing but left only Fenton and Staffordshire County Council opposed to the plan , with Tunstall neutral and Hanley , Stoke and Longton in favour . The bulk of the inquiry examined rating schemes based largely on the Owen or Geen proposals from the previous federation attempt . 
 On 23 February 1908 , less than six weeks after the inquiry closed , the Local Government Board issued a draft provisional bill for the federation of the six towns . This was not unexpected but the rating scheme proposed differed from the schemes discussed during the inquiry and included a complicated valuation of the properties belonging to each municipality , something that none of the towns wished to carry out . Nevertheless , Hanley , Longton and Tunstall all supported the draft order while Stoke , Fenton and Burslem opposed it . 
 Once the draft order had been issued , the locus of the process moved from the Potteries to London with the Local Government Provisional Order ( No. 3 ) Bill introduced in the House of Commons in July 1908 by the Select Committee on Private bills chaired by Sir George White . The bill received its third reading on 31 July 1908 but had undergone significant amendment during its passage through the House of Commons , most notably in the introduction of a complex , differential rating system for a period of 10 years . Few of the interested parties were pleased with the proposal and , although the differential system was welcomed , a period of 20 years was preferred with the complicated valuation required of all public assets proving unpopular . As a result , Tunstall withdrew its support for the order leaving only Hanley and Longton to promote the bill in the House of Lords . Neither council was particularly in favour of the financial settlement but felt honour bound to promote the bill , having been the initial instigators of the scheme . Petitions objecting to the bill were submitted to the House of Lords by Staffordshire County Council , Burslem , Fenton , Stoke , and Tunstall councils , the Longton Justices , the North Staffordshire Railway Company , and individual Tunstall ratepayers . 
 The House of Lords Select Committee assigned to deal with the bill was chaired by Lord Cromer and sat during November and December 1908 . After several sessions , the committee declared several important decisions . It reaffirmed that federation would benefit of the people of the Potteries , that a differential rating system for a fixed period was required , that asset valuation in each town should be abandoned , and that the committee reserved the right to decide a course of action should the parties not be able to reach agreement . This last point was important because without it all disputes would have to be passed back either to the Local Government Board or the House of Commons . With prorogation of the current Parliament on the horizon , this would have led to delays that jeopardised the passage of the whole bill through Parliament during that parliamentary session . 
 On 16 December 1908 , less than a week after the committee made its announcement , the six towns informed the committee that an agreement had been reached and that a differential rating system for the next 20 years had been settled on . No valuation of assets would be undertaken and that each town was responsible for discharging any outstanding loans as of 31 December 1907 . At this point the committee redrafted the bill according to the terms agreed by the towns and it was passed by the House of Lords on 19 December 1908 . Returned to the House of Commons the bill was passed by the Commons the same day , with Royal Assent being received on 21 December 1908 . The Local Government Provisional Order ( No. 3 ) Confirmation Act ( 8 Edw . 7 <unk> ) came into force on 31 March 1910 with the new council consisting of 78 councillors representing 26 wards . The new council as one of their first actions voted Cecil Wedgwood to be the first mayor of the county borough of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent . Wedgwood had previously been appointed acting mayor ( primarily to act as returning officer for the first municipal elections ) by the Local Government Board . So as not to show bias towards any of the six town halls , the council held its inaugural meeting at the North Stafford Hotel . On 1 July 1925 the county borough of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent became the City of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent under letters patent from King George V dated 5 June 1925 . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Black @-@ shouldered kite = 
 The black @-@ shouldered kite ( Elanus axillaris ) , Australian black @-@ shouldered kite , or simply Australian kite , is a small raptor found in open habitat throughout Australia . It resembles similar species found in Africa , Eurasia and North America , including the black @-@ winged kite , a species that has in the past also been called " black @-@ shouldered kite " . 
 Measuring 35 – 38 cm ( 14 – 15 in ) in length with a wingspan of 80 – 95 cm ( 31 – 37 in ) , the adult black @-@ shouldered kite is a small and graceful raptor with red eyes . Their primary call is a clear whistle , uttered in flight and while hovering . 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites form monogamous pairs , breeding between August and January . The birds engage in aerial courtship displays which involve high circling flight and ritualised feeding mid @-@ air . Three or four eggs are laid and incubated for around thirty days . Chicks are fully fledged within five weeks of hatching and can hunt for mice within a week of leaving the nest . Juveniles disperse widely from the home territory . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The black @-@ shouldered kite was first described by English ornithologist John Latham in 1801 , as Falco axillaris . Its specific name is derived from the Latin axilla , meaning " armpit " . 
 The name " black @-@ shouldered kite " was formerly used for a Eurasian and African species , Elanus <unk> , with the Australian species , Elanus axillaris , and the North American species , the white @-@ tailed kite Elanus leucurus , treated as subspecies of this . These three Elanus species have comparable plumage patterns and sizes , however , they are now regarded as distinct , and the name black @-@ winged kite is used for E. <unk> . Modern references to the black @-@ shouldered kite should therefore unambiguously mean the Australian species , E. axillaris . The Australian black @-@ shouldered kite was formerly called E. <unk> , but it was not clear that the name applied to this species alone . 
 In 1851 , British zoologist Edward Blyth described <unk> , the " smooth clawed kites " as a formal subfamily of Accipitridae . However , they are also grouped in <unk> , the broader subfamily of hawks and eagles described by French ornithologist Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot in 1816 . 
 A taxonomic proposal based on DNA studies has recommended classifying Elanus kites as a separate family ( <unk> ) . A 2004 molecular study of cytochrome @-@ b DNA sequences shows them to have split off from typical hawks and eagles at an earlier date than the Osprey , which has been classified in its own family . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites are around 35 to 38 cm ( 14 to 15 in ) in length and have a wingspan of between 80 and 95 cm ( 31 and 37 in ) and an average weight of 291 g ( 10 @.@ 3 oz ) . Adults are a pale grey with a white head and white underparts . The leading edge of the inner wing is black . When perched , this gives them their prominent black " shoulders " . Like related species they feature bright red eyes , set in a black comma @-@ shaped marking . They have a squared tail and a streamlined aerodynamic body . The bill is short with a sharp , hooked tip to the upper mandible . Their nostrils and the cere are bright yellow and the bill is black . The legs and feet are also yellow , and the feet have three toes facing forwards and one toe facing backwards . The sexes are similar , with females only just larger than males , although they can be up to 15 % heavier . 
 The juveniles ’ markings follow a similar pattern to adult birds , but they are washed with a rusty brown on the head and upper breast , and the back and wings are mottled buff or brown with prominent white tips . The young birds ’ eyes are brown . 
 The black @-@ shouldered kite is very similar to the related raptor species , the letter @-@ winged kite ( E. scriptus ) but has the black mark above and behind the eye , a white rather than grey crown , and shows all @-@ white underparts in flight except for the black patch at the shoulder and dark wingtips . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites are generally silent , except in the breeding season when their calls , though weak , can be persistent . They primarily utter clear whistled ' chee , chee , chee ' calls in flight and while hovering , or a hoarse wheezing ' <unk> @-@ ah ' when perched . The call has been confused with that of a silver gull . A short high whistle is the primary contact call between a pair , while a harsh scraping call is the most common call used by females and large young , and brooding females call to their young with a deep , soft , frog @-@ like croak . 
 A variety of different calls have been recorded from captive birds , including harsh , harmonic , chatter and whistle vocalisations . Harsh calls were made when a bird was alarmed or agitated , whistle @-@ type calls were emitted in general contexts , sometimes monotonously , and shorter duration ' chatter ' calls were given when a bird sighted a human near the enclosure . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Australian kites may be sedentary or nomadic , and generally occur in open grasslands or valleys where there are scattered clumps of trees . In urban areas they are found on the edge of towns on wasteland , irregularly mown areas , or grassy roadside verges . They also hunt over coastal dunes , drier marshland , and farmland . 
 Their numbers fluctuate during drought and floods , and can be irruptive in response to sudden increases in mouse populations . The most distant banding recovery was from South Australia to eastern New South Wales , a distance of 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) . 
 Although reported throughout Australia , they are most common in the relatively fertile south @-@ east and south @-@ west corners of the mainland , and in south @-@ east Queensland . They are rare in the deep desert and are only occasional visitors to northern Tasmania and the Torres Strait islands . As the species has a large range and an increasing population , it has been listed as " Least Concern " on the IUCN Red List of Threatened species . In southwestern Australia , they are now one of the most commonly recorded raptors in the wheatbelt . 
 European occupation of Australia has , on the whole , benefited black @-@ shouldered kites through land clearing and irrigation for agriculture and grain harvesting and storage practices which provide suitable conditions for much larger numbers of mice . According to raptor researcher Dr Stephen Debus , this species did not suffer from eggshell thinning during the period of DDT use in Australia , though he believes it is possible that secondary poisoning may occur from rodenticides used during mouse plagues or from pesticides used during locust plagues . Populations in areas with high sheep and rabbit numbers may decline , as these animals compact the soil and reduce the available habitat for mice . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Sociality = = = 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites usually hunt singly or in pairs , though where food is plentiful they occur in small family groups and can be loosely gregarious at times of irruptions , with up to 70 birds reported feeding together during a mouse plague . They roost communally , like other Elanus species . 
 They are territorial when food is not abundant . The practice of " tail flicking " where , on landing , the tail is flicked up and lowered and the movement repeated persistently is thought to be a possible territorial display . Black @-@ shouldered kites have been observed in aerial combat at the margins of territories , locking talons in a behaviour described as " grappling " . 
 = = = Food and hunting = = = 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites live almost exclusively on mice , and have become a specialist predator of house mice , often following outbreaks of mouse plagues in rural areas . They take other suitably sized creatures when available , including grasshoppers , rats , small reptiles , birds , and even ( very rarely ) rabbits , but mice and other mouse @-@ sized mammals account for over 90 % of their diet . Their influence on mouse populations is probably significant : adults take two or three mice a day each if they can , around a thousand mice a year . On one occasion , a male was observed bringing no less than 14 mice to a nest of well @-@ advanced fledglings within an hour . In another study , a female kite was seen to struggle back to fledglings in the nest with a three @-@ quarters grown rabbit , a heavy load for such a small bird . 
 Like other <unk> kites , black @-@ shouldered kites hunt by quartering grasslands for small creatures . This can be from a perch , but more often by hovering in mid @-@ air . When hunting the kite hovers with its body hanging almost vertically , and its head into the wind . Unlike the Australian kestrel , the black @-@ winged kite shows no obvious sideways movement , even in a strong breeze . One study of a nesting pair noted that the male searched aerially for 82 % of the search time . Typically , a kite will hover 10 to 12 m ( 33 to 39 ft ) above a particular spot , peering down intently , sometimes for only a few seconds , often for a minute or more , then glide swiftly to a new vantage point and hover again . When hunting from a perch , a dead tree is the preferred platform . Like other Elanus kites , The black @-@ shouldered kite grips a vertical branch with a foot on either side , each one above the other and turned inwards , which enables them to maintain a secure footing on relatively small branches . Though hovering is the most common hunting method , the kites have been observed searching the ground beneath a vantage point for periods of up to an hour . 
 When a mouse or other prey is spotted , the kite drops silently onto it , feet @-@ first with wings raised high ; sometimes in one long drop to ground level , more often in two or more stages , with hovering pauses at intermediate heights . Prey is seized in the talons and about 75 % of attacks are successful . Prey can either be eaten in flight or carried back to a perch . Birds will have a favoured feeding perch , beneath which accumulate piles of pellets or castings . 
 They are diurnal , preferring to hunt during the day , particularly in the early morning and mid to late afternoon , and will occasionally hunt in pairs . Their hunting patterns , outside breeding periods and periods of abundant prey , have distinct crepuscular peaks , perhaps corresponding to mouse activity . 
 = = = Flight = = = 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites spiral into the wind like a kestrel . They soar with v @-@ shaped up @-@ curved wings , the primaries slightly spread and the tail widely fanned . In level flight progress is rather indirect . Their flight pattern has been described as ' winnowing ' with soft steady beats interspersed with long glides on angled wings . They can most often be seen hovering with wings curved and tail pointing down . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 Aerial courtship displays involve single and mutual high circling flight , and the male may fly around slowly with stiff exaggerated flaps , commonly known as butterfly @-@ flight . Courting males dive at the female , feeding her in mid @-@ flight . The female grabs food from the male 's talons with hers while flipping upside @-@ down . They may lock talons and tumble downwards in a ritualised version of grappling , but release just before landing . All courtship displays are accompanied by constant calling . 
 Black @-@ shouldered kites form monogamous pairs . The breeding season is usually August to January , but is responsive to mice populations , and some pairs breed twice in a good season . Both sexes are involved in building the nest , which is a large untidy shallow cup of sticks usually in the foliage near the top of trees , taking about two weeks to complete the nest @-@ building . The flat nest is built of thin twigs and is around 28 to 38 cm ( 11 to 15 in ) across when newly built , but growing to around 78 cm ( 31 in ) across and 58 cm ( 23 in ) deep after repeated use . The nest is lined with green leaves and felted fur , though linings of grass and cow dung have also been reported . It is generally located in the canopy of an isolated or exposed tree in open country , elevated 5 to 20 m ( 16 to 66 ft ) or more above the ground . Black @-@ shouldered kites have been known to use old Australian magpie , crow or raven nests . 
 Females perform most of the care of eggs and nestlings , though males take a minor share of incubation and brooding . The clutch consists of three to four dull white eggs of a tapered oval shape measuring 42 mm × 31 mm ( 1 @.@ 7 in × 1 @.@ 2 in ) and with red @-@ brown blotches that are often heavier around the larger end of the egg . The female incubates the eggs for 30 days and when the eggs hatch the chicks are helpless but have soft down covering their body . For the first two weeks or so the female broods the chicks constantly , both day and night . The female does no hunting at all for the first three weeks after hatching , but calls to the male from the nest , and he generally responds by bringing food . The female feeds the chicks with the mice brought back to the nest by the male , feeding them in tiny pieces for the first week or two , at which time the chicks are capable of swallowing a mouse whole . The nestling period lasts around 36 days , and the post @-@ fledging period at least 36 days with parental feeding for at least 22 days . When the chicks are older both parents take it in turns to feed them . Black feathers start to appear along the chicks ' wings when they are about a fortnight old , and they are fully fledged and are ready to fly in five weeks . Within a week of leaving the nest the young birds are capable of hunting for mice on their own . 
 Juveniles disperse widely , taking up territory that can be as far as 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) from the nest site . 
 = GISHWHES = 
 The Greatest International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever Seen ( GISHWHES , pronounced <unk> @-@ wes ) is an annual week @-@ long competitive media scavenger hunt originally held each October or November , but more recently each August . Teams of 15 competitors earn points for submitting photos and videos of themselves completing prompts from a list they receive at the beginning of the week . Actor Misha Collins officially founded GISHWHES in 2011 after a publicity stunt to help the television series Supernatural ( on which Collins appears ) win a People 's Choice Award . The competition holds a world record for being the largest media scavenger hunt ever to take place , and several additional world records . 
 = = History = = 
 Actor Misha Collins , known for playing the angel Castiel on the American television series Supernatural , is the founder of GISHWHES . The competition began informally in 2010 when Holly Ollis , a publicist for Warner Bros. , asked Collins to engage his audience to help Supernatural move from second place to first in the People 's Choice Awards voting . Collins posted a message on Twitter , declaring that if the show won , Ollis had promised him a rhinoceros which he would share with everyone who helped by voting for the show . When Supernatural won the competition , Collins , partially inspired by his time at the University of Chicago as an undergraduate during which he participated in the school 's annual scavenger hunt , asked his followers to send him self @-@ addressed stamped envelopes into which he put scavenger hunt prompts written on the backs of jigsaw puzzle pieces from a puzzle depicting a rhino . Soon , participants began to respond to Collins 's " absurd " requests . One successful prompt , for example , challenged fans to photograph a group of firemen wearing nothing but kale . 
 Collins enjoyed this exercise so much that he decided to create an official scavenger hunt in 2011 . He established the event 's website and gave it its name , the Greatest International Scavenger Hunt the World Has Ever Seen , calling its acronym , GISHWHES , " the ugliest acronym the world has ever seen " . According to Collins , the primary reason for developing the competition was that he " loved the idea of thousands of people from all over the world connecting to create incredible things " . He hoped to use GISHWHES to encourage participants " to do good in the world " . The inaugural event , categorized by Guinness World Records as a " media scavenger hunt " , broke the record for the largest scavenger hunt of its kind . In 2012 , it broke its own record with 14 @,@ 580 participants , representing 69 different countries . The contest broke two additional world records in 2013 : the longest safety pin chain , measuring 1 @,@ 901 @.@ 8 metres ( 6 @,@ 239 @.@ 5 ft ) , and the largest online photo album of hugs , totaling 108 @,@ 121 images . 
 = = Contest = = 
 On the first day of the week @-@ long competition , a list is posted on the GISHWHES website with over 150 different tasks for competitors to complete during the hunt , which Collins and his friends , including co @-@ coordinator Jean Louise Alexander , have devised prior to the beginning of the competition . Teams then submit photos or videos of themselves completing the prompts at the contest 's website , receiving points for each item completed . While literal interpretations of prompts are preferred , judges will sometimes award points for especially creative responses . Prizes for the team with the most points at the end of GISHWHES have included a trip to Scotland for a slumber party with Collins and a trip to Vancouver for a " Viking surprise " . 
 Teams consist of 15 members who may come from different countries . Individuals may <unk> teams or sign up individually , in which case they are randomly grouped into appropriately sized teams . As of the 2013 contest , <unk> costs ran $ 19 per person with participation fees going towards Random Acts , a non @-@ profit run by Collins that aims to encourage random acts of kindness . 
 = = = Challenges = = = 
 GISHWHES challenges vary widely in focus and sometimes attract media attention . The Los Angeles @-@ focused OC Weekly reported on a local ice cream shop 's response to a GISHWHES team that asked them to create a custom ice cream flavor for the 2013 challenge " Get your team 's new ice cream flavor on sale in an ice cream parlor " . Another challenge involved participants using and spreading the word <unk> , Collins 's portmanteau of abnormal and awesome . During the 2013 hunt , competitors were asked to dress up as the DC Comics character Flash and have their pictures taken next to a functioning particle accelerator . As a result , the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility and Fermilab received numerous emails from GISHWHES participants and set up special tours for the visitors . Dean <unk> reported in Symmetry , the official magazine of Fermilab and the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory , that the visits were welcomed and seen as an opportunity to educate a wider audience on the goals of and research done at national laboratories . 
 Most GISHWHES challenges are completed successfully by at least one team , according to Collins . During the 2012 contest , for example , only one item saw no successes : coating a commercial blimp with fall leaves . Collins speculated it failed because of physical limitations . A 2013 challenge noted by <unk> , a French website run by Libération , challenged competitors to convince astronauts on the International Space Station to take a photo holding a sign with their team 's name . Efforts by participants were headed off by NASA , which posted that the astronauts were unable to participate on its official Twitter account . 
 = = = = Gallery = = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Aspects of the contests have been well received by some media outlets . A writer for <unk> called it an " avalanche of awesomeness " and compared the hunt 's acronym to " an apocryphal GWAR album or a lesser deity in H.P. Lovecraft 's consonant @-@ laden pantheon " . Reviewing the experience of participating in GISHWHES , a writer for Detroit 's <unk> @-@ TV described the contest as " a lot of fun " and recommended that others participate in the future . Shanghai Daily deemed several of GISHWHES 's challenges " outrageous " and " visually stunning " . Laura Prudom of The Huffington Post commended Collins 's " herculean " efforts in organizing the event . 
 Not all reception has been positive . Todd VanDerWerff wrote for Vox that , " Quite a few of the items basically invite participants to pester — or even harass — the famous and semi @-@ famous on Twitter , Tumblr , and Facebook . " A 2014 challenge asked hunters to convince published science fiction authors to write a 140 @-@ character story for them and some , such as John <unk> and Lauren DeStefano , complained that the task encouraged participants to harass them on social networks . 
 In an article analyzing Collins 's relationship with his fanbase , Middlebury College Assistant Professor Louisa Ellen Stein argued that GISHWHES was a " co @-@ authored transmedia experience " that " play [ ed ] with [ the ] power , erotics , and emotional excess present in Collins ' fandom . " Citing participants ' independent efforts to coordinate teams using a variety of online platforms , Stein suggested that " GISHWHES may lack the overt language of industrial reconfiguration found in the Divine Kickstarter Project [ a webseries that Collins engaged his fans to help fund ] . But through its satire and dadaist play , it more fully models the potential for a congregation of authors , both official and unofficial , to direct fannish and creative investment into digital participation . " Stein further argued that " decentralized projects like <unk> , with creators who fully immerse themselves in the surrounding digital cultures , show us the potential for future transmedia creative authorship in millennial culture . " 
 = = World Records = = 
 GISHWHES has broken several Guinness World Records . 
 • Largest Photo Scavenger Hunt ( 2011 ) 
 • Largest Media Scavenger Hunt ( 2012 ) 
 • Most Pledges for Campaign ( 2012 ) 
 • Largest Online Photo Album of " Hugs " ( 2013 ) 
 • Largest Chain of Safety Pins ( 2013 ) 
 • Largest gathering of people dressed as French maids ( 2014 ) 
 • Most people in a decorated hat competition ( 2014 ) 
 • Longest human chain to pass through a hula hoop ( 2014 ) 
 = = = Cited = = = 
 Stein , Louisa Ellen ( 2013 ) . " # <unk> to Your New God : Misha Collins and <unk> Authorship in the Digital Age " . In Gray , Jonathan ; Johnson , Derek . A Companion to Media Authorship . Hoboken , NJ : Wiley @-@ Blackwell . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 470 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Stein , Louisa Ellen ( 2015 ) . Millennial Fandom : Television Audiences in the <unk> Age . Iowa City , IA : University of Iowa Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 356 @-@ 5 . 
 = American automobile industry in the 1950s = 
 The 1950s were pivotal for the American automobile industry . The post @-@ World War II era brought a wide range of new technologies to the automobile consumer , and a host of problems for the independent automobile manufacturers . The industry was maturing in an era of rapid technological change ; mass production and the benefits from economies of scale led to innovative designs and greater profits , but stiff competition between the automakers . By the end of the decade , the industry had reshaped itself into the Big Three and AMC , and the age of small independent automakers was over , as most of them either consolidated or went out of business . 
 A number of innovations were either invented or improved sufficiently to allow for mass production during the decade : air conditioning , automatic transmission , power steering , power brakes , seat belts and arguably the most influential change in automotive history , the overhead @-@ valve V8 engine . The horsepower race had begun , laying the foundation for the muscle car era . 
 Automobile manufacturing became the largest industry segment in the US , and the largest ever created ; the US auto industry was many times larger than the automotive industries of the rest of the world combined . By 1960 , one @-@ sixth of working Americans were employed directly or indirectly by the industry , but automation and imports eroded the need for such a large workforce within a couple of decades . The 1950s were the pinnacle of American automotive manufacturing and helped shape the United States into an economic superpower . 
 = = Industry consolidation = = 
 At least 100 automobile companies had begun operations in Detroit by the beginning of the 20th century , but by the 1920s , the decade that gave rise to the Big Three , Ford was the largest . 
 In American automobile parlance , the Big Three refers to General Motors ( GM ) , Ford and Chrysler , each of which had bought out other companies to become conglomerates earlier in the 20th century . Together they accounted for 70 percent of auto sales . Their combined market share grew over the following decades , declining only slightly after World War II , but the Big Three soon came to dominate the industry , claiming 94 percent of all automobile sales in 1955 , 1956 and 1959 . The industry grew at a pace never before seen , and the broader industry soon employed one @-@ sixth of the entire American workforce . 
 In 1954 , the smaller American Motors Corporation ( AMC ) was formed when Hudson merged with Nash @-@ Kelvinator Corporation in a deal worth almost USD $ 200 million ( $ 1735 million in 2013 dollars ) the largest corporate merger in U.S. history at that time . Other mergers with smaller independent manufacturers followed . Although AMC was moderately successful it was never sufficiently large to challenge any of the Big Three , and was eventually bought by Chrysler in 1987 . 
 Studebaker had enjoyed earlier success and was the first independent automaker to produce a V8 engine , a 232 @.@ 6 cubic inch , 120 hp unit , the first low @-@ priced V8 . The company 's peak year was 1950 , when it produced and sold 329 @,@ 884 units . Studebaker struggled during the first half of the decade . The cars had styling ahead of their time but were overpriced when compared to the offerings of the Big Three . Low sales and financial difficulties led to a merger with Packard in 1954 , itself in financial trouble . The new company , Studebaker @-@ Packard Corporation , retired the Packard name in July 1958 , but continued marketing automobiles under the Studebaker name until 1966 . 
 = = Industry sales = = 
 This table shows the number of sales reported for each significant American automotive brand during the 1950s . 
 Some numbers are based on some estimates . Total does not count the figures from smaller independent automakers . 
 A total of almost 58 million cars were produced and sold during the 1950s by the American manufacturers . Compared to the total population of the United States by the end of the decade , 179 @,@ 323 @,@ 175 , that is almost one new vehicle for every three living persons of all ages . 
 = = = Production by year = = = 
 Production numbers are sometimes conflicting , depending on how they are calculated and how vehicles are classified , but according to Ward 's , the number of actual autos and duty trucks manufactured in North America for each year , including domestic production intended for export , are represented below : 
 = = Innovations = = 
 Many innovations were introduced or refined in the 1950s to make driving safer and more comfortable . Combined with lower prices and the growth of the suburbs , car ownership became ubiquitous and more people were driving longer distances . The new innovations fueled the automaker 's philosophy of " dynamic obsolescence " , forcing buyers to upgrade every few years and guaranteeing future sales . 
 = = = Automatic transmission = = = 
 The first automatic transmissions were developed by General Motors during the 1930s and introduced in the 1940 Oldsmobile as the " Hydra @-@ Matic " transmission . They were incorporated into GM @-@ built tanks during WW @-@ II and , after the war , GM marketed them as being " battle @-@ tested " . But it was not until the 1950s that they became dominant in American passenger cars . One of the most influential was the GM Powerglide , the first automatic transmission in a low @-@ cost automobile . It was a two @-@ speed automatic transmission that was in production from 1950 until 1973 ; variations are still used in drag racing owing to its simplicity and durability . Ford initially offered GM 's Powerglide for its Lincoln cars , as its own were not capable of handling the torque of the large V8s used in the vehicles , but soon after began production of its own inexpensive <unk> . Before the end of the decade , more than half of new cars sold in America had automatic transmissions . 
 = = = Power windows = = = 
 The first automatic power windows were developed by Packard in 1940 . Each of the major American brands experimented with the technology , which was initially for luxury vehicles as a replacement for manually operated roll up windows . In the 1950s , these became widespread in American passenger cars . 
 = = = Suspension design = = = 
 As more roads were built and average travel speeds increased , the inherent limitations of the pre @-@ war suspension systems became obvious . Before the 1950s , most automobiles used a kingpin @-@ based front suspension , which limited the degree of free movement and ultimately the smoothness of the ride , particularly at higher speeds . The transition to a ball joint type of suspension allowed greater flexibility in adjustment and the use of a variety of methods to support the weight of the car : leaf springs , coil springs and torsion bars . In combination with a shock absorber , the newer suspension designs made cars safer and more controllable at highway speeds , although at the cost of being slightly less durable than kingpin @-@ based systems . 
 As the 1950s approached , solid front axles had been generally replaced with front wheel independent suspension , smoothing the ride considerably and allowing for safer highway speeds . Along with others , the 1950 Studebaker Champion introduced independent front suspension into its product line , with Cadillac marketing its new " Knee @-@ Action " suspension in 1953 model year automobiles . 
 The vast majority of American made vehicles continued to use simple Live rear axles into the 1980s , but Americans could access four wheel Independent suspension technology on imported cars , like the 1952 Volkswagen Beetle , 1961 Jaguar E @-@ Type , and 1968 <unk> 510 . 
 In 1958 , Cadillac introduced self @-@ levelling air suspension as a $ 215 option , a first for an American manufacturer , and a quick response to the suspension advances of the 1955 Citroën DS . This replaced the coil springs with an air @-@ filled bladder , but the American version proved troublesome and was discontinued . Later that same year , Chevrolet , Buick , Oldsmobile , Ford , Mercury and Pontiac also introduced air suspension as an option for select models but it was unreliable and was soon dropped . For Buick , the unpopular " Air <unk> Suspension " contributed to the division 's decline to fifth place in industry sales for 1958 . Decades later though it became a common and reliable method of suspension on luxury cars , buses , large transport trucks , and in some custom car applications . 
 = = = Chassis design = = = 
 Unibody construction first went into mass @-@ production in the 1934 Citroën Traction Avant , the 1936 Lincoln @-@ Zephyr , and the 1941 Nash 600 . It came into popular use until the 1950s . Unibody construction differs from the traditional " <unk> on chassis " design in that it integrates much of the framing into a single body using a number of pieces welded together into a single unit , thus distributing the load over the entire frame of the car . Chrysler claimed that unibody construction made its automobiles much stronger , more rigid , easy to handle , and quieter . 
 = = = V8 engine = = = 
 The more powerful V8 engine had been in mass production cars since the 1914 Cadillac , but it became more commonplace in the newer and heavier cars being built in the 1950s . Of particular significance was the American 's use of this technology in cars at a relatively modest price point . 
 The Chevrolet small block 265 cubic inch engine was released in the 1955 model year and still the basis for the V8 engines in use by General Motors today . The original 265 cubic inch engine with a two @-@ barrel carburetor produced 162 hp , while the four @-@ barrel version in the 1955 Corvette produced 195 hp , an amazing amount of power at the time . By 1957 , the engine had been increased to 283 cubic inches , including a fuel @-@ injected version that produced 283 hp , the first engine to have a ratio of 1 : 1 horse power versus cubic inches . 
 Ford used its V8 flathead engine in most of its line up through the beginning of the decade , even as it introduced the Ford Y @-@ block engine and the similar but larger Lincoln Y @-@ block V8 engine in 1952 for its luxury car lines . These were soon phased out with the Ford Windsor engine in 1962 , which still forms the basis for the current engine line . The Lincoln Y @-@ block 317 cubic inch motor was rated at 160 hp , only slightly higher than the 336 cubic inch " Invincible 8 " flathead design that it replaced . The Lincoln also came in 341 and 368 cubic inch displacement ( CID ) versions . Like the GM motor , it used an overhead @-@ valve design rather than the <unk> @-@ valve design shared by all flathead engines . 
 Studebaker began development of its overhead @-@ valve Commander V8 in 1947 . Despite later rumors that Studebaker had copied the Cadillac OHV V8 design , Cadillac OHV V8s were not available to the public until 1949 , and therefore , not available for Studebaker to copy until Studebaker 's own engine was well into development . The Studebaker engine also had features not found in the Cadillac design . Testing was well under way by early 1950 , and the first production units were installed in late 1950 model @-@ year Commanders , thereby becoming the first OHV V8 available in a low @-@ priced American sedan . The engine was officially available in 1951 model @-@ year Commanders and Commander Land Cruisers . The engine displaced 232 @.@ 6 cubic inches with a bore of 3 @.@ 375 inches and stroke of 3 @.@ 250 inches . It produced 120 hp at 4000 rpm , and 190 lb. ft. torque at 2000 rpm . Due to the stroke being smaller than the bore , the engine had excellent fuel economy and longevity . Since the engine was designed to be scalable , it appeared in various displacements throughout the 1950s , including 224 , 259 , and 289 cubic inch versions . It should be noted the Studebaker 289 was in production in 1956 , a full seven years before the Ford Windsor 289 was available in 1963 . They only had displacement in common . The Studebaker OHV V8 reached its zenith in the 1960s with the record @-@ breaking Avanti R @-@ series , with the R @-@ 3 having a maximum displacement of 304 @.@ 5 cubic inches , and the experimental R @-@ 5 having dual superchargers and producing 635 hp . 
 Chrysler created its V @-@ 8 Firepower engine for the 1951 model year , using hemispherical combustion chambers . It featured 331 @.@ 1 CID and produced an impressive 180 hp at 4000 rpm While the name " Firepower " is no longer used , the name " Hemi " is still synonymous with Chrysler as a trademarked name for its engines , although they no longer use hemispherical combustion . The engines were larger and heavier than competing designs from GM and Ford owing to the larger cylinder heads required for hemispherical combustion . By 1959 Chrysler was producing a 375 hp , 413 CID engine for its Chrysler 300 , triple the average horsepower of just a decade earlier . 
 AMC also developed its own overhead @-@ valve V8 engine called the Gen @-@ I , in 1956 . The original was a 250 CID design and within a few years , a 287 CID and a 255 hp 327 CID version was produced . 
 = = = Seat belts = = = 
 Nash offered optional seat belts in some models by 1949 , and in all models the following year . Ford followed suit in 1955 , but it was the Swedish company Saab who introduced seat belts as standard equipment , in the Saab GT 750 shown at the 1958 New York Motor Show . 
 The first modern three @-@ point seat belt , the CIR @-@ Griswold restraint used in most consumer vehicles today , was patented in 1955 ( US patent 2 @,@ 710 @,@ 649 ) by the Americans Roger W. Griswold and Hugh <unk> . It was developed into its modern form by Swedish inventor Nils Bohlin ( US patent 3 @,@ 043 @,@ 625 ) for Volvo , who introduced the three @-@ point safety device in 1959 as standard equipment . He demonstrated its effectiveness in a study of 28 @,@ 000 accidents in Sweden ; <unk> occupants sustained fatal injuries throughout the whole speed range , whereas none of the belted occupants were fatally injured at accident speeds below 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , and no belted occupant was fatally injured if the passenger compartment remained intact . American manufacturers followed their lead , and most automobiles had three @-@ point front seat belts as standard equipment by 1964 and standard rear seat belts by 1968 . 
 = = = Tires = = = 
 Radial tires were invented by Michelin in 1948 , and quickly became standard equipment on Michelin 's auto making subsidiary Citroën . 
 Use spread to 100 % of the US auto population by the 1980s , following Consumer Reports 1968 evaluation of competing technologies , noting the technology 's superiority in tread life , safety , handling and fuel economy . 
 The 1968 Pontiac GTO offered optional OEM radial tires , but only for one year ; they became standard on all 1970 Lincoln Continental Mark IIIs . 
 = = = Air conditioning = = = 
 The 1953 Chrysler Imperial was the first production car in twelve years to offer air conditioning , following tentative experiments by Packard in 1940 and Cadillac in 1941 . In actually installing optional <unk> air conditioning units to its Imperials in 1953 , Chrysler beat Cadillac , Buick and Oldsmobile , who added it as an option later that year . The Pontiac Star Chief offered the first modern " <unk> " design in 1954 . By 1960 , air conditioning was a common dealer option and was installed in 20 percent of all automobiles on American roads . 
 = = = Steering linkage = = = 
 BMW began to use precise rack and pinion steering systems in the 1930s , and many other European manufacturers soon adopted the technology . American automakers adopted rack and pinion steering beginning with the 1974 Ford Pinto . 
 = = = Steering power assistance = = = 
 The first power @-@ assisted steering on any type of vehicle dates to 1876 , but little is recorded of the system . Other attempts were made to add power @-@ assisted steering to motorized vehicles such as in the 1903 Columbia 5 @-@ ton truck and other heavy vehicles , but it was not until 1928 that a practical hydraulic power system was invented by Francis W. Davis . It was used on some armored vehicles and heavy trucks during World War II , but it took more than decades before the system was commercialized in passenger automobiles . 
 Chrysler introduced the first commercially available passenger car power @-@ steering system on the 1951 Chrysler Imperial , marketed under the name of <unk> . The option was available for less than $ 200 . General Motors followed suit the next year , offering it as an option for the 1952 Cadillac . Two years later , Cadillac was the first manufacturer to offer power @-@ assisted steering as standard equipment . 
 = = = Brakes = = = 
 By 1939 , all the major car makers were using unassisted hydraulic brakes ; Ford was the last to switch from cable @-@ manipulated systems . Power @-@ assisted Vacuum servo brakes had been invented in 1903 , but did not become generally available as an option until the 1950s . Self @-@ adjusting brakes initially were offered on the 1957 Mercury and 1958 Edsel , and other manufacturers soon followed suit . Buick offered power brakes as standard equipment on several of its vehicles by the 1954 model year . 
 American vehicles used Drum brakes until the 1962 Studebaker Avanti - the first American production model to offer front wheel Disc brakes . These are less prone to fade and are the current standard of design . 
 = = = Entertainment = = = 
 Until mid @-@ decade , all radios in automobiles used vacuum tubes , but on April 28 , 1955 , Chrysler and Philco announced the development and production of the first all @-@ transistor radio for an automobile . Dubbed the Mopar model <unk> , it was jointly developed by Chrysler and Philco and offered as a $ 150 option for 1956 Imperial and Chrysler car models . Philco manufactured the radio exclusively for Chrysler at its Sandusky , Ohio plant . A few years earlier in 1952 , Blaupunkt had been the first company to offer FM radio for automobiles , although AM radio still dominated for years to come . Beginning in 1955 , Chrysler offered a small phonograph called the Highway Hi @-@ Fi in its luxury cars , which played proprietary seven @-@ inch records . It proved unpopular and was soon discontinued . 
 = = Concept cars = = 
 Auto design in the 1950s reflected the Atomic Age , the Jet Age and the Space Age . Several technologies were pioneered in these prototypes , but most never reached production owing to their impracticality or other market forces . The concept cars ranged from the insightful to the bizarre and were often uncomfortable or non @-@ functional . They were sometimes created to inspire the public 's imagination or simply to promote the image of the company or the product line as a whole . 
 The Ford <unk> was a concept car announced by Ford in 1958 . The design lacked the capacity to house an internal combustion engine and was instead designed to be powered by a then nonexistent small nuclear power plant in the rear of the vehicle , similar to a submarine 's . 
 The Mercury XM @-@ 800 was one of many concept cars created by Ford . It was introduced at the 1954 Detroit Auto Show , and featured forward @-@ canted headlights , rear tailfins ( a first for Ford at that time ) , and power seats , brakes , steering and other advancements . Like many similar cars of the time it was not operational , except for the electrical components such as the motorized trunk and front hood , although some of its innovations appeared later in the Lincoln Premiere . 
 Harley Earl helped develop the General Motors Firebird , a series of three concept cars shown at Motorama auto shows in the 1950s . The Firebird I , II and III were part of a research project to study the feasibility of gas turbine engines and featured radical , aircraft @-@ like styling . 
 = = Notable failures = = 
 Named after Henry Ford 's son , Edsel Ford , the Edsel made its debut as a separate car division on September 4 , 1957 , for the 1958 model year . The front grill was said by critics to look like " an Oldsmobile sucking on a lemon " . It ended up being a marketing blunder that not only cost Ford almost $ 250 million ( $ <unk> million in 2013 dollars ) , but also turned the word Edsel into an enduring metaphor for failure . The car sold poorly and production for the final 1960 model year had ceased by November 1959 . 
 In 1956 , Ford tried to revive the Continental brand as a standalone line of ultra luxury automobiles , but abandoned the attempt after the 1957 model year , by which time around 3000 Mark II cars had been built . The failure was due in part to the price tag of $ <unk> , an extraordinary amount of money for the time . The Continental thereafter became a successful car model under Ford 's Lincoln brand . 
 Kaiser , Allstate , Frazer and the economy / compact Henry J product lines all ceased production before the end of the 1955 model year run , partly owing to their failure to produce and market a viable V8 engine in a marketplace increasingly focused on the clout ( and horsepower ) associated with a V8 power plant . In particular , the Henry J ( named after Henry J Kaiser sold an initially strong 82 @,@ 000 units with its 68 hp , inline @-@ four power plant and optional 80 hp inline @-@ six , but starting at $ 1363 , the consumer could buy a full @-@ sized Chevrolet auto with an inline @-@ 6 for only $ 200 more than the Henry J inline @-@ 4 , making it economically unappealing , and all three lines underpowered when compared to the offerings of the Big Three . The Allstate is an example of badge engineering , being a rebranded Henry J. It was sold exclusively at Sears , Roebuck and Company in 1952 and 1953 . 
 DeSoto died a slow death in the 1950s owing to decreasing popularity and the 1958 recession . Chrysler moved the DeSoto into the mainstream price range when it came out with the upper priced Imperial line , putting the Chrysler marque in direct competition with it . By the 1961 model year , the DeSoto was reduced to a single model and on November 18 , 1960 , Chrysler ended the DeSoto marque , just two weeks after the introduction of the 1961 models . Chrysler seemingly sudden announcement to discontinue the marque resulted in negative publicity as their advertising and press releases had given the impression the brand would be continued . It offered a $ 300 discount towards 1962 Chrysler vehicles to recent DeSoto purchasers as consolation . Added to the expense of changing signs at dealerships and other expenses , the estimated the cost of ending the marque was more than $ 2 @.@ 2 million . 
 Hudson produced automobiles for 49 years , until 1957 . Hudson cars were very popular in NASCAR in the early 1950s , in particular the Hudson Hornet , now known as well for its prominence in the 2006 Pixar animated movie , Cars . Its early popularity was due to its sleek design , low center of gravity and excellent handling , but it failed to keep up with rest of the industry by mid @-@ decade . The 1955 Hudson was actually a rebadged Nash auto with different trim . It were offered with a V8 in 1955 , but it was too little to save the brand , which was discontinued two years later . 
 Packard began the 1950s on a difficult note , as sales dropped from 116 @,@ 248 in 1949 to an underwhelming 42 @,@ 627 in 1950 . While its higher @-@ end products offered advanced features such as automatic transmission as standard equipment , its overall body designs were considered dated . Four years after the 1954 merger with Studebaker , production under the Packard marque ceased as the company was unable to keep up with the advances and sales of the Big Three . 
 Crosley produced cars from 1939 to 1952 , including the only compact cars in an era of bigger and more powerful cars . They were unique in that they were sold through the Crosley 's network of appliance stores . Peak production was in 1948 , with almost 29 @,@ 000 vehicles produced , followed by a sharp drop off in demand , resulting in an unsustainable loss of more than $ 1 million that year . The automobiles sold for a maximum of $ 350 , could go as fast as 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) , and achieved 50 miles per gallon . In 1952 , the company was sold to the General Tire and Rubber Company , which liquidated the assets and ended production of all Crosley automobiles . 
 Muntz Car Company produced cars from 1950 through 1954 in Chicago . Muntz was assisted by Frank Kurtis , who had earlier attempted to produce a sports car under the Kurtis Kraft marque ( the Kurtis Kraft Sport , which sold just 36 units by 1950 ) . The company managed to produce only about 400 cars during 1951 – 1954 . It was estimated by Muntz himself that his company lost about $ 1000 on each car , leading to its collapse after just four years in business . 
 = = Influential events = = 
 A number of critical events changed the manufacturing environment during the decade , including two wars , cultural changes and economic difficulties , creating opportunity and challenges for the automobile industry . 
 = = = War = = = 
 World War II ended in September 1945 , which allowed for the conversion of the economy to a peacetime economy , with excess industrial capacity and a high demand for new consumer goods by returning soldiers . 
 The Cold War began in after World War II and served to increase paranoia and concern over a nuclear war with the Soviet Union . Many Americans responded by escaping into a lifestyle of heavy consumerism , which benefited automakers . President Dwight D. Eisenhower launched the Interstate Highway System by signing the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 into law . Eisenhower gained an appreciation of the German Autobahn network as a necessary component of a national defense system while he was serving as Supreme Commander of the Allied forces in Europe during World War II . 
 The Korean War officially began on June 25 , 1950 , and a cease fire was signed three years later in July 1953 , and no official ending . For automakers in the early 1950s , this meant US government control over raw materials such as steel . While not as strict as the rationing that was seen during World War II , the impact was obvious , with steel being rationed to the different manufacturers under government control , rather than by market forces . The National Production Authority ( NPA ) had the final say on what resources each company would be given . In 1952 , it limited the industry to 4 @,@ 342 @,@ 000 cars , with General Motors ( GM ) given a quota of 41 percent of that total . The company exceeded its quota in the first three quarters , forcing it to close some production lines in the fourth . These limitations continued until the NPA was shut down in October 1953 . 
 = = = = Cultural changes = = = = 
 The decade saw a shift in American culture due in part to suburbanization , the Interstate system , and the baby boom . The 1950s were centered in the post @-@ war baby boom , with an average of about 4 million births annually throughout the decade . From 1946 to 1964 , a total of about 77 million new " baby boomers " were born , dramatically increasing the demand for automobiles for the new families . The new Interstate Highway system facilitated the migration to the suburbs . Automobile ownership had once been considered a luxury but now had become a necessity , as well as a cultural symbol for independence and individuality . Ever @-@ larger families drove the demand for larger automobiles , and for the first time , many families owned more than one automobile . New suburbs such as Levittown , Pennsylvania were rapidly being developed , fueled by the promise of new Interstates and expanding families . 
 = = = = 1952 steel strike = = = = 
 Although it lasted for only 53 days , the 1952 steel strike caused the National Production Authority ( NPA ) to limit the amount of steel available to automakers , and had a broad effect before and after the strike . During the run up to the strike , unemployment in Detroit jumped to 8 @.@ 3 percent in December 1951 , auto employment dropped to 600 @,@ 000 a month later and soup kitchens were set up in Detroit . Auto employment dropped by another 100 @,@ 000 during the strike , which ended on June 2 , 1952 . While the strike was for better wages for steel workers , many auto workers blamed their unions for layoffs . The auto manufacturers were accused of speeding up work during these period of heavy layoffs , which resulted in a number of wildcat strikes . 
 = = = = Recession of 1958 = = = = 
 The Recession of 1958 was in part due to dramatic declines in the automotive industry during 1957 and early 1958 . It had been a record year for sales in 1955 with the industry selling almost 8 million automobiles , but this extraordinary surge in sales served to reduce demand in the following few years . Sales had declined to 6 @.@ 1 million in 1957 and just 4 @.@ 3 million by 1958 , making 1958 the worst year for auto sales since World War II . Manufacturing had declined 47 percent by the end of the recession , and Michigan experienced 11 percent unemployment , the highest of any state at that time . 
 = = Labor union activity = = 
 The 1950s mark the peak of union membership as a percentage of the total US workforce , with labor membership peaking at 35 percent of the <unk> workforce by mid @-@ decade . The United Auto Workers ( UAW ) was founded in 1935 and helped play a major role in reshaping the automotive industry after World War II . By 1954 , almost all UAW workers had health coverage and other benefits that didn 't exist in the automotive industry previously . Pension plans were established , as well as a Supplemental Unemployment Benefits fund , which supplemented employees unemployment insurance during periods of layoff . 
 A series of pivotal strikes took place during the decade , including the 1950 Chrysler Strike which lasted 104 days between January and May and centered around the UAW 's demand that Chrysler pay a pension to retired workers , as well as other benefits . A first for the UAW , the union paid striking workers benefits during the strike , dangerously depleting its cash reserves . In the end , Chrysler capitulated on the main issue , but not before the strike had disastrous consequences for the automaker . Chrysler ended the year with an 8 percent gain in sales over the previous year , compared to GM and Ford 's gains of 38 percent and 47 percent respectively , costing Chrysler an estimated $ 1 billion in lost sales . 
 = = Racial discrimination = = 
 During the 1950s , racial discrimination was common throughout America and the auto industry was not immune . African @-@ Americans were typically offered only the lowest paying jobs or were outright denied employment as employers openly advertised for " white only " applicants . Workplace discrimination was not universal , but it was widespread and it was not until 1955 that listing racial preferences in job advertising became illegal under Michigan law . Still , hiring practices varied according to the individual plant managers , so some factories were relatively integrated while others had virtually no black employees . African @-@ Americans had made up 15 percent of the auto manufacturing workforce in 1945 increasing only slightly to 16 percent by 1960 , even while blacks outnumbered whites in the city of Detroit . Although unions fought for the end of racial discrimination , manufacturers were free to openly discriminate in their hiring until the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act . 
 = = Enduring models = = 
 A few automobiles introduced in the 1950s have had an impact that extends well beyond the decade . By being continuously recognized or reinvented , they have created a following of admirers that often spans multiple generations . 
 The Studebaker <unk> <unk> was introduced in 1953 and is considered by many to be one of the most beautiful American @-@ made automobiles of the 1950s . It was designed by a team led by industrial designer Raymond Loewy and is sometimes called the " Loewy Coupe " . 
 The Chevrolet Corvette was first introduced in 1953 , and as of the 2014 model year is still in production . It has gone through seven major generations , with minor changes yearly , and still features a fiberglass body , a tradition since the original model rolled off the assembly line . Originally , Chevrolet had expected to use fiberglass only for the concept car shown at Motorama and to use steel for production cars . It has come with V8 engine as standard equipment every year since 1955 but used the Blue Flame inline six @-@ cylinder engine for its first two years of production . In 2012 , Consumer Reports named it the best sportscar available in America . 
 The Ford Thunderbird was introduced in 1955 and remained in production until 1997 . Production resumed in 2002 and continued through the 2005 model year . There were with eleven or twelve different generations during these time spans . Unlike the Corvette , it was not marketed as a sportscar , but rather as a personal luxury car . The car changed dramatically in size during these production periods , sometimes having a back seat and other times not . 
 Chrysler produced the first of its 300 series automobiles for the 1955 model year , whereby they added a letter to the model name for each year . This lettering scheme was continued until 1965 , but at the same time they began producing the " non @-@ letter series " automobiles for the 1962 model year , so there are three years with overlapping model names of different vehicles . The non @-@ letter models were produced through the 1971 model year . It was not until 1979 that Chrysler began using the " 300 " name again , as a rebadged Cordoba for the latter half the model year . It would be 20 more years before they again used the name , this time for the Chrysler 300M , which was produced for the 1998 through 2004 model years . Finally in the 2005 model year , the Chrysler 300 was introduced and as of 2013 , is still in production . 
 = Al @-@ Kateb v Godwin = 
 Al @-@ Kateb v Godwin was a decision of the High Court of Australia , which ruled on 6 August 2004 that the indefinite detention of a stateless person was lawful . The case concerned Ahmed Al @-@ Kateb , a Palestinian man born in Kuwait , who moved to Australia in 2000 and applied for a temporary protection visa . The Commonwealth Minister for Immigration 's decision to refuse the application was upheld by the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Federal Court . In 2002 Al @-@ Kateb declared that he wished to return to Kuwait or Gaza . However , since no country would accept Al @-@ Kateb he was declared stateless and detained under the policy of mandatory detention . 
 The two main issues considered by the High Court were whether the Migration Act 1958 ( the legislation governing immigration to Australia ) permitted a person in Al @-@ Kateb 's situation to be detained indefinitely , and if so , whether this was permissible under the Constitution of Australia . A majority of the court decided that the Act did allow indefinite detention , and that the Act was not unconstitutional . 
 The controversy surrounding the outcome of the case resulted in a review of the circumstances of twenty @-@ four stateless people in immigration detention . In 2007 , nine of these people , including Al @-@ Kateb , were granted bridging visas and allowed to enter the community . 
 = = Background to the case = = 
 Ahmed Al @-@ Kateb was born in Kuwait in 1976 , the son of Palestinian parents . Kuwait 's Nationality Law is based on jus sanguinis ( Article 2 ) and does not provide for jus soli except in the case of foundlings ( Article 3 ) . For this reason Al @-@ Kateb did not acquire Kuwaiti citizenship at birth , and was thus considered a stateless person . Al @-@ Kateb left his country of birth after Kuwaiti authorities pressured nearly 200 @,@ 000 Palestinians to leave Kuwait . In December 2000 , Al @-@ Kateb , travelling by boat , arrived in Australia without a visa or passport , and was taken into immigration detention under the provisions of the Migration Act 1958 . 
 In January 2001 , Al @-@ Kateb applied for a protection visa , on the grounds that the United Nations 1954 Convention Relating to the Status of Stateless Persons obliged Australia to protect him . His application was rejected , a decision upheld by the Refugee Review Tribunal and the Federal Court of Australia . In June 2002 , Al @-@ Kateb stated that he wished to voluntarily leave Australia and be sent to Kuwait or to Gaza . However attempts by the Government of Australia to remove Al @-@ Kateb to Egypt , Jordan , Kuwait , Syria , and the Palestinian territories ( which would have required the approval of Israel ) failed . 
 Al @-@ Kateb then applied to the Federal Court for writs of habeas corpus and mandamus , demanding that immigration officials comply with section 198 of the Migration Act which required that Al @-@ Kateb , because his application for a visa had been rejected , be removed from the country " as soon as reasonably practicable " . However , those applications were dismissed . Al @-@ Kateb then sought writs of habeas corpus and mandamus on the basis that he was being unlawfully detained , and although the judge found that " removal from Australia is not reasonably practicable at the present time as there is no real likelihood or prospect of removal in the reasonably foreseeable future " , his application was dismissed . However , a case with substantially identical facts , decided twelve days later by a Full Court of the Federal Court , resulted in the release of another detainee , Akram Al Masri . 
 Finally , Al @-@ Kateb appealed the decision against him to a Full Court of the Federal Court , hoping that the reasoning applied in the Al Masri case ( which was factually similar to his situation ) would be applied to him . The appeal was removed into the High Court at the request of the then Attorney @-@ General of Australia Daryl Williams , under provisions of the Judiciary Act 1903 . Pending the appeal , Al @-@ Kateb was released in April 2003 , by an interlocutory consent order of the Federal Court . The case was argued alongside two other cases which also concerned immigration detention and hearings were held on 12 November and 13 November 2003 . 
 The respondents in the case were all members of the Government of Australia , including two officials in the Department of Immigration , Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs , and the then Minister for Immigration , Phillip Ruddock , and were represented by the Solicitor @-@ General of Australia , David Bennett . The first named respondent , Philippa Godwin , was Deputy Secretary of <unk> . Al @-@ Kateb was represented by Claire O 'Connor , from the Legal Services Commission of South Australia . 
 = = Arguments = = 
 The question in the case was whether Al @-@ Kateb 's continued detention was lawful . That question involved several issues , namely whether the provisions of the Migration Act allow a person to be detained even if they have no prospect of being removed from Australia , and if they did , whether those provisions were then lawful under the Constitution of Australia . 
 = = = Indefinite detention = = = 
 Since Al @-@ Kateb 's application for a visa was rejected , he was classified as an unlawful non @-@ citizen . Section 196 of the Migration Act provides that unlawful non @-@ citizens can only be released from immigration detention if they are granted a visa , deported , or removed from Australia . Section 198 ( 6 ) of the Act requires immigration officials to " remove [ from Australia ] as soon as reasonably practicable an unlawful non @-@ citizen " . 
 One possible interpretation of these provisions is that unlawful non @-@ citizens should be kept in detention for as long as necessary to remove them , and that if removing them never became practicable , that they would be detained until death . In contrast , Al @-@ Kateb argued that the provisions only allowed unlawful non @-@ citizens to be detained while removal was a practical possibility , and that if removal was not a practical possibility , then they should be released from detention , at least while it remained impractical . 
 Much of the argument for Al @-@ Kateb centred on the fact that he was a stateless man . Kateb 's lawyer , O 'Connor , noted that the provisions in the Migration Act about refugees were based on the United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees , both of which overlooked the situation of stateless persons . Several exchanges during the hearings illustrated the way in which the usual processes of the immigration system were not adapted well , if at all , to dealing with stateless people . In one such exchange , O 'Connor referred to Al @-@ Kateb both by his name and by the identifier used on the formal documents , " <unk> " ( in matters concerning asylum seekers , names are usually suppressed in order to prevent persecution should they return to their country of origin ) . After some debate about whether to suppress Al @-@ Kateb 's name , Justice Kirby said that " there often is a very good reason ... because people suffer great risks if their name goes on the Internet that that will become known to the country that they want to avoid , " to which Al @-@ Kateb 's lawyer replied , " That is correct , but , of course , with Mr Al @-@ Kateb there is no country . " 
 The respondents argued that the provisions required that unlawful non @-@ citizens be detained until their removal , and that the purpose of removal , on which the detention was founded , did not cease to exist just because it was not practicable in the foreseeable future to carry out that purpose . They made what was referred to as " the ' never say never ' proposition " , that although securing a person 's removal or deportation from Australia may be difficult , and " often it takes years of diplomatic negotiation before a country is prepared to accept someone ... it is very hard to imagine a case where the purpose of removal or deportation is one that can never occur . " Although the respondents did not challenge the finding of fact in the Federal Court that there was no real possibility of Al @-@ Kateb 's removal in the foreseeable future , they argued that the test applied to reach that decision " fails to take into account ... the difficulties and the fact that things can change . " 
 = = = Non @-@ judicial detention = = = 
 The issue of whether the Act was constitutionally valid revolved around the fact that immigration detention is a form of administrative detention , or detention imposed by the executive branch of government . Detention generally is considered to be a judicial function , which can be exercised only by courts , pursuant to Chapter III of the Australian Constitution . However , there are certain exceptions which allow non @-@ judicial detention , such as detention in order to effect an arrest , or detention for quarantine purposes . Courts in Australia have also held that , generally , detention of non @-@ citizens for immigration purposes is also valid . 
 In this situation , the court had decided in previous cases that immigration detention , for the purposes of processing and removal , did not infringe on Chapter III . Al @-@ Kateb argued that if indeed the provisions of the Migration Act extended as far as to allow the indefinite detention of people like him , then it would have gone beyond those valid purposes and would infringe Chapter III . That is , non @-@ judicial detention is permitted for the purposes of facilitating the removal of unlawful non @-@ citizens , and if the prospects of removal are remote or impracticable for the reasonably foreseeable future , then the detention can no longer be considered to be for the purpose of removal . Al @-@ Kateb 's argument in this respect relied on a decision of the Federal Court in another case , Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs v Al Masri , in which a Full Court of the Federal Court found that a person in a very similar situation to Al @-@ Kateb was entitled to be released . 
 The respondents focused on the case in which this system of exceptions was first articulated , Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration , Local Government and Ethnic Affairs . The concept of detention as an exclusively judicial function was clearly articulated by only three judges out of seven , Brennan , Deane and Dawson , and although in later cases that central concept was generally agreed with , their list of exceptions was not . The respondents focused on Justice Gaudron 's decision in Chu , in which she said : 
 " Detention in custody in circumstances not involving some breach of the criminal law and not coming within well @-@ accepted categories of the kind to which Brennan , Deane and Dawson JJ refer is offensive to ordinary notions of what is involved in a just society . But I am not presently persuaded that legislation authorizing detention in circumstances involving no breach of the criminal law and travelling beyond presently accepted categories is necessarily and inevitably offensive to <unk> " 
 The respondents also noted that Gaudron made similar comments in the Stolen Generations case , which also considered non @-@ judicial detention in the context of Aboriginal children who were forcibly removed from their parents ' care . For this reason and others , they argued that the power to detain people for the purposes of criminal trial and punishment ( as opposed to detention generally ) was clearly a judicial function , but there is no general rule and other powers to detain may not offend Chapter III . 
 = = Judgment = = 
 The ultimate decision , reached by a majority of four judges to three , was that the Migration Act did permit indefinite detention . Each judge delivered a separate judgment with Justices McHugh , Hayne , Callinan and Heydon forming the majority , although Justice Heydon agreed entirely with Justice Hayne , and offered no extra reasoning . Chief Justice Gleeson and Justices Gummow and Kirby dissented , finding instead that the Migration Act should not be interpreted to permit indefinite detention . 
 = = = Indefinite detention = = = 
 Justice Hayne delivered the leading judgment for the majority . On the question of whether the Migration Act allowed people in Al @-@ Kateb 's situation to be detained indefinitely , he said : 
 " ... the most that could ever be said in a particular case where it is not now , and has not been , reasonably practicable to effect removal , is that there is now no country which will receive a particular non @-@ citizen whom Australia seeks to remove , and it cannot now be predicted when that will happen . " 
 He said that because the removal or deportation of people always involves some degree of uncertainty , then the interpretation of the relevant provisions in the Migration Act could not proceed on the assumption that removal is always possible . He concluded that : 
 " ... even if , as in this case , it is found that ' there is no real likelihood or prospect of [ the non @-@ citizen 's ] removal in the reasonably foreseeable future ' , that does not mean that continued detention is not for the purpose of subsequent removal . " 
 Justice McHugh stated simply that the language of the sections was not ambiguous , and clearly required the indefinite detention of Al @-@ Kateb . He said that the requirement that people be removed " as soon as reasonably practicable " was directed at limiting the duration of detention to as little as necessary , but it did " not mean that the detention ... is limited to a maximum period expiring when it is impracticable to remove or deport the person . " 
 Chief Justice Gleeson , in dissent , said that in interpreting legislation , the courts " do not impute to the legislature an intention to abrogate or curtail certain human rights or freedoms ( of which personal liberty is the most basic ) unless such an intention is clearly manifested by unambiguous language " . He concluded that the provisions requiring that unlawful non @-@ citizens be detained were ambiguous in that in a situation such as Al @-@ Kateb 's , where it became impossible to fulfil the purpose for which he was detained , the law was not clear as to whether the result is that the detention should be suspended until the purpose becomes possible again , or that the detention should continue indefinitely . The Act did not deal with a situation like Al @-@ Kateb 's . Gleeson said : 
 " In making that choice I am influenced by the general principle of interpretation stated above . I am also influenced by the consideration that the detention in question is mandatory , not discretionary . In a case of uncertainty , I would find it easier to discern a legislative intention to confer a power of indefinite administrative detention if the power were coupled with a discretion ... " 
 Accordingly , he found that a proper construction of the provisions of the Act would not permit Al @-@ Kateb 's detention to continue indefinitely . 
 Justice Callinan , who was in the majority , also discussed the purpose of detention , in obiter dicta . He said that detention of non @-@ citizens for the purposes of deportation may not be the only form of detention that would be within the federal parliament 's aliens power , rather " it may be the case that detention for the purpose of preventing aliens from entering the general community , working , or otherwise enjoying the benefits that Australian citizens enjoy is constitutionally acceptable . " 
 = = = Non @-@ judicial detention = = = 
 The second issue was whether indefinite detention for migration purposes infringed on Chapter III of the Australian Constitution . While every judge discussed this issue , only three judges , Justices McHugh , Hayne and Heydon , found it necessary to make a final decision on the issue . They all reached the same conclusion , that the detention scheme was constitutional . 
 Justice Hayne concluded that the detention scheme in the Migration Act did not contravene Chapter III because , fundamentally , it was not punitive . The Act did not make being in Australia without a visa an offence ( although it had been in the past ) , and in reality he considered the mandatory detention scheme to be not that different from a system in which all people were prevented from entering Australia without permission at all . 
 Justice McHugh also emphasised that immigration detention was not punitive , saying : 
 " A law requiring the detention of the alien takes its character from the purpose of the detention . As long as the purpose of the detention is to make the alien available for deportation or to prevent the alien from entering Australia or the Australian community , the detention is non @-@ punitive . " 
 McHugh suggested that detention for a non @-@ punitive purpose could still offend Chapter III if it prevented a court " from determining some matter that is a condition precedent to authorising detention . " However , that was not the case here . 
 In dissent , Justice Gummow recognised that " the focusing of attention on whether detention is ' penal or punitive in character ' is apt to mislead " , and emphasised the purpose of detention as the fundamental criterion by which non @-@ judicial detention was allowed in previous cases . He said that " it cannot be for the executive government to determine the placing from time to time of that boundary line which marks off a category of deprivation of liberty from the reach of Ch III . " 
 = = = Constitutional interpretation = = = 
 In addition to the substantive issues in the case , there was also more general historical and theoretical issues involved . During Justice McHugh 's final years on the court , he and Justice Kirby expressed differing views on constitutional interpretation , and particularly on the role of international law and principles of human rights in that process . In this case , the two judges continued that debate . 
 Justice McHugh drew analogies between the legislation at issue in the case , and previous legislation which had authorised indefinite administrative detention , such as the arrangements under the War Precautions Act 1914 . Regulations made under that and other acts allowed the internment of several thousand people , including German Australians during World War I and Japanese Australians during World War II . McHugh noted that those arrangements had been challenged , and upheld , in the High Court ( for example in the 1915 case of Lloyd v Wallach ) , and emphasised that at no time had anyone questioned that detention for protective purposes , as opposed to punitive purposes , would conflict with Chapter III . He concluded that although the situation at hand was " tragic " , the courts were not at liberty to question the propriety of decisions made by the Parliament of Australia on moral or human rights grounds , given the absence of a bill of rights in Australia . 
 Justice Kirby retorted that " ' Tragic ' outcomes are best repaired before they become a settled rule of the Constitution . " He also drew a historical analogy , referring to the 1951 Communist Party case where the High Court rejected attempts by the Menzies government to outlaw the Australian Communist Party . After noting McHugh 's recent praise of the decision in a speech , Kirby said : 
 " We should be no less vigilant than our predecessors were . As they did in the Communist Party Case , we also should reject Executive assertions of self @-@ defining and self @-@ fulfilling powers . We should deny such interpretations to federal law , including the Act ... This Court should be no less defensive of personal liberty in Australia than the courts of the United States , the United Kingdom and the Privy Council for Hong Kong have been , all of which have withheld from the Executive a power of unlimited detention . " 
 Referring to the cases in which the High Court had upheld the wartime legislation allowing indefinite administrative detention , Kirby said that equivalent decisions in other countries had come to be regarded as embarrassing and incorrect , and should be likewise regarded in Australia . While conceding that the scope of the Parliament 's powers with respect to defence will be greater in wartime than in peacetime , Kirby said that they could not extend so far as to displace fundamental constitutional requirements such as those in Chapter III . 
 Finally , Kirby also suggested that there was much scope for expanding the reach of the limitations on legislative and executive power imposed by Chapter III , and drawing on another paper by McHugh , argued that this ought to extend to the protection of due process rights as implicit constitutional rights , in the absence of an explicit bill of rights . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 As a result of the decision , Al @-@ Kateb had to return to immigration detention . Claire O 'Connor , Al @-@ Kateb 's lawyer , said that " The effect of this decision is that [ Al @-@ Kateb ] will be locked up until a state of Palestine is created or some other Middle Eastern state is willing to have him . It 's taken 51 years so far . I 'm not holding my breath . " 
 The decision sparked much controversy about the scope of the mandatory detention laws . Along with the two other immigration detention decisions handed down on that day , the case prompted several political leaders , including the then Federal President of the Australian Labor Party Carmen Lawrence , and Australian Democrats leader Senator Andrew Bartlett , to call for an Australian bill of rights . The executive director of the Sydney Institute , Gerard Henderson , said that the case demonstrated " the need for empathy in public policy " . 
 However , the case also aroused controversy about the court itself . David Marr described the four to three decision as indicating a new division in the composition of the court , the " liberty divide " , and noted that the result on the liberty question moved the court in the opposite direction to the contemporary trends of the Supreme Court of the United States and the House of Lords . Arthur Glass observed that the minority judges began their judgments from the position that indefinite non @-@ judicial detention and the curtailment of personal freedom were troubling consequences , and noted that " as is not uncommon in statutory construction , where you start from is critical to where you end up . " Marr accused the majority of deciding that " saving Australia from boat people counts for more than Al @-@ Kateb 's raw liberty . " 
 The controversy resulted in pressure on the new Immigration Minister Amanda <unk> , who agreed to review the cases of twenty @-@ four stateless people in immigration detention , and ultimately granted bridging visas to nine people including Al @-@ Kateb , allowing them to be released into the community . However , the conditions of the bridging visas did not permit holders to work , study , obtain social security benefits or receive healthcare from Medicare , and Al @-@ Kateb remained entirely dependent on donations from friends and supporters to survive . Al @-@ Kateb said of his situation , " We [ are ] just walking in a big detention . And we are all the time worried that they will send us back to detention again … It 's like a death punishment . " He was granted a permanent visa in October 2007 by immigration minister Kevin Andrews . 
 In a 2005 speech to the Law Society of the University of Sydney , Justice McHugh reiterated his view of the case as a tragic situation , and said that it was necessary for " the informed and impassioned " to seek reforms to legislation to protect individual rights , since the absence of a bill of rights limited the ability of the courts to protect rights . McHugh said that cases in countries such as the United Kingdom , in which courts had found that indefinite administrative detention was not lawful , were based on bills of rights or other instruments such as the European Convention on Human Rights , and lamented that without such instruments , Australian courts are " not empowered to be as active as the Supreme Court of the United States or the House of Lords in the defence of the fundamental principles of human rights . " 
 In response to McHugh 's speech , Chief Justice Gleeson said that the issue of whether or not Australia should have a bill of rights was a purely political one , and not a matter for the courts . Gleeson said that while he had personal political views on the matter , " It doesn 't serve the community for a serving Chief Justice to enter that arena . " 
 = = = Academic response = = = 
 In academic circles the case is generally seen as an example of the court taking two different approaches to statutory interpretation , with the legalistic approach of the majority judges in contrast with the purposive approach of the minority judges . 
 Christopher Richter suggested that the majority 's legalistic approach , while yielding a workable construction of the provisions of the Migration Act , resulted in a dangerous situation in this case because the Act did not specifically address the situation of stateless persons , and the literal approach did not allow for gaps in the legislation to be filled . Matthew Zagor suggests that there are various assumptions about the constitutional relationship between the branches of government implicit in these two different approaches . He argues that the majority , particularly Justice Callinan , preferred the plain meaning of the Migration Act because for them " the key principle at play is simple : the Court should not frustrate Parliament 's purpose or obstruct the executive . " Zagor also comments on the irony that the supposedly legalistic conclusion reached by the majority is at odds with a prior High Court decision led by Australia 's most prominent legalist , Chief Justice Owen Dixon , in which he implied a temporal limit onto World War II era legislation which also included a scheme of executive detention . 
 Some commentators , such as Juliet Curtin , have noted that both the majority and minority judgments , except for that of Justice Kirby , focused almost exclusively on Australian law and did not consider either international law or decisions from other common law countries . Curtin argues that this attitude to international jurisprudence , which included decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States and of the House of Lords , demonstrates an " insular disregard for the principles of international law " on the court 's part . 
 Several commentators have expressed the view that the decision has produced confusion and uncertainty with respect to constitutional restrictions on executive power in this area . Matthew Zagor notes that while the three minority Justices in this case , and Justice Callinan in another case , have expressed their support for the existing test in Chu Kheng Lim ( that non @-@ punitive detention is constitutionally permissible where it is " reasonably capable of being seen as necessary " ) , the test was not in fact used by the majority in this case to conclude that the detention here was permissible . He also points out that in later cases , only Justice Kirby seemed to uphold the ' vibe ' of the Chu Kheng Lim test , with Chief Justice Gleeson and Justice Gummow attempting to separate the character of detention from its consequences ( suggesting that detention which is punitive in effect may not necessarily also be punitive in character ) . Finally , Zagor argues that of the Justices who questioned the Chu Kheng Lim test , none were able to provide a coherent alternative to substitute for it . 
 = Hurricane Hilary ( 1993 ) = 
 Hurricane Hilary was a Category 3 hurricane that caused significant flooding in the Midwestern United States in August 1993 . A westward moving tropical depression gradually developed on August 17 south of the Mexican coast , attaining hurricane status two days later . The storm further intensified into a Category 3 hurricane , attaining peak winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . By August 23 , the hurricane nearly stalled while interacting with Tropical Storm Irwin . Executing a small counter @-@ clockwise loop , Hilary degraded to tropical storm intensity and took a northerly track for the remainder of its existence . The storm made two landfalls in Mexico , one in Baja California Sur on August 25 and one in Sonora the following day . Tropical cyclone warnings and watches were issued for much of the southern Mexican coastline ; however , they were later discontinued when the threat ended , but were issued again when the system posed a threat to the Baja California Peninsula . Hilary dropped in excess of 5 in ( 130 mm ) rain along its path in some areas , and flash flooding in California and Iowa . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Several small areas of convection developed in association with a tropical wave on August 14 near Central America . Over the next two days , the convection migrated across Central America , and then entered the Gulf of Tehuantepec on August 16 . The next morning , Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E formed south of an upper @-@ level low that was located in the Gulf of Mexico . Banding features slowly increased in coverage , and on August 18 , the depression intensified , becoming Tropical Storm Hilary about 100 mi ( 160 km ) south of the Pacific coast of Mexico . Hilary steadily gained strength , but its outflow remained restricted . Moving northwest on a track parallel to the coast of Mexico at around 10 mi ( 16 km ) due to a complex steering pattern , Hilary was initially poorly organized and its low @-@ level circulation was tough to find . The storm failed to intensify further until August 19 , when the storm was upgraded into a hurricane after the cyclone developed very cold cloud tops . 
 Even though most computer models expected Hilary to remain offshore , meteorologists suggested there was a possibility of making landfall near Manzanillo . The next day , an eye formed ; subsequently , Hilary reached Category 2 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . By the time , the hurricane had grown into a large cyclone with gale @-@ force winds extending out 130 mi ( 210 km ) from the center . Under weak steering currents , Hilary became a major hurricane , a cyclone with winds of 111 mph ( 190 km / h ) or higher , early on August 21 . Shortly thereafter , Hilary reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 mph ( 155 km / h ) . Around this time , Hurricane Hilary developed a 15 mi ( 24 km ) eye . Later that day , however , the eye had shrunk to about 9 mi ( 14 km ) in diameter . The eye , which was very well @-@ defined , was surrounded by a central dense overcast , a large mass of deep convection . 
 Shortly after its peak , Hurricane Hilary 's motion became unsteady . After nearly stalling , the hurricane turned to the west on August 22 , only to become nearly stationary again the next day . Slowly executing a small counter @-@ clockwise loop , Hilary underwent a Fujiwhara interaction with Tropical Storm Irwin which was several hundred miles southeast . Meanwhile , Hilary began to weaken , by early on August 22 , the eye became poorly defined and convection diminished . The eye dissipated within 12 hours , and the winds quickly diminished to 85 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Later that day , the thunderstorm activity became partially exposed from the center , and on August 23 , Hilary was downgraded to a tropical storm due to lack of organization . 
 The interaction continued to weaken Hilary , leaving it with little thunderstorm activity and winds of just 40 mph ( 60 km / h ) on August 24 , before resuming a northerly motion . Around this time , Hilary finally absorbed Irwin . While Hilary began to traverse cooler waters , the environment became more favorable . Upon developing a 200 mb anticyclone , Hilary began to revive based on data from satellite imagery and ship reports . Tropical Storm Hilary made landfall in Baja California Sur on two separate occasions as a strong tropical storm on August 25 . Weakening over land , the cyclone regenerated deep convection over the Gulf of California . As a tropical depression , Hilary made its final landfall on August 26 just west of Hermosillo in Sonora . While most of the mid to upper level moisture associated with the storm got pulled inland by a shortwave trough , the low level center dissipated in the northern Gulf on August 27 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to Hilary 's proximity to Mexico on August 20 , hurricane watches were issued for much of the southern coastline ; however , they were later discontinued . Once the system began its northward track , further watches and warnings were issued for the Baja California Peninsula and the Gulf of California coastline . Heavy rains , with a maximum recorded amount of 11 @.@ 35 in ( 288 mm ) in <unk> <unk> , Colima , were accompanied the storm . Along the Baja California Peninsula , a statewide rainfall total of 4 @.@ 33 in ( 110 mm ) fell in Huerta Vieja . However , no damage or loss of life took place . Winds along the peninsula were strong , though not as strong as Hurricane Calvin , a hurricane which struck the peninsula during July 1993 . 
 The outer bands of Hurricane Hilary also brought localized downpours to parts of California , resulting in flash floods . In Arizona , 3 @.@ 75 inches ( 95 mm ) of rain fell on Green Valley , and 3 @.@ 50 inches ( 89 mm ) of precipitation was recorded at Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument , resulting in flash flooding . Hilary produced a surge of moisture that dropped over 25 % of the summer rainfall in portions of New Mexico . The remains of Hilary combined with a cold front to produce widespread flooding across the Midwestern United States . About 10 in ( 250 mm ) fell in some areas of Iowa , forcing rivers and streams to overflow its banks . Hundreds of people evacuated their homes . 
 = Hurricane Erika ( 2003 ) = 
 Hurricane Erika was a weak hurricane that struck extreme northeastern Mexico near the Texas @-@ Tamaulipas border in mid @-@ August of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season . Erika was the eighth tropical cyclone , fifth tropical storm , and third hurricane of the season . At first , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) operationally did not designate it as a hurricane because initial data suggested winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) at Erika 's peak intensity . It was not until later data was analyzed that the NHC revised it to Category 1 intensity in the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm developed from a non @-@ tropical area of low pressure that was tracked for five days before developing in the eastern Gulf of Mexico on August 14 . Under the influence of a high pressure system , Erika moved quickly westward and strengthened under favorable conditions . It made landfall as a hurricane on northeastern Mexico on August 16 and rapidly dissipated inland . 
 While Erika 's precursor disturbance was moving across Florida , it dropped heavy rainfall . In south Texas , Erika produced moderate winds of 50 to 60 mph ( 80 to 95 km / h ) along with light rain , causing minor and isolated wind damage in the state . In northeastern Mexico , Erika produced moderate amounts of rainfall , resulting in mudslides and flooding . There , two people were killed when their vehicle was swept away by floodwaters . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weak surface area of low pressure detached from a frontal system on August 8 while 1 @,@ 150 miles ( 1 @,@ 850 km ) to the east of Bermuda . It moved southwestward , and on August 9 , it generated convection as it passed beneath a cold @-@ core upper @-@ level low . The surface low and the upper @-@ level low turned westward as it revolved around a common center , and by August 11 , the surface low developed into a trough while 440 miles ( 700 km ) south of Bermuda . As the system rapidly continued westward , much of the convection remained near the center of the upper @-@ level low , preventing development of a closed surface circulation . On August 13 , while located near the northwestern Bahamas , a substantial increase in convection resulted in the upper @-@ level low building downwards to the middle levels of the troposphere , coinciding with the development of an upper level anticyclone . 
 A closed low @-@ level circulation nearly developed on August 14 to the east of Key Largo , Florida , but it weakened due to the deep convection remaining to the north over the mid @-@ level center . The mid @-@ level storm continued westward and moved across Florida . After crossing Florida , Hurricane Hunters indicated a poorly defined circulation , but with winds exceeding tropical storm strength , and the system was designated as Tropical Storm Erika late on August 14 while located 85 miles ( 135 km ) west of Fort Myers . 
 With well @-@ established outflow and low levels of wind shear , Erika strengthened as the circulation became better defined . A high pressure system persisted over the south @-@ central United States , forcing the storm to move just south of due west at 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) . On August 15 , convection organized into bands , and as its winds approached hurricane strength , an eye developed within the storm . Erika turned to the west @-@ southwest on August 16 , and attained hurricane status just prior to making landfall near Boca San Rafael , Tamaulipas in northeastern Mexico , or about 40 miles ( 70 km ) south of the United States – Mexico border . The storm rapidly weakened over the mountainous Sierra Madre Oriental , and Erika dissipated early on August 17 . The mid @-@ level circulation maintained integrity as it crossed Mexico , and led to the formation of a tropical disturbance after entering the Gulf of California on August 18 . It turned to the northwest and weakened on August 20 . 
 Operationally Erika was never upgraded to hurricane status . Based on a persistent eye feature on radar and Doppler weather radar @-@ estimated surface winds of 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , the National Hurricane Center posthumously upgraded Erika to a hurricane . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The threat of Erika 's onslaught prompted the evacuation of 51 oil platforms and 3 oil rigs in the western Gulf of Mexico . The lack of production led to a loss of production of 8 @,@ 708 barrels ( 1 @,@ 384 @.@ 5 m3 ) of oil per day and 173 @.@ 14 million cubic feet ( 4 @,@ 903 @,@ 000 m3 ) of natural gas per day . On the day of its landfall , the lack of production led to 1 @,@ 979 less barrels of oil for the day , or about 0 @.@ 12 % of the total daily production for the Gulf of Mexico , while the loss of 32 million cubic feet ( 910 @,@ 000 m3 ) of gas for the day was equivalent to 0 @.@ 23 % of the total production . However , due to its rapid motion , the passage of the storm resulted in minimal effects on operations . 
 While the storm was located in the eastern Gulf of Mexico on August 15 , the National Hurricane Center issued a Hurricane Watch and Tropical Storm Warning from Brownsville to Baffin Bay , Texas . The center also recommended a Hurricane Watch spanning from Soto la Marina , Tamaulipas to the international border . Late that same day , when strengthening was underway , a Hurricane Warning was either issued or recommended from La Pesca , Mexico to Baffin Bay , Texas , though the warnings for south Texas were dropped when a more southward motion occurred . Just one month after Hurricane Claudette caused millions in damage in south Texas , the fast movement of Erika caught citizens by surprise as it was forecast to make landfall near Brownsville . Citizens and business owners boarded up for the storm . About 10 @,@ 000 were evacuated from northeastern Mexico due to the threat for flooding , including 2 @,@ 000 in Matamoros . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The precursor disturbance was expected to bring heavy , yet needed rainfall to the Bahamas . The precursor disturbance dropped heavy precipitation while moving across Florida , including in Indian River County , and also produced 6 – 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 m ) waves with moderate wind gusts . 
 Erika produced light rainfall across southern Texas , peaking at 3 @.@ 83 inches ( 97 mm ) in Sabinal , though most locations reported less than two inches ( 50 mm ) of precipitation . In addition , weather radar estimated isolated accumulations of 4 to 6 inches ( 100 to 150 mm ) of precipitation in Kenedy and Brooks Counties . Sustained winds from Erika in south Texas peaked at 39 mph ( 62 km / h ) in Brownsville , where a gust of 47 mph ( 75 km / h ) was also recorded . Strong waves were reported northwards to Corpus Christi . The storm caused minor flooding and beach erosion along South Padre Island . Strong wind gusts of up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) caused isolated , minor wind damage in south Texas , including in South Padre Island , where the winds damaged the roof of a business . The winds also uprooted a large tree and caused limb damage to several small- to medium @-@ sized trees in Brownsville . In Texas , damage totaled to $ 10 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , $ 12 @.@ 9 thousand 2016 USD ) . 
 In Mexico , Hurricane Erika primarily affected the states of Tamaulipas and Nuevo León , but also had effects on Coahuila as well . Rainfall peaked at 6 @.@ 71 inches ( 170 @.@ 5 mm ) in Magueyes in Tamaulipas . Several other locations reported over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , including 4 @.@ 02 inches ( 102 mm ) in Cerro Prieto , which was the maximum amount in the state of Nuevo León , and 3 @.@ 42 inches ( 86 @.@ 8 mm ) in Monterrey , where 30 people were injured . Sustained winds peaked at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in San Fernando , where a gust of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) was also reported . The heavy rainfall resulted in severe flooding and mudslides , blocking several highways in northeastern Mexico . In Matamoros , the storm damaged roofs and cars . Moderate winds snapped tree branches and spread debris across roads , though locals considered the storm minor . In the Nuevo León city of Montemorelos , two people died when they were swept away after they drove their truck across a partially flooded bridge . Throughout Mexico , 20 @,@ 000 people were left without power due to the storm . The remnant circulation produced heavy amounts of precipitation in western Mexico and Baja California . 
 = Fuji @-@ class battleship = 
 The Fuji class ( <unk> , Fuji @-@ gata senkan ) was a two @-@ ship class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the mid @-@ 1890s . They were the first battleships in the IJN , and were constructed in the UK as Japan lacked the industrial facilities needed to build them . Their design was based on the battleships being built for the Royal Navy at that time . 
 The ships participated in the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , including the Battle of Port Arthur in February 1904 and two bombardments of Port Arthur during the following month . Yashima struck a mine off Port Arthur in May and capsized while under tow several hours later . Fuji fought in the Battles of the Yellow Sea and Tsushima and was lightly damaged in the latter action . She was reclassified as a coast defence ship in 1910 and served as a training ship for the rest of her active career . The ship was hulked in 1922 and converted into a barracks ship fitted with classrooms . Fuji was finally broken up for scrap in 1948 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 19th century , the strategy of the Imperial Japanese Navy was based on the radical Jeune Ecole naval philosophy , as promoted by French military advisor and naval architect Emile Bertin . This emphasised cheap torpedo boats and commerce raiding to offset expensive , heavily armoured ships . The acquisition of two German @-@ built Dingyuan @-@ class ironclads by the Imperial Chinese Beiyang Fleet in 1885 threatened Japan 's interests in Korea . A visit by the Chinese warships to Japan in early 1891 forced the Japanese government to acknowledge that the IJN required similarly armed and armoured ships of its own to counter the ironclads ; the three lightly armoured Matsushima @-@ class cruisers ordered from France would not suffice , despite their powerful guns . The IJN decided to order a pair of the latest battleships from the United Kingdom as Japan lacked the technology and capability to construct its own battleships . 
 Obtaining funding for the battleships was a struggle for the Japanese government . The initial request was submitted in the budget of Prime Minister Matsukata Masayoshi in 1891 , but was deleted by the Diet of Japan due to political infighting . Matsukata submitted the request again and , when again denied , was forced to dissolve his cabinet . His successor , Prime Minister Itō Hirobumi , attempted to pass the funding measure in 1892 , but he also failed . This led to an extraordinary personal intervention by Emperor Meiji in a statement dated 10 February 1893 , wherein the emperor offered to fund the construction of the two battleships himself , through an annual reduction in the expenses of the Imperial Household , and asked that all government officials likewise agree to a reduction in their salaries by ten percent . The funding measure for the Fuji @-@ class battleships was passed by the Japanese Diet soon after . Completion of the ships was originally scheduled for 1899 , but the start of the First Sino @-@ Japanese War shortly before they were laid down in 1894 caused the government to accelerate the schedule by two years . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Fuji class was derived from that of the British Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships , albeit about 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) smaller . The Fuji @-@ class ships improved on the Royal Sovereigns in several ways ; they were about 1 knot ( 1 @.@ 9 km / h ; 1 @.@ 2 mph ) faster , they incorporated superior Harvey armour , and their guns , although smaller and lighter , were the same as those of the later Majestic @-@ class and were protected by armoured hoods ( gun turrets ) . The two ships of the class were almost identical even though they were designed by two different naval architects , Yashima by Philip Watts and Fuji by George C. <unk> . The primary difference was that Yashima had her deadwood cut away aft and was fitted with a balanced rudder . This made her almost a knot faster than her sister and gave her a smaller turning circle at the cost of a weaker stern that required careful attention when drydocked lest it sag . 
 The Fuji @-@ class ships had an overall length of 412 feet ( 125 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 73 @.@ 25 – 73 @.@ 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 3 – 22 @.@ 5 m ) , and a normal draught of 26 @.@ 25 – 26 @.@ 5 feet ( 8 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 1 m ) . They displaced 12 @,@ 230 – 12 @,@ 533 long tons ( 12 @,@ 426 – 12 @,@ 734 t ) at normal load . The ships had double bottoms and were subdivided into a total of 181 watertight compartments . The crew numbered about 650 officers and enlisted men . Yashima was fitted as a flagship with accommodation for an admiral and his staff . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Fuji @-@ class ships were powered by two Humphrys Tennant 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 18 m ) propeller , using steam generated by ten cylindrical boilers with a working pressure of 10 @.@ 898 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 069 kPa ; 155 psi ) . The engines were rated at 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) , using forced draught , and designed to reach a top speed of 18 @.@ 25 knots ( 33 @.@ 80 km / h ; 21 @.@ 00 mph ) although the ships proved to be faster during their sea trials , reaching top speeds of 18 @.@ 66 to 19 @.@ 46 knots ( 34 @.@ 56 to 36 @.@ 04 km / h ; 21 @.@ 47 to 22 @.@ 39 mph ) . A watertight centreline bulkhead separated the two engine rooms as well as the four boiler rooms . The boiler rooms were further separated by a transverse bulkhead . Unlike both the Royal Sovereigns and Majestics , the Fuji class had their funnels on the centreline . 
 The ships carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 620 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 590 long tons ) of coal which allowed them to steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . They were fitted with three electric dynamos , each rated at 32 kilowatts ( 43 hp ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main battery of the Fuji class consisted of four hydraulically operated Elswick Ordnance Company 40 @-@ calibre Type 41 twelve @-@ inch guns mounted in pear @-@ shaped twin @-@ gun barbettes fore and aft of the superstructure . The barbettes had a firing arc of 240 ° and the guns had a maximum elevation of + 15 ° and could depress to − 5 ° . These barbettes had armoured hoods , or turrets , to protect the guns . The mountings were virtually identical to those used in the first Majestic @-@ class battleships , which could only hoist ammunition from the below @-@ decks magazines in one position . However , 18 shells were stowed in each turret that allowed a limited amount of firing at any angle before their ammunition supply needed to be replenished . The guns were loaded at a fixed angle of 1 ° and fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 730 m / s ) . This gave them an approximate range of 16 @,@ 000 yards ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 Secondary armament of the Fuji class consisted of ten 40 @-@ calibre Type 41 six @-@ inch quick @-@ firing guns , four on the main deck in casemates and six guns on the upper deck protected by gun shields . They fired 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ( 700 m / s ) . Protection from torpedo boat attacks was provided by fourteen 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) three @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and ten 47 @-@ millimetre 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . The three @-@ pounder gun fired 3 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 927 ft / s ( 587 m / s ) while the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder fired 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) . The ships were also equipped with five 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , one in the bow above water and four submerged tubes , two on each broadside . 
 In 1901 , both ships exchanged 16 of their 47 mm guns for an equal number of QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns . They fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 359 ft / s ( 719 m / s ) . This raised the number of crewmen to 652 and later to 741 . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The armour scheme of the Fuji @-@ class ships was similar to that used by the Royal Sovereigns except that the Japanese ships used superior Harvey armour of the same thickness instead of compound armour . The waterline main belt was 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high , 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) of which was above the waterline at normal load , and had a maximum thickness of 18 inches ( 457 mm ) . It reduced to 16 inches ( 406 mm ) then 14 inches ( 356 mm ) at the ends past the two barbettes ; above it was a 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) strake of armour that ran between the barbettes . They were 14 inches thick outside the upper armour belt and reduced to 9 inches ( 229 mm ) behind the upper belt . Diagonal bulkheads connected the barbettes to the side armour ; the forward bulkhead was 14 inches thick while the rear bulkhead was 12 inches ( 305 mm ) thick . The armour of the casemates and the barbette hoods had a maximum thickness of 6 inches while the conning tower was protected by 14 inches of armour . The deck armour was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick and met the sides of the ship at the top of the main armour belt . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Both ships had reached Japan by February 1898 . At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in 1904 , Fuji and Yashima were assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet . They participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February , when Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the 1st Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defences with his main armament and engage the Russian ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a poor decision as his eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and six @-@ inch guns inflicted very little damage on the Russian vessels , which concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships . Yashima was not struck during the battle , but Fuji was hit twice , two men being killed and 10 wounded . 
 On 10 March , the two ships blindly bombarded the harbour of Port Arthur from Pigeon Bay , on the southwest side of the Liaodong Peninsula , at a range of 9 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) , but did little damage . When they tried again on 22 March , they were attacked by Russian coastal defence guns that had been transferred there , and also from several Russian ships in Port Arthur using observers overlooking Pigeon Bay . The Japanese ships disengaged after Fuji was hit by a 12 @-@ inch shell . 
 Fuji and Yashima participated in the action of 13 April when Tōgō successfully lured out two battleships of the Pacific Squadron . When the Russians spotted the five battleships of the 1st Division , they turned back for Port Arthur and the battleship Petropavlovsk struck a minefield laid by the Japanese the previous night . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , which prompted the Russians to lay more minefields . 
 On 14 May 1904 , the battleships Hatsuse , Shikishima , and Yashima , the protected cruiser Kasagi , and the dispatch boat Tatsuta put to sea to relieve the Japanese blockading force off Port Arthur . The following morning , the squadron encountered a Russian minefield . Hatsuse struck one mine that disabled her steering and Yashima struck two others when moving to assist Hatsuse . Yashima was towed away from the minefield , but she was still taking on water at an uncontrollable rate and the crew abandoned ship some five hours later . Kasagi took Yashima in tow , but the battleship 's list continued to increase and she capsized about three hours later . 
 During the Battle of the Yellow Sea in August 1904 , Fuji was not damaged because the Russian ships concentrated their fire on Tōgō 's flagship , the battleship Mikasa , which was leading the column . In May the following year , during the Battle of Tsushima , Fuji was hit a dozen times , the most serious of which penetrated the hood of the rear barbette , ignited some exposed propellant charges , killed eight men and wounded nine . After the ammunition fire was put out , the left gun in the barbette resumed firing and apparently delivered the coup de grâce that sank the battleship Borodino . 
 On 23 October 1908 , Fuji hosted a dinner for the American Ambassador , Thomas J. O 'Brien , and the senior officers of the Great White Fleet during its circumnavigation of the world . In 1910 , her cylindrical boilers were replaced by Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers and her main armament was replaced by Japanese @-@ built guns . Fuji was reclassified as a first @-@ class coast defence ship the same year , and undertook training duties in various capacities until disarmed in 1922 . Her hulk continued to be used as a floating barracks and training centre at Yokosuka until 1945 . Fuji was damaged by American carrier aircraft during their 18 July 1945 attack on Yokosuka and capsized after the end of the war . The ship was scrapped in 1948 . 
 = Wet ( Nicole Scherzinger song ) = 
 " Wet " is a song by American recording artist Nicole Scherzinger , taken from her debut solo studio album Killer Love ( 2011 ) . The song was written by Ester Dean and Traci Hale , co @-@ written and produced by Norwegian duo StarGate ( Tor E. Hermansen and Mikkel S. Eriksen ) and Sandy Vee . The song was serviced as the fourth single from the album to British radio stations on August 28 , 2011 , by Polydor Records , while in Australia it was released in the following month . 
 The dance @-@ pop and pop song speak of Scherzinger singing that " her body is aching for a man 's touch " . It received generally positive reviews from music critics . The song received moderate commercial success where it peaked at number twenty @-@ one on the UK Singles Chart , in addition to peaking at number ten on the Irish Singles Chart , where it also became one of her highest charting releases . The accompanying music video for " Wet " was directed by Justin Francis . It was generally received by critics which favored Scherzinger 's intricate choreography . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Wet " was recorded in 2010 at Roc the Mic Studios in New York City , Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles and The Bunker Studios in Paris . Scherzinger 's vocals were recorded by Eriksen and Miles Walker at Roc the Mic Studios and Westlake Recording Studios and by Vee at The Bunker Studios . " Wet " was mixed by Vee at The Bunker Studios and by Phil Tan at The Ninja Beat Club in Atlanta , Georgia . Additional and assistant engineering was carried out by Damien Lewis . All instrumentation was completed by Eriksen , Hermansen and Vee . " Wet " was not given a traditional release . In the UK , it was given an impact date of August 28 , 2011 ; sometimes record labels will choose a date for a song to impact as a single and for promotion but not give the song a separate listing from the album in digital download stores . Just less than a month later , it was serviced to radio in Australia on September 26 , 2011 . 
 " Wet " is an uptempo track , containing a thumping disco beat , a throbbing bass , and electronic beats . The song was written by Ester Dean and Traci Hale , and co @-@ written and produced by Norwegian duo StarGate and Sandy Vee . Scherzinger is said to confesses that her body is " aching for a man 's touch " , stating " This beat is filthy dirty / I feel it all over me " . Described as a " dance @-@ ready club banger " by Idolator , the song chronicles " many sexy ways " Scherzinger gets wet ; sweating , a shower , a swim , and drowning . Scherzinger continues the whole " drenched " theme within the songs ' chorus : " Well Imma take my clothes off / Take a leap and surf through the crowd / Dripping down my neck / <unk> wet , sink or swim or you drown / Let 's get a little wet . " In the song , Scherzinger sings about running around naked , stating " I feel like whatever I do tonight would be the talk of the town . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Wet " garnered generally positive reviews from critics . Awarding the song with three out of five stars , Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the song a mixed review , stating that although Scherzinger purrs with conviction , the song sounds ultimately similar to Rihanna 's " Only Girl ( In The World ) " . While reviewing the album , the same website reviewed " Wet " as a highlight of the album , and named it a possible future single . Idolator stated that Scherzinger is " positively dripping with sex appeal in her ode to getting doused " , later adding that the Stargate @-@ produced " dance jam is the musical equivalent of a run through the sprinkler " . Idolator finished its review by stating that after an addition of a well @-@ known rapper , the song could hit the domestic Top 40 . While reviewing the album , Becky Bain of Idolator stated that " Wet " along with " Club Banger Nation " would strike a chord with clubgoers . David Griffiths of 4Music named " Wet " an essential addition to anybody 's party playlist . In another interview by Griffiths , he named " Wet " a " cracking pop tune " , stating that the " hits keep coming " for Scherzinger . Kim Dawson of Daily Star complimented the song as a " saucy tune " . Describing the song as a " surefire smash " for Scherzinger , Pip Ellwood of Entertainment @-@ Focus complimented the song as the best track on the album , stating that its beat is better than that of lead single " Poison " due to the fact that it is " impossible not to move to . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Wet " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 189 . On the week of August 20 , 2011 , it went to its peak of number 21 . " Wet " debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number forty @-@ eight on the week ending August 11 , 2011 . The following week , August 18 , 2011 , " Wet " climbed to number ten on the Irish Singles Chart . The song also peaked at number thirteen on the Scottish Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Wet " was shot in a single day to accommodate her schedule as a judge on the X Factor . It was shot on a Los Angeles car park – it was the only suitable location due to its proximity to the X Factor studios . The video was directed by Justin Francis . On August 2 , 2011 , Scherzinger released behind the scenes photos of the songs music video with Scherzinger wearing a two @-@ piece attire and clutching a net around her body as she stands behind a wall of water . The video makes use of product placement of Carrera 's " Champion " . The music video premiered through MSN Music UK on August 3 , 2011 . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Scherzinger hiding out from police , evading capture and disguising herself with some aviator shades and a studded hoodie . As she is being surveyed by security camera , Scherzinger begins to dance athletically and acrobatically . Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy believed that part of Scherzinger 's dance contained old Navajo rain dance moves . Scherzinger than alternates outfits to a black leather - corset top , high @-@ waisted shorts and thigh @-@ high boots , as scenes of Scherzinger singing behind a window pane while it ’ s raining are interlaced into the clip . Scherzinger , accompanied by a group of female dancers , than enter an indoor swimming pool were men are seen spraying graffiti into the wall . Scherzinger and her back @-@ up dancers than begin to dance in the emptied concrete pool , as the men begin to soak Scherzinger with hoses . As the police enter the building , Scherzinger is warned by a man acting as a lookout . Scherzinger and all her companions escape , only to leave the police discovering a spray @-@ painted message of " Wet " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critics generally favored the songs accompanying music video , in particular Scherzinger 's intricate choreography . On the day the video premiered , a reviewer from Rap @-@ Up wrote " It ’ s getting hot in here , " referencing Scherzinger 's " smokin ’ body " and " steamy visuals " . Staff of Idolator spoke favorably of Scherzinger 's choreography , stating that it " would make the other Pussycat Dolls blush " . Amy Sciarretto of PopCrush gave the video a positive review stating that she was impressed of Scherzinger 's athletic and acrobatic methods of dancing . She continued , " she doesn ’ t even have to try and be sexy ; she just is " . Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy appreciated Scherzinger 's writhing around on the floor in " somewhat compromising positions " and added that Scherzinger is wet for about 50 percent of the video , so " we 're guessing guys across the country aren 't going to be writing complaint letters anytime soon . " Sophie Forbes of Daily Mail positively stated " Clutching a net round her body , she looked sensational in her taupe two piece as she stared wistfully off into the distance . " David Griffiths of 4Music positively reviewed the song 's music video stating it " featur [ ed ] some jaw @-@ droppingly good dancing , a hair flick or two and some serious thrusting , it gets a big thumbs up from us . " " Wet " ranked at number 70 on MTV 's most watched music videos of 2011 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Scherzinger performed the song for the first time in Stratford , London at Westfield Stratford City on September 13 , 2011 . The performance was included in a set of multiple songs off of Killer Love , and was sung in order to celebrate the shopping centre 's opening . Scherzinger began her performance with a fringed leather coat in red and black , the colours of the Westfield logo , a cutaway black <unk> dress and purple platform heels which she whipped off to reveal an even racier outfit underneath . She than wore a black leather number covered in tassels and chains . Scherzinger 's performance was accompanied onstage by several dancers , whom were wearing shiny metallic trousers , as she performed in front of thousands of fans . The song was also performed in 2012 on her first solo tour , the Killer Love Tour . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Album version 
 " Wet " – 3 : 37 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Roc the Mic Studios , New York ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; The Bunker Studios , Paris . 
 Mixed at The Bunker Studios , Paris ; Ninja Club Studios , Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , Sandy Wilhelm , Ester Dean , Traci Hale 
 Production – Stargate , Sandy Vee 
 Mixing – Sandy Vee , Phil Tan 
 Additional engineering – Damien Lewis 
 Instruments – Mikkel S. Eriksen , Tor Erik Hermansen , Sandy Vee 
 Background vocals – Ester Dean 
 Credits adapted from Killer Love booklet liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Cyclone Lam = 
 Cyclone Lam in 2015 was the strongest storm to strike Australia 's Northern Territory since Cyclone Monica in 2006 . It formed from the monsoon trough on February 12 in the Coral Sea . For much of its duration , the system moved westward due to a ridge to the south . The system crossed over the Cape York Peninsula and moved into the Gulf of Carpentaria , whereupon it gradually organized due to warm waters and favorable outflow . On February 16 , the Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) classified it as a Category 1 on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale and gave it the name Lam . The storm intensified further while drifting toward the Wessel Islands , developing an eye and strengthening to the equivalence of a minimal hurricane on February 18 . It strengthened to reach maximum sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) early on February 19 before turning to the southwest , making it a Category 4 cyclone . That day , it made landfall on Northern Territory between Milingimbi and Elcho Island at peak intensity , and it rapidly weakened over land . About six hours after Lam moved ashore , Cyclone Marcia struck Queensland as a Category 5 cyclone , marking the first time on record that two storms of Category 4 intensity struck Australia on the same day . 
 In its formative stages , Lam produced heavy rainfall and flooding in Far North Queensland . Later , the cyclone 's rainfall set daily precipitation records in Northern Territory . However , the winds caused the most damage , with gusts estimated as high as 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . The highest gust was 170 km / h ( 110 mph ) at Cape Wessel on <unk> Island . Lam caused considerable destruction , particularly affecting local aboriginal communities . Total damage in the Northern Territory reached at least A $ 82 @.@ 4 million ( US $ 64 @.@ 4 million ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On February 12 , the monsoon trough extended through the Coral Sea , developing a weak tropical low in the northern portion of the sea , according to the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) . The system had a persistent area of convection , or thunderstorms , around a consolidating circulation . Conditions were moderately favorable for further development , including the presence of some wind shear and favorable outflow to the south . The system moved slowly westward into the Cape York Peninsula without much development , entering the Gulf of Carpentaria on February 15 , as it was steered by a ridge to the south . Thereafter , the convection consolidated and organized while the mid- and low @-@ level circulations aligned . As a result , the BoM began classifying it as Tropical Low 13U at 06 : 00 UTC on February 16 while the system was about 235 km ( 145 mi ) northwest of Weipa , Queensland . On the same day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert , noting the decreasing wind shear and warm water temperatures of over 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . 
 Within six hours of its classification as Tropical Low 13U , the system developed a central dense overcast , which is an organized area of convection around the center . At 18 : 00 UTC on February 16 , the BoM upgraded the low to a Category 1 on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale , naming it Lam . At that time , the BoM anticipated the cyclone would intensify to peak 10 minute sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) within 72 hours , which proved very accurate . Also at 18 : 00 UTC on February 16 , the JTWC began classifying the system as Tropical Cyclone <unk> . Early on February 17 , an eye feature began forming within the convection . That day , Lam moved quicker to the west @-@ northwest and slowed its rate of strengthening as it approached the Wessel Islands . Early on February 18 , the eye became better defined , moving over Cape Wessel . At 06 : 00 UTC that day , the BoM upgraded Lam to a Category 3 Severe Tropical Cyclone with 10 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , equivalent to a minimal hurricane . 
 When Lam was passing near Cape Wessel , the lower and middle level circulations were slightly displaced , although the center was embedded within the deepest convection . The eyewall became smaller and more defined over time as the outflow strengthened , indicating that the cyclone was undergoing rapid deepening late on February 18 . Around the same time , Lam turned to the southwest as the ridge to the south weakened . At 12 : 00 UTC on February 19 , the BoM upgraded Lam to a Category 4 cyclone , estimating peak 10 minute winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) ; this was based on the well @-@ defined eye and rainbands on satellite imagery . At the same time , the JTWC estimated the same intensity , only in 1 minute winds . At around 16 : 30 UTC ( 2 : 00 a.m. local time ) on February 19 , Lam made landfall – moved ashore – along Northern Territory between Milingimbi Island and Elcho Island at peak intensity . The eye quickly deteriorated as the cyclone moved through the Top End . The storm weakened rapidly over land , deteriorating into a tropical low about 12 hours after landfall . The JTWC continued tracking Lam until February 22 , when the weak circulation was located in the northeastern portion of Western Australia . 
 About six hours after Lam moved ashore , Cyclone Marcia made landfall along Queensland , making it the first time on record that two storms of at least Category 4 intensity struck Australia on the same day . Lam was the first severe tropical cyclone to strike Northern Territory since Cyclone Monica in April 2006 . In addition , Lam 's landfall on February 19 marked the third latest date for Australia to receive its first landfall , and the latest since 1988 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When the BoM first <unk> Lam as Tropical Low 13U , the agency also issued a cyclone watch for the Cape York Peninsula and Arnhem Land . Before the storm struck , officials transported residents in Lam 's path by air to the capital city Darwin . All 426 people living in <unk> were airlifted , and the storm caused many schools in the region to be closed ; students from <unk> continued classes after they evacuated to Darwin . Residents anticipated Lam 's intensity to be lower at landfall , which left some off guard . 
 The origins of Lam brought heavy rainfall and flooding to Far North Queensland . Upon striking Northern Territory , Cyclone Lam produced estimated wind gusts of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) , which knocked down many trees and power lines . The highest observed wind gust was 170 km / h ( 110 mph ) at Cape Wessel on <unk> Island . The winds were strong enough to cause two anemometers to fail , with peak recordings of 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) on Elcho Island and 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) on Milingimbi Island . Offshore Northern Territory , Lam destroyed several houses along Elcho Island and left residents without water or electricity . In the town of <unk> on the island , two @-@ thirds of the houses were affected , with 130 having roof damage , ten seriously damaged , and six destroyed . By a week after the storm , 250 residents were still displaced . However , water and power were restored to <unk> by February 25 . Damage on Elcho Island totaled $ 47 million ( AUD , $ 37 million USD ) . Total damage in the Northern Territory reached at least A $ 82 @.@ 4 million ( US $ 64 @.@ 4 million ) . 
 In Ramingining , the winds damaged a court house and police offices , and killed one dog . " Thousands " of people were homeless or displaced due to the storm , many residing in shelters . Farther inland , Lam dropped heavy rainfall that caused flooding , peaking at 258 @.@ 5 mm ( 10 @.@ 18 in ) at <unk> Hill along the Waterhouse River . The rains set daily precipitation records at three Northern Territory locations . A girl required medical treatment after steeping on a downed power line . There were no deaths or other serious injuries due to the storm , and damage was less than expected despite the intensity ; this was possibly due to the storm moving ashore at low tide . 
 Following the storm , the Northern Territory government declared a state of emergency for the hardest hit areas . It provided financial assistance to families affected by the storm , totaling $ 1 @,@ 245 ( AUD ) for each family . The government sent a Royal Australian Air Force plane with emergency supplies to Darwin after a request from the Northern Territory . Officials sent crews to Elcho Island to help clear debris and restore power . Residents in Ramingining were under a boil @-@ water advisory following the storm . A crew of 15 volunteers flew from Alice Springs and Maningrida to help emergency workers . An online crowdfunding group raised over $ 12 @,@ 000 ( AUD ) within one day to provide emergency supplies . Emergency officials also advised residents not to drive around disaster areas for " sightseeing " due to the potential to disrupt repairs . A water and power worker estimated the power lines would be restored within one week , although that was dependent on internal building damage or tree removal . Following the storm , many residents returned to their damaged homes and lived instead in tents . The Northern Territory government established a tent city on the offshore Elcho Island , which was dismantled on March 20 due to the threat of approaching Cyclone Nathan . 
 = Tropical cyclone rainfall forecasting = 
 Tropical cyclone rainfall forecasting involves using scientific models and other tools to predict the precipitation expected in tropical cyclones such as hurricanes and typhoons . Knowledge of tropical cyclone rainfall climatology is helpful in the determination of a tropical cyclone rainfall forecast . More rainfall falls in advance of the center of the cyclone than in its wake . The heaviest rainfall falls within its central dense overcast and eyewall . Slow moving tropical cyclones , like Hurricane Danny and Hurricane Wilma , can lead to the highest rainfall amounts due to prolonged heavy rains over a specific location . However , vertical wind shear leads to decreased rainfall amounts , as rainfall is favored downshear and slightly left of the center and the <unk> side is left devoid of rainfall . The presence of hills or mountains near the coast , as is the case across much of Mexico , Haiti , the Dominican Republic , much of Central America , Madagascar , Réunion , China , and Japan act to magnify amounts on their windward side due to forced ascent causing heavy rainfall in the mountains . A strong system moving through the mid latitudes , such as a cold front , can lead to high amounts from tropical systems , occurring well in advance of its center . Movement of a tropical cyclone over cool water will also limit its rainfall potential . A combination of factors can lead to exceptionally high rainfall amounts , as was seen during Hurricane Mitch in Central America . 
 Use of forecast models can help determine the magnitude and pattern of the rainfall expected . Climatology and persistence models , such as r @-@ CLIPER , can create a baseline for tropical cyclone rainfall forecast skill . Simplified forecast models , such as the Kraft technique and the eight and sixteen @-@ inch rules , can create quick and simple rainfall forecasts , but come with a variety of assumptions which may not be true , such as assuming average forward motion , average storm size , and a knowledge of the rainfall observing network the tropical cyclone is moving towards . The forecast method of <unk> assumes that the rainfall structure the tropical cyclone currently has changes little over the next 24 hours . The global forecast model which shows the most skill in forecasting tropical cyclone @-@ related rainfall in the United States is the GFS ( Global Forecasting System ) . 
 = = Rainfall distribution around a tropical cyclone = = 
 A larger proportion of rainfall falls in advance of the center ( or eye ) than after the center 's passage , with the highest percentage falling in the right @-@ front quadrant . A tropical cyclone 's highest rainfall rates can lie in the right rear quadrant within a training ( non @-@ moving ) inflow band . Rainfall is found to be strongest in their inner core , within a degree of latitude of the center , with lesser amounts farther away from the center . Most of the rainfall in hurricanes is concentrated within its radius of gale @-@ force winds . Larger tropical cyclones have larger rain shields , which can lead to higher rainfall amounts farther from the cyclone 's center . Storms which have moved slowly , or loop , lead to the highest rainfall amounts . Riehl calculated that 33 @.@ 97 inches ( 863 mm ) of rainfall per day can be expected within one @-@ half degree , or 35 miles ( 56 km ) , of the center of a mature tropical cyclone . Many tropical cyclones progress at a forward motion of 10 knots , which would limit the duration of this excessive rainfall to around one @-@ quarter of a day , which would yield about 8 @.@ 50 inches ( 216 mm ) of rainfall . This would be true over water , within 100 miles ( 160 km ) of the coastline , and outside topographic features . As a cyclone moves farther inland and is cut off from its supply of warmth and moisture ( the ocean ) , rainfall amounts from tropical cyclones and their remains decrease quickly . 
 = = = Vertical wind shear = = = 
 Vertical wind shear forces the rainfall pattern around a tropical cyclone to become highly asymmetric , with most of the precipitation falling to the left and downwind of the shear vector , or downshear left . In other words , southwesterly shear forces the bulk of the rainfall north @-@ northeast of the center . If the wind shear is strong enough , the bulk of the rainfall will move away from the center leading to what is known as an exposed circulation center . When this occurs , the potential magnitude of rainfall with the tropical cyclone will be significantly reduced . 
 = = = Interaction with frontal boundaries and upper level troughs = = = 
 As a tropical cyclone interacts with an upper @-@ level trough and the related surface front , a distinct northern area of precipitation is seen along the front ahead of the axis of the upper level trough . Surface fronts with precipitable water amounts of 1 @.@ 46 inches ( 37 mm ) or more and upper level divergence overhead east of an upper level trough can lead to significant rainfall . This type of interaction can lead to the appearance of the heaviest rainfall falling along and to the left of the tropical cyclone track , with the precipitation streaking hundreds of miles or kilometers downwind from the tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Mountains = = = 
 Moist air forced up the slopes of coastal hills and mountain chains can lead to much heavier rainfall than in the coastal plain . This heavy rainfall can lead to landslides , which still cause significant loss of life such as seen during Hurricane Mitch in Central America , where several thousand perished . 
 = = Tools used in preparation of forecast = = 
 = = = Climatology and persistence = = = 
 The Hurricane Research Division of the Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory created the r @-@ CLIPER ( rainfall climatology and persistence ) model to act as a baseline for all verification regarding tropical cyclone rainfall . The theory is , if the global forecast models cannot beat predictions based on climatology , then there is no skill in their use . There is a definite advantage to using the forecast track with r @-@ CLIPER because it could be run out 120 hours / 5 days with the forecast track of any tropical cyclone globally within a short amount of time . The short range variation which uses persistence is the Tropical Rainfall Potential technique ( <unk> ) technique , which uses satellite @-@ derived rainfall amounts from microwave imaging satellites and extrapolates the current rainfall configuration forward for 24 hours along the current forecast track . This technique 's main flaw is that it assumes a steady state tropical cyclone which undergoes little structural change with time , which is why it is only run forward for 24 hours into the future . 
 = = = Numerical weather prediction = = = 
 Computer models can be used to diagnose the magnitude of tropical cyclone rainfall . Since forecast models output their information on a grid , they only give a general idea as to the areal coverage of moderate to heavy rainfall . No current forecast models run at a small enough grid scale ( 1 km or smaller ) to be able to detect the absolute maxima measured within tropical cyclones . Of the United States forecasting models , the best performing model for tropical cyclone rainfall forecasting is known as the GFS , or Global Forecasting System . The GFDL model has been shown to have a high bias concerning the magnitude of heavier core rains within tropical cyclones . Beginning in 2007 , the NCEP Hurricane @-@ WRF became available to help predict rainfall from tropical cyclones . Recent verification shows that both the European ECMWF forecast model and North American Mesoscale Model ( NAM ) show a low bias with heavier rainfall amounts within tropical cyclones . 
 = = = Kraft rule = = = 
 During the late 1950s , this rule of thumb came into being , developed by R. H. Kraft . It was noted from rainfall amounts ( in imperial units ) reported by the first order rainfall network in the United States that the storm total rainfall fit a simple equation : 100 divided by the speed of motion in knots . This rule works , even in other countries , as long as a tropical cyclone is moving and only the first order or synoptic station network ( with observations spaced about 60 miles ( 97 km ) apart ) are used to derive storm totals . Canada uses a modified version of the Kraft rule which divides the results by a factor of two , which takes into account the lower sea surface temperatures seen around Atlantic Canada and the prevalence of systems undergoing vertical wind shear at their northerly latitudes . The main problem with this rule is that the rainfall observing network is denser than either the synoptic reporting network or the first order station networks , which means the absolute maximum is likely to be underestimated . Another problem is that it does not take the size of the tropical cyclone or topography into account . 
 = Partition ( song ) = 
 " Partition " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her self @-@ titled fifth studio album released in 2013 . Beyoncé co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the song with Justin Timberlake , Timbaland , Jerome " J @-@ Roc " Harmon , Dwane " Key Wane " Weir , and Mike Dean , with extra writing from The @-@ Dream and extra production from Jordy " Boots " Asher . The song was sent to urban contemporary on February 25 , 2014 as the third single from Beyoncé by Columbia Records . 
 The song consists of two parts , individually titled " Yoncé " and " Partition " . " Partition " has been described as " electro @-@ R & B " also known as PBR & B that moves " from a sweet , girl @-@ group pop sound to Dirty South hip @-@ hop " . Its production musically consists of a sparse synthesized arrangement , a thrusting bassline and a heavy drumbeat giving it elements of electro @-@ R & B. Exploring the deep , sexual nature of Beyoncé , " Partition " depicts sexual intercourse in the back of a limousine . The closing minute of the song features a French word interpolation similar to a quote by actress Julianne Moore in the 1998 film The Big Lebowski . 
 " Partition " was widely acclaimed by contemporary music critics , who commended Beyoncé 's advocacy for freedom and confidence in the expression of female sexuality . They also praised the catchy lyrics ; the Monica Lewinsky reference in the second part of " Partition " became known as one of the most memorable lines within the album . Beyoncé was complimented for her half @-@ rapped vocal delivery and received comparisons to British recording artist M.I.A. Following the album 's release , " Partition " picked up airplay on United States urban contemporary radio stations . It has since peaked at number 23 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , number nine on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart . 
 Accompanying music videos for " Yoncé " and " Partition " were released on December 13 , 2013 , on Beyoncé . The former clip was directed by Ricky Saiz and filmed on the streets of Brooklyn , New York , while the latter was directed by Jake Nava and shot at the Parisian cabaret club , Crazy Horse . Both " Yoncé " and " Partition " were added to the setlist and performed live during the second European leg of The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) and later during the On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) and The Formation World Tour ( 2016 ) . Both of the songs were performed at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards as part of a medley of the singer 's eponymous album . 
 = = Conception and release = = 
 " Partition " was written by Terius Nash , Justin Timberlake , Timothy Mosley , Beyoncé , Jerome Harmon , Dwane Weir , Charisse Hill and Mike Dean . The production was handled by Timberlake , Beyoncé , Dean , Jordy " Boots " Asher as well as Mosley , Harmon and Wane under their stage names Timbaland , J @-@ Roc and Key Wane respectively . " Partition " was conceived as a two @-@ part song , the first part of which is called " Yoncé " . The latter 's original drumbeat was created by Timberlake on a bucket . Mike Dean then added the dropping 808 's lead synths , claps and strings . Beyoncé described the sound that he created as " organic " and said , " It reminded me of being in middle school during the lunch breaks , when you just start free @-@ styling . " The trio decided to keep the buckets as Beyoncé wanted an organic production . Then The @-@ Dream started writing some of the lyrics including , " Yoncé all on his mouth like liquor " . Beyoncé found it awkward at the beginning but she soon loved the phrase , which lead to the birth of her new alter ego , Yoncé . The singer revealed that she was " embarrassed " after she recorded " Partition " because of its overtly sexual lyrics . Speaking about how the other part of the song materialized , Beyoncé said : 
 It takes me back to being in my car as a teenager . It takes me back to when me and my husband first meet , and he tries to scoop me and he thinks I 'm the hottest thing in the world . I kinda had this whole fantasy of being in the car , and this whole movie played in my head . I didn 't have a pen and paper . I got to the mic , I 'm like , ' Oh , press <unk> 
 The song was produced at the Jungle City Studios and Oven Studios in New York City . Once the musical arrangements were done by the production team , the music was recorded by Stuart White , Chris Godbey , Ann Mincieli and Bart Schoudel . White and Tony Maserati mixed the track while the audio engineering was carried out by James Krausse and Matt Weber with assistance from Justin Hergett , Chris <unk> and Matt Wiggers ; the second engineer was Ramon Rivas . The audio mastering was done by Tom Coyne and Aya Merrill . Timberlake and Timbaland served as backing vocalists and recorded the vocals of Beyoncé . The spoken section towards the end of " Partition " was recorded by <unk> Fahmy , one of Beyoncé 's dancers . " Partition " officially impacted US urban contemporary radio on February 25 , 2014 as the third single from Beyoncé . " Partition " also officially impacted radio stations in Italy on March 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Partition " has been described as " electro @-@ R & B " that moves " from a sweet , girl @-@ group pop sound to Dirty South hip @-@ hop " . It builds on a slinky Caribbean groove and spacey heavy beats provided by Roland TR @-@ 808 toms and bass drums . The track also musically consists of sparse synthesizer pulses , little swoops and finger snaps . The lyrics are candidly sexual ; Melissa Locker of Time magazine wrote that " Partition " leaves no sexual innuendo unturned . Commenting on Beyoncé 's vocal styles and experimentation on the track , Annie Zaleski of Las Vegas Weekly noted that she displays much attitude through her lines and ornaments her singing with trills — rapid alternations between two adjacent notes , usually a semitone or tone apart . Zaleski further wrote that Beyoncé adopts a doo @-@ wop vocal @-@ based style to sing some of the lyrics and even utters occasional purrs — murmuring sounds expressive of pleasure . 
 The song begins with a short call @-@ and @-@ response audio clip from The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour as Beyoncé asks the crowd " Lemme [ sic ] hear you say ' <unk> [ sic ] Ms. Carter ! ' " . It then transitions into what Andrew Hampp of Billboard magazine called the " lady thug anthem " of " Yoncé " . Beyoncé delivers half @-@ rapped verses on the first half of the song , in which the female protagonist teases male subjects in a club as she turns heads . In the first verse , she warns the other women in the club , " Every girl on here gotta look me up and down / All on Instagram cake by the pound " . The singer adds on the second verse , " I sneezed on the beat and the beat got sicker . " " Yoncé " closes with the bridge as Beyoncé sings repeatedly , " Yoncé all on his mouth like liquor " , while an ascending siren echoes over a staccato bass that hits heavily and uniformly in the background . 
 The second part , titled " Partition " , is preceded by the sound of paparazzi camera clicks and a window whirring up , which separates it from the first part " Yoncé " . " Partition " has a fractured production and is lyrically about the female protagonist having sex with her romantic interest in the backseat of a limousine . Caitlin White , writing for The 405 , highlighted that the song details a romantic relationship in which women do not act as sexual objects during sexual intercourse but rather use " the physical act of love as a form of agency " , from which they derive pleasure . " Partition " gained significant attention for its explicit lyrics , with frequent references made to the opening lines of the first verse in which Beyoncé asks her driver to put up the partition . 
 On the hook lines , Beyoncé adopts whispery vocals , singing that she wants to please her man , " Take all of me / I just wanna be the girl you like , girl you like " . The closing minute of the song features a French spoken word interpolation , which translates roughly as : " Do you like sex ? Sex . I mean , the physical activity . Coitus . Do you like it ? You 're not interested in sex ? Men think that feminists hate sex , but it 's a very stimulating and natural activity that women love " . David Haglund and Forrest Wickman of Slate magazine noted similarities between this spoken section and a similar quote by actress Julianne Moore in 1998 film The Big Lebowski . In May 2014 , during an interview with Vanity Fair , Lewinsky addressed the lyrics of the song mentioning her , saying , " Thanks , Beyoncé , but if we 're <unk> , I think you meant ' Bill Clinton 'd all on my gown ' " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Partition " received universal acclaim from contemporary critics , who commended its experimental production and sexual yet catchy lyrics . The line , " He Monica Lewinsky @-@ ed all on my gown " , was covered in several reviews and pointed out as one of the most memorable from the album . Glenn Gamboa of Newsday wrote that Beyoncé " channels her inner Prince , moving from a sweet , girl @-@ group pop sound to Dirty South hip @-@ hop " . Michael Cragg of The Guardian highlighted that Beyoncé gives the best explanation of the album 's raison d 'être through the line , " Radio say speed it up / I just go slower " . He further commended the way Beyoncé half @-@ raps " with a delicious snarl " in the first part of the song . Many critics , including Una <unk> of The Irish Times and Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune welcomed Beyoncé 's rapping on " Partition " and compared it to the work of British recording artist M.I.A. Andrew Barker of Variety magazine highlighted that among the songs that discuss sexuality on Beyoncé , " none hold a candle to the absolutely scorching ' Partition ' " . He also praised how Beyoncé " toss [ es ] off a few old @-@ school battle rhymes " with the line , " I sneezed on the beat , and the beat got sicker " , being a standout . Similarly , Miles Marshall Lewis of Ebony magazine noted that lines like , " I sneezed on the beat and the beat got sicker / Yoncé all on his mouth like liquor " , would make listeners smile . He praised how Beyoncé " spills lyrics ... in a confident flow " and concluded , " As a singing rapper , she 's still way more precious than ferocious . " 
 Andrew Hampp of Billboard magazine commended the memorability of the lyrics and wrote that " ' Partition ' is yet another ' gettin ’ freaky with my baby ' jam , with some of Bey 's most frankly sexual lines yet . " Similarly , Eliana Dockterman of Time magazine hailed the lyrical content of " Partition " ; she noted that it suitably exemplifies " embodiment of modern feminism for a generation that has been reluctant to claim the word " and further praised how Beyoncé " express [ es ] her desire to please [ her partner ] while still projecting a fierce , independent persona " . Melissa Locker , also writing for Time magazine , suggested that Beyoncé should work with Timbaland more often as " his sultry beats paired with her R @-@ rated lyrics and the catchy chorus ' It took 45 minutes to get all dressed up / And we ain ’ t even gonna make it to this club ' , make a captivating combination " . Chris Bosman of the same publication wrote an extensive review of the song : 
 But Beyoncé is far from being all sentiment . Because a large part of being Beyoncé in America in 2013 is being a sexual creature and not only being unafraid of that fact , but reveling — and reveling confidently — in it . The amorphous , shifting Houston @-@ trap @-@ meets @-@ Noah Shebib trunk rattler ' Partition ' exemplifies this particular sentiment . On the track , the Queen Bey tells her driver to put the partition up because ' I don ’ t need you seeing ' Yoncé on her knees ' ; uses Monica Lewinsky as a euphemism for her man finishing on her clothing ; reveals that ' he like to call me Peaches when we get this nasty ' ; and repeats that it took her ' 45 minutes to get all dressed up / and we ain ’ t even gonna make it to this club ' . And in maybe the wildest moment in an album full of bold moves , Beyoncé actually slips in the French translation of Julianne Moore 's ' Feminists love sex ' monologue from The Big Lebowski . 
 Ryan B. Patrick of Exclaim ! noted that songs in the vein of " Partition " effectively display genre diversity , Beyoncé 's vocal range and " a penchant of musical experimentation " . Matthew Perpetua of BuzzFeed praised the French spoken section on " Partition " , comparing it to the Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie sample on " Flawless " as she added : " It 's good that these ideas aren 't directly expressed by Beyoncé herself – in context , these bits are like reblogged quotes that frame her artistic intentions – because she knows she doesn ’ t need to be so didactic when she 's actually singing about sex , and to do so would defeat her point about owning her pleasures . " Caitlin White of The 405 wrote extensively of " Partition " as a song that effectively shows that Beyoncé " catapults herself out of her very femininity into personhood by positioning female sexuality as a powerful , amorphous <unk> that transcends the female body even while uplifting it . " White concluded that the singer does not exalt herself to become " the highest sex object or an egotistical pop princess " but anoints herself " as sexual goddess , she is at once desiring and desired , fulfilled and fulfilling " . Mikael Wood of Los Angeles Times wrote that " the spooky , almost perversely stripped @-@ down ' Partition ' reflect [ s ] [ Beyoncé 's ] determination , rare among superstars , to keep pushing creatively " . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 In the annual Pazz and Jop mass critics poll of the year 's best in music in 2013 , " Partition " was ranked at number 124 . In July the following year , the writers of Spin magazine placed it at number four on the list of the 57 best songs so <unk> placed it at number four on the list of the 57 best songs so far , with a writer of the publication noting something " intensely gratifying about all the raunchiness on the strip @-@ tease , booty @-@ dropping banger " and added that it " oozes <unk> swag and immediately became a coy anthem for pop @-@ loving women ; a song to flash and strut and snap to , and not only because the beat does too " . Pitchfork Media listed the song 26th on its year @-@ end list for 2014 . Cosmopolitan editor Eliza Thompson ranked " Partition " as the Best Song of 2014 on her year @-@ end list . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the US Billboard Hot 100 , " Partition " debuted at number 86 for the week ending January 25 , 2014 without being released as a single . Following several weeks of spending different positions on the chart , it moved from 97 to its peak position of 23 for the week ending March 15 , 2014 in its eighth week of charting . The song spent a total of 21 weeks on the chart and it was last seen at the position of 44 . " Partition " became Beyoncé 's tenth number @-@ one on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Airplay chart , extending her record for the most leaders among women . It also became Beyoncé 's twentieth number @-@ one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the issue dated May 17 , 2014 , making her the third artist with the most number @-@ ones on the chart , behind Madonna ( 43 ) and Rihanna ( 22 ) . In January 2015 , it was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) denoting shipment of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies in that country . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Partition " entered the UK Singles Chart and the UK R & B Chart , at numbers 90 and 15 respectively on March 8 , 2014 . The following week , it moved to 74 and 12 on the charts respectively , which eventually became its peak positions . In Ireland , the single entered the Irish Singles Chart at its peak position of number 57 for the week ending March 13 , 2014 . The next week , which also marked its last , it fell to the position of 83 spending a total of two weeks on the chart . <unk> , " Partition " charted on the Ultratip charts in both regions of Belgium , ( Wallonia and Flanders ) , in France and in South Korea . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 Music videos for " Yoncé " and " Partition " were released on December 13 , 2013 on Beyoncé through the iTunes Store . The video for " Partition " was uploaded to Beyoncé 's official Vevo account on February 25 , 2014 while the one for " Yoncé " was uploaded on November 24 , 2014 to coincide with the release of Beyoncé : Platinum Edition . 
 = = = " Yoncé " = = = 
 = = = = Background and concept = = = = 
 The video for " Yoncé " was directed by Ricky Saiz , and features fashion and video models Chanel Iman , Jourdan Dunn and Joan Smalls . Filming took place on the streets of Brooklyn , New York . The director wanted to add " a raw , kind of lo @-@ fi , very New York kind of grimy , dark aesthetic " to the video . Through the clip , Beyoncé introduces viewers to her new alter ego Yoncé , whose preferences include Brooklyn , her grill , and " being the hottest girl in the club " . Beyoncé was inspired by the visuals of the 1990 David Fincher @-@ directed video for George Michael 's " Freedom " and she conceptualized of a " contemporary , street version " of the clip for " Yoncé " . " Freedom " similarly featured the lip @-@ sync performance of several contemporary supermodels . 
 Saiz wanted to keep the video mostly in the moment without much narrative ; he said , " [ I ] wanted it to be more about the girls , doing the performance with Beyoncé taking a backseat as a kind of madam character " ; in order to convey that idea , the singer does not sing the song 's lyrics in the video . He envisioned the clip as being " sexy and provocative , but not so overt " , leaning to more sophisticated visuals . In an interview with New York magazine , Saiz affirmed that there are many references to 1990s eroticism and the 1995 video for " Human Nature " by American singer Madonna in the clip for " Yoncé " . Elaborating further on the video shoot , Saiz told BuzzFeed , " The girls were incredible . Everyone kind of checked whatever ego at the door and we were all there to make something fun and special . " He described the cast as being " spontaneous and not at all contrived " . Joan Smalls revealed during an interview that the crew did not follow a certain script while filming and added it was " up for interpretation " - she mentioned the scene where she licks Beyoncé 's breast as her own idea , getting inspiration from the song 's lyrics . 
 = = = = Synopsis and reception = = = = 
 The video for " Yoncé " opens with a close @-@ up shot of a woman 's mouth . Beyoncé and the models are dressed by Karen Langley in leather , fishnets , and straps as they pose against a brick wall , with cameras showing flashes of skin , close @-@ ups of lips , and erotic tongue flicks . During one point in the video , Smalls is seen licking the singer 's chest . In one scene , Beyoncé sports a molded bodysuit by Yves Saint Laurent with pierced nipples . During another scene , she is seen with denim shorts , a leather jacket with leopard @-@ print sleeves and a necklace by All Saints <unk> . She is also seen wearing a cut @-@ out orange bodysuit by Hervé Leger with a coat and heels . The clip ends with the singer walking on a runway with photographers taking pictures of her and shouting her name . The final scene was meant to be in line with the lyrics " Welcome to Paris " and help it transition to the song 's second part , " Partition " . 
 Allison Davis of New York magazine described the video for " Yoncé " as a " contemporary , gritty and voyeuristic " with " nineties @-@ era eroticism and subtle sexuality " , before summarizing the visual as " two minutes and four seconds of fashion and sex " . Michael Zelenko of The Fader found a " hyper @-@ sexualized vision of ruby @-@ red lips , tongues , booty shorts and fish @-@ net body suits " being presented in the clip . Conor Behan of The Independent dubbed " Yoncé " as a " street @-@ wise update " of George Michael 's " Freedom ! ' 90 " . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis described the video as " super sexy " further praising the singer 's showcased persona . Joanna <unk> from The New York Times described the look of the character Beyoncé portrayed in the video for the song as " [ f ] <unk> " . Whitney Phaneuf of the website HitFix noted its concept to be a street styled runway and concluded " The four women pose in gritty back alleys and against brick walls , projecting a tough and seductive image that matches the song . " Nicole James of the website Fuse called the clip very " sexy " . Erin Donnelly of the website Refinery29 deemed the clip one of the " sexiest offerings " by the singer yet . Lindsey Weber writing for Vulture noted that Beyoncé was hardly outshined by the models in the visual . Vanity Fair editor Michelle Collins praised the fact that the singer was brave enough to " surround herself with three of the world 's most beautiful supermodels " . A more mixed review came from Brent DiCrescenzo from Time Out magazine who remarked that the shooting for the video lasted only several hours . 
 = = = " Partition " = = = 
 = = = = Background and concept = = = = 
 The video for " Partition " was directed by Jake Nava and was shot at the Parisian cabaret club , Crazy Horse . It was filmed quickly as Jay @-@ Z had to travel to London for a concert after the shooting . In a video commentary to the album , Beyoncé said : " The day that I got engaged was my husband 's birthday and I took him to Crazy Horse . And I remember thinking , ' Damn , these girls are fly . ' I just thought it was the ultimate sexy show I 've ever seen . And I was like , ' I wish I was up there , I wish I could perform that for my man ... ' So that 's what I did for the video . " Talking about the video , Nava noted that for the shooting Beyoncé was trying to be " even more risque than she 's been in the past " . While filming , he further tried to " create and capture a bit of genuine intimacy " between the singer and her husband . During a commentary about the video for the song , Beyoncé revealed her motivation to film it by saying , 
 " I was 195 pounds when I gave birth ... I worked crazily to get my body back . I wanted to show my body . I wanted to show that you can have a child and you can work hard and you can get your body back . I know that there 's so many women that feel the same thing after they give birth . You can have your child and you can still have fun and still be sexy and still have dreams and still live for yourself . I 'm not embarrassed about it , and I don 't feel like I have to protect that side of me because I do believe that sexuality is a power we all have . " 
 = = = = Synopsis = = = = 
 The story of the video was meant to illustrate the lyrics of the song . It depicts the sexual fantasies of a rich and bored housewife played by Beyoncé who tries to seduce her man while having breakfast at her house wearing a white robe . The video opens with various shots of a big mansion in which the singer is seen in one of the rooms . She tries to get her man 's attention while he reads a newspaper . As he does not notice her , she throws a napkin on the floor and her female servant comes to lift it . The clip transitions to scenes of Beyoncé dressed in a Victorian jeweled outfit with a mask in her hands , lip @-@ syncing the lyrics and dancing to the rhythm of the song . Afterwards , she is seen entering a limousine in which Jay @-@ Z is already inside . Scenes of Beyoncé with a black coat and lingerie walking in front of the car are also intertwined throughout . 
 The car stops in front of the club Crazy Horse . The following scenes show the singer emerging in a different set with a black background , as well as dancing atop a grand piano . Later , she is seen with female hands on her body as she dances seductively . Other scenes show her wearing lingerie and performing a pole dance with several other female dancers . Shortly afterwards , Beyoncé performs a choreographed chair dance across a purple background as Jay @-@ Z is seen in the audience watching her while smoking a cigar . The end of the video shows the singer dancing with another woman next to her to a projected cheetah print . The last seconds cut to the breakfast table where Beyoncé is seen . For the video , the singer wears an archival corset by Christian Lacroix , lace gloves by Chanel , and a crystal mask by Atelier Swarovski . 
 = = = = Reception = = = = 
 In a video review , Jon Blistein from Rolling Stone described it as " extravagant , scintillating " , further praising the dance moves . He concluded that the ending was in a classic " it @-@ was @-@ all @-@ a @-@ dream fashion " when the scenes cut back to the beginning . Melinda Newman , writing for HitFix described it as NSFW , highly stylized and a reclaim of the singer 's sexuality . Whitney <unk> of the same website praised the clip as the best on Beyoncé , further highlighting its " unforgettable song / video combination " accompanied with eroticism and Beyoncé 's post @-@ child sexuality . Melissa Locker , writing for Time stated that the singer went " properly XXX " for the " hot " clip and added that it would make viewers think differently about the word " peaches " . Edwin Ortiz of Complex felt that during the various wardrobe changes , each outfit was better than the previous . Ashley Lee from The Hollywood Reporter classified the visual as " ornate " and opined that Beyoncé portrayed an aristocrat daydreaming about affection . Similarly , Michael Zelenko of The Fader described her character as an aristocrat " in desperate need of physical attention " and noted similarities with the film True Lies in the strip scene . John Boone from E ! Online praised the overall sexiness of the video and the singer 's look in various scenes . Hailing the video " steamy " , Dan Reilly of Spin noted the variety of revealing outfits worn by Beyoncé and concluded " [ t ] here 's no nudity , but the video certainly comes close " . Writing on behalf of Vanity Fair , Michelle Collins stated in her review , " If you 're a fan of gorgeously choreographed burlesque routines , as well as women in their thirties who defy the logic of <unk> , ' Partition ' is a good starting off point in your journey through Beyoncé 's ' Beyoncé . ' " Alice Newbold of The Daily Telegraph hailed the explicit nature of the video stating how it showed Beyoncé as " one sassy lady on a mission to show she 's back in the game " . 
 Conor Behan of The Independent qualified the clip as being " effortlessly sexy " . Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone described the video for the song as the most NSFW from the album . Brent DiCrescenzo of Time Out referred to the clip for " Partition " as a classic MTV video . A more negative review came from The Verge 's Trent Wolbe who panned Nava 's contribution to the album as uninteresting . The Daily Telegraph writer Sarah Crompton stated that the video looked suitable for a porn website and described its imagery as " strip club dressed up as a Busby Berkeley musical " . Crompton went on to call the message the video sent " peculiar " and added that the singer should try to become a better role model for young girls . Vivienne Pattison of Mediawatch @-@ uk commented that such visuals showed that Beyoncé had " sold out " and undermined her position as a " role model " and previous " powerful messages that empowered women and girls " . In early March 2014 , Bill O 'Reilly criticized the video for " Partition " during his show The O 'Reilly Factor broadcast on Fox News . He said that it represented glorification of sex in the back of a limousine and offered critique that teenage girls are influenced by the singer , adding , " Why would she do it when she knows the devastation that unwanted pregnancies ... and fractured families [ ... ] I think Beyoncé , what she has done here , is inexplicable " . In response to these claims , Rutger University 's Kevin Allred argues that " Beyonce isn ’ t sensationalizing her own body and putting it on display for viewers to gawk at . Rather , she performs the historical objectification of black female bodies and replays that objectification in order to point out that , stereotypically , black women have had few means of garnering attention beyond sexual performances . She goes so far as forcing the viewer to be complicit in this objectification by positioning them as the direct viewer of the show she is enacting . " The video was nominated in the category for Video of the Year at the 2014 BET Awards . At the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards it was nominated in the categories for Best Choreography and Best Female Video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Both " Yoncé " and " Partition " were part of the setlist of the second European leg of The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour with the first performance of both tracks taking place in Glasgow at the SSE Hydro arena on February 20 , 2014 . During the performance of the songs , Beyoncé performed similar choreographies to the ones seen in the music videos of the songs with her background dancers . The end of " Partition " saw Beyoncé appearing with a silhouette , dancing on a couch . While reviewing one of the concerts of the tour , Robert Copsey from Digital Spy noted that the chair dance performed during " Partition " was the dancing highlight of the show . Graeme Virtue of The Guardian felt that " Partition " along with " Blow " and " Naughty Girl " , " make [ s ] a persuasive case for Mrs Carter , the unstoppable sex machine " . BBC News ' Mark Savage felt that " her new material [ from Beyoncé ] showcases an unparalleled variety of vocal styles , ranges and phrasing " during the concert , something he noticed in the " urban swagger " of " Yoncé " . 
 " Partition " and " Yoncé " were part of the setlist of Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z 's co @-@ headlining On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) where both of the songs were performed separately . The performance of " Partition " opened with a new half @-@ minute explicit rap verse sang by Jay @-@ Z seated as crimson light illuminated him . After he finished his part , Beyoncé appeared on stage in front of a digital screen dancing along with her female dancers on stripper poles . Consequence of Sound 's Alex Young chose the song as one of the particular highlights of the show . A pre @-@ recorded performance from that tour was broadcast at the 2014 BET Awards on June 29 , 2014 . Lily Harrison of E ! Online felt that the pair " certainly brought the house down with their sexy performance " while praising Beyoncé 's look and accurately performed choreography . Maurice Bobb on behalf of MTV News felt that the BET Awards " saved the best for last " and described the performance as " exciting " despite being pre @-@ recorded . Adam Fleischer of the same publication felt that the rapper was " sprinkling his classic Jay flair all over " in his verse during the performance . Spin editor Colin Joyce found the duo 's delivery of the song to be " stunning " . In 2016 , " Partition " and " Yoncé " were part of the setlist during The Formation World Tour . 
 " <unk> " and " Yoncé " were both performed by Beyoncé at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards on August 25 as part of a medley consisting of songs from her fifth studio album ; she appeared wearing a bejeweled bodysuit and performed a dance choreography on a pole for the former song ; " Yoncé " was performed later during her set . HitFix writer Melinda Newman noted that the performance of " Partition " emulated looks and poses from its clip . Nadeska Alexis from MTV News felt that the singer kept the audience " lifted " with the performance of " Yoncé " . In a review of her performance , Hilary Hughes of Fuse noted the performance " elicited nothing but chills and rapturous screams " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On January 9 , 2014 , Azealia Banks posted an unofficial remix of the song to her Soundcloud account , featuring Busta Rhymes . Their remix of the song has an extended intro lasting 90 seconds with the rappers singing " dirty " bars . Reviewers were critical of Rhymes ' contribution to the remix , with Spin 's Marc Hogan calling it " conventionally <unk> " , and Hayden Manders of Refinery29 suggesting it " take [ s ] the tease of the original 's writing and turn [ s ] it into sleaze . " Banks ' effort was contrastingly hailed for " delivering the <unk> wordplay that brought her to acclaim while wisely avoiding trying to beat either of the track 's other artists for sheer bawdiness " by Hogan and " working perfectly with the deep , subdued beat of Beyoncé 's original " by Carolyn Menyes from the website Music Times . 
 Upon the release of the album and " Partition " , the song has been covered by multiple dance crews on YouTube . Writing for Billboard , William <unk> and Jason Lipshutz thought that the dance videos uploaded to YouTube helped " Partition " to appear on charts such as the Hot 100 , although there were no official videos released as well as the audio was not available via digital retailers such as Spotify or Pandora . They further compared " Partition " to " Harlem Shake " , which performed well on charts due to viral videos , later created the meme with the same name . However they also noted the differences that " Partition " was mostly covered by professional choreographers , unlike " Harlem Shake " . On March 13 , 2014 , Vanessa Hudgens posted a video where she performed a choreography for " Yoncé " by Michelle " Jersey " <unk> , along with four female dancers . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Beyoncé 's website . 
 Video credits 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Millwall F.C. = 
 Millwall Football Club ( / <unk> / or locally [ <unk> ] ) is a professional association football club based in Bermondsey , South East London , England . The team play in League One , the third tier of English football . Founded as Millwall Rovers in 1885 , the club has retained its name despite having last played in the Millwall area of the Isle of Dogs in 1910 . From then until 1993 the club played at The Den , a now @-@ demolished stadium in New Cross , before moving to its current home stadium nearby , also called The Den . 
 The traditional club crest is a lion rampant , referred to in the team 's nickname " The Lions " . Millwall 's traditional kit consists of blue shirts , white shorts and blue socks . Millwall have a long @-@ standing rivalry with West Ham United . The local derby between the two sides has been contested almost 100 times since 1899 . In the media , Millwall 's supporters have often been associated with hooliganism , with numerous films having been made fictionalising their notoriety . The fans are renowned for their chant " No one likes us , we don 't care " which is sung to the tune of Sailing by Rod Stewart . 
 In 2004 , the team reached the final of the FA Cup and , in doing so , qualified for the UEFA Cup the following season , playing in Europe for the first time in their history . The club has also reached FA Cup semi @-@ finals on another four occasions , in 1900 , 1903 , 1937 and 2013 . Millwall have spent the majority of their existence competing in the second or third tier of the Football League . The team spent two seasons in the top flight between 1988 – 90 , in which the club achieved its highest ever finish of tenth place in the First Division . Based on all results during the club 's 89 seasons in the Football League from 1920 – 21 to 2015 – 16 , Millwall are ranked as the 39th most successful club in English football . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings and relocation : 1885 – 1919 = = = 
 Millwall Rovers were formed by the workers of J.T. Morton 's canning and preserve factory in the Millwall area of the Isle of Dogs in London 's East End in 1885 . Founded in Aberdeen in 1849 to supply sailing ships with food , the company opened their first English cannery and food processing plant at Millwall dock in 1872 and attracted a workforce from across the country , including the east coast of Scotland , primarily Dundee . The club secretary was 17 @-@ year @-@ old Jasper Sexton , the son of the landlord of The Islander pub in Tooke Street where Millwall held their club meetings . Millwall Rovers ' first fixture was held on a piece of waste ground on Glengall Road , on 3 October 1885 against Fillebrook , a team that played in Leytonstone . The newly formed team were beaten 5 – 0 . 
 Rovers found a better playing surface for the 1886 – 87 season , at the rear of the Lord Nelson pub and it became known as the Lord Nelson Ground . In November 1886 , the East End Football Association was formed , along with the Senior Cup Competition . Millwall made it to the final against London Caledonians , which was played at Leyton Cricket Ground . The match finished 2 – 2 and the teams shared the cup for six months each . Millwall won the East London Senior Cup at the first attempt . The club also won it the following two years , and the trophy became their property . 
 In April 1889 , a resolution was passed for Millwall to drop ' Rovers ' from their name and they were now playing under the name Millwall Athletic , inspired by their move to their new home The Athletic Grounds . They were founding members of the Southern Football League which they won for the first two years of its existence , and were runners @-@ up in its third . They were forced to move to a new ground North Greenwich in 1901 , as the Millwall Dock Company wanted to use their land as a <unk> . Millwall Athletic reached the FA Cup semi @-@ finals in 1900 and 1903 , and were also champions of the Western Football League in 1908 and 1909 . 
 Millwall moved to a new stadium , named The Den , in New Cross , South London in 1910 . The club had previously occupied four different grounds in the 25 years since their formation in East London ; limited expansion space on the Isle of Dogs meant The Lions had to move to boost support and attendances . The estimated cost of The Den was £ 10 @,@ 000 . The first match played at the new ground was on 22 October 1910 against reigning Southern League champions Brighton & Hove Albion , who won 1 – 0 . 
 = = = Entering the Football League : 1920 – 1939 = = = 
 Millwall , who had now also dropped ' Athletic ' from its name , were invited to join the Football League in 1920 for the 1920 – 21 season , along with 22 other clubs , through the creation of the new Football League Third Division . The Southern League was shorn of its status , with almost all its clubs deciding to leave — Millwall followed suit . Millwall 's first Football League match was on 28 August 1920 at The Den , and they were 2 – 0 winners against Bristol Rovers . 
 In the 1925 – 26 season Millwall had 11 consecutive clean sheets , a Football League record , which they hold jointly with York City and Reading . Millwall became known as a hard @-@ fighting Cup team and competed in various memorable matches , notably defeating three @-@ time league winners and reigning champions Huddersfield Town 3 – 1 in the third round of the 1926 – 27 FA Cup . In the 1927 – 28 season Millwall won the Third Division South title and scored 87 goals at home in the league , an English record which still stands . Matches against Sunderland and Derby County saw packed crowds of 48 @,@ 000 @-@ plus in the 1930s and 1940s . Their 1937 FA Cup run saw Millwall reach the semi @-@ finals for the third time , and a fifth round game against Derby still stands as Millwall 's record attendance of 48 @,@ 762 . Millwall were the 11th best supported team in England in 1939 , despite being in the Second Division . Millwall were one of the most financially wealthy clubs in England . The club proposed plans to improve the Den and signed international players . Winger Reg ' JR ' Smith was capped twice , scoring two goals for England in 1938 . The Lions were pushing for promotion to the First Division toward the end of the decade , but one week into the 1939 – 40 season , World War II broke out and Millwall were robbed of their aim . 
 = = = Wartime doldrums , wounded Lions : 1940 – 1965 = = = 
 On 7 April 1945 , Millwall appeared in a Football League War Cup final at Wembley Stadium against Chelsea , but because it was a wartime cup final it is not acknowledged in the record books . With the war in Europe in its last days , the number of spectators allowed to attend games was relaxed . The attendance was 90 @,@ 000 , the largest crowd Millwall have ever played in front of , which included King George VI , whom the team were introduced to before kick @-@ off . 
 The loss of so many young men during the Second World War made it difficult for clubs to retain their former status . This was especially true for Millwall , who appeared to suffer more than most . From being one of the country 's biggest clubs before the war , Millwall were reduced to one of its smallest afterward . The Den sustained severe bomb damage on 19 April 1943 , and one week later a fire , determined to have been caused by a discarded cigarette , also destroyed an entire stand . The club accepted offers from neighbours Charlton Athletic , Crystal Palace and West Ham United to stage games at their grounds . On 24 February 1944 , Millwall returned to The Den , to play in an all @-@ standing stadium . This was achieved with considerable volunteer labour by Lions fans . One of the biggest Cup upsets came in the fourth round of the 1956 – 57 FA Cup on 26 January 1957 , when Millwall beat Newcastle United 2 – 1 in front of a crowd of 45 @,@ 646 . At the time the club was fighting for Third Division survival . 
 During the late 1950s and early 1960s Millwall 's form was poor , and they were relegated into ( and became a founding member of ) Division Four . The first time in their history they had competed in the fourth tier of English football , which they remained in for four seasons until 1962 . They returned for the 1964 – 65 season , but were immediately promoted . This is the last time Millwall played in the fourth tier . 
 = = = Unbeaten records and the class of ' 71 : 1966 – 1987 = = = 
 Later in the decade , Millwall established a record of 59 home games without defeat ( 43 wins and 16 draws ) from 22 August 1964 to 14 January 1967 . During this spell , Millwall played 55 different teams , kept 35 clean sheets , scored 112 goals and conceded 33 . This was thanks largely to managers Billy Gray , who laid the foundations , and Benny Fenton , a former player who continued to build on Gray 's side . All the players , which included winger Barry Rowan , goalkeeper Alex Stepney and strikers Hugh Curran and Len Julians , were presented with a commemorative gold cigarette lighter by the Football Association . The record was eventually broken by Liverpool , who were unbeaten for 63 games at home between 1978 and 1981 . 
 In the early 1970s , the Millwall team included many notable and memorable players , now remembered by some fans as " The Class of ' 71 " . This was a team that included ; goalkeeper Bryan King , defender Harry Cripps , goalscoring midfielder Derek <unk> , Millwall 's most capped international player to date , Eamon Dunphy and the club 's longest serving player , Barry Kitchener . They missed out on promotion to Division One by one point . By remaining unbeaten at home in Division Two for the 1971 – 72 season , Millwall became the only club to go through an entire season without losing a match at home in four different divisions 1927 – 28 Division Three South , 1964 – 65 Division Four , 1965 – 66 Division Three and 1971 – 72 Division Two . In 1974 , Millwall hosted the first game to be played on a Sunday against Fulham . The Lions reached the quarter @-@ finals of the League Cup in 1974 , and again in 1977 . 
 George Graham managed Millwall from 1983 to 1986 , and during that time he guided the club to a Football League Group Cup win , beating Lincoln City 3 – 2 in the final in the 1982 – 83 season . The 1984 – 85 season was particularly successful , Millwall reached the FA Cup quarter @-@ finals and gained promotion to the Second Division , going unbeaten at home again in Division Three , winning 18 games and drawing five . In the FA Cup they were beaten 1 – 0 by First Division Luton Town at Kenilworth Road . The match is remembered for all the wrong reasons , after hooligans rioted at the game . 81 people ( including 31 police officers ) were injured in the disturbances . 
 = = = The top flight and new stadium : 1988 – 1996 = = = 
 Graham 's replacement was Glaswegian John Docherty . In his second season as manager , Millwall won the Second Division championship and gained promotion to the top flight of English football for the first time in the club 's history . Starting the 1988 – 89 season strongly , Millwall topped the league on 1 October 1988 having played six games ( winning four and drawing two ) and rarely slipped out of the top five before Christmas . This was mainly due to Tony Cascarino and Teddy Sheringham , who scored 99 goals between them in three seasons playing together . Millwall 's first top division season ended with a tenth @-@ place finish , which was the lowest place occupied by the club all season . The following season , they briefly led the league for one night in September 1989 after beating Coventry City 4 – 1 , but won only two more games all season and were relegated in 20th place at the end of the 1989 – 90 season . 
 Just before relegation was confirmed , Docherty was sacked and replaced by ex @-@ Middlesbrough manager Bruce Rioch . Striker Teddy Sheringham , who later played for England and was the highest @-@ scoring player throughout the Football League in the 1990 – 91 season , was sold to Nottingham Forest for £ 2 million after Millwall 's 6 – 2 defeat to Brighton & Hove Albion in the Second Division play @-@ offs . Rioch left Millwall in 1992 to be succeeded by Irish defender Mick McCarthy . McCarthy guided Millwall to third place in the new Division One at the end of the 1993 – 94 season . This was their first season at a new ground , at first known as The New Den ( to distinguish it from its predecessor ) but now called simply The Den , which was opened by the Labour party leader John Smith on 4 August 1993 . The new ground was the first all @-@ seater stadium to be built in England after the Taylor report on the Hillsborough disaster . The Lions knocked Arsenal out of the 1994 – 95 FA Cup in a third @-@ round replay , beating them 2 – 0 at Highbury . They also reached the quarter @-@ finals of the League Cup in 1995 . Millwall lost 5 – 1 on aggregate to Derby County in the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals that same 1994 – 95 season , in a tie blighted by crowd trouble . McCarthy resigned to take charge of the Republic of Ireland national team on 5 February 1996 , shortly after Millwall had been knocked off the top of the Division One table by Sunderland , following a 6 – 0 defeat . 
 = = = Relegation and administration : 1997 – 2000 = = = 
 Jimmy Nicholl of Raith Rovers was appointed as McCarthy 's replacement , but could not reverse the slump in form which saw Millwall relegated at the end of the 1995 – 96 season in 22nd place . Just five months earlier they had been top of Division One , but now Millwall found themselves in the third tier for the 1996 – 97 season . The club experienced severe financial difficulties that resulted in them being placed in financial administration for a short time . Nicholl was relieved of his duties and John Docherty returned on a short @-@ term basis to stabilise the club . 
 Millwall came out of administration , and new chairman Theo Paphitis appointed ex @-@ West Ham United manager Billy Bonds as manager . The 1997 – 98 season was not a successful one , with the club hovering close to relegation to the fourth tier . Bonds was sacked and replaced by Keith " Rhino " Stevens , with Alan McLeary as his assistant . McLeary was later promoted to the role of joint @-@ manager alongside Stevens . 
 Stevens and McLeary led Millwall to their first ever official appearance at Wembley Stadium . The Lions reached the 1999 Football League Trophy Final with a golden goal win against Gillingham in the semi @-@ finals , and a 2 – 1 aggregate victory over Walsall in the regional final . They faced Wigan Athletic in the final but , while playing in front of 49 @,@ 000 of their own fans , lost 1 – 0 to an injury @-@ time goal . Millwall also lost 1 – 0 on aggregate to Wigan in the Second Division play @-@ off semi @-@ finals the 1999 – 2000 season . 
 = = = Promotion , FA Cup Final and Europe : 2001 – 2004 = = = 
 Mark McGhee was named as Millwall 's new manager in September 2000 , and eight months later the club won promotion as Division Two champions , with the team built by Keith Stevens , after five years in the third tier of the league . They finished with 93 points , a club record . Winning the first match of the 2001 – 02 season 4 – 0 at home to Norwich City set the team up well for a good year , in which Millwall qualified for the Division One play @-@ offs , but lost to eventual winners Birmingham City 2 – 1 in the semi @-@ finals . Millwall finished mid @-@ table in the 2002 – 03 season and McGhee was sacked soon after the start of the 2003 – 04 season . 
 In 2003 , Dennis Wise , ex @-@ Chelsea and England player , became caretaker , and subsequently permanent player @-@ manager , of the club . In his first season in charge Wise led the club to the first FA Cup Final in their history . When Millwall took to the field at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff they were only the second team from outside the top flight to play in the Cup final since 1982 , and were the first team from outside the Premier League to reach the final since the foundation of the top tier in 1992 . The club was missing 16 players from their squad due to suspension or injury . They played the Cup final on 22 May 2004 , losing 3 – 0 to Manchester United . As United had already qualified for the UEFA Champions League , Millwall were assured of playing in the UEFA Cup . Midfielder Curtis Weston , substituted for Wise with one minute of normal time remaining , became the youngest Cup final player in history at 17 years 119 days , beating the 125 @-@ year @-@ old record of James F. M. Prinsep . In the 2004 – 05 UEFA Cup , Millwall lost 4 – 2 on aggregate in the first round proper to Hungarian champions Ferencváros , with Wise scoring both Millwall 's goals . 
 = = = Six managers in two years of upheaval : 2005 – 2006 = = = 
 In 2005 , Theo Paphitis announced that he was stepping down as chairman of the club with Jeff <unk> to replace him from May 2005 . At the end of the 2004 – 05 season , manager Dennis Wise announced that he was leaving as he was unable to form a working relationship with the new chairman . Former Millwall striker Steve Claridge was announced as the new player @-@ manager of Millwall . However , when <unk> then stepped down just two months after taking up the post , it was announced on 27 July that Claridge had been sacked after just 36 days , without ever taking charge of the team in a competitive match . 
 Former Wolverhampton Wanderers manager Colin Lee replaced him but lasted only five months in charge of the club . On 21 December , with the club bottom of the Championship , he became the club 's Director of Football and was replaced as manager by 32 @-@ year @-@ old player Dave Tuttle , on a short @-@ term contract until the end of the 2005 – 06 season . Tuttle had no prior experience in football management . In February 2006 , Lee left the club altogether . Millwall experienced a difficult season , having had four managers in 2005 . Their 13 goals scored at home was the second worst in Football League history . Their relegation to League One was confirmed on 17 April 2006 with a 2 – 0 loss against Southampton . In the closed season Nigel Spackman was appointed as the new manager , but he lasted only four months after a string of bad results . In September 2006 , Theo Paphitis ( chairman from 1997 to 2005 ) ended his nine @-@ year association with the club after a year @-@ long spell as a non @-@ executive director . 
 On 19 March 2007 , Willie Donachie signed a two @-@ year contract following some progress which had seen the club climb to 11th place in the league . Before Donachie took charge , Millwall had taken only six points from their first ten games . In the 2007 – 08 season Millwall sat bottom of the table at the beginning of October . Donachie was sacked on 8 October , with Richard Shaw and Colin West becoming caretaker managers . 
 = = = Stability and play @-@ off success : 2007 – 2013 = = = 
 In March 2007 , Chestnut Hill Ventures , led by American John Berylson , which have interests in business and financial services , retail , property and sport , invested £ 5 million into the club . The continued investment of Berylson , who has since become the club 's major shareholder and chairman , has steered The Lions on a better course on and off the pitch . The appointment of Kenny Jackett as manager on 6 November 2007 , proving crucial . 
 Over the course of the next two seasons Jackett led Millwall to two top six finishes in League One , in fifth and third place respectively . He won the League One Manager of the Month award three times while in charge of the club . Several of his key signings helped propel Millwall toward the play @-@ offs , and eventual promotion . After a play @-@ off final defeat in the 2008 – 09 season against Scunthorpe United and losing out on automatic promotion on the last day of the 2009 – 10 season to Leeds United by one point , Millwall made it back to Wembley , finally breaking the play @-@ off hoodoo run of five successive failures in 1991 , 1994 , 2000 , 2002 and 2009 , with a 1 – 0 win in the 2010 League One play @-@ off final against Swindon Town , securing a return to the Football League Championship after a four @-@ year absence . 
 Millwall 's first game back in the Championship was a 3 – 0 away win at Bristol City . The game had been much hyped due to City 's signing of then @-@ England goalkeeper David James . Only days after the defeat , Steve Coppell resigned as City manager . The Lions celebrated the 125th anniversary of the club on 2 October 2010 , which was the closest home game date to the first fixture Millwall ever played against Fillebrook on 3 October 1885 . Millwall drew 1 – 1 with Burnley and wore a special one @-@ off kit for the game , made by manufacturers Macron , which bore the names of every footballer who had played for the club . 
 Kenny Jackett celebrated five years in charge of the club in November 2012 , with a 4 – 1 victory away at Nottingham Forest . After a strong start to the 2012 – 13 season , including a 13 @-@ game unbeaten run and flirting with the play @-@ offs , Millwall finished poorly , with only five wins in the last 23 games , narrowly avoiding relegation on the last day of the season . Their poor league form coincided with reaching the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup for the fifth time in their history . They played Wigan Athletic at Wembley Stadium on 14 April 2013 , losing 2 – 0 to the eventual cup winners . Kenny Jackett resigned on 7 May 2013 . He was Millwall 's fourth @-@ longest serving manager . 
 = = = Relegation and fourth trip to Wembley in seven years : 2013 – present = = = 
 After a month of searching , Millwall appointed St Johnstone boss Steve Lomas as their new manager on 6 June 2013 . His appointment provoked mixed emotions among some supporters , due to him being a former captain of West Ham United , their biggest rival . Club record goalscorer Neil Harris returned to Millwall as a coach on 23 June 2013 after retiring as a footballer through injury . Millwall sacked Lomas on 26 December 2013 , after winning only five of his first 22 games in charge . Harris and youth team coach Scott Fitzgerald took over as joint caretaker @-@ managers . On 4 January 2014 Millwall lost 4 – 1 at Southend United in the FA Cup , a team 31 places below them in the football pyramid . Harris described the performance as a " shambles . " 
 The club appointed Ian Holloway as their new manager on 6 January 2014 , with the club sitting 21st in the table . He was given the priority of maintaining their Football League Championship status , which he achieved . Millwall went unbeaten in the last eight games of the 2013 – 14 season and finished in 19th place , four points above the relegation zone . Holloway was sacked on 10 March 2015 with the team second from bottom in the Championship , Neil Harris being reinstated as caretaker manager until the end of the season . He was unable to ensure survival , however , as Millwall 's relegation to League One was confirmed on 28 April with one game of the 2014 – 15 season still to play . Harris was confirmed permanent manager of Millwall the next day . In his first full season in charge , Harris led Millwall to a fourth @-@ place finish in League One and a play @-@ off final at Wembley , which the Lions lost 3 – 1 to Barnsley . 
 = = Colours , crest and nickname = = 
 = = = Kit = = = 
 Millwall 's traditional kit has predominantly consisted of blue shirts , white shorts and blue socks throughout their 125 @-@ year history . For the first 50 years , up until 1936 , they played in a traditional navy blue , similar to the colours of Scotland national team . This colour was chosen because it paid homage to the Scottish roots of the club , with the nucleus of the first Millwall Rovers squad being from Dundee . In 1936 , newly appointed Millwall manager Charlie Hewitt opted to change the kit colour from navy blue to a lighter royal blue , and the team have played in this colour for the best part of 74 years , with the exception of 1968 – 75 and 1999 – 2001 , in which the team played in an all @-@ white strip . Their kit for the 2010 – 11 season celebrated the 125th anniversary of the club , with Millwall adopting the darker navy blue of their first strip . The club has retained this colour since . As for change colours , yellow or white has been a frequent choice . The club had a grey away kit for the 2002 – 03 season , and also a green and white striped away kit for the 2003 – 04 season . Millwall wore a special one @-@ off camouflage kit to commemorate the centenary of the First World War against Brentford on 8 November 2014 . It went on sale to fans , with proceeds going to Headley Court , a rehabilitation centre for injured members of the British Armed Forces . 
 = = = Badge = = = 
 The club crest has been a rampant lion since 1936 , which was also introduced by Charlie Hewitt . There have been many variations of the lion ; the first was a single red lion , often mistakenly said to be chosen because of the club 's Scottish roots . The lion bore a striking resemblance to signs used by pubs named The Red Lion . From 1956 to 1974 Millwall 's crest was two leaping red lions facing each other . Former chairman Theo Paphitis brought back the badge in 1999 , where it was used for a further eight years . The current crest is a leaping lion , which first appeared on a Millwall kit in 1979 . It remained until 1999 and was re @-@ introduced again in 2007 . The club mascot is a giant lion called Zampa , so named after Zampa Road , the postal address of The Den . 
 = = = The Lions = = = 
 The team nickname is The Lions , previously The Dockers . The original Dockers name arose from the job of many of the club 's supporters in the early 1900s . The club did not like the moniker and changed the nickname after press headlined Millwall as ' Lions of the South ' , after knocking Football League leaders Aston Villa out of the 1899 – 1900 FA Cup . Millwall , then a Southern League side , went on to reach the semi @-@ final . The club adopted the motto : We Fear No Foe Where E 'er We Go . In the 2000s the club started to recognise its unique link with London 's docks by introducing Dockers ' Days , and archiving the club 's dock roots in the Millwall FC Museum . Dockers ' Days bring together past successful Millwall teams who parade on the pitch at half @-@ time . Supporters who were dockers are allowed to attend the game for free . In 2011 , Millwall officially named the east stand of The Den as the ' Dockers Stand ' in honour of the club 's former nickname . 
 = = = Kit sponsors and manufacturers = = = 
 For the 2013 – 14 season , Millwall chose the charity Prostate Cancer UK to sponsor their shirt for free . 
 = = Stadia = = 
 Main articles : The Den ( 1993 – present ) , The Den ( 1910 – 1993 ) , North Greenwich and The Athletic Grounds . 
 Millwall began life on the Isle of Dogs and inhabited four different grounds in the club 's first 25 years . Their first home was a piece of waste ground called Glengall Road , where they only stayed for one year . From 1886 to 1890 they played behind The Lord Nelson pub on East Ferry Road , which was known as the Lord Nelson Ground , before being forced to leave by the landlady , who received a better offer for its use . 
 They moved to their third home , The Athletic Grounds , on 6 September 1890 . This was their first purpose @-@ built ground , with a grandstand that seated 600 people and an overall capacity of between 10 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 . The club was forced to move on again though , this time by the Millwall Dock Company who wanted to use it as a <unk> . They relocated in 1901 to a location near their second home , which became known as North Greenwich . They remained an east London club for a further nine years , with the last game played on the Isle of Dogs on 8 October 1910 against Portsmouth , which Millwall won 3 – 1 . 
 On 22 October 1910 , Millwall crossed the river to South London , moving to Cold Blow Lane in New Cross . The fifth ground was called The Den , built at a cost of £ 10 @,@ 000 by noted football ground architect Archibald Leitch . The first game played there was against Brighton & Hove Albion , which Brighton won 1 – 0 . Millwall remained there for 83 years , until moving to their sixth and current ground , at first known as The New Den but now called simply The Den , on 4 August 1993 . The ground has an all @-@ seated capacity of 20 @,@ 146 . A Sporting Lisbon team , managed by Bobby Robson helped open the ground by playing a friendly , which The Lions lost 2 – 1 . 
 = = = Traditional songs = = = 
 A tradition at The Den is the playing of the official club song " Let ' em Come " , by Roy Green , as Millwall and the opposing team walk onto the pitch . It was specifically written for the club and the lyrics represent old London culture , such as eating jellied eels and having a glass of beer before going to the game . The song ends with all home fans standing , arms raised singing the last line , " Let ' em all ... come down .... to The Den ! " A television drama about a Millwall supporter and ex @-@ <unk> , starring David Jason , featured a lyric from the song in its title , Come Rain Come Shine . The song was played on repeat at Wembley Stadium after Millwall gained promotion to the Championship in 2010 . The song " Shoeshine Boy " by the Mills Blue Rhythm Band was played as the entrance song prior to " Let ' em Come " . 
 Other songs that have been regularly played at The Den over the years in the build @-@ up to a game include " London Calling " by The Clash , " No Surrender " by Bruce Springsteen , " Town Called Malice " by The Jam and " House of Fun " by Madness , which features the lyric " welcome to the lion 's den ... " . Status Quo 's cover version of " Rockin ' All Over the World " is played after every home win . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Millwall were listed eighth out of a list of 92 Football League clubs with the most rivals , with West Ham United , Crystal Palace , Charlton Athletic , Leeds United , Portsmouth and Gillingham considering them a major rival . 
 = = = Major rival = = = 
 Millwall 's fiercest rival is West Ham United . It is one of the most passionately contested local derbies in football . The two clubs have rarely met in recent years due to them playing in different leagues ; the majority of their meetings happened before the First World War , with some 60 meetings between 1899 – 1915 . The clubs have played 99 times since the first contest in 1899 . Millwall have won 38 , drawn 27 and lost 34 . Despite violence between the two sets of supporters and calls for future games between the clubs to be played behind closed doors , they last met in the Football League Championship in 2011 – 12 with no outright ban on either set of fans , and no repeat of crowd trouble . The rivalry between the sides , specifically the clubs ' two hooligan firms has been depicted on the big screen several times , in films such as Green Street . 
 = = = South London derbies = = = 
 Millwall are closest in proximity to Charlton Athletic , with The Den and The Valley being less than four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) apart . They last met in 2015 , where Millwall won 2 – 1 at The Den . Since their first competitive game in 1921 , Millwall have won 33 , drawn 25 and lost 12 . The Lions are unbeaten in their last eight games against Charlton , stretching over 19 years , where they 've won four and drawn four . The Addicks last win came in March 1996 at The Valley . The Lions last played against fellow South London club Crystal Palace in the 2012 – 13 season when both teams were in the Football League Championship . They drew 0 – 0 at The Den and 2 – 2 at Selhurst Park . In almost 100 competitive games between the two clubs since 1906 , Millwall have won 39 , drawn 29 and lost 29 . As of the 2015 – 16 season , the three South London teams compete in different tiers . Crystal Palace play in the Premier League , Charlton in the Championship and Millwall in League One after they were relegated in 2015 . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Reserve squad and youth academy = = = 
 As of 30 November 2015 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Player of the year = = = 
 As voted by Millwall Supporters Club members and season ticket holders . 
 = = = Personnel honours = = = 
 = = = = English Football Hall of Fame = = = = 
 Millwall players inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame : 
 See Millwall Lionesses for two female inductees . 
 = = = = PFA Fans ' Player of the Year = = = = 
 = = = = PFA Team of the Year = = = = 
 = = = Notable former players = = = 
 The following is a list of notable footballers who have played for Millwall , including players who have been honoured in Millwall 's Hall of Fame and have significantly contributed to the club 's history be it through being founder member players , having been given a testimonial for 10 years of service at the club , making over 100 appearances , scoring over 50 goals or having received recognition by their country in the form of international caps while playing for the club . 
 = = Managers = = 
 There have been 33 permanent and 14 caretaker managers since the appointment of the club 's first professional manager , Bert <unk> on 4 May 1911 . From 1890 to 1910 , Millwall directors Kidd , <unk> and Saunders were honorary managers , also working under the title of club secretary . Bob Hunter is Millwall 's longest serving manager , having stayed at the helm for 15 years . Prior to becoming manager , he was the club 's trainer for 21 years . He died in office in 1933 , having served at the club for a total of 36 years . Steve Claridge holds the shortest tenure at the club , having been in charge for a period of 36 days without ever taking charge of a first @-@ team game . Every Millwall manager has come from the United Kingdom or Ireland . 
 ( s ) 
 = secretary ( c ) = 
 caretaker 
 = = Club officials = = 
 As of 14 September 2015 . 
 = = = Board = = = 
 Chairman : John Berylson 
 Chief executive : Andy Ambler 
 Directors : James T. Berylson , Constantine <unk> , Trevor <unk> , Demos <unk> , Richard Press and Peter Garston 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 Head Coach : Neil Harris 
 Assistant Head Coach : David Livermore 
 First Team Coach : Andy Frampton 
 Goalkeeping coach : Kevin Pressman 
 Academy director : Scott Fitzgerald 
 Elite development squad manager : Justin Skinner 
 Chief scout : Terry Bullivant 
 = = Honours = = 
 Based on all results during the club 's 89 seasons in the Football League from 1920 – 21 to 2015 – 16 , Millwall are ranked as the 39th most successful club in English football . The following table details the club 's major achievements : 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 Barry Kitchener holds the record for Millwall appearances , having played 596 matches between 1966 and 1982 . The goalscoring record is held by Neil Harris , with 138 in all competitions . He broke the previous record of 111 goals , held by Teddy Sheringham on 13 January 2009 , during a 3 – 2 away win at Crewe Alexandra . The club 's widest victory margin in the league is 9 – 1 , a scoreline which they achieved twice in their Football League Third Division South championship @-@ winning year of 1927 . They beat both Torquay United and Coventry City by this score at The Den . Millwall 's heaviest league defeat was 8 – 1 away to Plymouth Argyle in 1932 . The club 's heaviest loss in all competitions was a 9 – 1 defeat at Aston Villa in an FA Cup fourth @-@ round second @-@ leg in 1946 . Millwall 's largest Cup win was 7 – 0 over Gateshead in 1936 . Their highest scoring aggregate game was a 12 @-@ goal thriller at home to Preston North End in 1930 when Millwall lost 7 – 5 . 
 = = = Player records = = = 
