 As of 8 May 2015 
 See List of Millwall F.C. seasons for Millwall 's top goalscorer each year since 1895 . 
 = = Millwall in European football = = 
 On 22 May 2004 Millwall played Manchester United in the FA Cup Final , losing 3 – 0 . As United had already qualified for the UEFA Champions League , Millwall were assured of playing in the UEFA Cup . Millwall played in the first round proper and lost 4 – 2 on aggregate to Ferencváros . 
 = = = European record = = = 
 = = Supporters and hooliganism = = 
 Millwall have averaged a gate close to 12 @,@ 000 per home game over their 86 seasons in the Football League , while the club have spent the majority of that time yo @-@ yoing back and forth between the second and third tiers of English football . Originally based in the East End of London , the club moved across the River Thames in 1910 to south east London and support is drawn from the surrounding areas . The club and fans have a historic association with football hooliganism , which came to prevalence in the 1970s and 1980s with a firm known originally as F @-@ Troop , eventually becoming more widely known as the Millwall Bushwackers , who were one of the most notorious hooligan gangs in England . On five occasions The Den was closed by The FA and the club has received numerous fines for crowd disorder . The BBC documentary Panorama was invited into the club by Millwall in 1977 to show the hooligan reputation was a myth and being blown out of proportion by reporting . Instead the BBC portrayed hooliganism as being deeply rooted in Millwall , and attempted to link them to the far @-@ right political party National Front . The show was extremely damaging for the club . Former club chairman Reg Burr once commented : " Millwall are a convenient coat peg for football to hang its social ills on " , an example being the reporting of convicted murderer Gavin Grant . Although he had played for eight different clubs , playing his fewest number of games ( four ) for Millwall , and was signed to Bradford City at the time , the BBC used the headline , " Former Millwall striker Gavin Grant guilty of murder " . 
 The stigma of violence attached to Millwall can be traced back over 100 years . Millwall played local rivals West Ham United away at Upton Park on 17 September 1906 in a Western League game . Both sets of supporters were primarily made up of dockers , who lived and worked in the same locality in east London . Many were rivals working for opposing firms and vying for the same business . A local newspaper , East Ham Echo , reported that , " From the very first kick of the ball it was seen likely to be some trouble , but the storm burst when Dean and Jarvis came into collision ( Millwall had two players sent off during the match ) . This aroused considerable excitement among the spectators . The crowds on the bank having caught the fever , free fights were plentiful . " In the 1920s Millwall 's ground was closed for two weeks after a Newport County goalkeeper , who had been struck by missiles , jumped into the crowd to confront some of the home supporters and was knocked unconscious . The ground was again closed for two weeks in 1934 following crowd disturbances after the visit of Bradford ( Park Avenue ) . Pitch invasions resulted in another closure in 1947 and in 1950 the club was fined after a referee and linesman were ambushed outside the ground . 
 In the 1960s , hooliganism in England became more widely reported . On 6 November 1965 Millwall beat west London club Brentford 2 – 1 away at Griffin Park and during the game a hand grenade was thrown onto the pitch from the Millwall end . Brentford 's goalkeeper Chic Brodie picked it up , inspected it and threw it into his goal . It was later retrieved by police and determined to be a harmless dummy . There was fighting inside and outside the ground during the game between both sets of supporters , with one Millwall fan sustaining a broken jaw . The Sun newspaper ran the sensationalist grenade @-@ related headline " Soccer Marches to War ! " Trouble was reported at Loftus Road on 26 March 1966 during a match between Queens Park Rangers and Millwall , at a time when both sides were near the top of the league table pushing for promotion to Division Two , but the London derby was won 6 – 1 by the west London based team , QPR . In the second @-@ half , a coin was thrown from the terraces , which struck Millwall player Len Julians on the head , drawing blood . The stadium announcer warned that the game would be abandoned if there were any more disturbances from the crowd , prompting some Millwall fans to invade the pitch in an unsuccessful attempt to get the game abandoned . When Millwall 's unbeaten home record of 59 games came to an end against Plymouth Argyle in 1967 , the windows of the away team 's coach were smashed . In the same year , a referee was attacked and the FA ordered the club to erect fences around The Den 's terracing . On 11 March 1978 a riot broke out at The Den during an FA Cup quarter @-@ final between Millwall and Ipswich Town , with the home team losing 6 – 1 . Fighting began on the terraces and spilled onto the pitch ; dozens of fans were injured , with some hooligans turning on their own team 's supporters leaving some innocent fans bloodied . Bobby Robson , then manager of Ipswich , said of Millwall fans afterward , " They [ the police ] should have turned the flamethrowers on them " . In 1982 Millwall club chairman Alan Thorne threatened to close the club because of violence sparked by losing in the FA Cup to non @-@ league side Slough Town . 
 The 1985 Kenilworth Road riot , after an FA Cup sixth @-@ round match between Luton Town and Millwall on 13 March 1985 , became one of the worst and widely reported incidents of football hooliganism to date . On that night , approximately 20 @,@ 000 people packed into a ground that usually only held half that number to watch Luton beat Millwall 1 – 0 . Numerous pitch invasions , fighting in the stands and missile @-@ throwing occurred , of which one such object hit Luton 's goalkeeper Les Sealey . It led to a ban on away supporters by Luton from their Kenilworth Road ground for four years . Luton were asked by Millwall to make the Wednesday night match all @-@ ticket , but this was ignored . As a result , rival hooligan firms gained access to the stadium . As well as the Millwall hooligans and those belonging to Luton 's firm the <unk> , many of the 31 fans arrested after the violence were identified as being from Chelsea 's Headhunters firm and West Ham United 's Inter City Firm . The FA commissioned an inquiry which concluded that it was " not satisfied that Millwall F.C. took all reasonable precautions in accordance with the requirements of FA Rule 31 ( A ) ( II ) . " A £ 7 @,@ 500 fine was levied against Millwall , though this was later withdrawn on appeal . The penalty that Millwall faced was perhaps that the club 's name was now " synonymous with everything that was bad in football and society " . 
 In May 2002 , hundreds of hooligans attaching themselves to Millwall were involved in disorder around the ground , after the team lost a play @-@ off game to Birmingham City . It was described by the BBC as one of the worst cases of civil disorder seen in Britain in recent times . A police spokeswoman said that 47 police officers and 24 police horses were injured , and the Metropolitan Police considered suing the club after the events . The then chairman Theo Paphitis responded that Millwall could not be blamed for the actions of a mindless minority who attach themselves to the club . " The problem of mob violence is not solely a Millwall problem , it is not a football problem , it is a problem which plagues the whole of our society " , he said . Paphitis later introduced a membership scheme whereby only fans who would be prepared to join and carry membership cards would be allowed into The Den . Scotland Yard withdrew its threat to sue , stating : " In light of the efforts made and a donation to a charity helping injured police officers , the Metropolitan Police Service has decided not to pursue legal action against Millwall F.C. in relation to the disorder " . Some legal experts said it would have been difficult to hold a football club responsible for something that occurred away from its ground and involved people who did not attend the match . The scheme introduced by Paphitis now only applies to perceived high @-@ risk away games . Many fans blame the scheme for diminishing Millwall 's away support , such as at Leeds United where fans are issued with vouchers which are then exchanged for tickets at a designated point of West Yorkshire Police 's choosing on the day of the game . Also , early kick @-@ off times arranged by the police often result in only a few hundred fans making the trip . 
 In January 2009 , hundreds of Millwall fans perceived as " high risk " individuals gained access to an FA Cup fourth @-@ round match away at Hull City . The game , won 2 – 0 by Hull , was overshadowed when seats , coins and plastic bottles were thrown by some away supporters . There were conflicting reports in the media as to whether missiles were initially thrown by Hull supporters following chanting and jeering by Millwall fans of Jimmy Bullard ( an ex @-@ West Ham player ) just prior to the fixture . On 25 August 2009 , Millwall played away at West Ham United in the Football League Cup , losing 3 – 1 after extra time . One Millwall supporter was stabbed during clashes between the two sets of fans outside the ground . The game saw hundreds of West Ham fans invade the pitch on three occasions , forcing the game to be temporarily suspended once . The police later said the violence , because of its scale , was organised beforehand . In the aftermath of the disorder , Millwall were handed three charges by the FA and later cleared of all of them ; West Ham received four charges and were found guilty on two counts : violent , threatening , obscene and provocative behaviour , and entering the field of play . West Ham were fined £ 115 @,@ 000 , an amount seen as an insult by Millwall , which staunchly defended the actions of its own fans and the club 's inability to do any more than it had for a match at a rival 's ground . 
 After a game against Queens Park Rangers at Loftus Road in September 2010 , manager Kenny Jackett said Millwall 's hooligan problems are to a certain extent exaggerated by media sensationalism . " I see it as unjust . We are an easy club to criticise and in my time [ at the club ] , the way we have been reported is unfair " , he said . Other examples of this include archive footage of their hooligan element 's past bad behaviour being shown , when disorder has occurred at other grounds , not involving them . During a game between Millwall and Huddersfield Town , The Observer reported that a Huddersfield Town fan had thrown a coin at a linesman , and that some Millwall fans had intervened , and handed the culprit over to police . The News of the World , however , bore the headline : " Millwall Thugs Deck <unk> With Concrete " . This has led to a siege mentality among supporters of the club , which gave rise to the Millwall fans ' famous terrace chant , No one likes us , we don 't care , being sung in defiant defence of themselves and their team . In April 2013 , Millwall met Wigan Athletic in a semi @-@ final of the FA Cup . Millwall lost the game 2 – 0 . Towards the end of the match , violence broke out in part of the stand allocated to Millwall , with individuals fighting amongst themselves and then against police , resulting in 14 arrests , of which two were Wigan supporters . In January 2014 , a Millwall fan ripped a linesman 's flag after a corner was not given to his side during a game against Leicester City ; Millwall lost 1 – 3 . 
 = = In the community = = 
 In 1985 , the club founded the Millwall Community Scheme ( MCS ) , which offers sporting , educational and charitable projects . The scheme is based next door to The Den , in the Lions Centre . Working with local children from the surrounding boroughs of Lewisham and Southwark , Millwall aim " to teach life lessons wrapped in football " , helping with social inclusion . The club help promote anti @-@ knife and anti @-@ gun crime . In a match against Charlton Athletic in 2009 , both teams wore special kits for the match in honour of murdered local teenagers and supporters Jimmy Mizen and Rob Knox . The logos of both clubs ' shirt sponsors were replaced by the text , " Street violence ruins lives " . The club has also helped raise over £ 10 @,@ 000 for the charity Help for Heroes . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Millwall have been depicted in films several times , specifically highlighting the club 's hooliganism firm the Bushwackers and the rivalry with West Ham United . Often glorifying football violence in the beginning , each film typically ends in loss of life , showing the futility of hooliganism . 
 The Firm ( 1989 ) – Real life Millwall supporter Gary Oldman plays Bex , leader of football firm the Inter City Crew , a fictional representation of West Ham 's Inter City Firm and their violent exploits . Millwall 's Bushwackers firm are called The Buccaneers in the film . 
 Arrivederci Millwall ( 1990 ) – A group of Millwall supporters travel to the 1982 World Cup in Spain , just after the Falklands War breaks out , intent on avenging a personal loss . 
 Black Books ( 2000 ) – In the first episode " Cooking the Books " , Bernard Black ( Dylan Moran ) attempts to antagonise some Millwall hooligans into injuring him severely enough so that he may avoid doing his taxes . Upon remarking , " How does the song go ? Millwall , Millwall , we 're really dreadful and all of our girlfriends are unfulfilled and alienated , " he succeeds . 
 The Football Factory ( 2004 ) – Primarily about the Chelsea Headhunters , who fight numerous other firms on away days , culminating in a big fight against Millwall 's Bushwackers . 
 Green Street ( 2005 ) – Elijah Wood plays an American student who gets involved with West Ham 's firm . The film builds up to a big clash with Millwall 's firm at the climax , after the two teams are drawn against each other in the Cup , foreshadowing similarities to the 2009 Upton Park riot . 
 Rise of the Footsoldier ( 2007 ) – The rise of a football hooligan is chronicled from his beginnings on the terraces to becoming a member of a notorious gang of criminals . The rivalry between West Ham and Millwall is portrayed during the opening scenes of the film . 
 Dhan <unk> Dhan Goal ( 2007 ) – The main protagonist Sunny Bhasin ( John Abraham ) initially agrees to leave <unk> United Football Club and signs a lucrative offer to play for Millwall F.C. He later decides not to play for Millwall though . 
 Green Street 2 : Stand Your Ground ( 2009 ) – A direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel to Green Street . It follows on directly from the original 's climax , with several members of West Ham 's and Millwall 's firms ending up in prison together and arranging a football match . 
 The Firm ( 2009 ) – A remake by Nick Love , director of The Football Factory and himself a Millwall supporter . Set in the 1980s , the film focuses on the music , fashion and culture surrounding football at the time . It was generally well received by critics . In October 2009 , the Metropolitan Police released still photos from the film in relation to a search for hooligans from the Upton Park riot . The mistake led to an apology from Scotland Yard . 
 St George 's Day ( 2012 ) – A British gangster film which featured cameos from Millwall players Liam Trotter , Alan Dunne , David Forde , Darren Ward and Scott Barron . The film also included several Millwall references such as ' No One Likes Us ' and ' We Fear No Foe ' . 
 The club 's ground The Den doubled as The Dragons Lair , home ground of fictional team <unk> United in the television series Dream Team . It also appeared in episodes of the shows The Bill and Primeval . In literature , books such as " No One Likes Us , We Don 't Care : True Stories from Millwall , Britain 's Most Notorious Football Hooligans " by Andrew Woods focuses on the hooligan element of Millwall . Sunday Mirror columnist Michael Calvin spent the 2009 – 10 season covering Millwall , writing the book Family : Life , Death and Football . The book looks at the rivalry with West Ham United , the stabbing of a Millwall supporter and the Lions play @-@ off success and promotion to The Championship under Kenny Jackett . 
 = = = Notable supporters = = = 
 = = = Official = = = 
 Official website 
 Official Twitter 
 Official Facebook 
 = = = News = = = 
 Millwall F.C. on BBC Sport : Club news – Recent results – Upcoming fixtures 
 Millwall news from Sky Sports 
 News at Den 
 Millwall at Football League 
 = = = General = = = 
 Millwall History Files 
 Millwall FC – The Millwall Year ( s ) 
 Millwall Supporters Club 
 Past Millwall kits ( 1885 – present ) 
 = Leave It to Beaver ( Veronica Mars ) = 
 " Leave It to Beaver " is the twenty @-@ second and final episode of the first season of the American television series Veronica Mars . Series creator Rob Thomas wrote the story , and collaborated with Diane Ruggiero to write the teleplay . The season finale was directed by Michael Fields , and was first aired on May 10 , 2005 in the United States on UPN . 
 The finale concludes the storyline of Lilly Kane 's murder , as Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) finally discovers the identity of the murderer after investigating the mystery with her father Keith Mars ( Enrico Colantoni ) throughout the season . Thomas said that the finale was more ambitious than the average episode , requiring a larger budget and more filming than usual . " Leave It to Beaver " was watched by 2 @.@ 99 million American viewers on its original airing . Critical reaction to the episode was generally positive , and several critics praised Thomas ' use of red herrings . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first season revolves around Veronica 's investigation of her best friend Lilly 's murder . Prior to the murder , Veronica was dumped by her boyfriend , Duncan Kane ( Teddy Dunn ) , who was also Lilly 's brother . After Lilly was killed , Veronica 's father , County Sheriff Keith Mars , accused Lilly 's father , popular software billionaire Jake Kane ( Kyle Secor ) , of being involved in the murder . This provoked Neptune 's wrath and Keith 's ousting as sheriff in a recall election . Veronica 's mother , Lianne Mars ( Corinne Bohrer ) , developed a drinking problem and left town . Veronica 's " 09er " friends — wealthy students from the fictional 90909 ZIP code — forced her to choose between them and her father ; Veronica chose her father . 
 After being voted out as sheriff , Keith opens a private investigation agency , Mars Investigations , where Veronica works part @-@ time . Veronica helps her father solve cases and conducts her own investigations on behalf of friends and acquaintances at school . Veronica discovers new evidence which suggests that Abel Koontz ( Christian Clemenson ) , the man imprisoned after confessing to Lilly 's murder , is innocent . As Veronica delves deeper into the murder case , she also works on other investigations , seeks her mother 's whereabouts and deals with the aftermath of being drugged and raped during an " 09er " party . Things get more complicated when Veronica falls into a relationship with Lilly 's ex @-@ boyfriend Logan Echolls ( Jason Dohring ) , who for a time held Veronica partly responsible for Lilly 's death and went out of his way to harass her . 
 In the previous episode , Keith proves the innocence of convicted murderer Koontz , who had falsely confessed to murdering Lilly . Veronica , who believed that she had been raped the previous year at a party , discovers that she and Duncan had sex while under the influence of GHB ; Duncan left that next morning because he believed Veronica was his sister . Veronica spends time with her boyfriend Logan in his pool house , but discovers a hidden video system linking to cameras focused on the bed . Veronica is shocked and goes home , only to find her mother Lianne has returned from rehab . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When a reporter writes an article about Koontz 's innocence , Duncan demands the truth from his parents , Jake and Celeste Kane ( Lisa Thornhill ) , who tell him that they arrived home one night to find Duncan covered in blood and holding Lilly 's body . Cassidy Casablancas ( Kyle Gallner ) tells Veronica that on the weekend of Lilly 's murder , he had gone surfing in Mexico with Logan and Dick Casablancas ( Ryan Hansen ) ; however , Logan had driven back to Neptune to see Lilly . Veronica and Keith discover that a shot glass Logan bought is on the evidence record of Lilly 's bedroom and car . Talking to Keith on the phone , Veronica suggests that Logan is the murderer , and their conversation is overheard by the leader of the Latino biker gang PCHers , Eli " Weevil " Navarro ( Francis Capra ) , who had a relationship with Lilly . 
 Keith ends his relationship with Wallace 's mother Alicia Fennel ( Erica Gimpel ) to give Lianne a second chance . Because Celeste refused to pay the $ 50 @,@ 000 reward for finding Duncan , Keith sues the Kanes , who agree to pay if Veronica signs away any future claim to their estate . Once Veronica signs , Keith shows her the DNA test that proves he is her father , meaning Veronica never had a claim of the estate . Logan is arrested , and once released he angrily breaks up with Veronica for providing the evidence against him . Logan then explains that when he saw Lilly after returning from Mexico , he knew their relationship was over and wrote a letter which he left in her car . 
 Veronica realizes that Logan 's letter was never found , and searches Lilly 's room during a dinner party at the Kane 's household . Duncan enters the room and they discover several videotapes which show Lilly having an affair with Logan 's father , Aaron Echolls ( Harry Hamlin ) . Veronica believes that Lilly found the tapes and refused to return them , which angered Aaron and he killed her ; Duncan arrived home to find Lilly dead and had an epileptic fit , at which time Jake and Celeste returned home . While an unseen person watches them from a closet , Veronica calls Keith and tells him that she will bring home the tapes , noting that Aaron is at the party . Before she leaves , Veronica tells Duncan that they are not related . Meanwhile , Logan is drunk and stands on a bridge railing . Weevil and the PCHers arrive and they initiate a fight . 
 While driving home , Veronica discovers Aaron in the back seat of her car and crashes into a power pole . Although both are knocked unconscious , Veronica awakens first and distributes the tapes around a nearby house . Aaron traps Veronica in a fridge , and when Keith arrives , he lights it on fire . Keith is burnt freeing Veronica , and Aaron is hit by a truck while trying to escape . The police arrive and Keith and Aaron are taken away on stretchers as Aaron is read his rights . Jake vows to see Aaron fry for his actions and is also arrested . Keith wakes up in hospital to find Alicia by his side . Veronica arrives home and tells her mother to leave before Keith comes home ; she knows that Lianne is still drinking and did not finish her rehab . Lianne packs her bags and steals the $ 50 @,@ 000 settlement check from the Kanes before she leaves . Veronica dreams about her and Lilly floating on a pool raft in a pool full of flowers , and they say their final goodbyes . Veronica wakes up and answers the door , and tells the unseen person , " I was hoping it would be you " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The first season of Veronica Mars features a different " case of the week " each episode , and the season @-@ long mystery of Lilly Kane 's murder . In addition to developing a separate mystery for each episode , the writers also had to provide clues that would lead to the murder 's resolution in the season finale . The murder mystery plot was planned from the beginning of the season and the killer 's identity remained the same throughout production . Thomas said that at the beginning of the season , " I know the broad strokes , I know who did it , I know how it was done , I know the big arcs , but we 're always filling in the details . Those are week to week . It 's a week to week challenge in the writers room figuring out how much information we want to dole out to the audience . " 
 Although series creator Rob Thomas always planned on Harry Hamlin 's character Aaron Echolls as the murderer , this reveal almost didn 't happen because Hamlin was almost unavailable to shoot the season finale due to a movie he had booked in Australia . However , he decided to continue on Veronica Mars instead . 
 Although the season 's plan was changed very little , Thomas said that Logan became a much bigger character than anticipated . Thomas attributed this to Jason Dohring being an engaging performer , and the crew wanting to write scenes for him . While the budget for each episode was around $ 1 @.@ 7 million , an extra $ 400 @,@ 000 was spent for the finale . Filming was extended by one full day with the first unit and an extra three days of filming with the second unit . Thomas promised that there would be " more action than you 've ever seen on Veronica Mars . " 
 Speaking about the episode 's filming , Thomas said , " our final Lilly moment is just beautiful . I think Veronica and Lilly saying goodbye to each other is what people want to see . As much as who killed Lilly Kane . " For the finale , Thomas promised " 80 percent total satisfaction . People will know who killed Lilly Kane . And there won 't be that twist at the end that ' perhaps they didn 't do it . ' I 'm not going to be leaving people like that . However , at the end of the episode , it gives us a pretty big cliffhanger question as well . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Leave It to Beaver " was watched by 2 @.@ 99 million American viewers on its original airing , ranking number 98 out of 112 in the weekly charts . This was an increase over the pilot , which was viewed by 2 @.@ 49 million American viewers . The first season averaged 2 @.@ 5 million viewers per episode . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Jesse Hassenger of PopMatters found the finale to be " breathlessly paced " . However , the writer was also dissatisfied with the cliffhanger , and hoped that the second season would not increase the series ' focus on Veronica 's relationships . Hassenger wrote , " so far , the series has eschewed the relationship angst so common in other teen @-@ centric shows ; Neptune hearts get broken , yes , but the show never stoops to that will @-@ they @-@ or @-@ won 't @-@ they dynamic . Veronica is that rare television character who 's too interesting for love triangles . " Filip Vukcevic of IGN thought that while the resolution of the murder was satisfying , it could have been better ; " I liked the way everything played out , but I didn 't get the Sixth Sense moment I was hoping for . I wanted the season finale to blow my mind , instead all it got out of me was , ' Ah , I see . That 's cool . ' " Vukcevic wrote that the pace of the season increased exponentially , and was at its best during the final episode . Both reviewers praised Rob Thomas 's use of red herrings . Vukcevic felt that " as the finale approaches you are led to believe that the murderer could be any one of several different people - not any easy thing to pull off convincingly . What makes good TV is audience participation . If you feel for a character or are puzzling out a mystery , you 're involved . And when you 're involved , you 're having a good time . " Hassenger cited Lianne , Duncan and Logan as the main red herrings . 
 Mike Duffy of the Detroit Free Press included the episode on his list of " 12 season finales you won 't want to miss " , citing " great writing , a merrily dark sense of humor and Bell 's self @-@ assured smart @-@ girl charm " as the main reasons to watch . Screenwriter and director Kevin Smith praised the " seat @-@ of @-@ your @-@ pants " season finale , writing that it managed to " thread the needle with the Lilly Kane murder so well , it never feels marginalized or played out over 22 episodes " . Smith compared the year @-@ long murder mystery to that of Twin Peaks , stating that " unlike Peaks , when the murderer is revealed and the storyline wrapped up in the final [ episode ] , it doesn 't feel like the show 's outlived its relevance ; thanks to the crisp writing , the deft fleshing @-@ out of the Mars universe and the endearing cast , you ’ re left wanting Veronica 's story to continue . " 
 Price Peterson , writing for TV.com , gave the episode an extremely positive review , writing that it was " stellar … just a perfect hour of television and a fantastic end to the season . I still can 't believe how well they pulled off the mystery . I did NOT see Aaron Echolls as the killer . " Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club gave a glowing review , praising the Keith @-@ Veronica dynamic , the conclusions to the story arcs , and the final sequence after it is revealed that Aaron is the murderer . " It ’ s also an interesting choice to have the reveal come about two @-@ thirds of the way through the episode , and have the episode end with a dramatic chase and fight scene . Veronica has so rarely been in direct personal danger that having Aaron Echolls chase and capture her , and having Keith show up for a brutal fight and rescue , is jarring . And I think it is effective . " Television Without Pity gave the episode an " A " . 
 Give Me My Remote listed the episode as the third best episode of Veronica Mars , writing " everything about this episode is superb , from the plotlines , to the stunts , and the performances . Kristen Bell , in particular , churned out <unk> wrenching , <unk> worthy scenes . " IGN ranked the episode as the best episode of Veronica Mars , writing " Once you realize Aaron is the one , you 're glued to your seat for the rest of the episode , possibly hiding behind a blanket . Getting to this reveal was worth the season @-@ long wait . " BuzzFeed listed the episode as the second best episode of the series , calling it " one of the most intense , thrilling , and emotional episodes of the show . " On a similar list , TV Line ranked the episode as the fourth best episode of the show . 
 = Kenneth Nichols = 
 Major General Kenneth David " Nick " Nichols ( 13 November 1907 – 21 February 2000 ) was a United States Army officer and an engineer . He worked on the Manhattan Project , which developed the Atomic Bomb during World War II , as Deputy District Engineer to James C. Marshall , and from 13 August 1943 as the District Engineer of the Manhattan Engineer District . He was responsible for both the uranium production facility at the Clinton Engineer Works at Oak Ridge , Tennessee and the plutonium production facility at Hanford Engineer Works in Washington state . 
 Nichols remained with the Manhattan Project after the war until it was taken over by the Atomic Energy Commission in 1947 . He was the military liaison officer with the Atomic Energy Commission from 1946 to 1947 . After briefly teaching at the United States Military Academy at West Point , he was promoted to major general and became chief of the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project , responsible for the military aspects of atomic weapons , including logistics , handling and training . He was Deputy Director for the Atomic Energy Matters , Plans and Operations Division of the Army 's general staff , and was the senior Army member of the military liaison committee that worked with the Atomic Energy Commission . 
 In 1950 , General Nichols became Deputy Director of the Guided Missiles Division of the Department of Defense . He was appointed chief of research and development when it was reorganized in 1952 . In 1953 , he became the general manager of the Atomic Energy Commission , where he promoted the construction of nuclear power plants . He played a key role in the proceedings brought against J. Robert Oppenheimer that resulted in Oppenheimer 's security clearance being revoked . In later life , Nichols became an engineering consultant on private nuclear power plants . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kenneth David Nichols was born on 13 November 1907 in West Park , Ohio , which later became part of Cleveland , Ohio , one of four children of Wilbur L. Nichols and his wife May née <unk> . He graduated fifth in his class at the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1929 and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the United States Army Corps of Engineers . In 1929 , Nichols went to Nicaragua as part of an expedition led by Lieutenant Colonel Daniel I. Sultan whose purpose was to conduct a survey for the Inter @-@ Oceanic Nicaragua Canal . A fellow officer in the expedition , who would later figure prominently in Nichols ' career , was First Lieutenant Leslie Groves . For his service on the expedition , Nichols was awarded the Nicaraguan Medal of Merit " for exceptional service rendered [ to ] the Republic of Nicaragua . " 
 Nichols returned to the United States in 1931 and went to Cornell University , where he received a bachelor 's degree in civil engineering . He became assistant to the Director of the Waterways Experiment Station in Vicksburg , Mississippi , in June 1932 . In August he continued his studies at Cornell , where he completed his master 's degree in civil engineering on 10 June 1933 . While at Cornell he married Jacqueline <unk> . Their marriage produced a daughter and a son . He returned to the Waterways Experiment Station in 1933 . The next year he received a fellowship awarded by the Institute of International Education to study European Hydraulic Research Methods for a year at the Technische Hochschule in Berlin . While there he was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 October 1934 . The thesis he wrote won an American Society of Civil Engineers award . On returning to the United States he received another one year posting to the Waterways Experiment Station . From September 1936 to June 1937 he was a student officer at Fort Belvoir , Virginia . He then became a student again , using his Technische Hochschule thesis as the basis for a Doctor of Philosophy degree from the State University of Iowa . He became an instructor at West Point in August 1937 , where he was promoted to captain on 13 June 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In June 1941 , Colonel James C. Marshall summoned Nichols to the Syracuse Engineer District to become area engineer in charge of construction of the Rome Air Depot . He was promoted to major on 10 October 1941 and lieutenant colonel on 1 February 1942 , when Marshall asked him to take on additional responsibility as area engineer in charge of construction of a new TNT plant , the Pennsylvania Ordnance Works , in Williamsport , Pennsylvania . On this project , Nichols worked with DuPont and Stone & Webster as major contractors , and dealt with Leslie Groves , now the colonel in charge of military construction . 
 In June 1942 , Nichols was again summoned by Marshall , this time to Washington , D.C. Marshall had recently been appointed as district engineer of the new Manhattan Engineer District ( MED ) , and had received authorization to staff it by drawing on officers and civilians working for the Syracuse Engineer District , which was now winding down as the major part of its construction program was nearing completion . Marshall started by designating Nichols as his Deputy District Engineer , which became effective when the Manhattan District was officially formed on 16 August 1942 . 
 The first major decision confronting the new district , which unlike other engineer districts had no geographic limits , was the choice of construction site . On 30 June Nichols and Marshall set out for Tennessee , where they met with officials of the Tennessee Valley Authority and looked over prospective sites in the foothills of the Cumberland Mountains that had been identified ( by scouts from the Office of Scientific Research and Development ) as possessing the desirable attributes of abundant electric power , water and transportation with sparse population . A site at Oak Ridge , Tennessee was chosen , but Marshall delayed purchase while he awaited scientific results that justified a full @-@ scale plant . Afterwards , Nichols visited the Metallurgical Laboratory , or " Met Lab " , at the University of Chicago , where he met with Arthur Compton . Seeing the problems of overcrowding there , Nichols , on his own authority , arranged for a new experimental site to be established in the Argonne Forest which would eventually become the Argonne National Laboratory . 
 Nichols took charge of ore procurement . He arranged with the State Department for export controls to be placed on uranium oxide and negotiated with Edgar Sengier for the purchase of 1 @,@ 200 tons of ore from the Belgian Congo that was being stored in a warehouse on Staten Island . Nichols arranged with the Eldorado Mining and Refining Company for the purchase of ore from its mine in Port Hope , Ontario , and its shipment in 100 @-@ ton lots . Nichols met with Undersecretary of the Treasury Daniel W. Bell and arranged for the transfer of 14 @,@ 700 tons of silver from the West Point Depository for use in the Y @-@ 12 National Security Complex in place of copper , which was in desperately short supply in wartime . 
 In September 1942 , Groves , now a brigadier general , became director of the Manhattan Project . Groves immediately moved on the most urgent issues . He promptly approved the purchase of the site at Oak Ridge and negotiated for the project to be given a AAA priority rating . Groves soon decided to establish his project headquarters on the fifth floor of the New War Department Building in Washington , D.C. , where Marshall had maintained a liaison office . 
 Nichols , who concentrated his attention on ore procurement , feed materials and the plutonium project , was promoted to colonel on 22 May 1943 . On 13 August , he replaced Marshall as District Engineer of the Manhattan Engineer District . As District Engineer , Nichols was responsible for both the uranium production facility at the Clinton Engineer Works at Oak Ridge and the plutonium production facility at the Hanford site . One of his first tasks as district engineer was to move the district headquarters to Oak Ridge , although its name did not change . For his wartime work on the Manhattan Project , Nichols was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal by the United States Secretary of War , Robert P. Patterson . 
 = = Post war = = 
 Nichols was promoted to brigadier general on 22 January 1946 . Following the departure of Major General Thomas Farrell , Nichols became Groves ' deputy , although he also continued as district engineer . Asked to spend more time on weapons production and storage , Nichols established a new underground assembly plant at the Mound Laboratories in Miamisburg , Ohio , and recommended that Sandia Base be transferred from the United States Army Air Corps to the Manhattan District . In December , Nichols recommended the closing down of the alpha tracks of the Y @-@ 12 plant , thereby cutting the payroll from 8 @,@ 600 to 1 @,@ 500 and saving $ 2 million a month . Henceforth , uranium enrichment would be performed by the gaseous diffusion plants , the wartime K @-@ 25 and the new K @-@ 27 , which had commenced operation in January 1946 . 
 Nichols kept the national laboratories operating with $ 60 million worth of research grants for fiscal year 1947 . He helped Captain Hyman G. Rickover train a team of naval engineers at Oak Ridge in nuclear propulsion . In June 1946 , Nichols went to Bikini Atoll to represent the Manhattan Project at Operation Crossroads , a series of nuclear weapons tests conducted to investigate their effects on warships . Like many of his contemporaries in an Army that was dramatically reduced in size as it rapidly demobilized , Nichols was reduced in rank , reverting to his substantive rank of lieutenant colonel on 30 June 1946 . On return from Bikini , he found that he had been made an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire . 
 The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 created the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) to take over the functions and assets of the Manhattan Project . President Harry S. Truman appointed its five commissioners on 28 October 1946 , and Groves appointed Nichols as the military liaison officer to the AEC . Nichols ' main responsibility was to help organize an orderly transfer of assets and responsibilities from the MED to the AEC . Military aspects were taken over by the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) . It was generally assumed that Nichols would become the AEC 's Director of Military Application , but while Nichol 's relationship with the AEC was cordial and the commissioners were impressed with his administrative skills , it also became clear that Nichols did not agree with the commissioners ' concept of the Director of Military Application as a staff rather than a line function . 
 In February 1947 Nichols was appointed Professor of Mechanics at West Point , but in April 1948 , he was recalled to command the AFSWP , with the rank of major general , becoming the youngest major general in the Army at the time . Although his rank entitled him to quarters at Fort Myer , Virginia , the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General Omar Bradley advised him not to ask for them as there had been criticism from some senior colonels . Nichols also became Senior Army Member of the Military Liaison Committee to the AEC , and Deputy Assistant Chief of Staff of the Army ( G @-@ 3 ) for Atomic Energy . 
 In his new role Nichols clashed with the AEC over the issue of whether it or the Department of Defense should have custody of nuclear weapons . The administration 's policy remained firmly in favor of AEC control . This was tested during the Berlin Blockade , when Truman ordered B @-@ 29 bombers to Europe . For a time there was talk of calling off the Operation Sandstone nuclear weapons tests , but Nichols successfully argued for their continuation . In 1950 , he became Deputy Director of the Guided Missiles Division of the Department of Defense , overseeing the Nike Project . He was appointed Chief of Research and Development when it was reorganized in 1952 . Nichols retired from the Army on 31 October 1953 . For his services from 1948 to 1953 , he was belatedly awarded a second Distinguished Service Medal in 1956 . 
 Nichols became General Manager of the AEC on 2 November 1953 . In this capacity he initiated the AEC Personnel Security Board hearing on the loyalty and trustworthiness of atomic scientist J. Robert Oppenheimer . In a harshly worded memorandum to the AEC on 12 June 1954 , subsequent to the hearing , Nichols recommended that Oppenheimer 's security clearance not be reinstated . In five " security findings , " Nichols said that Oppenheimer was " a Communist in every sense except that he did not carry a party card , " and that he " is not reliable or trustworthy . " The commission agreed , and Oppenheimer was stripped of his security clearance . A second scandal was the Dixon @-@ Yates contract , a political controversy that became a major issue in the 1954 elections , resulting in Nichols appearing before a United States Senate subcommittee . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Nichols left the Atomic Energy Commission in 1955 and opened a consulting firm on K Street , specializing in commercial atomic energy research and development . His clients included Alcoa , Gulf Oil , Westinghouse Electric Corporation and the Yankee Rowe Nuclear Power Station . Nichols was involved with the construction of the Yankee Rowe Nuclear Power Station , the first privately owned pressurized @-@ water plant , and the Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant , which commenced operation in 1961 and 1968 respectively . They were both experimental and not expected to be competitive with coal and oil , but later became more so due to inflation and large increases in coal and oil prices . He was critical of over @-@ regulation and protracted hearings , which meant that by the 1980s similar boiling @-@ water or pressurized @-@ water plants took almost twice as long to build in the United States as in France , Japan , Taiwan or South Korea . 
 Nichols died of respiratory failure on 21 February 2000 at the Brighton Gardens retirement home in Bethesda , Maryland . He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = External Links = = 
 = Fisher ( animal ) = 
 The fisher ( Martes pennanti ) is a small carnivorous mammal native to North America . It is a member of the mustelid family ( commonly referred to as the weasel family ) and a part of the marten genus . The fisher is closely related to but larger than the American marten ( Martes americana ) . The fisher is a forest @-@ dwelling creature whose range covers much of the boreal forest in Canada to the northern United States . Names derived from aboriginal languages include pekan , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . It is also called a fisher cat , although it is not a feline . 
 Males and females look similar . Adult males are 90 to 120 cm ( 35 – 47 in ) long and weigh 3 @.@ 5 to 6 kilograms ( 8 – 13 lb ) . Adult females are 75 to 95 cm ( 30 – 37 in ) long and weigh 2 to 2 @.@ 5 kg ( 4 – 6 lb ) . The fur of the fisher varies seasonally , being denser and glossier in the winter . During the summer , the color becomes more mottled , as the fur goes through a moulting cycle . The fisher prefers to hunt in full forest . Though an agile climber , it spends most of its time on the forest floor , where it prefers to forage around fallen trees . An omnivore , the fisher feeds on a wide variety of small animals and occasionally on fruits and mushrooms . It prefers the snowshoe hare and is one of the few animals able to prey successfully on porcupines . Despite its common name , the fisher seldom eats fish . 
 The reproductive cycle of the fisher lasts almost a year . Female fishers give birth to a litter of three or four kits in the spring . They nurse and care for their kits until late summer , when they are old enough to set out on their own . Females enter estrus shortly after giving birth and leave the den to find a mate . <unk> of the blastocyst is delayed until the following spring , when they give birth and the cycle is renewed . 
 Fishers have few predators besides humans . They have been trapped since the 18th century for their fur . Their pelts were in such demand that they were extirpated from several parts of the United States in the early part of the 20th century . Conservation and protection measures have allowed the species to rebound , but their current range is still reduced from its historic limits . In the 1920s , when pelt prices were high , some fur farmers attempted to raise fishers . However , their unusual delayed reproduction made breeding difficult . When pelt prices fell in the late 1940s , most fisher farming ended . While fishers usually avoid human contact , encroachments into forest habitats have resulted in some conflicts . There are anecdotal reports of fishers attacking pets and , in a 2009 case in Rhode Island , a 6 @-@ year @-@ old boy . In 2014 , a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy was attacked by what was believed to be a fisher in Massachusetts . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Despite the name fisher , the animal is not known to eat fish . The name comes from colonial Dutch <unk> or <unk> due to its resemblance to the European polecat ( Mustela putorius ) . In the French language , the pelt of a polecat is also called <unk> or <unk> . 
 In some regions , the fisher is known as a pekan , derived from its name in the Abenaki language . <unk> is an Algonquian word ( cf . Cree <unk> , <unk> , Ojibwa <unk> ) borrowed by fur traders . Other American Indian names for the fisher are Chipewyan <unk> and Carrier <unk> , both meaning " big marten " , and Wabanaki <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Latin specific name pennanti is named for Thomas Pennant , who described the fisher in 1771 . Buffon had first described the creature in 1765 , calling it a pekan . Pennant examined the same specimen but called it a fisher , unaware of Buffon 's earlier description . Other 18th @-@ century scientists gave it similar names , such as Schreber , who named it Mustela canadensis , and Boddaert , who named it Mustela <unk> . The fisher was eventually placed in the genus Martes by Smith in 1843 . 
 Members of the genus Martes are distinguished by their four premolar teeth on the upper and lower jaws . Its close relative Mustela has just three . The fisher has 38 teeth . The dentition formula is : 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 12 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 2 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 There is evidence that ancestors of the fisher migrated to North America during the Pliocene era between 2 @.@ 5 and 5 million years ago . Two extinct mustelids , M. <unk> and M. anderssoni , have been found in eastern Asia . The first true fisher , M. <unk> , has only been found in North America . There are strong indications that M. <unk> is related to the Asian finds , which suggests a migration . M. pennanti has been found as early as the Late Pleistocene era , about 125 @,@ 000 years ago . There are no major differences between the Pleistocene fisher and the modern fisher . Fossil evidence indicates that the fisher 's range extended farther south than it does today . 
 Three subspecies were identified by Goldman in 1935 , M.p. <unk> , M.p. pacifica , and M.p. pennanti . Later research has debated whether these subspecies could be positively identified . In 1959 , E.M. <unk> concluded that the subspecies are not separable based on either fur or skull characteristics . Although some debate still exists , in general it is recognized that the fisher is a monotypic species with no extant subspecies . 
 = = Biology and behavior = = 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 Fishers are a medium @-@ sized mammal , comparable in size to the domestic cat , and the largest species in the marten genus . Their bodies are long , thin , and low to the ground . The sexes have similar physical features but they are sexually dimorphic in size , with the male being much larger than the female . Males are 90 to 120 cm ( 35 – 47 in ) in length and weigh 3 @.@ 5 to 6 kg ( 8 – 13 lb ) . Females measure 75 to 95 cm ( 30 – 37 in ) and weigh 2 to 2 @.@ 5 kg ( 4 – 6 lb ) . The largest male fisher ever recorded weighed 9 kg ( 20 lb ) . 
 The fisher 's fur changes with the season and differs slightly between sexes . Males have coarser coats than females . In the early winter , the coats are dense and glossy , ranging from 30 mm ( 1 in ) on the chest to 70 mm ( 3 in ) on the back . The color ranges from deep brown to black , although it appears to be much blacker in the winter when contrasted with white snow . From the face to the shoulders , fur can be hoary @-@ gold or silver due to tricolored guard hairs . The underside of a fisher is almost completely brown except for randomly placed patches of white or cream @-@ colored fur . In the summer , the fur color is more variable and may lighten considerably . Fishers undergo moulting starting in late summer and finishing by November or December . 
 Fishers have five toes on each foot , with unsheathed , retractable claws . Their feet are disproportionately large for their legs , making it easier for them to move on top of snow packs . In addition to the toes , there are four central pads on each foot . On the hind paws there are coarse hairs that grow between the pads and the toes , giving them added traction when walking on a variety of surfaces . Fishers have highly mobile ankle joints that can rotate their hind paws almost 180 degrees , allowing them to maneuver well in trees and climb down head @-@ first . The fisher is one of relatively few mammalian species with the ability to descend trees head @-@ first . 
 A circular patch of hair on the central pad of their hind paws marks plantar glands that give off a distinctive odor . Since these patches become enlarged during breeding season , they are likely used to make a scent trail to allow fishers to find each other so that they can mate . 
 = = = Hunting and diet = = = 
 Fishers are generalist predators . Although their primary prey is snowshoe hare and porcupine , they are also known to supplement their diet with insects , nuts , berries , and mushrooms . Since they are solitary hunters , their choice of prey is limited by their size . Analyses of stomach contents and scat have found evidence of birds , small mammals , and even moose and deer . The latter food sources shows that they are not averse to eating carrion . Fishers have been observed to feed on the carcasses of deer left by hunters . While uncommon , fishers have been found to kill larger animals , such as wild turkey , bobcat and lynx . 
 Fishers are one of the few predators that seek out and kill porcupines . There are stories in popular literature that fishers can flip a porcupine onto its back and " scoop out its belly like a ripe melon " . This was identified as an exaggerated misconception as early as 1966 . Observational studies show that fishers will make repeated biting attacks on the face of a porcupine and kill it after about 25 – 30 minutes . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The female fisher begins to breed at about one year of age and her reproductive cycle is an almost year @-@ long event . Mating takes place in late March to early April . <unk> implantation is then delayed for 10 months until mid @-@ February of the following year when active pregnancy begins . After gestating for about 50 days , the female gives birth to one to four kits . The female then enters estrus 7 – 10 days later and the breeding cycle begins again . 
 Females den in hollow trees . Kits are born blind and helpless . They are partially covered with fine hair . Kits begin to crawl after about 3 weeks . After about 7 weeks they open their eyes . They start to climb after 8 weeks . Kits are completely dependent on their mother 's milk for the first 8 – 10 weeks , after which they begin to switch to a solid diet . After 4 months , kits become intolerant of their litter mates , and at 5 months , the mother pushes them out on their own . After one year , juveniles will have established their own range . 
 = = = Social structure and home range = = = 
 Fishers are generally crepuscular , being most active at dawn and dusk . They are active year @-@ round . Fishers are solitary , associating with other fishers only for mating purposes . Males become more active during mating season . Females are least active during pregnancy and gradually increase activity after birth of their kits . 
 A fisher 's hunting range varies from 6 @.@ 6 km2 ( 3 sq mi ) in the summer to 14 @.@ 1 km2 ( 5 sq mi ) in the winter . Ranges of up to 20 @.@ 0 km2 ( 8 sq mi ) in the winter are possible depending on the quality of the habitat . Male and female fishers have overlapping territories . This behavior is imposed on females by males due to dominance in size and a male desire to increase mating success . 
 = = = Parasites = = = 
 Parasites of fishers include Baylisascaris <unk> , Taenia sibirica , nematode <unk> sp . , Alaria <unk> , trematode Metorchis conjunctus , nematode Trichinella spiralis and <unk> sp . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Although fishers are competent tree climbers , they spend most of their time on the forest floor and prefer continuous forest to other habitats . Fishers have been found in extensive conifer forests typical of the boreal forest but are also common in mixed hardwood and conifer forests . Fishers prefer areas with continuous overhead cover with greater than 80 % coverage and will avoid areas with less than 50 % coverage . Fishers are more likely to be found in old @-@ growth forests . Since female fishers require moderately large trees for denning , forests that have been heavily logged and have extensive second growth appears to be unsuitable for their needs . 
 Another factor that fishers select for are forest floors that have large amounts of coarse woody debris . In western forests , where fire regularly removes understorey debris , fishers show a preference for riparian woodland habitat . Fishers tend to avoid areas with deep snow . Habitat is also affected by snow compaction and moisture content . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Fishers are widespread throughout the northern forests of North America . They are found from Nova Scotia in the east to the Pacific shore of British Columbia and Alaska . They can be found as far north as Great Slave Lake in the Northwest Territories and as far south as the mountains of Oregon . There are isolated populations in the Sierra Nevada of California and the Appalachian Mountains of Pennsylvania and West Virginia . 
 In the late 19th century and early 20th century , fishers were virtually eliminated from the southern and eastern parts of their range including most American states and eastern Canada including Nova Scotia . Over @-@ trapping and loss of forest habitat were the reasons for the decline . 
 Most states had placed restrictions on fisher trapping by the 1930s , coincidental with the end of the logging boom . A combination of forest regrowth in abandoned farmlands and improved forest management practices increased available habitat and allowed remnant populations to recover . Populations have since recovered sufficiently that the species is no longer endangered . Increasing forest cover in eastern North America means that fisher populations will remain sufficiently robust for the near future . Between 1955 and 1985 , some states had allowed limited trapping to resume . In areas where fishers were eliminated , porcupine populations subsequently increased . Areas with a high density of porcupines were found to have extensive damage to timber crops . In these cases , fishers were reintroduced by releasing adults relocated from other places into the forest . Once the fisher populations became reestablished , porcupine numbers returned to natural levels . In Washington State , fisher sightings were reported into the 1980s , but an extensive survey in the 1990s did not locate any . 
 Scattered fisher populations now exist in the Pacific Northwest . In 1961 , fishers from British Columbia and Minnesota were re @-@ introduced in Oregon to the southern Cascades near Klamath Falls and also to the Wallowa Mountains near La Grande . From 1977 @-@ 1980 , fishers were introduced to the region around Crater Lake . Starting in January 2008 , fishers were reintroduced into Washington State . The initial reintroduction was on the Olympic peninsula ( 90 animals ) , with subsequent reintroductions into the south Cascade mountains . The reintroduced animals are monitored by radio collars and remote cameras , and have been shown to be reproducing . From 2008 to 2011 , about 40 fishers were re @-@ introduced in the northern Sierra Nevada near Stirling City , complementing fisher populations in Yosemite National Park and along California 's northern boundary between the Pacific Coast Ranges and the Klamath Mountains . Fishers are a protected species in Oregon , Washington , and Wyoming . In Idaho and California , fishers are protected through a closed trapping season , but they are not afforded any specific protection ; however , it is expected that in California the fisher will probably be granted listing under the Endangered Species Act in 2014 . In June 2011 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recommended that fishers be removed from the endangered list in Idaho , Montana , and Wyoming . It also recommended further study to ensure that current populations are managed properly . 
 Recent studies , as well as anecdotal evidence , show that fishers have begun making inroads into suburban backyards , farmland , and <unk> areas in several US states and eastern Canada , as far south as most of northern Massachusetts , New York , Connecticut , and even rural New Jersey . Some reports have shown that populations have begun even on Cape Cod , although the populations are likely smaller than the populations in the western part of New England . 
 = = Fishers and people = = 
 Fishers have had a long history of contact with humans , but most of it has been to the detriment of fisher populations . <unk> attacks on humans are extremely rare , but fishers will attack if they feel threatened or cornered . In one case , a fisher was blamed for an attack on a six @-@ year @-@ old boy . In another case , a fisher is believed to be responsible for an attack on a twelve @-@ year @-@ old boy . 
 In 2003 , a new minor league baseball team based in Manchester , New Hampshire held a " Name The Team " contest ; the name New Hampshire Fisher Cats was chosen by the public from a list of suggestions reflecting the local culture and environment . 
 = = = Fur trade and conservation = = = 
 Fishers have been trapped since the 18th century . They have been popular with trappers due to the value of their fur , which has been used for scarves and neck pieces . The best pelts are from winter trapping with secondary quality pelts from spring trapping . The lowest @-@ quality furs come from out @-@ of @-@ season trapping when fishers are moulting . They are easily trapped , and the value of their fur was a particular incentive for catching this species . 
 Prices for pelts have varied considerably over the past 100 years . They were highest in the 1920s and 1930s , when average prices were about $ 100 US . In 1936 , pelts were being offered for sale in New York City for $ 450 – 750 per pelt . Prices declined through the 1960s but picked up again in the late 1970s . In 1979 , the Hudson 's Bay Company paid $ 410 for one female pelt . In 1999 , 16 @,@ 638 pelts were sold in Canada for $ 449 @,@ 307 ( CAN ) at an average price of $ 27 . 
 Between 1900 and 1940 , fishers were threatened with near @-@ extinction in the southern part of their range due to <unk> and alterations to their habitat . In New England , fishers , along with most other <unk> , were nearly exterminated due to unregulated trapping . Fishers became extirpated in many northern U.S. states after 1930 , but were still abundant enough in Canada to maintain a harvest of over 3 @,@ 000 fishers per year ( see figure ) . Limited protection was afforded in the early 20th century , but it was not until 1934 that total protection was finally given to the few remaining fishers . Closed seasons , habitat recovery , and reintroductions have restored fishers to much of their original range . 
 Trapping resumed in the U.S. after 1962 once numbers had recovered to sufficient numbers . During the early 1970s , the value of fisher pelts soared , leading to another population crash in 1976 . After a couple of years of closed seasons , fisher trapping re @-@ opened in 1979 with a shortened season and restricted bag limits . The population has steadily increased since then , with steadily increasing numbers of trapped animals , despite a much lower pelt value . 
 = = = Captivity = = = 
 Fishers have been captured live for fur farming , zoo specimens , and scientific research . From 1920 – 1946 , pelt prices averaged about $ 137 CAN . Since pelts were relatively valuable , attempts were made to raise fishers on farms . Fur farming was popular with other species such as mink and ermine , so it was thought that the same techniques could be applied to fishers . However , farmers found it difficult to raise fishers due to their unusual reproductive cycle . In general , knowledge of delayed implantation in fishers was unknown at the time . Farmers noted that females mated in the spring but did not give birth . Due to declining pelt prices , most fisher farms closed operations by the late 1940s . 
 Fishers have also been captured and bred by zoos , but they are not a common zoo species . Fishers are poor animals to exhibit because , in general , they hide from visitors all day . Some zoos have had difficulty keeping fishers alive since they are susceptible to many diseases in captivity . Yet there is at least one example of a fisher kept in captivity that lived to be ten years old , well beyond its natural lifespan of 7 years . 
 In 1974 , R.A. Powell raised two fisher kits for the purpose of performing scientific research . His primary interest was an attempt to measure the activity of fishers in order to determine how much food the animals required to function . He did this by running them through treadmill exercises that simulated activity in the wild . He compared this to their food intake and used the data to estimate daily food requirements . The research lasted for two years . After one year , one of the fishers died due to unknown causes . The second was released back into the wilderness of Michigan 's Upper Peninsula . 
 = = = Interactions with domestic animals = = = 
 In some areas , fishers can become pests to farmers when they raid chicken coops . There have been a few instances of fishers preying on cats and small dogs ; but in general , the evidence suggests these attacks are rare . A 1979 study examined the stomach contents of all fishers trapped in the state of New Hampshire ; cat hairs were found in only 1 of over 1 @,@ 000 stomachs . More recent studies in suburban upstate New York and Massachusetts found no cat remains in 24 and 226 fisher diet samples ( scat and stomach contents ) respectively . While there is popular belief for more frequent attacks on pets , zoologists suggest bobcats or coyotes are more likely to prey upon domestic cats and chickens . 
 = = = Poisoning = = = 
 In 2012 , a study conducted by Integral Ecology Research Center , UC Davis , US Forest Service , and the Hoopa Tribe showed that fishers in California were exposed to and killed by anticoagulant rodenticides associated with marijuana cultivation . In this study , 79 % of fishers that were tested in California were exposed to an average of 1 @.@ 61 different anticoagulant rodenticides and four fishers died directly attributed to these toxicants . A 2015 follow @-@ up study building on this data determined that the trend of exposure and mortality from these toxicants increased to 85 % , that California fishers were now exposed to an average of 1 @.@ 73 different anticoagulant rodenticides , and that nine more fishers died , bringing the total to 13 . The extent of marijuana cultivation within fishers ' home ranges was highlighted in a 2013 study focusing on fisher survival and impacts from marijuana cultivation within the Sierra National Forest . Research showed that fishers had an average of 5 @.@ 3 individual grow sites within their home range . One fisher had 16 individual grow sites within its territory . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 One of the first mentions of fishers in literature occurred in The Audubon Book of True Nature Stories . Robert Snyder relates a tale of his encounter with fishers in the woods of the Adirondack Mountains of New York . He recounts three sightings , including one where he witnessed a fisher attacking a porcupine . 
 In Winter of the Fisher , Cameron Langford relates a fictional encounter between a fisher and an aging recluse living in the forest . The recluse frees the fisher from a trap and nurses it back to health . The fisher tolerates the attention , but being a wild animal , returns to the forest when well enough . Langford uses the ecology and known habits of the fisher to weave a tale of survival and tolerance in the northern woods of Canada . 
 Fishers are mentioned in several other books including The Blood Jaguar ( an animal shaman ) , <unk> 's Birthday ( a porcupine hunter ) and in The Sign of the Beaver , where a fisher is thought to have been caught in a trap . 
 = Hans Bethe = 
 Hans Albrecht Bethe ( German : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; July 2 , 1906 – March 6 , 2005 ) was a German and American nuclear physicist who , in addition to making important contributions to astrophysics , quantum electrodynamics and solid @-@ state physics , won the 1967 Nobel Prize in Physics for his work on the theory of stellar nucleosynthesis . 
 For most of his career , Bethe was a professor at Cornell University . During World War II , he was head of the Theoretical Division at the secret Los Alamos laboratory which developed the first atomic bombs . There he played a key role in calculating the critical mass of the weapons and developing the theory behind the implosion method used in both the Trinity test and the " Fat Man " weapon dropped on Nagasaki in August 1945 . 
 After the war , Bethe also played an important role in the development of the hydrogen bomb , though he had originally joined the project with the hope of proving it could not be made . Bethe later campaigned with Albert Einstein and the Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists against nuclear testing and the nuclear arms race . He helped persuade the Kennedy and Nixon administrations to sign , respectively , the 1963 Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and 1972 Anti @-@ Ballistic Missile Treaty ( SALT I ) . 
 His scientific research never ceased and he was publishing papers well into his nineties , making him one of the few scientists to have published at least one major paper in his field during every decade of his career – which , in Bethe 's case , spanned nearly seventy years . Freeman Dyson , once one of his students , called him the " supreme problem @-@ solver of the 20th century " . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Bethe was born in Strasbourg , which was then part of Germany , on July 2 , 1906 , the only child of Anna ( née Kuhn ) and Albrecht Bethe , a privatdozent of physiology at the University of Strasbourg . Although his mother , the daughter of a professor at the University of Strasbourg , was Jewish , he was raised a Protestant like his father . Despite having a religious background , he was not religious in later life , and described himself as an atheist . 
 His father accepted a position as professor and director of the Institute of Physiology at the University of Kiel in 1912 , and the family moved into the director 's apartment at the Institute . He was initially schooled privately by a professional teacher as part of a group of eight girls and boys . The family moved again in 1915 when his father became the head of the new Institute of Physiology at the University of Frankfurt am Main . 
 Bethe attended the Goethe @-@ Gymnasium in Frankfurt , Germany . His education was interrupted in 1916 , when he contracted tuberculosis , and he was sent to Bad Kreuznach to recuperate . By 1917 , he had recovered sufficiently to attend the local <unk> , and the following year he was sent to the <unk> , a private , coeducational boarding school . He attended the Goethe @-@ Gymnasium again for his final three years of secondary schooling , from 1922 to 1924 . 
 Having passed his abitur , Bethe entered the University of Frankfurt in 1924 . He decided to major in chemistry . The instruction in physics was poor , and while there were distinguished mathematicians in Frankfurt like Carl Ludwig Siegel and Otto <unk> , Bethe disliked their approaches , which presented mathematics without reference to the other sciences . Bethe found that he was a poor experimentalist who destroyed his lab coat by spilling sulfuric acid on it , but he found the advanced physics taught by the associate professor , Walter Gerlach , more interesting . Gerlach left in 1925 , and was replaced by Karl Meissner , who advised Bethe that he should go to a university with a better school of theoretical physics , specifically the University of Munich , where he could study under Arnold Sommerfeld . 
 Bethe entered the University of Munich in April 1926 , where Sommerfeld took him on as a student on Meissner 's recommendation . Sommerfeld taught an advanced course on differential equations in physics , which Bethe enjoyed . Because he was such a renowned scholar , Sommerfeld frequently received advance copies of scientific papers , which he put up for discussion at weekly evening seminars . When Bethe arrived , Sommerfeld had just received Erwin Schrödinger 's papers on wave mechanics . 
 For his PhD thesis , Sommerfeld suggested that Bethe examine electron diffraction in crystals . As a starting point , Sommerfeld suggested Paul Ewald 's 1914 paper on X @-@ ray diffraction in crystals . Bethe later recalled that he became too ambitious , and , in pursuit of greater accuracy , his calculations became unnecessarily complicated . When he met Wolfgang Pauli for the first time , Pauli told him : " After Sommerfeld 's tales about you , I had expected much better from you than your thesis . " " I guess from Pauli , " Bethe later recalled , " that was a compliment . " 
 = = Early work = = 
 After Bethe received his doctorate , Erwin Madelung offered him an assistantship in Frankfurt , and in September 1928 Bethe moved in with his father , who had recently divorced his mother . His father met Vera <unk> earlier that year , and married her in 1929 . They had two children , Doris , born in 1933 , and Klaus , born in 1934 . Bethe did not find the work in Frankfurt very stimulating , and in 1929 he accepted an offer from Ewald at the Technische Hochschule in Stuttgart . While there , he wrote what he considered to be his greatest paper , Zur Theorie des <unk> <unk> <unk> durch <unk> ( " The Theory of the Passage of Fast <unk> Rays Through Matter " ) . Starting from Max Born 's interpretation of the Schrödinger equation , Bethe produced a simplified formula for collision problems using a Fourier transform , which is known today as the Bethe formula . He submitted this paper for his habilitation in 1930 . 
 Sommerfeld recommended Bethe for a Rockefeller Foundation Travelling Scholarship in 1929 . This provided $ 150 a month ( about $ 2 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars ) to study abroad . In 1930 , Bethe chose to do postdoctoral work at the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge in England , where he worked under the supervision of Ralph Fowler . At the request of Patrick Blackett , who was working with cloud chambers , Bethe created a relativistic version of the Bethe formula . Bethe was also known for his sense of humor , and with Guido Beck and Wolfgang <unk> , two other postdoctoral research fellows , created a hoax paper On the Quantum Theory of the Temperature of Absolute Zero where he calculated the fine structure constant from the absolute zero temperature in Celsius units , causing a scandal in the scientific world . The paper poked fun at a certain class of papers in theoretical physics of the day , which were purely speculative and based on spurious numerical arguments such as Arthur Eddington 's attempts to explain the value of the fine structure constant from fundamental quantities in an earlier paper . They were forced to issue an apology . 
 For the second half of his scholarship , Bethe chose to go to Enrico Fermi 's laboratory in Rome in February 1931 . He was greatly impressed by Fermi and regretted that he had not gone to Rome first . Bethe developed the Bethe <unk> , a method for finding the exact solutions for the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of certain one @-@ dimensional quantum many @-@ body models . He was influenced by Fermi 's simplicity and Sommerfeld 's rigor in approaching problems , and these qualities influenced his own later research . 
 The Rockefeller Foundation offered an extension of Bethe 's fellowship , allowing him to return to Italy in 1932 . In the meantime , Bethe worked for Sommerfeld in Munich as a privatdozent . Since Bethe was fluent in English , Sommerfeld had Bethe supervise all his English @-@ speaking postdoctoral fellows , including Lloyd P. Smith from Cornell University . Bethe accepted a request from Karl Scheel to write an article for the Handbuch der Physik on the quantum mechanics of hydrogen and helium . Reviewing the article decades later , Robert Bacher and Victor Weisskopf noted that it was unusual in the depth and breadth of its treatment of the subject , yet required very little updating for the 1959 edition . Bethe was then asked by Sommerfeld to help him with the <unk> article on electrons in metals . The article covered the basis of what is now called solid state physics . Bethe took a very new field and provided a clear , coherent and complete coverage of it . His work on the <unk> articles occupied most of his time in Rome , but he also co @-@ wrote a paper with Fermi on another new field , quantum electrodynamics , describing the relativistic interactions of charged particles . 
 In 1932 , Bethe accepted an appointment as an assistant professor at the University of Tübingen , where Hans Geiger was the professor of experimental physics . One of the first laws passed by the new National Socialist government was the Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service . Due to his Jewish background , Bethe was dismissed from his job at the University , which was a government post . Geiger refused to help , but Sommerfeld immediately gave Bethe back his fellowship at Munich . Sommerfeld spent much of the summer term of 1933 finding places for Jewish students and colleagues . 
 Bethe left Germany in 1933 , moving to England after receiving an offer for a position as lecturer at the University of Manchester for a year through Sommerfeld 's connection to William Lawrence Bragg . He moved in with his friend Rudolf Peierls and Peierls ' wife Genia . Peierls was a fellow German physicist who had also been barred from academic positions in Germany because his parents were Jewish . This meant that Bethe had someone to speak to in German , and did not have to eat English food . Their relationship was professional as well as personal . Peierls aroused Bethe 's interest in nuclear physics . After James Chadwick and Maurice Goldhaber discovered the photodisintegration of deuterium , Chadwick challenged Bethe and Peierls to come up with a theoretical explanation of this phenomenon . This they did on the four @-@ hour train ride from Cambridge back to Manchester . Bethe would investigate further in the years ahead . 
 In 1933 , the physics department at Cornell was looking for a new theoretical physicist , and Lloyd Smith strongly recommended Bethe . This was supported by Bragg , who was visiting Cornell at the time . In August 1934 , Cornell offered Bethe a position as an acting assistant professor . Bethe had already accepted a fellowship for a year to work with Nevill Mott at the University of Bristol for a semester , but Cornell agreed to let him start in the spring of 1935 . Before leaving for the United States , he visited the Niels Bohr Institute in Copenhagen in September 1934 , where he proposed to Hilde Levi , who accepted . However , the match was opposed by Bethe 's mother , who did not want him marrying a Jewish girl , and Bethe broke off their engagement a few days before their wedding date in December . 
 = = United States = = 
 Bethe arrived in the United States in February 1935 , and joined the faculty at Cornell University on a salary of $ 3 @,@ 000 . Bethe 's appointment was part of a deliberate effort on the part of the new head of its physics department , Roswell Clifton Gibbs , to move into nuclear physics . Gibbs had hired Stanley Livingston , who had worked with Ernest Lawrence , to build a cyclotron at Cornell . To complete the team , Cornell needed an experimentalist , and , on the advice of Bethe and Livingston , recruited Robert Bacher . Bethe received requests to visit Columbia University from Isidor Isaac Rabi , Princeton University from Edward Condon , University of Rochester from Lee DuBridge , Purdue University from Karl Lark @-@ Horovitz , the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign from Francis Wheeler Loomis , and Harvard University from John Hasbrouck Van Vleck . Gibbs moved to prevent Bethe from being poached by having him appointed as a regular assistant professor in 1936 , with an assurance that promotion to professor would soon follow . 
 Together with Bacher and Livingston , Bethe published a series of three articles , which summarized most of what was known on the subject of nuclear physics until that time , an account that became informally known as " Bethe 's Bible " , and remained the standard work on the subject for many years . In this account , he also continued where others left off , filling in gaps in the older literature . Loomis offered Bethe a full professorship at the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , but Cornell matched the offer , and the salary of $ 6 @,@ 000 . He wrote to his mother : 
 I am about the leading theoretician in America . That does not mean the best . Wigner is certainly better and Oppenheimer and Teller probably just as good . But I do more and talk more and that counts too . 
 On March 17 , 1938 , Bethe attended the Carnegie Institute and George Washington University 's fourth annual Washington Conference of Theoretical Physics . There were only 34 invited attendees , but they included Gregory Breit , Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar , George Gamow , Donald Menzel , John von Neumann , Bengt Strömgren , Edward Teller and Merle Tuve . Bethe initially declined the invitation to attend , because the conference 's topic , stellar energy generation , did not interest him , but Teller persuaded him to come . At the conference , Strömgren detailed what was known about the temperature , density and chemical composition of the Sun , and challenged the physicists to come up with an explanation . Gamow and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker had proposed in a 1937 paper that the Sun 's energy was the result of a proton – proton chain reaction : 
 But this did not account for the observation of elements heavier than helium . By the end of the conference , Bethe , working in collaboration with Charles Critchfield , had come up with a series of subsequent nuclear reactions that explained how the Sun shines : 
 That this did not explain the processes in heavier stars was not overlooked . At the time there were doubts about whether the proton – proton cycle described the processes in the Sun , but more recent measurements of the Sun 's core temperature and luminosity show that it does . When he returned to Cornell , Bethe studied the relevant nuclear reactions and reaction cross sections , leading to his discovery of the carbon @-@ nitrogen @-@ oxygen cycle ( CNO cycle ) : 
 The two papers , one on the proton – proton cycle , co @-@ authored with Critchfield , and the other on the carbon @-@ oxygen @-@ nitrogen ( CNO ) cycle , were sent to the Physical Review for publication . After Kristallnacht , Bethe 's mother had become afraid to remain in Germany . Taking advantage of her Strasbourg origin , she was able to emigrate to the United States in June 1939 on the French quota , rather than the German one , which was full . Bethe 's graduate student Robert Marshak noted that the New York Academy of Sciences was offering a $ 500 prize for the best unpublished paper on the topic of solar and stellar energy . So Bethe , in need of $ 250 to release his mother 's furniture , withdrew the CNO cycle paper and sent it in to the New York Academy of Sciences . It won the prize , and Bethe gave Marshak $ 50 finder 's fee and used $ 250 to release his mother 's furniture . The paper was subsequently published in the Physical Review in March . It was a breakthrough in the understanding of the stars , and would win Bethe the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1967 . In 2002 , at age 96 , Bethe sent a handwritten note to John N. Bahcall congratulating him on the use of solar neutrino observations to show that the CNO cycle accounts for about 7 % of the Sun 's energy ; the neutrino observations had started with Raymond Davis , whose experiment was based on Bahcall 's calculations and encouragement , and led to Davis 's receiving a share of the 2002 Nobel Prize . 
 Bethe married Rose Ewald , the daughter of Paul Ewald , on September 13 , 1939 , in a simple civil ceremony . They had two children , Henry and Monica . ( Henry was a contract bridge expert and former husband of Kitty Munson Cooper . ) He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in March 1941 . Writing to Sommerfeld in 1947 , Bethe confided that " I am much more at home in America than I ever was in Germany . As if I was born in Germany only by mistake , and only came to my true homeland at 28 . " 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 When the Second World War began , Bethe wanted to contribute to the war effort , but was unable to work on classified projects until he became a citizen . Following the advice of the Caltech aerodynamicist Theodore von Kármán , Bethe collaborated with his friend Teller on a theory of shock waves which are generated by the passage of a projectile through a gas . Bethe considered it one of their most influential papers . He also worked on a theory of armor penetration , which was immediately classified by the Army , making it inaccessible to Bethe , who was not an American citizen at the time . 
 After receiving security clearance in December 1941 , Bethe joined the MIT Radiation Laboratory , where he invented the Bethe @-@ hole directional coupler , which is used in microwave waveguides such as those used in radar sets . In Chicago in June 1942 , and then at the University of California , Berkeley , in July , he participated in a series of meetings at the invitation of Robert Oppenheimer , which discussed the first designs for the atomic bomb . They went over the preliminary calculations by Robert Serber , Stan Frankel , and others , and discussed the possibilities of using uranium @-@ 235 and plutonium . Teller then raised the prospect of a thermonuclear device , Teller 's " Super " bomb . At one point Teller asked if the nitrogen in the atmosphere could be set alight . It fell to Bethe and Emil Konopinski to perform the calculations to prove that this could not occur . " The fission bomb had to be done , " he later recalled , " because the Germans were presumably doing it . " 
 When Oppenheimer was put in charge of forming a secret weapons design laboratory , Los Alamos , he appointed Bethe director of the T ( Theoretical ) Division , the laboratory 's smallest but most prestigious division . This move irked the equally qualified but more difficult to manage Teller and Felix Bloch , who had coveted the job . A series of disagreements between Bethe and Teller between February and June 1944 over the relative priority of Super research led to Teller 's group being removed from T Division and placed directly under Oppenheimer . In September it became part of Fermi 's new F Division . 
 Bethe 's work at Los Alamos included calculating the critical mass and efficiency of uranium @-@ 235 and the multiplication of nuclear fission in an exploding atomic bomb . Along with Richard Feynman , he developed a formula for calculating the bomb 's explosive yield . After August 1944 , when the laboratory was reorganized and reoriented to solve the problem of the implosion of the plutonium bomb , Bethe spent much of his time studying the hydrodynamic aspects of implosion , a job which he continued into 1944 . In 1945 , he worked on the neutron initiator , and later on radiation propagation from an exploding atomic bomb . The Trinity nuclear test validated the accuracy of T Division 's results . When it was detonated in the New Mexico desert on July 16 , 1945 , Bethe 's immediate concern was for its efficient operation , and not its moral implications . He is reported to have commented : " I am not a philosopher . " 
 = = Hydrogen bomb = = 
 After the war , Bethe argued that a crash project for the hydrogen bomb should not be attempted , though after President Harry Truman announced the beginning of such a project , and the outbreak of the Korean War , Bethe signed up and played a key role in the weapon 's development . Though he would see the project through to its end , Bethe hoped that it would be impossible to create the hydrogen bomb . He would later remark in 1968 on the apparent contradiction in his stance , having first opposed the development of the weapon and later helping to create it : 
 Just a few months before , the Korean war had broken out , and for the first time I saw direct confrontation with the communists . It was too disturbing . The cold war looked as if it were about to get hot . I knew then I had to reverse my earlier position . If I did not work on the bomb , somebody else would — and I had thought if I were around Los Alamos I might still be a force for disarmament . So I agreed to join in developing the H @-@ bomb . It seemed quite logical . But sometimes I wish I were a more consistent idealist . 
 As for his own role in the project , and its relation to the dispute over who was responsible for the design , Bethe later said that : 
 After the H @-@ bomb was made , reporters started to call Teller the father of the H @-@ bomb . For the sake of history , I think it is more precise to say that Ulam is the father , because he provided the seed , and Teller is the mother , because he remained with the child . As for me , I guess I am the midwife . 
 In 1954 , Bethe testified on behalf of J. Robert Oppenheimer during the Oppenheimer security hearing . Specifically , Bethe argued that Oppenheimer 's stances against developing the hydrogen bomb in the late 1940s had not hindered its actual development , a topic which was seen as a key motivating factor behind the hearing . Bethe contended that the developments which led to the successful Teller – Ulam design were a matter of serendipity and not a question of manpower or logical development of previously existing ideas . During the hearing , Bethe and his wife also tried hard to convince Edward Teller against testifying . However , Teller did not agree , and his testimony played a major role in the revocation of Oppenheimer 's security clearance . While Bethe and Teller had been on very good terms during the prewar years , the conflict between them during the Manhattan Project , and especially during the Oppenheimer episode , permanently marred their relationship . 
 = = Later work = = 
 = = = Lamb shift = = = 
 After the war ended , Bethe returned to Cornell . In June 1947 , he participated in the Shelter Island Conference . Sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences and held at Shelter Island , New York , the conference on the " Foundations of Quantum Mechanics " was the first major physics conference held since the war . It was a chance for American physicists to come to together , pick up where they had left off before the war , and establish the direction of post @-@ war research . 
 A major talking point at the conference was the discovery by Willis Lamb and his graduate student Robert Retherford shortly before the conference began that one of the two possible quantum states of hydrogen atoms had slightly more energy than predicted by the Paul Dirac 's theory ; this became known as the Lamb shift . Oppenheimer and Weisskopf suggested that this was a result of quantum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field . Pre @-@ war quantum electrodynamics ( QED ) gave absurd , infinite values for this ; but the Lamb shift showed that it was both real and finite . Hans Kramers proposed renormalization as a solution , but no one knew how to do the calculation . 
 Bethe managed to work it out on the train from New York to Schenectady . He arrived at a value of 1040 MHz , extremely close to that obtained experimentally by Lamb and Retherford . He did so by realising that it was a non @-@ relativistic process , which greatly simplified the calculations . His paper , published in the Physical Review in August 1947 was only two pages long and contained just 12 mathematical equations , but was enormously influential . Hitherto , it had been assumed that the infinities meant that QED was fundamentally flawed , and that a new , radical theory was required . Bethe demonstrated that this was not necessary . 
 One of Bethe 's most famous papers is one he never wrote : the 1948 Alpher – Bethe – Gamow paper . George Gamow added Bethe 's name ( in absentia ) without consulting him , knowing that Bethe would not mind , and against Ralph Alpher 's wishes . This was apparently a reflection of Gamow 's sense of humor , wanting to have a paper title that would sound like the first three letters of the Greek alphabet . As one of the Physical Review 's reviewers , Bethe saw the manuscript and struck out the words " in absentia " . 
 = = = Astrophysics = = = 
 Bethe believed that the atomic nucleus was like a quantum liquid drop . He investigated the nuclear matter problem by considering the work done by Keith <unk> on perturbation theory . Working with Jeffrey Goldstone , he produced a solution for the case where there was an infinite hard @-@ core potential . Then , working with Baird <unk> and Albert <unk> , he came up with an approximation that converted the scattering equation into an easily solved differential equation . This then led him to the Bethe @-@ <unk> equation , a generalisation of Ludvig <unk> 's approach to three @-@ body scattering . He then used these techniques to examine the neutron stars , which have densities similar to those of nuclei . 
 Bethe continued to do research on supernovae , neutron stars , black holes , and other problems in theoretical astrophysics into his late nineties . In doing this , he collaborated with Gerald E. Brown of Stony Brook University . In 1978 , Brown proposed that that they collaborate on supernovae . These were reasonably well understood by this time , but the calculations were still a problem . Using techniques honed from decades of working with nuclear physics , and some experience with calculations involving nuclear explosions , Bethe tackled the problems involved in stellar gravitational collapse , and the way in which various factors affected a supernova explosion . Once again , he was able to reduce the problem to a set of differential equations , and solve them . 
 At age 85 , Bethe wrote an important article about the solar neutrino problem , in which he helped establish the conversion mechanism for electron neutrinos into muon neutrinos proposed by Stanislav <unk> , Alexei Smirnov and Lincoln Wolfenstein to explain a vexing discrepancy between theory and experiment . Bethe argued that physics beyond the Standard Model was required to understand the solar neutrino problem , because it assumed that neutrinos have no mass , and therefore cannot <unk> into each other ; whereas the MSW effect required this to occur . Bethe hoped that corroborating evidence would be found by the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory ( SNO ) in Ontario , Canada , by his 90th birthday , but he did not get the call from SNO until June 2001 , when he was nearly 95 . 
 In 1996 , Kip Thorne approached Bethe and Brown about LIGO , the Laser Interferometer Gravitational @-@ Wave Observatory , designed to detect the gravitational waves from merging neutron stars and black holes . Since Bethe and Brown were good at calculating things that could not be seen , could they look at the mergers ? The 90 @-@ year @-@ old Bethe quickly became enthused , and soon began the required calculations . The result was a 1998 paper on the " Evolution of Binary Compact Objects Which Merge " , which Brown regarded as the best that the two produced together . 
 = = Political stances = = 
 In 1968 , Bethe , along with IBM physicist Richard Garwin , published an article criticising in detail the anti @-@ ICBM defense system proposed by the Department of Defense . The two physicists described in the article that nearly any measure taken by the US would be easily thwarted with the deployment of relatively simple decoys . Bethe was one of the primary voices in the scientific community behind the signing of the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty prohibiting further atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons . 
 During the 1980s and 1990s , Bethe campaigned for the peaceful use of nuclear energy . After the Chernobyl disaster , Bethe was part of a committee of experts that analysed the incident . They concluded that the reactor suffered from a fundamentally faulty design and human error also had significantly contributed to the accident . " My colleagues and I established , " he explained " that the Chernobyl disaster tells us about the deficiencies of the Soviet political and administrative system rather than about problems with nuclear power . " Throughout his life Bethe remained a strong advocate for electricity from nuclear energy , which he described in 1977 as " a necessity , not merely an option . " 
 In the 1980s he and other physicists opposed the Strategic Defense Initiative missile system conceived by the Ronald Reagan administration . In 1995 , at the age of 88 , Bethe wrote an open letter calling on all scientists to " cease and desist " from working on any aspect of nuclear weapons development and manufacture . In 2004 , he joined 47 other Nobel laureates in signing a letter endorsing John Kerry for President of the United States as someone who would " restore science to its appropriate place in government " . 
 Historian Gregg Herken wrote : 
 When Oppenheimer died , <unk> 's long @-@ time friend , Hans Bethe , assumed the mantle of the scientist of conscience in this country . Like Jefferson and Adams , Teller and Bethe would live on into the new century which they and their colleagues had done so much to shape . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bethe 's hobbies included a passion for stamp @-@ collecting . He loved the outdoors , and was an enthusiastic hiker all his life , exploring the Alps and the Rockies . He died in his home in Ithaca , New York on March 6 , 2005 of congestive heart failure . He was survived by his wife Rose and two children . At the time of his death , he was the John Wendell Anderson Emeritus Professor of Physics Emeritus at Cornell University . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Bethe received numerous honors and awards in his lifetime and afterwards . He became a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1947 , and that year was received the National Academy of Sciences 's Henry Draper Medal . He was awarded the Max Planck Medal in 1955 , the Franklin Medal in 1959 , the Royal Astronomical Society 's Eddington Medal and the United States Atomic Energy Commission 's Enrico Fermi Award in 1961 , the Rumford Prize in 1963 , the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1967 , the National Medal of Science in 1975 , Oersted Medal in 1993 , the Bruce Medal in 2001 , and the Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement in the Sciences by the American Philosophical Society posthumously in 2005 . 
 Bethe was elected Foreign Member of the Royal Society ( ForMemRS ) in 1957 , and he gave the 1993 Bakerian Lecture at the Royal Society on the Mechanism of Supernovae . 
 Cornell named the third of five new residential colleges , each of which is named after a distinguished former member of the Cornell faculty , Hans Bethe House after him , as was the Hans Bethe Center , 322 4th St. NE , Washington , DC , home to the Council for a Livable World , where Bethe was a longtime board member , and the Bethe Center for Theoretical Physics at University of Bonn in Germany . He also has an asteroid , <unk> Bethe , that was discovered in 1990 named after him , as was the American Physical Society 's Hans Bethe Prize . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Bethe , H. A. " Theory of High Frequency Rectification by Silicon Crystals " , Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) Radiation Laboratory , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( October 29 , 1942 ) . 
 Bethe , H. A. " Theoretical Estimate of Maximum Possible Nuclear Explosion " , Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory @-@ Schenectady , N.Y. , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( January 31 , 1950 ) . 
 Bethe , H. A. ; <unk> , R. " Three @-@ body Problem in Nuclear Matter " , University of Southern California @-@ Los Angeles , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( 1967 ) . 
 Bethe , H. A. " Note on Inverse Bremsstrahlung in a Strong Electromagnetic Field " , Los Alamos National Laboratory ( LANL ) , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( September 1972 ) . 
 Bethe , H. A. " Pauli Principle and <unk> Scattering " , Los Alamos National Laboratory ( LANL ) , United States Department of Energy ( through predecessor agency the Atomic Energy Commission ) , ( October 1972 ) . 
 Bethe , H. A. " Fusion Hybrid Reactor " , Sandia National Laboratories , United States Department of Energy , ( August 1981 ) . 
 = Hypothyroidism = 
 Hypothyroidism , also called underactive thyroid or low thyroid , is a common disorder of the endocrine system in which the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone . It can cause a number of symptoms , such as poor ability to tolerate cold , a feeling of tiredness , constipation , depression , and weight gain . Occasionally there may be swelling of the front part of the neck due to goiter . Untreated hypothyroidism during pregnancy can lead to delays in growth and intellectual development in the baby , which is called cretinism . 
 Worldwide , too little iodine in the diet is the most common cause of hypothyroidism . In countries with enough iodine in the diet , the most common cause of hypothyroidism is the autoimmune condition Hashimoto 's thyroiditis . Less common causes include : previous treatment with radioactive iodine , injury to the hypothalamus or the anterior pituitary gland , certain medications , a lack of a functioning thyroid at birth , or previous thyroid surgery . The diagnosis of hypothyroidism , when suspected , can be confirmed with blood tests measuring thyroid @-@ stimulating hormone ( TSH ) and thyroxine levels . 
 Prevention at the population level has been with the universal salt <unk> . Hypothyroidism can be treated with levothyroxine . The dose is adjusted according to symptoms and normalization of the thyroxine and TSH levels . Thyroid medication is safe in pregnancy . While a certain amount of dietary iodine is important , excessive amounts can worsen certain types of hypothyroidism . 
 Worldwide about one billion people are estimated to be iodine deficient ; however , it is unknown how often this results in hypothyroidism . In the United States , hypothyroidism occurs in 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 % of people . Subclinical hypothyroidism , a milder form of hypothyroidism characterized by normal thyroxine levels and an elevated TSH level , is thought to occur in 4 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 5 % of people in the United States . Hypothyroidism is more common in women than men . People over the age of 60 are more commonly affected . Dogs are also known to develop hypothyroidism and in rare cases cats and horses can also have the disorder . The word " hypothyroidism " is from Greek hypo- meaning " reduced " , <unk> for " shield " , and eidos for " form . " 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 People with hypothyroidism often have no or only mild symptoms . Numerous symptoms and signs are associated with hypothyroidism , and can be related to the underlying cause , or a direct effect of having not enough thyroid hormones . Hashimoto 's thyroiditis may present with the mass effect of a goiter ( enlarged thyroid gland ) . 
 Delayed relaxation after testing the ankle jerk reflex is a characteristic sign of hypothyroidism and is associated with the severity of the hormone deficit . 
 = = = Myxedema coma = = = 
 Myxedema coma is a rare but life @-@ threatening state of extreme hypothyroidism . It may occur in those who are known to have hypothyroidism when they develop another illness , but it can be the first presentation of hypothyroidism . The illness is characterized by very low body temperature without shivering , confusion , a slow heart rate and reduced breathing effort . There may be physical signs suggestive of hypothyroidism , such as skin changes or enlargement of the tongue . 
 = = = Pregnancy = = = 
 Even mild or subclinical hypothyroidism has been associated with impaired fertility and an increased risk of miscarriage . Hypothyroidism in early pregnancy , even with limited or no symptoms , may increase the risk of pre @-@ eclampsia , offspring with lower intelligence , and the risk of infant death around the time of birth . Women are affected by hypothyroidism in 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 5 % of pregnancies . Subclinical hypothyroidism during pregnancy has also been associated with gestational diabetes and birth of the baby before 37 weeks of pregnancy . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Newborn children with hypothyroidism may have normal birth weight and height ( although the head may be larger than expected and the posterior fontanelle may be open ) . Some may have drowsiness , decreased muscle tone , a hoarse @-@ sounding cry , feeding difficulties , constipation , an enlarged tongue , umbilical hernia , dry skin , a decreased body temperature and jaundice . A goiter is rare , although it may develop later in children who have a thyroid gland that does not produce functioning thyroid hormone . A goiter may also develop in children growing up in areas with iodine deficiency . Normal growth and development may be delayed , and not treating infants may lead to an intellectual impairment ( IQ 6 – 15 points lower in severe cases ) . Other problems include the following : large scale and fine motor skills and coordination , reduced muscle tone , squinting , decreased attention span , and delayed speaking . Tooth eruption may be delayed . 
 In older children and adolescents , the symptoms of hypothyroidism may include fatigue , cold intolerance , sleepiness , muscle weakness , constipation , a delay in growth , overweight for height , pallor , coarse and thick skin , increased body hair , irregular menstrual cycles in girls , and delayed puberty . Signs may include delayed relaxation of the ankle reflex and a slow heart beat . A goiter may be present with a completely enlarged thyroid gland ; sometimes only part of the thyroid is enlarged and it can be knobby in character . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Hypothyroidism is caused by inadequate function of the gland itself ( primary hypothyroidism ) or by not enough stimulation by thyroid @-@ stimulating hormone ( central hypothyroidism ) . Primary hypothyroidism is about a thousandfold more common than central hypothyroidism . 
 Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of primary hypothyroidism and endemic goiter worldwide . In areas of the world with sufficient dietary iodine , hypothyroidism is most commonly caused by the autoimmune disease Hashimoto 's thyroiditis ( chronic autoimmune thyroiditis ) . Hashimoto 's may be associated with a goiter . It is characterized by infiltration of the thyroid gland with T lymphocytes and autoantibodies against specific thyroid antigens such as thyroid peroxidase , thyroglobulin and the TSH receptor . 
 After women give birth , about 5 % develop postpartum thyroiditis which can occur up to nine months afterwards . This is characterized by a short period of hyperthyroidism followed by a period of hypothyroidism ; 20 – 40 % remain permanently hypothyroid . 
 Autoimmune thyroiditis is associated with other immune @-@ mediated diseases such as diabetes mellitus type 1 , pernicious anemia , myasthenia gravis , celiac disease , rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus . It may occur as part of autoimmune <unk> syndrome ( type 1 and type 2 ) . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Thyroid hormone is required for the normal functioning of numerous tissues in the body . In health , the thyroid gland predominantly secretes thyroxine ( T4 ) , which is converted into triiodothyronine ( T3 ) in other organs by the selenium @-@ dependent enzyme <unk> deiodinase . <unk> binds to the thyroid hormone receptor in the nucleus of cells , where it stimulates the turning on of particular genes and the production of specific proteins . Additionally , the hormone binds to integrin <unk> on the cell membrane , thereby stimulating the sodium – hydrogen antiporter and processes such as formation of blood vessels and cell growth . In blood , almost all thyroid hormone ( 99 @.@ 97 % ) is bound to plasma proteins such as thyroxine @-@ binding globulin ; only the free unbound thyroid hormone is biologically active . 
 The thyroid gland is the only source of thyroid hormone in the body ; the process requires iodine and the amino acid tyrosine . Iodine in the bloodstream is taken up by the gland and incorporated into thyroglobulin molecules . The process is controlled by the thyroid @-@ stimulating hormone ( TSH , thyrotropin ) , which is secreted by the pituitary . Not enough iodine , or not enough TSH , can result in decreased production of thyroid hormones . 
 The hypothalamic – pituitary – thyroid axis plays a key role in maintaining thyroid hormone levels within normal limits . Production of TSH by the anterior pituitary gland is stimulated in turn by thyrotropin @-@ releasing hormone ( TRH ) , released from the hypothalamus . Production of TSH and TRH is decreased by thyroxine by a negative feedback process . Not enough TRH , which is uncommon , can lead to not enough TSH and thereby to not enough thyroid hormone production . 
 Pregnancy leads to marked changes in thyroid hormone physiology . The gland is increased in size by 10 % , thyroxine production is increased by 50 % , and iodine requirements are increased . Many women have normal thyroid function but have immunological evidence of thyroid autoimmunity ( as evidenced by autoantibodies ) or are iodine deficient , and develop evidence of hypothyroidism before or after giving birth . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Laboratory testing of thyroid stimulating hormone levels in the blood is considered the best initial test for hypothyroidism ; a second TSH level is often obtained several weeks later for confirmation . Levels may be abnormal in the context of other illnesses , and TSH testing in hospitalized people is discouraged unless thyroid dysfunction is strongly suspected . An elevated TSH level indicates that the thyroid gland is not producing enough thyroid hormone , and free T4 levels are then often obtained . Measuring T3 is discouraged in the assessment for hypothyroidism . There are a number of symptom rating scales for hypothyroidism ; they provide a degree of objectivity but have limited use for diagnosis . 
 Many cases of hypothyroidism are associated with mild elevations in creatine kinase and liver enzymes in the blood . They typically return to normal when hypothyroidism has been fully treated . Levels of cholesterol , low @-@ density lipoprotein and lipoprotein ( a ) can be elevated ; the impact of subclinical hypothyroidism on lipid parameters is less well @-@ defined . 
 Very severe hypothyroidism and myxedema coma are characteristically associated with low sodium levels in the blood together with elevations in antidiuretic hormone , as well as acute worsening of kidney function due to a number of causes . 
 A diagnosis of hypothyroidism without any lumps or masses felt within the thyroid gland does not require thyroid imaging ; however , if the thyroid feels abnormal , diagnostic imaging is then recommended . The presence of antibodies against thyroid peroxidase ( TPO ) makes it more likely that thyroid nodules are caused by autoimmune thyroiditis , but if there is any doubt , a needle biopsy may be required . 
 If the TSH level is normal or low and serum free T4 levels are low , this is suggestive of central hypothyroidism ( not enough TSH or TRH secretion by the pituitary gland or hypothalamus ) . There may be other features of hypopituitarism , such as menstrual cycle abnormalities and adrenal insufficiency . There might also be evidence of a pituitary mass such as headaches and vision changes . Central hypothyroidism should be investigated further to determine the underlying cause . 
 = = = Overt = = = 
 In overt primary hypothyroidism , TSH levels are high and T4 and T3 levels are low . Overt hypothyroidism may also be diagnosed in those who have a TSH on multiple occasions of greater than <unk> / L , appropriate symptoms , and only a borderline low T4 . It may also be diagnosed in those with a TSH of greater than <unk> / L. 
 = = = Subclinical = = = 
 Subclinical hypothyroidism is a milder form of hypothyroidism characterized by an elevated serum TSH level , but with a normal serum free thyroxine level . This milder form of hypothyroidism is most commonly caused by Hashimoto 's thyroiditis . In adults it is diagnosed when TSH levels are greater than 5 mIU / L and less than <unk> / L. The presentation of subclinical hypothyroidism is variable and classic signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism may not be observed . Of people with subclinical hypothyroidism , a proportion will develop overt hypothyroidism each year . In those with detectable antibodies against thyroid peroxidase ( TPO ) , this occurs in 4 @.@ 3 % , while in those with no detectable antibodies , this occurs in 2 @.@ 6 % . Those with subclinical hypothyroidism and detectable anti @-@ TPO antibodies who do not require treatment should have repeat thyroid function tests more frequently ( e.g. yearly ) compared with those who do not have antibodies . 
 = = = Pregnancy = = = 
 During pregnancy , the thyroid gland must produce 50 % more thyroid hormone to provide enough thyroid hormone for the developing fetus and the expectant mother . In pregnancy , free thyroxine levels may be lower than anticipated due to increased binding to thyroid binding globulin and decreased binding to albumin . They should either be corrected for the stage of pregnancy , or total thyroxine levels should be used instead for diagnosis . TSH values may also be lower than normal ( particularly in the first trimester ) and the normal range should be adjusted for the stage of pregnancy . 
 In pregnancy , subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as a TSH between 2 @.@ 5 and 10 mIU / l with a normal thyroxine level , while those with TSH above 10 mIU / l are considered to be overtly hypothyroid even if the thyroxine level is normal . Antibodies against TPO may be important in making decisions about treatment , and should , therefore , be determined in women with abnormal thyroid function tests . 
 Determination of TPO antibodies may be considered as part of the assessment of recurrent miscarriage , as subtle thyroid dysfunction can be associated with pregnancy loss , but this recommendation is not universal , and presence of thyroid antibodies may not predict future outcome . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Hypothyroidism may be prevented in a population by adding iodine to commonly used foods . This public health measure has eliminated endemic childhood hypothyroidism in countries where it was once common . In addition to promoting the consumption of iodine @-@ rich foods such as dairy and fish , many countries with moderate iodine deficiency have implemented universal salt <unk> ( USI ) . Encouraged by the World Health Organization , 130 countries now have USI , and 70 % of the world 's population are receiving iodized salt . In some countries , iodized salt is added to bread . Despite this , iodine deficiency has reappeared in some Western countries as a result of attempts to reduce salt intake . 
 Pregnant and breastfeeding women , who require 66 % more daily iodine requirement than non @-@ pregnant women , may still not be getting enough iodine . The World Health Organization recommends a daily intake of 250 µg for pregnant and breastfeeding women . As many women will not achieve this from dietary sources alone , the American Thyroid Association recommends a 150 µg daily supplement by mouth . 
 = = Screening = = 
 Screening for hypothyroidism is performed in the newborn period in many countries , generally using TSH . This has led to the early identification of many cases and thus the prevention of developmental delay . It is the most widely used newborn screening test worldwide . While TSH @-@ based screening will identify the most common causes , the addition of T4 testing is required to pick up the rarer central causes of neonatal hypothyroidism . If T4 determination is included in the screening done at birth , this will identify cases of congenital hypothyroidism of central origin in 1 : 16 @,@ 000 to 1 : 160 @,@ 000 children . Considering that these children usually have other pituitary hormone deficiencies , early identification of these cases may prevent complications . 
 In adults , widespread screening of the general population is a matter of debate . Some organizations ( such as the United States Preventive Services Task Force ) state that evidence is insufficient to support routine screening , while others ( such as the American Thyroid Association ) recommend either intermittent testing above a certain age in both sexes or only in women . Targeted screening may be appropriate in a number of situations where hypothyroidism is common : other autoimmune diseases , a strong family history of thyroid disease , those who have received radioiodine or other radiation therapy to the neck , those who have previously undergone thyroid surgery , those with an abnormal thyroid examination , those with psychiatric disorders , people taking amiodarone or lithium , and those with a number of health conditions ( such as certain heart and skin conditions ) . Yearly thyroid function tests are recommended in people with Down syndrome , as they are at higher risk of thyroid disease . 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Hormone replacement = = = 
 Most people with hypothyroidism symptoms and confirmed thyroxine deficiency are treated with a synthetic long @-@ acting form of thyroxine , known as levothyroxine ( L @-@ thyroxine ) . In young and otherwise healthy people with overt hypothyroidism , a full replacement dose ( adjusted by weight ) can be started immediately ; in the elderly and people with heart disease a lower starting dose is recommended to prevent over supplementation and risk of complications . Lower doses may be sufficient in those with subclinical hypothyroidism , while people with central hypothyroidism may require a higher than average dose . 
 Blood free thyroxine and TSH levels are monitored to help determine whether the dose is adequate . This is done 4 – 8 weeks after the start of treatment or a change in levothyroxine dose . Once the adequate replacement dose has been established , the tests can be repeated after 6 and then 12 months , unless there is a change in symptoms . In people with central / secondary hypothyroidism , TSH is not a reliable marker of hormone replacement and decisions are based mainly on the free T4 level . <unk> is best taken 30 – 60 minutes before breakfast , or four hours after food , as certain substances such as food and calcium can inhibit the absorption of levothyroxine . There is no direct way of increasing thyroid hormone secretion by the thyroid gland . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Adding liothyronine ( synthetic T3 ) to levothyroxine has been suggested as a measure to provide better symptom control , but this has not been confirmed by studies . In 2007 , the British Thyroid Association stated that combined T4 and T3 therapy carried a higher rate of side effects and no benefit over T4 alone . Similarly , American guidelines discourage combination therapy due to a lack of evidence , although they acknowledge that some people feel better when receiving combination treatment . Treatment with liothyronine alone has not received enough study to make a recommendation as to its use ; due to its shorter half @-@ life it needs to be taken more often . 
 People with hypothyroidism who do not feel well despite optimal levothyroxine dosing may request adjunctive treatment with liothyronine . A 2012 guideline from the European Thyroid Association recommends that support should be offered with regards to the chronic nature of the disease and that other causes of the symptoms should be excluded . Addition of liothyronine should be regarded as experimental , initially only for a trial period of 3 months , and in a set ratio to the current dose of levothyroxine . The guideline explicitly aims to enhance the safety of this approach and to counter its indiscriminate use . 
 = = = = <unk> animal thyroid = = = = 
 <unk> thyroid extract is an animal @-@ based thyroid gland extract , most commonly from pigs . It is a combination therapy , containing forms of T4 and T3 . It also contains calcitonin ( a hormone produced in the thyroid gland involved in the regulation of calcium levels ) , T1 and T2 ; these are not present in synthetic hormone medication . This extract was once a mainstream hypothyroidism treatment , but its use today is unsupported by evidence ; British Thyroid Association and American professional guidelines discourage its use . 
 = = = Subclinical hypothyroidism = = = 
 There is little evidence whether there is a benefit from treating subclinical hypothyroidism , and whether this offsets the risks of <unk> . Untreated subclinical hypothyroidism may be associated with a modest increase in the risk of coronary artery disease . A 2007 review found no benefit of thyroid hormone replacement except for " some parameters of lipid profiles and left ventricular function " . There is no association between subclinical hypothyroidism and an increased risk of bone fractures . 
 Since 2008 , consensus American and British opinion has been that in general people with TSH under 10 mIU / l do not require treatment . American guidelines recommend that treatment should be considered if the TSH is elevated but below 10 mIU / l in people with symptoms of hypothyroidism , detectable antibodies against thyroid peroxidase , a history of heart disease or are at an increased risk for heart disease . 
 = = = Myxedema coma = = = 
 Myxedema coma or severe <unk> hypothyroidism usually requires admission to the intensive care , close observation and treatment of abnormalities in breathing , temperature control , blood pressure , and sodium levels . Mechanical ventilation may be required , as well as fluid replacement , <unk> agents , careful <unk> , and corticosteroids ( for possible adrenal insufficiency which can occur together with hypothyroidism ) . Careful correction of low sodium levels may be achieved with <unk> saline solutions or vasopressin receptor antagonists . For rapid treatment of the hypothyroidism , levothyroxine or liothyronine may be administered intravenously , particularly if the level of consciousness is too low to be able to safely swallow medication . 
 = = = Pregnancy = = = 
 In women with known hypothyroidism who become pregnant , it is recommended that serum TSH levels are closely monitored . <unk> should be used to keep TSH levels within the normal range for that trimester . The first trimester normal range is below 2 @.@ 5 mIU / L and the second and third trimesters normal range is below 3 @.@ 0 mIU / L. Treatment should be guided by total ( rather than free ) thyroxine or by the free T4 index . Similarly to TSH , the thyroxine results should be interpreted according to the appropriate reference range for that stage of pregnancy . The levothyroxine dose often needs to be increased after pregnancy is confirmed , although this is based on limited evidence and some recommend that it is not always required ; decisions may need to based on TSH levels . 
 Women with anti @-@ TPO antibodies who are trying to become pregnant ( naturally or by assisted means ) may require thyroid hormone supplementation even if the TSH level is normal . This is particularly true if they have had previous miscarriages or have been hypothyroid in the past . Supplementary levothyroxine may reduce the risk of preterm birth and possibly miscarriage . The recommendation is stronger in pregnant women with subclinical hypothyroidism ( defined as TSH 2 @.@ 5 – 10 mIU / l ) who are anti @-@ TPO positive , in view of the risk of overt hypothyroidism . If a decision is made not to treat , close monitoring of the thyroid function ( every 4 weeks in the first 20 weeks of pregnancy ) is recommended . If anti @-@ TPO is not positive , treatment for subclinical hypothyroidism is not currently recommended . It has been suggested that many of the aforementioned recommendations could lead to unnecessary treatment , in the sense that the TSH cutoff levels may be too restrictive in some ethnic groups ; there may be little benefit from treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism in certain cases . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Worldwide about one billion people are estimated to be iodine deficient ; however , it is unknown how often this results in hypothyroidism . In large population @-@ based studies in Western countries with sufficient dietary iodine , 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 % of the population have overt hypothyroidism . A larger proportion , 4 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 5 % , have subclinical hypothyroidism . Of people with subclinical hypothyroidism , 80 % have a TSH level below the 10 mIU / l mark regarded as the threshold for treatment . Children with subclinical hypothyroidism often return to normal thyroid function , and a small proportion develops overt hypothyroidism ( as predicted by evolving antibody and TSH levels , the presence of celiac disease , and the presence of a goiter ) . 
 Women are more likely to develop hypothyroidism than men . In population @-@ based studies , women were seven times more likely than men to have TSH levels above 10 <unk> / l . 2 – 4 % of people with subclinical hypothyroidism will progress to overt hypothyroidism each year . The risk is higher in those with antibodies against thyroid peroxidase . Subclinical hypothyroidism is estimated to affect approximately 2 % of children ; in adults , subclinical hypothyroidism is more common in the elderly , and in Caucasians . There is a much higher rate of thyroid disorders , the most common of which is hypothyroidism , in individuals with Down syndrome and Turner syndrome . 
 Very severe hypothyroidism and myxedema coma are rare , with it estimated to occur in 0 @.@ 22 per million people a year . The majority of cases occur in women over 60 years of age , although it may happen in all age groups . 
 Most hypothyroidism is primary in nature . Central / secondary hypothyroidism affects 1 : 20 @,@ 000 to 1 : 80 @,@ 000 of the population , or about one out of every thousand people with hypothyroidism . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1811 , Bernard Courtois discovered iodine was present in seaweed , and iodine intake was linked with goiter size in 1820 by Jean @-@ Francois <unk> . Gaspard Adolphe <unk> proposed in 1852 that endemic goiter was the result of not enough iodine intake , and Eugen Baumann demonstrated iodine in thyroid tissue in 1896 . 
 The first cases of myxedema were recognized in the mid @-@ 19th century ( the 1870s ) , but its connection to the thyroid was not discovered until the 1880s when myxedema was observed in people following the removal of the thyroid gland ( <unk> ) . The link was further confirmed in the late 19th century when people and animals who had had their thyroid removed showed improvement in symptoms with transplantation of animal thyroid tissue . The severity of myxedema , and its associated risk of mortality and complications , created interest in discovering effective treatments for hypothyroidism . Transplantation of thyroid tissue demonstrated some efficacy , but recurrences of hypothyroidism was relatively common , and sometimes required multiple repeat <unk> of thyroid tissue . 
 In 1891 , the English physician George Redmayne Murray introduced subcutaneously injected sheep thyroid extract , followed shortly after by an oral formulation . Purified thyroxine was introduced in 1914 and in the 1930s synthetic thyroxine became available , although desiccated animal thyroid extract remained widely used . <unk> was identified in 1952 . 
 Early attempts at <unk> therapy for hypothyroidism proved difficult . After hypothyroidism was found to cause a lower basal metabolic rate , this was used as a marker to guide adjustments in therapy in the early 20th century ( around 1915 ) . However , a low basal metabolic rate was known to be non @-@ specific , also present in malnutrition . The first laboratory test to be helpful in assessing thyroid status was the serum protein @-@ bound iodine , which came into use around the 1950s . 
 In 1971 , the thyroid stimulating hormone ( TSH ) radioimmunoassay was developed , which was the most specific marker for assessing thyroid states in patients . Many people who were being treated based on basal metabolic rate , minimizing hypothyroid symptoms , or based on serum protein @-@ bound iodine , were found to have excessive thyroid hormone . The following year , in 1972 , a T3 radioimmunoassay was developed , and in 1974 , a T4 radioimmunoassay was developed . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 In veterinary practice , dogs are the species most commonly affected by hypothyroidism . The majority of cases occur as a result of primary hypothyroidism , of which two types are recognized : lymphocytic thyroiditis , which is probably immune @-@ driven and leads to destruction and fibrosis of the thyroid gland , and idiopathic atrophy , which leads to the gradual replacement of the gland by fatty tissue . There is often lethargy , cold intolerance , exercise intolerance , and weight gain . Furthermore , skin changes and fertility problems are seen in dogs with hypothyroidism , as well as a number of other symptoms . The signs of myxedema can be seen in dogs , with prominence of skin folds on the forehead , and cases of myxedema coma are encountered . The diagnosis can be confirmed by blood test , as the clinical impression alone may lead to overdiagnosis . <unk> thyroiditis is associated with detectable antibodies against thyroglobulin , although they typically become undetectable in advanced disease . Treatment is with thyroid hormone replacement . 
 Other species that are less commonly affected include cats and horses , as well as other large domestic animals . In cats , hypothyroidism is usually the result of other medical treatment such as surgery or radiation . In young horses , congenital hypothyroidism has been reported predominantly in Western Canada and has been linked with the mother 's diet . 
 = Yugoslav monitor Drava = 
 The Yugoslav monitor Drava was the name ship of the Enns @-@ class river monitors built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . As SMS Enns , she was part of the Danube Flotilla during World War I , and fought against the Serbian and Romanian armies from Belgrade to the lower Danube . In October 1915 , she was covering an amphibious assault on Belgrade when she was holed below the waterline by a direct hit , and had to be towed to Budapest for repairs . After World War I she was provided to the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) , and renamed Drava . 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Drava spent six days shelling airfields near Mohács in Hungary and fought off a small flotilla of Hungarian gunboats . On 12 April , she was attacked by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka divebombers of the Luftwaffe . The anti @-@ aircraft gunners on the ship claimed three enemy aircraft , but nine of the Stukas scored hits , most of which had little effect . Unfortunately for Drava , the last bomb dropped straight down her funnel and exploded in her engine room , killing 54 of the crew , including her captain , Aleksandar Berić . Only thirteen of the crew survived . She was subsequently raised and scrapped by Hungary during their occupation of parts of Yugoslavia . Berić was posthumously awarded the Order of Karađorđe 's Star for his sacrifice , and the base of the Serbian River Flotilla at Novi Sad is named after him . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 The name ship of the Enns @-@ class river monitors was built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy by Schiffswerft Linz and Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino ( STT ) . She was laid down by Schiffswerft Linz at Linz on 21 November 1913 , as part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 1912 Naval Program . When World War I broke out in July 1914 , construction of Enns was well advanced , but Schiffswerft Linz had been taken over by STT , and her machinery was therefore ordered from the STT works near Trieste . On 2 August , the machinery was dispatched by train to Linz and installation began without delay . She was launched in September 1914 , and completed on 17 October of that year . Despite the requirement that Enns and SMS Inn be constructed as sister ships , and the fact that their size and armament were identical , there were significant design differences between the two vessels , as they were constructed by completely independent shipbuilding companies . Enns had an overall length of 60 @.@ 2 m ( 197 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 10 @.@ 3 m ( 33 ft 10 in ) , and a normal draught of 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) . Her standard displacement was 536 tonnes ( 528 long tons ) , and her crew consisted of 95 officers and enlisted men . She had two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by two Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers , and her engines were rated at 1 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 100 kW ) , with a maximum of 1 @,@ 700 ihp ( 1 @,@ 300 kW ) . She was designed to reach a top speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) , and carried 70 tonnes ( 69 long tons ) of fuel oil . 
 Enns was armed with one twin gun turret of 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 45 guns mounted forward , and three single 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 10 howitzer turrets mounted on the aft deck . On the upper deck there were two single 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) L / 50 anti @-@ aircraft guns , one on the port side forward of the funnel , and one on the starboard side to the rear of the funnel . She was also equipped with six 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine guns . The maximum range of her Škoda 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 45 guns was 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Her armour consisted of belt and bulkheads 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick , deck armour 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , and her conning tower and gun turrets were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 The original plans called for open anti @-@ aircraft mounts , but the experience of the existing monitors in the first battles on the Danube against Serbia demonstrated that the mounts needed protection from small arms fire , so armoured barbettes were added . These modifications meant that crew in the conning tower were unable to view directly aft of the ship , so a 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) high rectangular box was placed on top of the conning tower . When standing on a platform inside the conning tower , the crew were then able to look aft . In order to avoid any increase in her draught from these modifications , her hull was lengthened . Due to the urgent need for the ship to be put into service , the planned telescopic mast was not installed , and an alternative mast was constructed using angle iron lattice . Enns was launched on 29 July 1914 and commissioned on 17 October 1914 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The month after Enns was commissioned into the Danube Flotilla she was in action against Serbian forces at Belgrade , under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant ( LSL ) Richard Funk . French artillery support arrived in Belgrade in November , endangering the monitor 's anchorage , with only Enns having the range to match the French guns . On 21 November , Enns engaged the French battery in an artillery duel at a range of 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . This stalemate continued until the following month when the Serbs briefly evacuated Belgrade in the face of an Austro @-@ Hungarian assault . After less than two weeks , the Austrians had to withdraw from Belgrade , and it was soon re @-@ occupied by the Serbs , reinforced by the Russians and French . Enns continued in action against Serbia and her allies at Belgrade until late December , when her base was withdrawn to Petrovaradin for the winter . 
 In January 1915 , British artillery arrived in Belgrade , further bolstering its defences . In mid @-@ February , the monitors redeployed to an anchorage at Zemun . Following the commencement of the Gallipoli campaign , munitions supply to the Ottomans became critical , and despite the failure of an earlier attempt to ship arms and ammunition down the Danube , another attempt was planned . On 30 March , the steamer Belgrad left Zemun , escorted by Enns and the monitor SMS Bodrog . The convoy was undetected as it sailed past Belgrade at night during a storm , but after the monitors returned to base , the steamer struck a mine near Vinča , and after coming under heavy artillery fire , exploded near Ritopek . On 22 April 1915 , a British picket boat that had been brought overland by rail from Salonika was used to attack the Danube Flotilla anchorage at Zemun , firing two torpedoes without success . In September 1915 , the Central Powers were joined by Bulgaria , and the Serbian Army soon faced overwhelming Austrian and German ground troops . In early October , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Third Army attacked Belgrade , and Enns , along with the majority of the flotilla , was heavily engaged in support of the crossings near the Belgrade Fortress and Ada Ciganlija island . During the final river crossing and support of the resulting bridgehead , Enns was near Grosser Krieg Island on 8 October when she received a direct hit below the waterline and her 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) magazine flooded . She was towed out of danger by the armed steamer Almos , and was eventually hauled to Budapest where she was repaired . During repairs , the barbettes on her upper deck were replaced with turrets for the anti @-@ aircraft guns . Despite the fact that the howitzers had not been particularly successful , a plan to replace the aft howitzer mount with a turret similar to that used on SMS Bodrog was not carried out . 
 When she returned to the flotilla after repairs , she saw action at <unk> in early October 1916 , where she contributed to the defeat of the Romanian Flămânda Offensive . The Romanian attempt to cross the Danube to attack the rear of Generalfeldmarschall August von Mackensen 's Austro @-@ Hungarian Third Army was thwarted , and a force consisting of Enns , the monitors SMS Leitha , SMS Temes ( II ) and SMS Szamos , the patrol boat Viza and the armed steamer Balaton destroyed a pontoon bridge near <unk> . After forays against Giurgiu to secure trains loaded with coal and oil , in November Enns and other ships supported the crossing of the Danube by von Mackensen 's army at Sistow . The following month , Enns bombarded <unk> , resulting in the expulsion of enemy troops from the village . From late December 1916 to mid @-@ March 1917 , Enns and other ships of the flotilla wintered at Turnu Severin . 
 In March 1917 , Enns relocated to Brăila in eastern Romania , where it remained until July 1918 . Sent to Linz and Budapest for an overhaul in dry dock , Enns then returned to eastern Romania and was stationed at Reni where she met a group of monitors and patrol boats that had been operating against Russia in the Black Sea . In October 1918 , the Danube Flotilla was under serious threat of being cut off in the lower Danube by French forces after the Bulgarians concluded an armistice with the British and French . After the steamer Croatia was fired on by the French as it tried to get past Lom , she cut her tow line , releasing seven lighters , which ran aground on a sandbank . Croatia was hit , suffered casualties and grounded on the Romanian side of the river . The French retrieved three of the lighters and towed them into the anchorage at Lom . The following day , Enns and two other monitors managed to release three of the remaining lighters while under heavy French fire , and towed them upstream . The flotilla continued to retreat up the Danube , running the gauntlet of French and Serbian forces . With the dissolution of Austria @-@ Hungary , the South Slavs went ashore at Vukovar , and the Austrian , Hungarian and Czech crew members of the flotilla continued on their journey , arriving in Budapest on 6 November , and Enns began flying the Hungarian flag . On 8 December , the monitors were seized by the Allies , and less than two weeks later Enns was towed to Belgrade where she was handed over to Serbia to be maintained on behalf of the soon to be formed Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . 
 = = = Interwar period and World War II = = = 
 Immediately after the armistice , Enns was crewed by sailors of the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS , later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in 1918 – 19 . Under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye concluded in September 1919 , Enns was transferred to the KSCS along with a range of other vessels , including three other river monitors , and was officially handed over to the KSCS navy and renamed Drava in 1920 . Her sister ship Inn was transferred to Romania and renamed <unk> . In 1925 – 26 , Drava was refitted , but by the following year only two of the four river monitors of the KSCS Navy were being retained in full commission at any time . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships were engaging in little gunnery training , and few exercises or manoeuvres , due to reduced budgets . 
 Drava was based at <unk> under the command of Aleksandar Berić , when the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began on 6 April 1941 . She was assigned as flagship of the 1st Mine Barrage Division , and was responsible for the Hungarian border on the Danube , under the operational control of the 30th Infantry Division Osiječka , which was part of the 2nd Army . Drava steamed upstream to Mohács in Hungary to shell the airfield there on 6 and 8 April , but was subjected to daily attacks by the Luftwaffe . On 10 April , Drava and her fellow monitor Morava were ordered to sail downstream to conform with the withdrawals of the 1st and 2nd Army 's from Bačka and Baranja . About 14 : 00 the following day , a Yugoslav lookout near Batina signalled Drava that a group of four Hungarian patrol boats , armed with 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) guns , was coming down the Danube from the direction of Mohács . Drava engaged the patrol boats at a range of 6 – 7 km ( 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 3 mi ) , and drove the small Hungarian flotilla north again . Berić followed this up at 16 : 00 by once again shelling the airfield at Mohács . Morale on the ship was good , but when Berić met with Army elements later that day he became aware of the situation elsewhere , and nine crew deserted . 
 Early on 12 April , with the other three monitors having been scuttled the night before , Drava was attacked by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka divebombers of Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 flying from Arad , Romania . The anti @-@ aircraft gunners on the ship claimed three enemy aircraft , and nine of the Stukas scored hits on her , most of which had little effect . However , the last bomb dropped straight down her funnel and exploded in her engine room , killing 54 of the crew . Only 13 survived , and she sank off <unk> . Having ordered the burning of codes before she sank , Berić and his first officers were among the dead , but two of the successful anti @-@ aircraft gunners were among the survivors . During the occupation of Yugoslavia , Drava was raised and then scrapped by Hungary . Berić was posthumously awarded the Order of Karađorđe 's Star for his sacrifice . In April 2015 , a bust of Berić was unveiled at the village of <unk> , near Stara <unk> . The barracks of the Serbian River Flotilla in Novi Sad are also named after him . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = News = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ = 
 Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ ( 26 May 1908 – 1976 ) was a Vietnamese politician who was the first Prime Minister of South Vietnam , serving from November 1963 to late January 1964 . Thơ was appointed to head a civilian cabinet by the military junta of General Dương Văn Minh , which came to power after overthrowing and assassinating Ngô Đình Diệm , the nation 's first president . Thơ 's rule was marked by a period of confusion and weak government , as the Military Revolutionary Council ( MRC ) and the civilian cabinet vied for power . Thơ lost his job and retired from politics when Minh 's junta was deposed in a January 1964 coup by General Nguyễn Khánh . 
 The son of a wealthy Mekong Delta landowner , Thơ rose through the ranks as a low @-@ profile provincial chief under French colonial rule , and he was briefly imprisoned by Imperial Japan when they invaded and deposed the French during World War II . During this time he met Minh for the first time as they shared a cell . Following World War II , he became the Interior Minister in the French @-@ backed State of Vietnam , an associated state in the French Union . After the establishment of the Republic of Vietnam following the partition , Thơ was sent to Japan as ambassador and secured war reparations . Recalled to Vietnam within a year , he helped to dismantle the private armies of the Hòa Hảo religious sect in the mid @-@ 1950s . Tho led the political efforts to weaken the Hòa Hảo leadership . While Minh led the military effort , Thơ tried to buy off Hòa Hảo leaders . One commander , Ba Cụt , was personally hostile to Thơ , whose father had confiscated the land of Ba Cụt 's family decades earlier . The stand @-@ off could not be ended peacefully in this case , and Ba Cụt was captured and executed . 
 This success earned Thơ the vice presidential slot in December 1956 to widen the popular appeal of Diệm 's nepotistic and sectarian regime . It was reasoned that Thơ 's southern heritage would broaden the regime 's political appeal — Diệm 's family was from central Vietnam and most administrators were not from South Vietnam . Thơ was not allowed to take part in policy decisions and had little meaningful power , as Diệm 's brothers , Nhu and Cẩn , commanded their own private armies and secret police , and ruled arbitrarily . Thơ oversaw South Vietnam 's failed land reform policy , and was accused of lacking vigour in implementing the program as he was himself a large landowner . He was noted for his faithful support of Diệm during the Buddhist crisis that ended the rule of the Ngô family . Despite nominally being a Buddhist , Thơ defended the regime 's pro @-@ Roman Catholic policies and its violent actions against the Buddhist majority . 
 Thơ turned against Diệm and played a passive role in the coup . Upon the formation of the new government , he struggled to keep the nation under control as the MRC and civilian cabinet often gave contradictory orders . Media freedom and political debate were increased , but this backfired as Saigon became engulfed in infighting , and Thơ had a series of newspapers shut down after they used the new @-@ found freedom to attack him . During that time , South Vietnam 's military situation deteriorated as the consequences of Diệm 's falsification of military statistics and the misguided policies that resulted were exposed . Minh and Thơ had a plan to try to end the war by winning over non @-@ communist members of the insurgency , believing that they constituted the majority of the opposition and could be coaxed away , weakening the communists . As part of this policy , which the U.S. opposed , the government chose to take a low @-@ key military approach in an attempt to portray themselves to the Vietnamese public as peacemakers . However , they were deposed in Khánh 's U.S.-backed coup before they could pursue their strategy . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The son of a wealthy southern landowner , Thơ was born in the province of Long Xuyên in the Mekong Delta . He began his bureaucratic career in 1930 , serving the French colonial authorities as a low @-@ profile provincial chief . During World War II , Thơ rose to become the first secretary of the Resident Superior of Annam , the French governor of the central region of Vietnam . During this time , he crossed paths with Ngô Đình Diệm , a former Interior Minister under the French regime in the 1930s . The French thought that Diệm was working with Imperial Japan and tried to have him arrested , but Thơ tipped off Diệm and the Kempeitai , resulting in their escape . 
 In March 1945 , Japan , which had invaded and occupied French Indochina in 1941 during World War II , decided to take direct control and overthrew the French colonial regime . Thơ was thrown into a crowded cell with several other prisoners that had no light or toilet and filled with their own excrement . One of his cellmates was Dương Văn Minh , then a junior officer in the French military forces with whom he would work over the next two decades . Thơ was released first and lobbied to have Minh released as well and the pair remained close friends . 
 Following World War II , Thơ became Interior Minister in the French @-@ backed State of Vietnam under former Emperor Bảo Đại . Following the withdrawal of France from Indochina after the Battle of Điện Biên Phủ , Vietnam was partitioned into a communist north and anti @-@ communist south . Following the proclamation of the Republic of Vietnam — commonly known as South Vietnam — by President Ngô Đình Diệm , who had dethroned Bảo Đại in a fraudulent referendum , Thơ was appointed the inaugural ambassador to Japan . Despite spending most of his time in Tokyo confined to his bed by a fractured hip , Thơ secured reparations from Japan for its imperial occupation of Vietnam during World War II . 
 In 1956 , Diệm recalled him to Saigon to help deal with the Hòa Hảo , a religious sect equipped with a private army . The Hòa Hảo was effectively an autonomous entity in the Mekong Delta , as its private army enforced a parallel administration and refused to integrate into the Saigon administration . While the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) General Dương Văn Minh led the military effort against the Hòa Hảo , Thơ helped to weaken the sect by buying off its warlords . 
 However , one Hòa Hảo commander , Ba Cụt , continued to fight , having had a personal history of bad blood with Thơ 's own family . The orphaned , illiterate Cụt 's adopted father 's rice paddies were confiscated by Thơ 's father , which purportedly imbued Cụt with a permanent hatred towards the landowning class . Cụt was eventually surrounded and sought to make a peace deal so he sent a message to Thơ asking for negotiations so that his men could be integrated into mainstream society and the nation 's armed forces . Thơ agreed to meet Ba Cụt alone in the jungle , and despite fears the meeting was a Hòa Hảo trap , he was not ambushed . However , Cụt began asking for additional concessions and the meeting ended in a stalemate . Cụt was captured on 13 April 1956 and guillotined after a brief trial and his remaining forces were defeated in battle . 
 During this period , Thơ was the Secretary of State for the National Economy . In November , Diệm appointed Thơ as vice president in an effort to widen the regime 's popular appeal . The appointment was endorsed by the National Assembly in December 1956 , in accordance with the constitution . The move was widely seen as an attempt to use Thơ 's Mekong Delta roots to increase the government 's popular appeal among southern peasants , because Diệm 's regime was dominated by family members , Catholics from central Vietnam . 
 = = Diệm era = = 
 Despite the importance of his title , Thơ rarely appeared with Diệm in public and was a figurehead with little influence . The real power lay with Diệm 's younger brothers , Nhu and Cẩn , who commanded private armies and secret police , as well as giving orders directly to ARVN generals . Nhu reportedly once ordered a bodyguard to slap Thơ because he felt Thơ had shown him a lack of respect . Diệm held Thơ in contempt and did not allow him to take part in major policy decisions , despite theoretically being the second most powerful man in the country . Thơ had a rapport with the military officers , having befriended Minh years earlier . He was regarded as a genial and affable administrator with a reputation for making compromises . 
 Thơ was charged with overseeing South Vietnam 's land reform program , because the minister of agrarian reform , Nguyễn Văn Thoi , answered to him . As both men were wealthy landowners , they had little incentive for the program to succeed . The U.S. embassy received angry criticism of Thoi 's lack of enthusiasm towards implementing the policy , stating , " he is most certainly not interested in land distribution which would divest him of much of his property " . 
 Thơ also retained a degree of influence over domestic economic policies , which ran far behind Diệm 's priorities of absolute control over the military and other apparatus through which he maintained his rule . Despite never having been trained in economic matters , Thơ had a prominent hand in the administration of the Commodity Import Program , an American initiative akin to the Marshall Plan , whereby aid was funnelled into the economy through importing licenses rather than money , in order to avoid inflation . However , Thơ 's administration of the program led to the vast majority of the imports being consumer goods for the upper classes , rather than capital goods to develop South Vietnam 's economic capacity . Under Thơ 's watch , the foreign trade deficit hovered between 150 and 200 % , and the gap between the urban elite and the peasant majority grew . American advisers thought Thơ and the Ngô brothers continually went against their counsel because they were either incompetent or simply distrustful and thus did the opposite of what was recommended . 
 Thơ also clashed with Interior Minister Nguyễn Hữu Châu over economic strategy . Châu was the married to Madame Nhu 's sister and appointed due to nepotism , but was later expelled from the Ngô family due to his dissent . The Americans claimed Thơ , who was trained in public security , " knew more about political control than the ' basic laws of the market place ' " . In mid @-@ 1961 , after a visit by U.S. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and pressure from leading American officials , Diệm relieved Thơ of his economic duties . 
 Thơ then began to put try to put pressure on the Americans to influence Diệm . During a fact @-@ finding mission by General Maxwell Taylor , the chief of the U.S. military , and Walt Rostow , Thơ and Minh complained of Diệm 's autocratic ways and religious favoritism towards his fellow Catholics to the disadvantage of the majority Buddhist populace . In 1962 , he told senior U.S. Embassy official Joseph Mendenhall that Diệm 's military subordinates invented arbitrary and falsely inflated figures of Viet Cong fighters . 
 = = Role in Buddhist crisis = = 
 Despite being a Buddhist , Thơ had a reputation for heaping praise on Diệm 's Roman Catholic government . On Diệm 's 62nd birthday , Thơ paid tribute , saying , " thanks to the Almighty for having given the country a leader whose genius was outweighed only by his virtue " . ( Buddhism is a Dharmic religion which does not recognise a supreme being in a theistic sense . ) Thơ later accompanied Diệm to the Roman Catholic <unk> Church to pray for the President . Thơ had little public following , with American Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor calling him " unimpressive " , while prominent State Department official Paul <unk> derided Thơ as a " nonentity " . 
 In another project , the village of La Vang in Quảng Trị Province near the border with North Vietnam , was the scene of a female apparition in the late 19th century . Buddhists claimed that the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara ( also known as <unk> ; Vietnamese : Quan <unk> ) performed the miracle . Diệm 's brother , Ngô Đình Thục , was the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Huế and the foremost religious figure in South Vietnam 's nepotistic regime . Thục declared that the apparition was the Virgin Mary , and ordered that a cathedral be built in place of the makeshift Buddhist pagoda that occupied the site . Thơ made notable financial donations to the project for political reasons . 
 In June , as the Buddhist crisis escalated , Diệm appointed Thơ to lead a government committee to deal with grievances raised by the Buddhist community following the Huế Vesak shootings in which eight Buddhists were killed by government forces while protesting a ban on the flying of Buddhist flags . The committee concluded the Việt Cộng was responsible for the deaths , despite eyewitness accounts and amateur video showing that the government had fired directly at protesters . The committee 's whitewash caused Buddhist protests to escalate . When de facto First Lady Madame Nhu ( herself a Buddhist convert to Catholicism ) mockingly described the self @-@ immolation of Buddhist monk Thích Quảng Đức as a " barbecue " , Thơ refused to condemn her remarks , saying they were " personal opinions " . 
 Thơ was part of an Interministerial Committee , a group of government officials that negotiated a Joint Communique with the Buddhists to end the civil disobedience . An agreement was signed , but never implemented . Thơ was later criticised by the Nhus through their English language mouthpiece , the Times of Vietnam , for the deal . Despite the general amnesty granted to arrested Buddhist activists , on 13 August , Thơ gave a press conference during which he vowed to prosecute the Buddhist victims of the Huế Vesak shootings , and revoking the amnesty and vowing to jail Buddhist demonstrators . 
 At a farewell dinner for U.S. ambassador Frederick Nolting in July , Thơ called for the Buddhists to be " crushed without pity " . He derisively said that Buddhism was not a religion and further claimed that while anybody could become a Buddhist monk , it took years of training to become a Catholic priest . When the Thai ambassador disagreed , citing his own previous monastic training , Thơ taunted him in front of other diplomats . 
 With the pressure on the Diệm regime increasing during the Buddhist crisis , Nhu and Diệm began to shun their cabinet members because they presented arguments contrary to the thinking of the Ngô family . Many ministers attempted to resign , but Thơ was credited with persuading them to stay in office . Finding the situation increasingly intolerable , Thơ also considered resigning but the dissident generals urged him to remain . They were worried that mass resignations would arouse suspicion of a coup plot . 
 = = Prime Minister = = 
 In private , Thơ expressed his displeasure with Diệm 's rule to U.S. officials . He complained of Diệm 's reliance on Nhu in the running of the country , Nhu 's attempt to run a police state through his secret Cần Lao apparatus and the lack of success against the Việt Cộng . During the McNamara Taylor mission to South Vietnam , Thơ confided his belief that the country was heading in the wrong direction to the American delegation , imploring them to pressure Diệm to reform his policies . He privately revealed his belief that of the thousands of fortified settlements built under Nhu 's Strategic Hamlet Program , fewer than thirty were functional . 
 Joseph Mendenhall , a senior Vietnam adviser in the US State Department , advocated the removal of Diệm in a military coup and his replacement with Thơ . Thơ was privately aware that he was the choice of the generals to run the government after the planned overthrow of Diệm . By this time , Diệm and Nhu realized a plot was afoot against them , but did not know that General Tôn Thất Đính , a palace favourite was involved . Nhu ordered Đính and Colonel Lê Quang Tung , the ARVN Special Forces commander , to plan a fake coup against the Ngô family . 
 One of Nhu 's objectives was to trick dissidents into joining the false uprising so that they could be identified and eliminated . Another objective of the public relations stunt was to give a false impression of the strength of the regime . The first stage of the scheme would involve loyalist soldiers , disguised as insurgents , faking a coup and vandalising the capital . A " revolutionary government " consisting of opposition activists who had not consented to being named in the regime would be announced , while Diệm and Nhu would pretend to be on the run . During the orchestrated chaos of the first coup , the loyalists and Nhu 's underworld contacts would kill the leading plotting generals and their assistants , such as Thơ , CIA agent Lucien Conein , and U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge Jr . A fake " counter @-@ coup " was to follow , whereupon the loyalists would triumphantly re @-@ enter Saigon to restore the Diệm regime . However , the plot failed because Đính was part of the coup plot and sent the loyalist forces out of the capital to open the door for the rebels . 
 After the coup on 1 November 1963 , in which Diệm and Nhu were killed the following day , Thơ was appointed Prime Minister by Minh 's military junta five days later , on 6 November 1963 . He was the leading civilian in the provisional government overseen by the Military Revolutionary Council ( MRC ) . Minh had earlier promised U.S. officials that the civilians would be above the generals in the hierarchy . In addition , he was minister for finance and the economy . Thơ 's appointment was not universally popular , with some leading figures privately lobbying for a clean break from the Diệm era . 
 = = = Relationship with junta = = = 
 Thơ 's civilian government was plagued by infighting . According to Thơ 's assistant , Nguyễn Ngọc Huy , the presence of Generals Trần Văn Đôn and Tôn Thất Đính in both the civilian cabinet and the MRC paralysed the governance process . Đính and Đôn were subordinate to Thơ in the civilian government , but as members of the MRC they were superior to him . Whenever Thơ gave an order in the civilian hierarchy with which the generals disagreed , they would go to the MRC and countermand it . 
 Saigon newspapers , which had re @-@ opened following the end of Diệm 's censorship , reported that the junta was paralysed because all twelve generals in the MRC had equal power . Each member of the MRC had the power of veto , enabling them to stonewall policy decisions . The press , which was liberalised following the downfall of Diệm , strongly attacked Thơ , accusing his government of being " tools " of the MRC . Thơ 's record under Diệm 's presidency was called into question , with allegations circulating in the media that he had supported the repression of the Buddhists by Diệm and Nhu . Thơ claimed that he had countenanced Nhu 's brutal Xá Lợi Pagoda raid , attempting to prove that he would have resigned were it not for Minh 's pleas to stay . The media further derided Thơ for the personal benefits that he gained from the Diệm administration 's land policy . Minh defended Thơ 's anti @-@ Diệm credentials by declaring that Thơ had taken part in the planning of the coup " from the very outset " and that he enjoyed the " full confidence " of the junta . 
 At one point in December , Thơ could no longer withstand what the free media were publishing about him and called around 100 journalists into his office . An angry Thơ shouted at the writers and banged his first on the table , assailing them for what he regarded as inaccurate , irresponsible and disloyal reporting . Thơ claimed the media were lying in saying that he and his civilian cabinet were puppets of the generals , and claimed that one of the journalists was a communist while another was a drug addict . He said that his administration would " take steps to meet the situation " if the media did not behave responsibly . Having already had his Information Minister , General Đỗ Mậu , circulate a list of topics that were not to be reported on , Thơ had Mậu close down three newspapers for " disloyalty " on the following day . 
 On 1 January 1964 , a Council of Notables , comprising sixty leading citizens , met for the first time , having been selected by Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo . Its job was to advise the military and civilian wings of the government with a view towards reforming human rights , the constitution and the legal system . Thơ publicly stated that he expected a " rational attitude " coupled with " impartial and realistic judgments " and said that it was part of the provisional government 's quest to " clear the way for a permanent regime , which our people are longing for " . The council consisted almost entirely of professionals and academic leaders , with no representatives from the agricultural or labour movements . It soon became engaged in endless debate and never achieved its initial task of drafting a new constitution . Thơ later admitted that the Council was unrepresentative of South Vietnamese society and had been a failure . He claimed that the council 's desire to move away from the rubber stamp model of Diệm 's National Assembly had caused it to degenerate into a debating society . 
 = = = Policies = = = 
 With the fall of Diệm , various American sanctions that were implemented against South Vietnam in response to the repression of the Buddhist crisis and Nhu 's Special Forces ' Xá Lợi Pagoda raids , were lifted . The freeze on U.S. economic aid , the suspension of the Commercial Import Program and various capital works initiatives were lifted . The United States quickly moved to recognise Thơ and Minh . 
 Thơ 's government halted Nhu 's Strategic Hamlet Program . Nhu had trumpeted the program as the solution to South Vietnam 's difficulties with Việt Cộng insurgents , believing that the mass relocation of peasants into fortified villages would isolate the Viet Cong from their peasant support base . Thơ contradicted Nhu 's earlier reports on the success of the program , claiming that only 20 % of the 8 @,@ 600 existing strategic hamlets were under Saigon 's control , with the rest having been taken over by the communists . Those hamlets that were deemed to be tenable were consolidated , while the remainder were dismantled and their inhabitants returned to their ancestral land . 
 Thơ 's approach to removing Diệm supporters from positions of influence drew criticism from both supporters and opponents of the deposed president . Some felt he was not vigorous enough in removing pro @-@ Diệm elements from authority , whereas others felt that the magnitude of the turnover of public servants was excessive and bordering on vengeance . A number of officials suspected of having engaged in corruption or Diệmist oppression were indiscriminately arrested without charge , most of whom were later released . Đính and the new national police chief , General Mai Hữu Xuân , were given control of the interior ministry . The pair were accused of arresting people en masse , before releasing them in return for bribes and pledges of loyalty . Not all officials under Diệm could automatically be considered pro @-@ Diệm , yet there were calls for further removals of the old guard . The government was criticised for firing large numbers of district and provincial chiefs directly appointed by Diệm , causing a breakdown in law and order during the abrupt transition of power . One high profile and heavily criticised non @-@ removal was that of General Đỗ Cao Trí , the commander of the ARVN I Corps who gained prominence for his particularly stringent anti @-@ Buddhist crackdown in the central region around Huế . Trí was simply transferred to the II Corps in the Central Highlands directly south of the I Corps region . 
 Thơ and the leading generals in the MRC also had a secret plan to end the communist insurgency , which called itself the National Liberation Front ( NLF ) and claimed to be independent of the communist government of North Vietnam . They claimed that most of them were first and foremost southern nationalists opposed to foreign military intervention and U.S. involvement and support of Diệm . The MRC and Thơ thought that an agreement to end the war within South Vietnam was possible . Thơ recalled in later years that his government 's plan was to generate support among the Cao Đài , Hòa Hảo and ethnic Cambodian minorities , elements of which were in the NLF and bring them back into the mainstream fold out of the insurgency into a non @-@ communist pro @-@ West political system . He thought that it was possible to sideline the communists as he described them as " still having no dominance and only a minor position " within the NLF . According to Thơ , this plan was not a deal with the communists or the NLF as his group saw it as a political attempt to coax back non @-@ communist dissidents and isolate those that were communists . 
 The government rebuffed American proposals to bomb North Vietnam on the grounds that such actions would cede the moral high ground , which they claimed on the basis of fighting purely for self @-@ defense . For their part , Minh and Thơ 's leadership group believed that a more low @-@ key military approach was needed for their political campaign against the insurgency . Minh and Thơ explicitly and bluntly turned down the bombing proposal in a 21 January meeting with US officials . Australian historian Anne E. Blair identified this exchange as sealing the regime 's " death warrant " . 
 She pointed out that when the discussion was reported to Washington , the leading US generals in the U.S. military lobbied Defense Secretary Robert McNamara , claiming that it was no longer feasible to work within the parameters laid out by Saigon and that the U.S. should simply take control of anti @-@ communist military policy , thereby necessitating a coup . The Americans became increasingly concerned with Saigon 's reluctance to intensify the war effort , and bombing rebuff was regarded as a critical point . The government 's plans to win over the NLF were never implemented to any degree before the government was deposed . 
 = = = Downfall = = = 
 The provisional government lacked direction in policy and planning , resulting in its quick collapse . The number of rural attacks instigated by the Viet Cong surged in the wake of Diệm 's deposal , due to the displacement of troops into urban areas for the coup . The increasingly free discussion generated from the surfacing of new and accurate data following the coup revealed that the military situation was far worse than what was reported by Diệm . The incidence of Việt Cộng attacks continued to increase as it had done during the summer of 1963 , the weapons loss ratio worsened and the rate of Viet Cong defections fell . The units that participated in the coup were returned to the field to guard against a possible major communist offensive in the countryside . The falsification of military statistics by Diệm 's officials had led to miscalculations , which manifested themselves in military setbacks after Diệm 's death . Aside from battlefield setbacks , something that was outside his remit , Thơ was also becoming unpopular in the military establishment . One of the goals of the various anti @-@ Minh coup plots at the time was to remove Thơ , and the prime minister 's unpopularity helped to distract some of the incumbent officers from the fact that they were the primary target ; at that time , the MRC was moving toward removing Thơ , and Minh was the only senior general to retain confidence in him . 
 On 29 January , General Nguyễn Khánh ousted Minh 's MRC in a bloodless pre @-@ dawn coup ; although Khánh accused the junta of intending to make a deal with the communists and claimed to have proof , he was actually motivated by personal ambition . After Khánh was deposed a year later , he admitted that the allegations against Minh 's group were false . In later years , Khánh , Thơ and Minh 's generals all agreed that the coup was strongly encouraged by the Americans and could not have occurred without their backing . 
 Thơ was apprehended during the coup and put under house arrest while the plotters consolidated their grip on power ; he was then removed from the political scene . The civilian arm of the government was replaced with Khánh appointees , and Thơ left politics , having personally enriched himself during his period in government . His activities after leaving politics are not known . He died in 1976 in Saigon . 
 = Berwyn Heights , Maryland mayor 's residence drug raid = 
 The drug raid at the residence of former Berwyn Heights mayor Cheye Calvo was a controversial action taken by the Prince George 's County , Maryland , Sheriff 's Office and Police Department on July 29 , 2008 . The raid was the culmination of an investigation that began in Arizona , where a package containing 32 pounds ( 15 kg ) of marijuana was intercepted in a warehouse , addressed to the mayor 's residence . Instead of intercepting the package in transit , the police allowed the package to be delivered . Once the package arrived at the house , a SWAT team raided and held the mayor and his mother @-@ in @-@ law at gunpoint , and shot and killed his two dogs , one while it attempted to run away . 
 The event gained national and international media attention . While the Calvos were cleared of wrongdoing , the police were accused by the Calvos and civil rights groups of lacking a proper search warrant , excessive force , and failure to conduct a proper background investigation of the home being raided . Despite the criticisms , no action has been taken against the officers or their respective police departments . In August 2010 , Sheriff Michael A. Jackson stated that " We 've apologized for the incident , but we will never apologize for taking drugs off our streets . Quite frankly , we 'd do it again . Tonight . " 
 = = Raid = = 
 On July 29 , 2008 , a SWAT team from the Sheriff 's Office , agents of the State of Maryland , executing a search warrant and assisting the separate County Police , conducted a raid on the home of Berwyn Heights Mayor Cheye Calvo . The raid was initiated after the Mayor brought a package delivered by the SWAT team into his home . A drug @-@ sniffing dog in Arizona had determined that the package — addressed to the Mayor 's wife — contained 32 pounds ( 15 kg ) of marijuana . While taking control of the residence , Sheriff 's deputies shot Calvo 's two pet Labrador retrievers , including one who was cited by Calvo to be running away from officers . Calvo and his mother @-@ in @-@ law were handcuffed and questioned for several hours , with Calvo wearing just underwear . 
 = = Response of law enforcement agencies = = 
 The incident received wide coverage in the United States and abroad . Immediately following the raid , both the Sheriff 's Office and County Police stated that the Berwyn Heights raid was proper because of the large quantity of drugs involved . 
 On August 7 , 2008 , Mayor Calvo called for a federal investigation of the incident by the U.S. Department of Justice . The local chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) also requested an investigation . In early August , the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) began a civil rights investigation into the incident . 
 On August 8 , 2008 , the County Police cleared the Calvos of any wrongdoing relating to the drug shipment . Chief of Police Melvin High called the Calvos " innocent victims " who were caught up in the drug trafficking ring . While High said he regretted the loss of the Calvo 's dogs , he did not apologize for the actions taken by his officers . 
 In a press conference on the same day as High 's exoneration , Sheriff Michael A. Jackson defended the conduct of the deputies who conducted the raid . However , an internal investigation was launched as with any incident involving the discharge of a deputy 's weapon . The results of the investigation , released on September 4 , 2008 , concluded the conduct of the deputies was appropriate and no wrongdoing was committed . According to the report , the first dog was shot after " engaging an officer " and the second was seen " running towards a second officer " and shot as well . 
 As of December 2008 , the county police has indicated their investigation is not complete . The FBI is still monitoring the situation . In August 2010 while campaigning to be elected county executive , Sheriff Jackson stated , " We 've apologized for the incident , but we will never apologize for taking drugs off our streets .... Quite frankly , we 'd do it again . Tonight . " 
 = = Criticism of police actions = = 
 = = = Improper search warrant = = = 
 During the interrogation , Calvo repeatedly requested to see the search warrant , but his lawyer stated no copy was provided until three days later . A County Police spokesman initially stated that a no @-@ knock warrant had been issued for Calvo 's home . However , after Calvo 's lawyer challenged that statement and media published copies of the warrant , the commander of the county 's narcotics enforcement division stated that no @-@ knock warrants do not exist in the county . However , no @-@ knock warrants were clarified in a 2005 law , sponsored by Baltimore Delegate Curt Anderson , that limits their use to suspects fleeing into a house , or if a suspect is considered armed or is attempting to destroy evidence . 
 = = = Lack of a background investigation = = = 
 During interrogation , Calvo stated that officers did not believe he was the Mayor and for a time refused his request that they contact the Berwyn Heights Police Department ( which was unaware of the raid ) to confirm his identity . Police Chief High stated his department did not know the home was owned by the mayor and his wife . 
 Patrick Murphy , chief of police for the Berwyn Heights Police Department , was especially critical of the county police . Murphy argued that the raid could have been prevented if his department had handled the situation , stating " you can 't tell me the chief of police of a municipality wouldn 't have been able to knock on the door of the mayor of that municipality , gain his confidence and enter the residence " . Furthermore , according to Mayor Calvo , a memorandum of understanding between the county and the city requires county police to inform the city if an operation is being conducted within their jurisdiction . 
 = = = Use of excessive force = = = 
 In an editorial a week after the shooting , The Washington Post criticized the actions of police officers as " a Keystone Cops operation from start to finish " , alluding to the lack of proper execution by the sheriff 's office 's SWAT team . Additionally , groups such as the Cato Institute were critical of the operation and used it as an example of the dangers of the War on Drugs and the militarization of local police departments in the United States . Marc Fisher of the Post also related this incident to the growing prevalence of SWAT units , even in small jurisdictions , noting a massive increase in the amount of SWAT deployments since the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 Further criticism was leveled against the sheriff 's office 's deputies for the shooting of Calvo 's two dogs . Contrary to the official internal investigations conducted by the sheriff 's office and the county , Calvo stated his dogs were not a threat to the deputies . To support his claims , Calvo paid for a necropsy to be conducted on each dog by the Maryland Department of Agriculture . According to the results , one dog was shot four times , including twice in the head and chest . The other dog was shot twice , including once in the back of the leg which bolsters Calvo 's argument that the dog was fleeing and that the force used was " unbelievably excessive " . This version of events was also confirmed by the later testimony of a law enforcement officer present at the raid . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Later arrests = = = 
 Prince George 's County Police later arrested two men in a drug trafficking plan involving the shipment of large parcels of marijuana to addresses of uninvolved residents . After each parcel was delivered outside the addressee 's home , another individual would retrieve the drugs . Police seized six packages containing 417 pounds ( 189 kg ) of marijuana . 
 = = = Internal investigation = = = 
 On June 19 , 2009 , the Prince George 's County Sheriff 's Office issued a report of an internal investigation that cleared its deputies of any wrongdoing in the Berwyn Heights raid . Prince George 's County Sheriff Michael Jackson said during a press conference that the findings of the report " are consistent with what I 've felt all along : My deputies did their job to the fullest extent of their abilities .... In the sense that we kept these drugs from reaching our streets , this operation was a success . " Jackson 's explanation did not address the fact that the package was intercepted in the FedEx warehouse and delivered under police supervision . 
 During the press conference , Jackson gave the first apology for the raid by a county official . " I am sorry for the impact this has had on Mayor Calvo , Ms. <unk> and Ms. Porter and for the loss of their family pets , " Jackson said . " It is extremely unfortunate that a felonious drug trafficker involved this family in his criminal enterprise . " 
 In response to the report , Cheye Calvo issued the following statement : " By commending his deputies for their actions , the Sheriff is placing other innocent families and innocent family pets at risk . There is no excuse for the no @-@ knock entry into our home , the killing of Payton and Chase , and the prolonged handcuffing of my mother @-@ in @-@ law and myself . " 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 A lawsuit was filed in June 2009 against Prince George 's County Sheriff Michael Jackson ; Detective Shawn Scarlata ; the state of Maryland ; Prince George 's County ; and two " John Doe " deputy sheriffs , whose names were not immediately released . In depositions , law enforcement personnel admitted that at least one of the dogs was running away when shot . In January 2011 , the suit was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount of money and various SWAT reforms . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 In 2009 , Mayor Cheye Calvo proposed a measure that would require every Maryland police department that operates a SWAT team to submit biannual reports on its activities , including where and when it was deployed and whether an operation resulted in arrests , evidence seizures , or injuries . The bill passed that same year , despite strong opposition from Maryland 's police agencies . Maryland was the first state to adopt such legislation ; Utah became the second when it passed a similar bill in March 2014 . 
 = Psoriasis = 
 Psoriasis is a long @-@ lasting autoimmune disease which is characterized by patches of abnormal skin . These skin patches are typically red , itchy , and scaly . They may vary in severity from small and localized to complete body coverage . Injury to the skin can trigger psoriatic skin changes at that spot , which is known as Koebner phenomenon . 
 There are five main types of psoriasis : plaque , guttate , inverse , pustular , and <unk> . Plaque psoriasis , also known as psoriasis vulgaris , makes up about 90 % of cases . It typically presents with red patches with white scales on top . Areas of the body most commonly affected are the back of the forearms , shins , around the navel , and the scalp . Guttate psoriasis has drop @-@ shaped lesions . Pustular psoriasis presents with small non @-@ infectious pus @-@ filled blisters . Inverse psoriasis forms red patches in skin folds . <unk> psoriasis occurs when the rash becomes very widespread , and can develop from any of the other types . <unk> and toenails are affected in most people at some point in time . This may include pits in the nails or changes in nail color . 
 Psoriasis is generally thought to be a genetic disease which is triggered by environmental factors . In twin studies , identical twins are three times more likely to both be affected compared to non @-@ identical twins ; this suggests that genetic factors predispose to psoriasis . Symptoms often worsen during winter and with certain medications such as beta blockers or NSAIDs . Infections and psychological stress may also play a role . Psoriasis is not contagious . The underlying mechanism involves the immune system reacting to skin cells . Diagnosis is typically based on the signs and symptoms . 
 There is no cure for psoriasis . However , various treatments can help control the symptoms . These treatments may include steroid creams , vitamin D3 cream , ultraviolet light , and immune system suppressing medications such as methotrexate . About 75 % of cases can be managed with creams alone . The disease affects 2 – 4 % of the population . Men and women are affected with equal frequency . The disease may begin at any age . Psoriasis is associated with an increased risk of psoriatic arthritis , lymphomas , cardiovascular disease , Crohn 's disease , and depression . Psoriatic arthritis affects up to 30 % of individuals with psoriasis . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Plaque = = = 
 Psoriasis vulgaris ( also known as chronic stationary psoriasis or plaque @-@ like psoriasis ) is the most common form and affects 85 % – 90 % of people with psoriasis . Plaque psoriasis typically appears as raised areas of inflamed skin covered with silvery @-@ white scaly skin . These areas are called plaques and are most commonly found on the elbows , knees , scalp , and back . Psoriatic <unk> ( <unk> psoriasis ) involves widespread inflammation and exfoliation of the skin over most of the body surface . It may be accompanied by severe itching , swelling , and pain . It is often the result of an exacerbation of unstable plaque psoriasis , particularly following the abrupt withdrawal of systemic glucocorticoids . This form of psoriasis can be fatal as the extreme inflammation and exfoliation disrupt the body 's ability to regulate temperature and perform barrier functions . 
 = = = Pustular = = = 
 Pustular psoriasis appears as raised bumps filled with noninfectious pus ( pustules ) . The skin under and surrounding the pustules is red and tender . Pustular psoriasis can be localized , commonly to the hands and feet ( <unk> <unk> ) , or generalized with widespread patches occurring randomly on any part of the body . <unk> continua is a form of localized psoriasis limited to the fingers and toes that may spread to the hands and feet . <unk> <unk> et plantaris is another form of localized pustular psoriasis similar to acrodermatitis continua with pustules erupting from red , tender , scaly skin found on the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet . 
 Generalized pustular psoriasis ( pustular psoriasis of von <unk> ) , also known as impetigo herpetiformis during pregnancy , is a rare and severe form of psoriasis that may require hospitalization . The development of generalized pustular psoriasis is often caused by an infection , abrupt withdrawal of topical corticosteroid treatment , pregnancy , hypocalcemia , medications , or following an irritating topical treatment for plaque psoriasis . This form of psoriasis is characterized by an acute onset of numerous pustules on top of tender red skin . This skin eruption is often accompanied by a fever , muscle aches , nausea , and an elevated white blood cell count . <unk> pustular psoriasis ( APP ) , a rare form of generalized pustular psoriasis , is the most common type seen during childhood . APP tends to occur in women more frequently than in men , and is usually less severe than other forms of generalized pustular psoriasis such as impetigo herpetiformis . This form of psoriasis is characterized by ring @-@ shaped plaques with pustules around the edges and yellow <unk> . APP most often affects the torso , neck , arms , and legs . 
 = = = Other skin lesions = = = 
 Additional types of psoriasis affecting the skin include inverse psoriasis , guttate psoriasis , oral psoriasis , and seborrheic @-@ like psoriasis . 
 Inverse psoriasis ( also known as flexural psoriasis ) appears as smooth , inflamed patches of skin . The patches frequently affect skin folds , particularly around the genitals ( between the thigh and groin ) , the armpits , in the skin folds of an overweight abdomen ( known as panniculus ) , between the buttocks in the <unk> cleft , and under the breasts in the <unk> fold . Heat , trauma , and infection are thought to play a role in the development of this atypical form of psoriasis . <unk> psoriasis is a subtype of psoriasis common in infants characterized by red papules with silver scale in the diaper area that may extend to the torso or limbs . <unk> psoriasis is often misdiagnosed as napkin dermatitis ( diaper rash ) . 
 Guttate psoriasis is characterized by numerous small , scaly , red or pink , droplet @-@ like lesions ( papules ) . These numerous spots of psoriasis appear over large areas of the body , primarily the trunk , but also the limbs and scalp . Guttate psoriasis is often triggered by a streptococcal infection , typically streptococcal pharyngitis . The reverse is not true . 
 Oral psoriasis is very rare , in contrast to lichen planus , another common <unk> disorder that commonly involves both the skin and mouth . When psoriasis involves the oral mucosa ( the lining of the mouth ) , it may be asymptomatic , but it may appear as white or grey @-@ yellow plaques . <unk> tongue is the most common finding in those with oral psoriasis and has been reported to occur in 6 @.@ 5 – 20 % of people with psoriasis affecting the skin . The microscopic appearance of oral mucosa affected by geographic tongue ( migratory stomatitis ) is very similar to the appearance of psoriasis . However , modern studies have failed to demonstrate any link between the two conditions . 
 <unk> @-@ like psoriasis is a common form of psoriasis with clinical aspects of psoriasis and seborrheic dermatitis , and may be difficult to distinguish from the latter . This form of psoriasis typically manifests as red plaques with greasy scales in areas of higher sebum production such as the scalp , forehead , skin folds next to the nose , skin surrounding the mouth , skin on the chest above the sternum , and in skin folds . 
 = = = Psoriatic arthritis = = = 
 Psoriatic arthritis is a form of chronic inflammatory arthritis that has a highly variable clinical presentation and frequently occurs in association with skin and nail psoriasis . It typically involves painful inflammation of the joints and surrounding connective tissue and can occur in any joint , but most commonly affects the joints of the fingers and toes . This can result in a sausage @-@ shaped swelling of the fingers and toes known as <unk> . Psoriatic arthritis can also affect the hips , knees , spine ( spondylitis ) , and <unk> joint ( <unk> ) . About 30 % of individuals with psoriasis will develop psoriatic arthritis . Skin manifestations of psoriasis tend to occur before arthritic manifestations in about 75 % of cases . 
 = = = Nail changes = = = 
 Psoriasis can affect the nails and produces a variety of changes in the appearance of finger and toe nails . Nail psoriasis occurs in 40 – 45 % of people with psoriasis affecting the skin and has a lifetime incidence of 80 – 90 % in those with psoriatic arthritis . These changes include pitting of the nails ( pinhead @-@ sized depressions in the nail is seen in 70 % with nail psoriasis ) , whitening of the nail , small areas of bleeding from capillaries under the nail , yellow @-@ reddish discoloration of the nails known as the oil drop or salmon spot , thickening of the skin under the nail ( <unk> hyperkeratosis ) , loosening and separation of the nail ( <unk> ) , and crumbling of the nail . 
 = = = Medical signs = = = 
 In addition to the appearance and distribution of the rash , specific medical signs may be used by medical practitioners to assist with diagnosis . These may include Auspitz 's sign ( pinpoint bleeding when scale is removed ) , Koebner phenomenon ( psoriatic skin lesions induced by trauma to the skin ) , and itching and pain localized to papules and plaques . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The cause of psoriasis is not fully understood , but a number of theories exist . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Around one @-@ third of people with psoriasis report a family history of the disease , and researchers have identified genetic loci associated with the condition . Identical twin studies suggest a 70 % chance of a twin developing psoriasis if the other twin has the disorder . The risk is around 20 % for nonidentical twins . These findings suggest both a genetic susceptibility and an environmental response in developing psoriasis . 
 Psoriasis has a strong hereditary component , and many genes are associated with it , but it is unclear how those genes work together . Most of the identified genes relate to the immune system , particularly the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) and T cells . Genetic studies are valuable due to their ability to identify molecular mechanisms and pathways for further study and potential drug targets . 
 Classic genome @-@ wide linkage analysis has identified nine loci on different chromosomes associated with psoriasis . They are called psoriasis susceptibility 1 through 9 ( PSORS1 through <unk> ) . Within those loci are genes on pathways that lead to inflammation . Certain variations ( mutations ) of those genes are commonly found in psoriasis . Genome @-@ wide association scans have identified other genes that are altered to characteristic variants in psoriasis . Some of these genes express inflammatory signal proteins , which affect cells in the immune system that are also involved in psoriasis . Some of these genes are also involved in other autoimmune diseases . 
 The major determinant is PSORS1 , which probably accounts for 35 % – 50 % of psoriasis heritability . It controls genes that affect the immune system or encode skin proteins that are overabundant with psoriasis . PSORS1 is located on chromosome 6 in the major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) , which controls important immune functions . Three genes in the PSORS1 locus have a strong association with psoriasis vulgaris : HLA @-@ C variant HLA @-@ Cw6 , which encodes a MHC class I protein ; <unk> , variant WWC , which encodes a coiled protein that is overexpressed in psoriatic epidermis ; and <unk> , variant allele 5 , which encodes <unk> , a protein which is expressed in the granular and cornified layers of the epidermis and upregulated in psoriasis . 
 Two major immune system genes under investigation are interleukin @-@ 12 subunit beta ( <unk> ) on chromosome <unk> , which expresses interleukin @-@ 12B ; and <unk> on chromosome 1p , which expresses the interleukin @-@ 23 receptor , and is involved in T cell differentiation . Interleukin @-@ 23 receptor and <unk> have both been strongly linked with psoriasis . T cells are involved in the inflammatory process that leads to psoriasis . These genes are on the pathway that up @-@ regulate tumor necrosis factor @-@ α and nuclear factor κB , two genes involved in inflammation . Recently , the first gene directly linked to psoriasis has been identified . A rare mutation in the gene encoding for the <unk> protein plus an environmental trigger was enough to cause plaque psoriasis ( the most common form of psoriasis ) . 
 = = = Lifestyle = = = 
 Conditions reported as accompanying a worsening of the disease include chronic infections , stress , and changes in season and climate . Others include hot water , scratching psoriasis skin lesions , skin dryness , excessive alcohol consumption , cigarette smoking , and obesity . 
 = = = HIV = = = 
 The rate of psoriasis in HIV @-@ positive individuals is comparable to that of HIV @-@ negative individuals , however , psoriasis tends to be more severe in people infected with HIV . A much higher rate of psoriatic arthritis occurs in HIV @-@ positive individuals with psoriasis than in those without the infection . The immune response in those infected with HIV is typically characterized by cellular signals from Th2 subset of CD4 + helper T cells , whereas the immune response in psoriasis vulgaris is characterized by a pattern of cellular signals typical of Th1 subset of CD4 + helper T cells and Th17 helper T cells . It is hypothesized that the diminished CD4 + <unk> cell presence causes an overactivation of CD8 + <unk> cells , which are responsible for the exacerbation of psoriasis in HIV @-@ positive people . Psoriasis in those with HIV / AIDS is often severe and may be untreatable with conventional therapy . 
 = = = Microbes = = = 
 Psoriasis has been described as occurring after strep throat , and may be worsened by skin or gut colonization with Staphylococcus aureus , Malassezia , and Candida albicans . 
 = = = Medications = = = 
 Drug @-@ induced psoriasis may occur with beta blockers , lithium , antimalarial medications , non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs , <unk> , calcium channel blockers , captopril , <unk> , granulocyte colony @-@ stimulating factor , interleukins , interferons , lipid @-@ lowering drugs , and paradoxically TNF inhibitors such as infliximab or adalimumab . Withdrawal of corticosteroids ( topical steroid cream ) can aggravate psoriasis due to the rebound effect . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Psoriasis is characterized by an abnormally excessive and rapid growth of the epidermal layer of the skin . Abnormal production of skin cells ( especially during wound repair ) and an overabundance of skin cells result from the sequence of pathological events in psoriasis . Skin cells are replaced every 3 – 5 days in psoriasis rather than the usual 28 – 30 days . These changes are believed to stem from the premature maturation of keratinocytes induced by an inflammatory cascade in the dermis involving dendritic cells , macrophages , and T cells ( three subtypes of white blood cells ) . These immune cells move from the dermis to the epidermis and secrete inflammatory chemical signals ( cytokines ) such as tumor necrosis factor @-@ α , interleukin @-@ 1β , interleukin @-@ 6 , interleukin @-@ 36 and interleukin @-@ 22 . These secreted inflammatory signals are believed to stimulate keratinocytes to proliferate . One hypothesis is that psoriasis involves a defect in regulatory T cells , and in the regulatory cytokine interleukin @-@ 10 . 
 Gene mutations of proteins involved in the skin 's ability to function as a barrier have been identified as markers of susceptibility for the development of psoriasis . 
 DNA released from dying cells acts as an inflammatory stimulus in psoriasis and stimulates the receptors on certain dendritic cells , which in turn produce the cytokine interferon @-@ α . In response to these chemical messages from dendritic cells and T cells , keratinocytes also secrete cytokines such as interleukin @-@ 1 , interleukin @-@ 6 , and tumor necrosis factor @-@ α , which signal downstream inflammatory cells to arrive and stimulate additional inflammation . 
 Dendritic cells bridge the innate immune system and adaptive immune system . They are increased in psoriatic lesions and induce the proliferation of T cells and type 1 helper T cells ( Th1 ) . Targeted immunotherapy as well as psoralen and ultraviolet A ( PUVA ) therapy can reduce the number of dendritic cells and favors a Th2 cell cytokine secretion pattern over a Th1 / Th17 cell cytokine profile . Psoriatic T cells move from the dermis into the epidermis and secrete interferon @-@ γ and interleukin @-@ 17 . Interleukin @-@ 23 is known to induce the production of interleukin @-@ 17 and interleukin @-@ 22 . Interleukin @-@ 22 works in combination with interleukin @-@ 17 to induce keratinocytes to secrete neutrophil @-@ attracting cytokines . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 A diagnosis of psoriasis is usually based on the appearance of the skin . Skin characteristics typical for psoriasis are scaly , erythematous plaques , papules , or patches of skin that may be painful and itch . No special blood tests or diagnostic procedures are needed to make the diagnosis . 
 The differential diagnosis of psoriasis includes dermatological conditions similar in appearance such as discoid eczema , <unk> eczema , <unk> rosea ( may be confused with guttate psoriasis ) , nail fungus ( may be confused with nail psoriasis ) or cutaneous T cell lymphoma ( 50 % of individuals with this cancer are initially misdiagnosed with psoriasis ) . Dermatologic manifestations of systemic illnesses such as the rash of secondary syphilis may also be confused with psoriasis . 
 If the clinical diagnosis is uncertain , a skin biopsy or scraping may be performed to rule out other disorders and to confirm the diagnosis . Skin from a biopsy will show clubbed epidermal projections that <unk> with dermis on microscopy . <unk> thickening is another characteristic histologic finding of psoriasis lesions . The stratum <unk> layer of the epidermis is often missing or significantly decreased in psoriatic lesions ; the skin cells from the most superficial layer of skin are also abnormal as they never fully mature . Unlike their mature counterparts , these superficial cells keep their nucleus . Inflammatory infiltrates can typically be visualized on microscopy when examining skin tissue or joint tissue affected by psoriasis . <unk> skin tissue affected by psoriatic inflammation often has many CD8 + T cells while a predominance of CD4 + T cells makes up the inflammatory infiltrates of the dermal layer of skin and the joints . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 = = = = Morphological = = = = 
 Psoriasis is classified as a <unk> disorder and is most commonly subdivided into different categories based on histological characteristics . Variants include plaque , pustular , guttate , and flexural psoriasis . Each form has a dedicated ICD @-@ 10 code . Psoriasis can also be classified into <unk> and pustular types . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Another classification scheme considers genetic and demographic factors . Type 1 has a positive family history , starts before the age of 40 , and is associated with the human leukocyte antigen , HLA @-@ Cw6 . Conversely , type 2 does not show a family history , presents before age 40 , and is not associated with HLA @-@ Cw6 . Type 1 accounts for about 75 % of persons with psoriasis . 
 The classification of psoriasis as an autoimmune disease has sparked considerable debate . Researchers have proposed differing descriptions of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis ; some authors have classified them as autoimmune diseases while others have classified them as distinct from autoimmune diseases and referred to them as immune @-@ mediated inflammatory diseases . 
 = = = = Severity = = = = 
 There is no consensus about how to classify the severity of psoriasis . Mild psoriasis has been defined as a percentage of body surface area ( BSA ) ≤ 10 , a Psoriasis Area Severity Index ( PASI ) score ≤ 10 , and a dermatology life quality index ( DLQI ) score ≤ 10 . Moderate to severe psoriasis was defined by the same group as BSA > 10 or PASI score > 10 and a DLQI score > 10 . The DLQI is a 10 question tool used to measure the impact of several dermatologic diseases on daily functioning . The DLQI score ranges from 0 ( minimal impairment ) to 30 ( maximal impairment ) and is calculated with each answer being assigned 0 – 3 points with higher scores indicating greater social or occupational impairment . 
 The psoriasis area severity index ( PASI ) is the most widely used measurement tool for psoriasis . PASI assesses the severity of lesions and the area affected and combines these two factors into a single score from 0 ( no disease ) to 72 ( maximal disease ) . Nevertheless , the PASI can be too unwieldy to use outside of research settings , which has led to attempts to simplify the index for clinical use . 
 = = Management = = 
 While no cure is available for psoriasis , many treatment options exist . Topical agents are typically used for mild disease , phototherapy for moderate disease , and systemic agents for severe disease . 
 = = = Topical agents = = = 
 Topical corticosteroid preparations are the most effective agents when used continuously for 8 weeks ; retinoids and coal tar were found to be of limited benefit and may be no better than placebo . Greater benefit has been observed with very potent corticosteroids when compared to potent corticosteroids . Vitamin D analogues such as <unk> were found to be significantly superior to placebo . Combination therapy with vitamin D and a corticosteroid was superior to either treatment alone and vitamin D was found to be superior to coal tar for chronic plaque psoriasis . 
 <unk> and <unk> such as mineral oil , petroleum jelly , <unk> , and <unk> ( an oil @-@ in @-@ water emollient ) were found to increase the clearance of psoriatic plaques . <unk> have been shown to be even more effective at clearing psoriatic plaques when combined with phototherapy . However , certain <unk> have no impact on psoriasis plaque clearance or may even decrease the clearance achieved with phototherapy . The emollient salicylic acid is structurally similar to para @-@ <unk> acid ( PABA ) , commonly found in sunscreen , and is known to interfere with phototherapy in psoriasis . Coconut oil , when used as an emollient in psoriasis , has been found to decrease plaque clearance with phototherapy . <unk> creams and ointments applied directly to psoriatic plaques can help reduce inflammation , remove built @-@ up scale , reduce skin turnover , and clear affected skin of plaques . <unk> and creams containing coal tar , <unk> , corticosteroids ( i.e. <unk> ) , <unk> , vitamin D3 analogs ( for example , <unk> ) , and retinoids are routinely used . The use of the finger tip unit may be helpful in guiding how much topical treatment to use . 
 Vitamin D analogues may be useful with steroids ; however , alone have a higher rate of side effects . They may allow less steroids to be used . 
 Another topical therapy used to treat psoriasis is a form of <unk> , which involves daily baths in the Dead Sea . This is usually done for four weeks with the benefit attributed to sun exposure . This is cost @-@ effective and it has been propagated as an effective way to treat psoriasis without medication . Decreases of PASI scores greater than 75 % and remission for several months have commonly been observed . Side @-@ effects may be mild such as itchiness , folliculitis , sunburn , <unk> , and a theoretical risk of <unk> skin cancer or melanoma has been suggested . However , more recent studies have determined that there does not appear to be increased risk of melanoma in the long @-@ term . Data are inconclusive with respect to <unk> skin cancer risk , but support the idea that the therapy is associated with an increased risk of benign forms of sun @-@ induced skin damage such as , but not limited to , <unk> <unk> or liver spots . Dead Sea <unk> is also effective for psoriatic arthritis . 
 = = = Phototherapy = = = 
 Phototherapy in the form of sunlight has long been used for psoriasis . <unk> of 311 – 313 nanometers are most effective , and special lamps have been developed for this application . The exposure time should be controlled to avoid over exposure and burning of the skin . The UVB lamps should have a timer that will turn off the lamp when the time ends . The amount of light used is determined by a person 's skin type . Increased rates of cancer from treatment appear to be small . Narrow band UVB light ( NBUVB ) phototherapy has been demonstrated to have similar efficacy to PUVA . 
 A major mechanism of NBUVB is the induction of DNA damage in the form of pyrimidine dimers . This type of phototherapy is useful in the treatment of psoriasis because the formation of these dimers interferes with the cell cycle and stops it . The interruption of the cell cycle induced by NBUVB opposes the characteristic rapid division of skin cells seen in psoriasis . The activity of many types of immune cells found in the skin is also effectively suppressed by NBUVB phototherapy treatments . The most common short @-@ term side effect of this form of phototherapy is redness of the skin ; less common side effects of NBUVB phototherapy are itching and blistering of the treated skin , irritation of the eyes in the form of conjunctival inflammation or inflammation of the cornea , or cold sores due to reactivation of the herpes simplex virus in the skin surrounding the lips . Eye protection is usually given during phototherapy treatments . 
 <unk> and ultraviolet A phototherapy ( PUVA ) combines the oral or topical administration of psoralen with exposure to ultraviolet A ( UVA ) light . The mechanism of action of PUVA is unknown , but probably involves activation of psoralen by UVA light , which inhibits the abnormally rapid production of the cells in psoriatic skin . There are multiple mechanisms of action associated with PUVA , including effects on the skin 's immune system . PUVA is associated with nausea , headache , fatigue , burning , and itching . Long @-@ term treatment is associated with squamous cell carcinoma ( but not with melanoma ) . A combination therapy for moderate to severe psoriasis using PUVA plus acitretin resulted in benefit , but acitretin use has been associated with birth defects and liver damage . 
 = = = Systemic agents = = = 
 Psoriasis resistant to topical treatment and phototherapy may be treated with systemic therapies including oral medications or injectable treatments . Patients undergoing systemic treatment must have regular blood and liver function tests to check for medication toxicities . Pregnancy must be avoided for most of these treatments . The majority of people experience a recurrence of psoriasis after systemic treatment is discontinued . 
 Non @-@ biologic systemic treatments frequently used for psoriasis include methotrexate , ciclosporin , <unk> , <unk> such as dimethyl fumarate , and retinoids . Methotrexate and ciclosporin are drugs that suppress the immune system ; retinoids are synthetic forms of vitamin A. These agents are also regarded as first @-@ line treatments for psoriatic <unk> . 
 <unk> are manufactured proteins that interrupt the immune process involved in psoriasis . Unlike generalised immunosuppressive drug therapies such as methotrexate , biologics target specific aspects of the immune system contributing to psoriasis . These medications are generally well @-@ tolerated and limited long @-@ term outcome data have demonstrated biologics to be safe for long @-@ term use in moderate to severe plaque psoriasis . However , due to their immunosuppressive actions , biologics have been associated with a small increase in the risk for infection . Professional guidelines regard biologics as third @-@ line treatment for plaque psoriasis following inadequate response to topical treatment , phototherapy , and non @-@ biologic systemic treatments . The safety of biologics during pregnancy has not been assessed . European guidelines recommend avoiding biologics if a pregnancy is planned ; anti @-@ TNF therapies such as infliximab are not recommended for use in chronic carriers of the hepatitis B virus or individuals infected with HIV . 
 Several monoclonal antibodies target cytokines , the molecules that cells use to send inflammatory signals to each other . TNF @-@ α is one of the main executor inflammatory cytokines . Four monoclonal antibodies ( <unk> ) ( infliximab , adalimumab , <unk> , and <unk> pegol ) and one recombinant TNF @-@ α decoy receptor , etanercept , have been developed to inhibit TNF @-@ α signaling . Additional monoclonal antibodies , such as <unk> , have been developed against pro @-@ inflammatory cytokines interleukin @-@ 12 , interleukin @-@ 23 and interleukin @-@ 17 and inhibit the inflammatory pathway at a different point than the anti @-@ TNF @-@ α antibodies . IL @-@ 12 and IL @-@ 23 share a common domain , <unk> , which is the target of the recently FDA @-@ approved <unk> . 
 Two drugs that target T cells are <unk> and <unk> . <unk> is a monoclonal antibody that specifically targets the <unk> subunit of LFA @-@ 1 . It also blocks the adhesion molecules on the endothelial cells that line blood vessels , which attract T cells . <unk> was voluntarily withdrawn from the European market in February 2009 and from the US market in June 2009 by the manufacturer due to the medication 's association with cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy . <unk> also blocks the molecules that dendritic cells use to communicate with T cells and even causes natural killer cells to kill T cells as a way of controlling inflammation . 
 Individuals with psoriasis may develop neutralizing antibodies against monoclonal antibodies . Neutralization occurs when an antidrug antibody prevents a monoclonal antibody such as infliximab from binding antigen in a laboratory test . Specifically , neutralization occurs when the antidrug antibody binds to infliximab 's antigen binding site instead of TNF @-@ α . When infliximab no longer binds tumor necrosis factor alpha , it no longer decreases inflammation , and the psoriasis may worsen . Neutralizing antibodies have not been reported against etanercept , a biologic drug that is a fusion protein composed of two TNF @-@ α receptors . The lack of neutralizing antibodies against etanercept is probably secondary to the innate presence of the TNF @-@ α receptor , and the development of immune tolerance . 
 = = = Surgery = = = 
 Limited evidence suggests removal of the tonsils may benefit people with chronic plaque psoriasis , guttate psoriasis , and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Alternative therapy = = = 
 <unk> studies have suggested that individuals with psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis may benefit from a diet supplemented with fish oil rich in eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) and docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) . Conflicting evidence exists indicating that there may be an increased incidence of psoriasis in people with celiac disease . Psoriatic disease severity decreased after 3 months of a gluten free diet in patients with anti @-@ gliadin antibodies . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Most people with psoriasis experience nothing more than mild skin lesions that can be treated effectively with topical therapies . 
 Psoriasis is known to have a negative impact on the quality of life of both the affected person and the individual 's family members . Depending on the severity and location of outbreaks , individuals may experience significant physical discomfort and some disability . <unk> and pain can interfere with basic functions , such as self @-@ care and sleep . Participation in sporting activities , certain occupations , and caring for family members can become difficult activities for those with plaques located on their hands and feet . Plaques on the scalp can be particularly embarrassing , as flaky plaque in the hair can be mistaken for dandruff . 
 Individuals with psoriasis may feel self @-@ conscious about their appearance and have a poor self @-@ image that stems from fear of public rejection and psychosexual concerns . Psoriasis has been associated with low self @-@ esteem and depression is more common among those with the condition . People with psoriasis often feel prejudiced against due to the commonly held incorrect belief that psoriasis is contagious . Psychological distress can lead to significant depression and social isolation ; a high rate of thoughts about suicide has been associated with psoriasis . Many tools exist to measure the quality of life of patients with psoriasis and other dermatological disorders . Clinical research has indicated individuals often experience a diminished quality of life . Children with psoriasis may encounter bullying . 
 Several conditions are associated with psoriasis . These occur more frequently in older people . Nearly half of individuals with psoriasis over the age of 65 have at least three comorbidities , and two @-@ thirds have at least two comorbidities . 
 = = = Cardiovascular disease = = = 
 Psoriasis has been associated with obesity and several other cardiovascular and metabolic disturbances . The incidence of diabetes is 27 % higher in people affected by psoriasis than in those without the condition . Severe psoriasis may be even more strongly associated with the development of diabetes than mild psoriasis . Younger people with psoriasis may also be at increased risk for developing diabetes . Individuals with psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis have a slightly higher risk of heart disease and heart attacks when compared to the general population . Cardiovascular disease risk appeared to be correlated with the severity of psoriasis and its duration . There is no strong evidence to suggest that psoriasis is associated with an increased risk of death from cardiovascular events . Methotrexate may provide a degree of protection for the heart . 
 The odds of having hypertension are 1 @.@ 58 times higher in people with psoriasis than those without the condition ; these odds are even higher with severe cases of psoriasis . A similar association was noted in people who have psoriatic arthritis — the odds of having hypertension were found to be 2 @.@ 07 times greater when compared to odds of the general population . The link between psoriasis and hypertension is not currently understood . Mechanisms hypothesized to be involved in this relationship include the following : dysregulation of the renin @-@ angiotensin system , elevated levels of <unk> 1 in the blood , and increased oxidative stress . The incidence of the heart rhythm abnormality atrial fibrillation is 1 @.@ 31 times higher in people with mild psoriasis and 1 @.@ 63 times higher in people with severe psoriasis . There may be a slightly increased risk of stroke associated with psoriasis , especially in severe cases . Treating high levels of cholesterol with statins has been associated with decreased psoriasis severity , as measured by PASI score , and has also been associated with improvements in other cardiovascular disease risk factors such as markers of inflammation . These cardioprotective effects are attributed to ability of statins to improve blood lipid profile and because of their anti @-@ inflammatory effects . <unk> use in those with psoriasis and hyperlipidemia was associated with decreased levels of high @-@ sensitivity C @-@ reactive protein and TNFα as well as decreased activity of the immune protein LFA @-@ 1 . Compared to individuals without psoriasis , those affected by psoriasis are more likely to satisfy the criteria for metabolic syndrome . 
 = = = Other diseases = = = 
 The rates of Crohn 's disease and ulcerative colitis are increased when compared with the general population , by a factor of 3 @.@ 8 and 7 @.@ 5 respectively . Few studies have evaluated the association of multiple sclerosis with psoriasis , and the relationship has been questioned . Psoriasis has been associated with a 16 % increase in overall relative risk for non @-@ skin cancer . People with psoriasis have a 52 % increased risk cancers of the lung and bronchus , a 205 % increase in the risk of developing cancers of the upper gastrointestinal tract , a 31 % increase in the risk of developing cancers of the urinary tract , a 90 % increase in the risk of developing liver cancer , and a 46 % increase in the risk of developing pancreatic cancer . The risk for development of non @-@ melanoma skin cancers is also increased . Psoriasis increases the risk of developing squamous cell carcinoma of the skin by 431 % and increases the risk of basal cell carcinoma by 100 % . There is no increased risk of melanoma associated with psoriasis . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Psoriasis is estimated to affect 2 – 4 % of the population of the western world . The rate of psoriasis varies according to age , gender , region and ethnicity ; a combination of environmental and genetic factors is thought to be responsible for these differences . It can occur at any age , although it most commonly appears for the first time between the ages of 15 and 25 years . Approximately one third of people with psoriasis report being diagnosed before age 20 . Psoriasis affects both sexes equally . 
 Psoriasis affects about 7 @.@ 5 million Americans and occurs more frequently between the ages of 15 and 50 . 
 People with inflammatory bowel disease such as Crohn 's disease or ulcerative colitis are at an increased risk of developing psoriasis . Psoriasis is more common in countries farther from the equator . Persons of white European ancestry are more likely to have psoriasis and the condition is relatively uncommon in African Americans and extremely uncommon in Native Americans . 
 = = History = = 
 Scholars believe psoriasis to have been included among the various skin conditions called <unk> ( translated as leprosy ) in the Hebrew Bible , a condition imposed as a punishment for slander . The patient was deemed " impure " ( see <unk> and <unk> ) during their afflicted phase and is ultimately treated by the <unk> . However , it is more likely that this confusion arose from the use of the same Greek term for both conditions . The Greeks used the term <unk> ( <unk> ) for scaly skin conditions . They used the term psora to describe itchy skin conditions . It became known as Willan 's <unk> in the late 18th century when English dermatologists Robert Willan and Thomas Bateman differentiated it from other skin diseases . <unk> , they said , is distinguished by the regular , circular form of patches , while psoriasis is always irregular . Willan identified two categories : <unk> <unk> and psora <unk> . 
 Psoriasis is thought to have first been described in Ancient Rome by Cornelius Celsus . The disease was first classified by English physician Thomas Willan . The British dermatologist Thomas Bateman described a possible link between psoriasis and arthritic symptoms in 1813 . 
 The history of psoriasis is littered with treatments of dubious effectiveness and high toxicity . In the 18th and 19th centuries , Fowler 's solution , which contains a poisonous and carcinogenic arsenic compound , was used by dermatologists as a treatment for psoriasis . Mercury was also used for psoriasis treatment during this time period . Sulfur , iodine , phenol were also commonly used treatments for psoriasis during this era when it was incorrectly believed that psoriasis was an infectious disease . Coal tars were widely used with ultraviolet light irradiation as a topical treatment approach in the early 1900s . During the same time period , psoriatic arthritis cases were treated with intravenously administered gold preparations in the same manner as rheumatoid arthritis . All of these treatments have been replaced with modern topical and systemic therapies . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The word psoriasis is from Greek <unk> , meaning " itching condition " or " being itchy " from psora , " itch " and <unk> , " action , condition " . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 The International Federation of Psoriasis Associations ( <unk> ) is the global umbrella organization for national and regional psoriasis patient associations and also gathers the leading experts in psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis research for scientific conferences every three years . The Psoriasis International Network , a program of the Fondation René Touraine , gathers dermatologists , <unk> and other caregivers involved in the management of psoriasis . Non @-@ profit organizations the National Psoriasis Foundation in the United States , the Psoriasis Association in the United Kingdom and Psoriasis Australia offer advocacy and education about psoriasis in their respective countries . 
 = = Research = = 
 The role of insulin resistance in the pathogenesis of psoriasis is currently under investigation . Preliminary research has suggested that antioxidants such as polyphenols may have beneficial effects on the inflammation characteristic of psoriasis . 
 Many novel drugs being researched target the Th17 / IL @-@ 23 axis , particularly IL @-@ <unk> inhibitors , as IL @-@ <unk> is present in increased concentrations in psoriasis skin lesions while contributing less to protection against opportunistic infections . Other cytokines such as IL @-@ 17 and IL @-@ 22 also have been targets for inhibition as they play important roles in the pathogenesis of psoriasis . Another avenue of research has focused on the use of vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors to treat psoriasis . Oral agents being investigated as alternatives to medications administered by injection include Janus kinase inhibitors , protein kinase C inhibitors , mitogen @-@ activated protein kinase inhibitors , and phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitors , all of which have proven effective in various phase 2 and 3 clinical trials . However , these agents have potentially severe side @-@ effects due to their immunosuppressive mechanisms . 
 = Heidi Montag = 
 Heidi Blair Pratt ( née Montag ; born September 15 , 1986 ) is an American television personality , singer , fashion designer , and author . Born and raised in Crested Butte , Colorado , she befriended Lauren Conrad in 2005 . In 2006 , Montag came to prominence after being cast in the MTV reality television series The Hills , which chronicled the personal and professional lives of Conrad , Montag , and friends Audrina Patridge and Whitney Port . During its production , she briefly attended the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising and was employed by event planning company Bolthouse Productions . As the series progressed , Montag began dating fellow cast member Spencer Pratt , which ultimately ended her friendship with Conrad . Their ensuing feud became the central focus of the series , and was carried through each subsequent season . 
 The couple , collectively nicknamed " Speidi " , married in April 2009 . Later that year , they made controversial appearances on the second season of the American version of I 'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here ! . In January 2010 , Montag released her debut studio album Superficial ; it was critically panned and commercially unsuccessful , failing to earn back the money she spent making it . She also received widespread criticism after undergoing ten cosmetic surgery procedures in one day . In 2011 , Montag was featured on the television series Famous Food , where she and several celebrities competed for a restaurant partnership . Two years later , she and Pratt competed as a single entity on the eleventh series of the British version of Celebrity Big Brother , eventually becoming the runners @-@ up . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1986 – 2005 : Early life = = = 
 Heidi Blair Montag was born on September 15 , 1986 in Crested Butte , Colorado to parents Darlene and Bill Montag . After divorcing , Darlene married Tim Egelhoff ; they owned The Timberline restaurant for twenty @-@ one years until its closing in 2010 . Montag has an older sister Holly , also a reality television personality , and a younger brother Sky . Their father later married Terri O 'Hara ; their step @-@ brother Eric O 'Hara died in 2008 after an accidental fall from an icy roof . 
 After graduating from high school , Montag moved to California and attended the Academy of Art University in San Francisco for one semester . During freshman orientation , she befriended Lauren Conrad , who at the time was a primary cast member of the MTV reality television series Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County . After both transferred to the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in Los Angeles , California , Montag was subsequently featured in four episodes during the series ' second season . However , after failing to find the school " challenging " , she dropped out and received employment from Bolthouse Productions as an assistant . Within two years , she was promoted as an event planner . 
 = = = 2006 – 10 : The Hills and Superficial = = = 
 After moving to Los Angeles in 2006 , the Laguna Beach spin @-@ off series The Hills was developed to chronicle the lives of now @-@ housemates Conrad and Montag and friends Audrina Patridge and Whitney Port . That year , she began a short @-@ lived relationship with Jordan Eubanks ; she described its end as " the best decision of [ her ] life " . By the second season , Montag and Conrad 's friendship had deteriorated after the former began dating and later moved in with Spencer Pratt . During the third season , Conrad ended her friendship with Montag after she suspected that Pratt was responsible for rumors of a sex tape involving her and her former boyfriend Jason Wahler ; the ensuing feud carried through each subsequent season . 
 In May 2007 , Montag and Pratt announced their engagement . In August , she entered the music industry and began recording her debut studio album . Later that month , the song " Body Language " was leaked on the internet , and featured an uncredited rap verse from Pratt . The following month , she confirmed to Us Weekly that she had undergone a breast augmentation and rhinoplasty five months prior . Montag 's first promotional single and its accompanying music video " Higher " were released in February 2008 . Later that month , she appeared on the cover of Maxim . Montag collaborated with Anchor Blue to launch her first clothing line " <unk> " in April . Her contract was not renewed the following year after the company decided against featuring celebrity endorsements in future advertising . 
 During the fourth season of The Hills , Montag and Pratt eloped in Mexico on November 20 , 2008 . As the couple decides to officially marry in the fifth season , Conrad made her final appearance on the series during the mid @-@ season finale , where she attended the wedding after much deliberation and made peace with Montag . The ceremony was held on April 25 , 2009 in Pasadena , California . Subsequently , Conrad was replaced by her former Laguna Beach : The Real Orange County cast member Kristin Cavallari , who had previously introduced Montag and Pratt . 
 After several additional unauthorized leaks , Montag enlisted songwriter Cathy Dennis to continue work on her album . She released her first two extended plays Wherever I Am and Here She Is ... in 2009 . The former included the song " More Is More " ; debuting at number 50 on the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart , it became her first and only song to chart in the country . Later that year , she and Pratt appeared on the second season of the American version of I 'm a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here ! in support of the " Feed the Children " foundation . They quit after Montag was hospitalized with a gastric ulcer and later created controversy after alleging that they were subject to torture during production . After leaving the series , Montag and Pratt became notorious for their antics and antagonistic roles , notably during an interview with Al Roker of Today , and were described as " everything that 's wrong with America " . In August , she performed her first official single , the finished version of " Body Language " , at the Miss Universe 2009 ; her appearance was met with a negative critical response , who criticized its overall production . The following month , she appeared on the cover of Playboy . In November , Montag and Pratt released the book " How to Be Famous : Our Guide to Looking the Part , Playing the Press , and Becoming a Tabloid Fixture " . 
 In January 2010 , Montag revealed to People that she had undergone ten cosmetic surgery procedures in a single day two months prior , performed by Frank Ryan . Among the procedures were brow @-@ lifts , ear @-@ <unk> , a chin reduction , as well as a second rhinoplasty and second breast augmentation . She commented that she almost died from too much Demerol , reducing her breath rate to five breaths per minute . Her debut studio album Superficial was digitally released later that month to an overwhelmingly negative critical response from critics . The self @-@ funded record cost nearly $ 2 million and sold approximately 1 @,@ 000 copies in first @-@ week downloads , failing to earn back the money spent making it . In May , she and Pratt made their final appearance on The Hills halfway through the sixth and final season . In December 2013 , Montag stated that she and Conrad have " talked a few times " since the series ' conclusion , elaborating that " it 's unfortunate things happened the way that it did , but we 're both different people now , older and more mature . " However , in 2015 Heidi angrily excoriated Lauren when she appeared on Marriage Boot Camp , during a sequence where the contestants were asked to forgive someone who had hurt them in the past ; Heidi told a stand @-@ in for Lauren that Lauren had " ruined my life with her lies " , said that Lauren DID have a sex tape and had falsely blamed it on her , and that she " forgave " Lauren for being terrible and trying to ruin her life . Heidi was universally lambasted for bringing up the sex tape lies anew , parroting the views of Spencer Pratt ( who , it 's worth noting , is who Lauren actually blamed for spreading the false rumors — Lauren felt Heidi knew he was lying but took Spencer 's side because she loved him ) , and trying to use Lauren 's name to get publicity for herself . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Later Career = = = 
 After her exit from The Hills , Montag auditioned for the replacement of Megan Fox in the third installment of the Transformers series , but was ultimately not featured in the film . In June 2010 , she and producer Steve Morales commenced work on her unreleased second studio album . The following month , Montag filed for divorce from Pratt , citing irreconcilable differences in the petition . However , they called it off in September after confessing that the action was intended to boost Montag 's ailing career . In November , they renewed their vows in <unk> , California . In February 2011 , Montag made her feature film debut as Kimberly in Just Go with It . Later that year , she appeared on the VH1 reality television series Famous Food , where she competed against other celebrities for a partnership stake in a restaurant in which they worked to open . In October , Montag began writing a memoir . The following year , she released her third extended play Dreams Come True . 
 In January 2013 , Montag and Pratt as a single entity competed as housemates on the eleventh series of the British version of Celebrity Big Brother , where they notably developed a minor feud with singer and television personality Rylan Clark . They were named the runners @-@ up , losing to Clark . On February 18 , Channel 5 aired a one @-@ off television special discussing Montag and Pratt 's rise to prominence , titled Speidi : Scandal , Secrets & Surgery ! . Later that year , they launched the Speidi Show , which was initially assumed to be a web series in which the couple used a different reality television format for each installment . However , the project was later revealed to be an example of networked improv narrative , where Montag and Pratt collaborated with Mark Marino and Rob Wittig to create a Twitter game in which players Live Tweet an imaginary show . In October 2013 , Montag revealed that her original F @-@ cup breast implants resulted in severe health issues , and underwent a breast reduction surgery to replace them with D @-@ cup implants . She and Pratt appeared in the television special After Shock : Heidi & Spencer , which premiered on December 9 , 2013 , on E ! , during which they admitted that many of the situations they were involved with in the various reality series they starred on were in fact made up by the shows producers . Montag and Pratt later appeared on an episode of Celebrity Wife Swap in June 2014 , for which they swapped with Olympic athlete Amanda Beard and her husband Sacha Brown . In October 2015 , Heidi and her husband made several media appearances that were largely devoted to two subjects : claiming that their image as terrible people stemming from " The Hills " was not factual and , somewhat <unk> , their intense dislike of Lauren Conrad , which included Heidi 's husband admitting he spread rumors ( which Heidi said were true but have never been proven ) that Lauren made a sex tape with a former boyfriend . Heidi also claimed she had been paid to remain Lauren 's friend during her time on the show , while also adding she had reconciled with her family to her husband 's displeasure . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Superficial ( 2010 ) 
 Extended plays 
 Wherever I Am ( 2009 ) 
 Here She Is ... ( 2009 ) 
 Dreams Come True ( 2012 ) 
 = Emily Sartain = 
 Emily Sartain ( March 17 , 1841 – June 17 , 1927 ) was an American painter and engraver . She was the first woman in Europe and the United States to practice the art of mezzotint engraving , and the only woman to win a gold medal at the 1876 World Fair in Philadelphia . Sartain became a nationally recognized art educator and was the director of the Philadelphia School of Design for Women from 1866 to 1919 or 1920 . Her father , John Sartain , and three of her brothers , William , Henry and Samuel were artists . Before she entered the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts and studied abroad , her father took her on a Grand Tour of Europe . She helped found the New Century Club for working and professional women , and the professional women 's art clubs , The Plastic Club and The Three Arts Club . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Emily Sartain was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania on March 17 , 1841 . She was the fifth of eight children of Philadelphia master printer and publisher of Sartain 's Magazine John Sartain and Susannah Longmate Swaine Sartain . 
 In 1858 , Sartain graduated from the Philadelphia Normal School and then taught school until the summer of 1862 . John Sartain taught his daughter art , including the mezzotint engraving technique that he revived , which was a favored process in England that created high @-@ quality prints of paintings . John Sartain believed in equal opportunities for women and encouraged his daughter to pursue a career . He mortgaged his house and gave her a " gentleman 's education " in fine art by taking her on a Grand Tour of Europe beginning the summer of 1862 . They started in Montreal and Quebec and then sailed for Europe . She enjoyed the English countryside ; old world cities , especially Florence and Edinburgh ; the Louvre ; Italian Renaissance paintings ; and artists like Dante and engraver Elena Perfetti . She traveled to Venice to visit William Dean Howells and his wife Elinor Mead Howells , who was a painter . Sartain decided in the course of the trip that she wanted to become an artist . During their travels the <unk> learned that William Sartain had enlisted during the Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) and later hastily returned to the United States when John and Emily learned that the Confederate States Army had crossed into Chambersburg , Pennsylvania , which is 158 miles west of Philadelphia . 
 Of John and Susannah Sartain 's children , Samuel ( 1830 – 1906 ) , Henry ( 1833 – 1895 ) , William Sartain ( 1843 – 1925 ) and Emily were painters and engravers , beginning a legacy of Sartain family artists and printmakers . Sartain sought her father 's input on her work throughout her career and benefited from his support and connections . She carried on the <unk> engraving technique that he taught her . Sartain lived with her parents into adulthood , supporting and caring for them in their later years . In 1886 , her parents moved into her living quarters at the Philadelphia School of Design for Women . 
 = = Education = = 
 A portrait painter and engraver , Emily Sartain studied with Christian <unk> and her father , John Sartain , at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts . She met Thomas Eakins at the academy and entered into what biographer Henry Adams believes was Eakin 's " first known romance " . Their romantic relationship ended after Eakins went to Paris to study art and Eakins succumbed to what Sartain described as " temptations of the great city " and due to her interest in women 's rights . The two remained lifelong friends . 
 In 1870 , Sartain met Mary Cassatt in Philadelphia and the following year they left for Paris , London , Parma , and Turin to study painting . The women spent the first winter in Italy and studied printmaking with Carlo Raimondi , who taught engraving at the Academy of Fine Arts in Parma . Sartain spent the rest of the four @-@ year stay in Paris and studied under Évariste Vital <unk> . She shared a studio with Jeanne <unk> . Florence <unk> , Sartain 's friend , also worked in the studio occasionally . The women copied each other 's work and provided one another criticism and encouragement . Two of Sartain 's paintings , genre painting Le Piece de Conviction ( The Reproof ) and a portrait of Mlle. Del <unk> , were accepted at the Paris salon in 1875 . Sartain returned to the United States that year , when she ran out of money . Harriet ( Hattie ) Judd Sartain , who was her brother Samuel 's wife and a successful homeopathic physician , had lent Emily Sartain money for her education . Emily believed Hattie was likely to continue to help with education expenses in Philadelphia where expenses were lower and she would more likely sell her works . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Sartain set up a studio in Philadelphia in 1875 where she created paintings and engravings . Over the course of her career she made copies of paintings in Spanish and Italian galleries , portraits , genre paintings , and was the first woman to practice the art of the mezzotint in the United States and Europe . Among her works were period scenes that depicted submissive women with downcast eyes as in Italian Woman and The Reproof . Sartain exhibited her works in cities along the East Coast of the United States and was the only woman to win a gold medal at the 1876 World Fair in Philadelphia for The Reproof . She won the Mary Smith Prize for best picture by a woman at the 1881 and 1883 Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts exhibits . Sartain worked as art editor for the paper Our Continent from 1881 to 1883 . She was then the art editor for New England <unk> ( 1883 ) by Ellen C. H. Rollins . Joseph M. Pennell said that Sartain was " the only trained woman art editor I ever knew " . 
 Sartain was a progressive New Woman , who with her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Hattie Judd Sartain , formed the woman 's organization , the New Century Club . Hattie is believed to have helped her attain the commissions of portraits of local physicians Constantin Hering and James Caleb Jackson . Besides having financed her education and being her ally and mentor , Hattie also modeled for Sartain . 
 = = = Philadelphia School of Design for Women = = = 
 In 1886 she became the director of the Philadelphia School of Design for Women , in which her father had served on the board as vice president for years . It was the country 's largest art school for women , where she was , according to Henry Adams , " a pioneering advocate of advanced education for women . " Sartain implemented life @-@ drawing classes at the Philadelphia School of Design for Women , using draped male and nude women models , which was uncommon for women artists at the time . She created a professional program that was built upon technical and lengthy training and high standards . The women were taught to create works of art based upon three @-@ dimensional and human forms . She trained women who taught art . Through her efforts , she brought the level of instruction at the school to that of a French academy and similar to that of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts . Industrial design schools for women were often considered purveyors of lower forms of art , but Sartain believed that good art was defined more by the artist 's capabilities than the medium and that the same aesthetic principles used to judge fine art could be applied to commercial art . She was responsible for introducing important faculty members such as Robert Henri , Samuel Murray and Daniel Garber to the school . Sartain was an established , national authority on art education and art for women by 1890 . 
 She was an exhibitor , member of the Fine Arts jury , chair of the decorating committee for the Pennsylvania Building , and an art education speaker at the 1893 Chicago World 's Columbian Exposition . In 1897 , Emily Sartain and Alice Barber Stephens , a teacher at the school , founded The Plastic Club in Philadelphia . She was president of the club from 1899 to 1903 and again in 1904 and 1905 . Sartain also help found the Three Arts Club . She spoke in London in 1899 at the Professional Section of the International Congress of Women . In 1900 , Sartain attended the first international conference on art education in Paris . She was one of three delegates from the United States that year and again in 1904 in Berne . Her article " Value of Training in Design for Woman " was published in 1913 in The New York Times . She led the design school until 1919 or 1920 . Her niece , Harriet Sartain led the school after her retirement . Harriet was Henry 's daughter and had been mentored by her Aunt Emily . Sartain received certificates , medals , and diplomas in recognition of her service to art and education , including recognition from the London Society of Literature , Science and Art . 
 Nina de Angeli Walls wrote , 
 As Sartain 's career illustrates , art schools conferred professional status in a cultural field once dominated by men . Women artists used formal schooling to counter the accusation of amateurism frequently leveled at them . Nineteenth century design schools were the first institutions to offer professional certification for women in such careers as art education , fabric design , or magazine illustration ; hence , the schools opened unprecedented paths to female economic independence . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Sartain retired to San Diego , California . During her career Sartain traveled to Europe most summers and continued to travel abroad every year during her retirement . She was visiting in Philadelphia when she died on June 17 , 1927 . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Franklin Institute Of Science , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 
 Frederick Fraley , ca . 1891 – 1901 , oil 
 Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts : Christ Walking on the Sea , Emily Sartain after Henry Richter , 1865 , mezzotint , etching and stipple 
 Christ Walking on the Water , Emily Sartain after Charles Jalabert , 1867 , engraving with roulette 
 Ralph Waldo Emerson , Emily Sartain after William Henry Furness , Jr . , 1871 , mezzotint , etching , engraving and stipple 
 Untitled , 1887 , oil on wood 
 Welcome News , 1888 , etching on chine <unk> 
 I. S. <unk> , etching , engraving , mezzotint , stipple and photomechanical texture 
 S. C. Huntington , etching , engraving , mezzotint and stipple 
 President Lincoln and Son , mezzotint , etching , engraving , stipple and photomechanical ground 
 His Excellency Baron Lisgar , mezzotint , etching , stipple and photomechanical ground 
 Samuel Partridge , mezzotint , etching , engraving and stipple 
 Alexander Thomson , Emily Sartain after J. C. Darley , etching , engraving , mezzotint and photomechanical ground 
 J. W. Weir , Etching , engraving and photomechanical ground 
 = Terang Boelan = 
 Terang Boelan ( [ <unk> <unk> ] ; Indonesian for " Full Moon " , Terang Bulan in the Perfected Spelling System ) is a 1937 film from the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) . Written by Saeroen , directed by Albert Balink , and starring Rd Mochtar , Roekiah and Eddie T. Effendi , Terang Boelan follows two lovers who elope after one is almost forced to marry an opium smuggler . The film was shot in the Indies and Singapore , and was partially inspired by the 1936 Hollywood film The Jungle Princess . It was aimed at native audiences and included keroncong music , which was popular at the time , and several actors from Balink 's previous work Pareh ( 1936 ) . 
 Terang Boelan was a commercial success in both the Indies and abroad , earning 200 @,@ 000 Straits dollars in British Malaya . This success revived the faltering domestic film industry and inspired films aimed at Malay audiences in Malaya , creating a formula of songs , beautiful scenery and romance that was followed for decades afterwards . The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran described it as a turning point in the history of Indonesian cinema for its catalytic effect on the industry 's growth . Like many Indonesian films of the era , Terang Boelan has been lost since at least the 1970s . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rohaya ( Roekiah ) must separate from her lover , Kasim ( Rd Mochtar ) , so that she can marry her father 's choice , the disreputable but rich Musa ( Eddie T. Effendi ) . The night before the wedding , Kasim plays the song " Terang Boelan " for Rohaya , and they agree to elope . The following day , Rohaya and Kasim escape from Sawoba Island to Malacca , where Kasim begins work at a drydock and Rohaya keeps busy as a housewife . They discover that Kasim 's old friend , Dullah ( Kartolo ) , has lived in Malacca for some time . 
 Their life together is interrupted when Musa , who is revealed to be an opium dealer , discovers them . While Kasim is away at work , Rohaya 's father ( <unk> ) comes and takes her back to Sawoba . Kasim , having discovered Musa 's deeds , also returns to Sawoba and rallies the villagers to his side by telling them of Musa 's opium dealings . He and Musa begin fighting . When it appears Kasim may lose , he is saved by Dullah , who had followed him back to Sawoba . The villagers and Rohaya 's father agree that Kasim and Rohaya should be together , as they are truly in love . 
 = = Background = = 
 During 1934 and early 1935 , all feature films released in the Dutch East Indies had been made by the American @-@ educated Chinese @-@ Indonesian director The Teng Chun . His low budget but popular films were mainly inspired by Chinese mythology or martial arts , and although aimed at ethnic Chinese proved popular among native audiences because of their action sequences . The Teng Chun 's dominance was an effect of the Great Depression and changing market trends . The Great Depression had led to the Dutch East Indies government collecting higher taxes and cinemas selling tickets at lower prices , ensuring that there was a very low profit margin for local films . As a result , cinemas in the colony mainly showed Hollywood productions , while the domestic industry decayed . The Teng Chun was able to continue his work only because his films often played to full theatres . 
 In an attempt to show that locally produced , well @-@ made films could be profitable , the Dutch journalist Albert Balink , who had no formal film experience , produced Pareh ( Rice ) in 1935 in collaboration with the ethnic Chinese Wong brothers ( Othniel and Joshua ) , and the Dutch documentary filmmaker Mannus Franken . The film cost 20 times as much as an average local production , in part because of Balink 's perfectionism , and was ultimately a failure . The Indonesian writer and cultural critic Armijn Pane wrote that Pareh had performed poorly with native audiences as it was seen as looking at them through European eyes . Pareh bankrupted its producers , and enabled The Teng Chun to dominate the industry – although with less traditional stories – for a further two years . 
 = = Production = = 
 By late 1936 Balink had obtained financial backing from several domestic and foreign companies with which he , the Wongs , and Franken opened the Dutch Indies Film Syndicate ( Algemeen Nederlandsch Indisch Filmsyndicaat , or ANIF ) in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) . Although this new establishment focused mainly on newsreels and documentaries , on 1 January 1937 ANIF announced that it would produce several feature films , one of which was Terang Boelan . 
 The story for Terang Boelan was written by Saeroen , a reporter with the newspaper Pemandangan who had close connections to the theatrical community , shortly after the domestic release of the American @-@ produced Dorothy Lamour vehicle The Jungle Princess ( 1936 ) , which served as an inspiration . The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran wrote that this gave Terang Boelan stylistic and thematic similarities to the earlier film . The Indonesian film critic Salim Said also recognised such similarities , describing Terang Boelan as reflecting the " jungle princess " works popular at the time . Saeroen named the fictional island on which Terang Boelan takes place " Sawoba " after the crew : Saeroen , Wong , and Balink . 
 Production had begun by February 1937 , under Balink 's direction and with the Wongs as cinematographers , only to be interrupted by the relocation of ANIF 's offices . Filming had begun by May of that year . Sources conflict as to whether Franken was involved : Biran wrote that Franken had been left in charge of the studio 's documentaries , while the American film scholar Karl G. Heider recorded Franken as co @-@ directing the film . As opposed to The Teng Chun , who aimed his films at lower @-@ class audiences , Balink aimed his film at educated native Indonesians , attempting to show them not from a European perspective but as they viewed themselves . According to Said , this arose as a reaction to Pareh 's failure and resulted in a less ethnological approach . Terang Boelan was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white using highly flammable nitrate film at <unk> in Batavia , Merak Beach in Banten , and Tanjong Katong in Singapore . The use of nitrate film may have been a factor in the film 's later loss . 
 The cast of Terang Boelan mainly consisted of actors who had appeared in Pareh . This included the leading actor , Rd Mochtar , and several minor players , including Eddie T. Effendi and Soekarsih . Other cast members , including the leading lady Roekiah and her husband Kartolo , were drawn from traditional toneel theatrical troupes ; this may have been part of an effort to attract theatregoers . The film , which included the songs " Terang Boelan " and " Boenga Mawar " ( " Rose " ) , required its cast to sing keroncong music ( traditional music with Portuguese influences ) ; because Mochtar 's voice was ill @-@ suited to the task , the musician Ismail Marzuki – who also composed the film 's score – sang while Mochtar lip synced . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Terang Boelan premiered on 8 December 1937 at the Rex Theatre in Batavia , the capital of the Dutch East Indies ; it played to a nearly full theatre . Also marketed under the Dutch title Het <unk> der <unk> , the film was advertised as showing that the Indies were as beautiful as Hawaii , a popular island paradise in Hollywood films . Posters also emphasised the use of Indonesian @-@ language dialogue . William van der Heide , a lecturer on film studies at the University of Newcastle in Australia , notes that the film continued a trend of " <unk> " , or the application of a national ( Indonesian ) understanding to borrowed concepts ; for Terang Boelan this <unk> process involved the inclusion of " exotic local settings " and keroncong music . Such adaptations of foreign films had arisen several years earlier and continued long after Terang Boelan 's release . 
 The film was a commercial success , both in the Indies and nearby British Malaya . Native audiences filled the cinemas , most of them working @-@ class people , including native fans of toneel and keroncong who rarely watched films . After being licensed by RKO Radio Pictures , the film was screened in British Malaya , where it was advertised as " the first and best Malay musical " and earned 200 @,@ 000 Straits dollars ( then equivalent to US $ 114 @,@ 470 ) in two months . Terang Boelan proved to be the most successful production in the area until Krisis ( Crisis ) in 1953 , released after the Netherlands recognised Indonesia 's independence in 1949 . 
 Despite the success , ANIF was displeased with the film and halted its other non @-@ documentary productions ; one of the studio 's cameramen , an Indo man named <unk> Steffens , suggested that ANIF 's management preferred works of non @-@ fiction as a more intellectual medium . Disappointed by the company 's reaction , Balink left the Indies and emigrated to the United States in March 1938 . Terang Boelan 's cast left ANIF not long afterwards and , after briefly touring Malaya , joined Tan 's Film . They made their first film for Tan 's , Fatima , in 1938 . Mochtar , who soon married fellow Terang Boelan actress Soekarsih , continued to be cast as Roekiah 's lover ; the two were a popular screen couple until Mochtar left Tan 's in 1940 over a wage dispute . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of Terang Boelan led to an increase in film production in the colony , many of the films following the same formula , including songs , beautiful scenery and romance . Before Terang Boelan , local studios had generally been unsuccessful in finding a formula popular with audiences , but the triple successes of Terang Boelan , Fatima , and Alang @-@ Alang ( Grass , 1939 ) revived the industry . Four new production houses were established in 1940 , and actors and actresses previously attached to theatrical troupes entered the film industry , which was reaching new audiences . Most locally produced films released in the Indies were made between 1939 and the Japanese occupation in 1942 . Meanwhile , in Malaya , the brothers Run Run and <unk> Shaw , drawing inspiration from Terang Boelan and Alang @-@ Alang 's success with Malay audiences , established Malay Film Productions in Singapore , where it became one of the more successful production houses . 
 Heider considered Terang Boelan one of the two most important cinematic works from the Dutch East Indies during the 1930s ; Balink 's earlier film Pareh was the other . He notes that Terang Boelan " set the tone for popular Indonesian cinema " , a tone that remained dominant into the 1990s . Biran considered the film a turning point in the history of Indonesian cinema , showing the possibilities of the medium and serving as a catalyst for further development . Said concurred , describing the film as a milestone in Indonesia 's history because of the widespread formula it introduced . The repeated use of Terang Boelan 's formula has been criticised . The director Teguh Karya , for instance , denounced films that used it without building on it , leaving the formula " undeveloped and static " . 
 Terang Boelan is considered lost , as are most domestic productions from the era . The Filipino film historian and director Nick <unk> noted that productions made with nitrate film – such as Terang Boelan – burned easily and were thus easily lost , but suggested that copies of the film may have survived until the 1970s . In a 1991 publication Said , Heider , and the American translator John H. McGlynn expressed hope that a copy of the film might be lying around in someone 's attic or closet in Indonesia or the Netherlands . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Gray @-@ tailed vole = 
 The gray @-@ tailed vole ( Microtus canicaudus ) also known as the gray @-@ tailed meadow vole or gray @-@ tailed meadow mouse , is a rodent in the genus Microtus ( small @-@ eared " meadow voles " ) of the family Cricetidae . <unk> are small mammals , and this species lies roughly in the middle of their size range . First collected in 1895 , it is endemic to the Willamette Valley , Oregon , and Clark County , Washington , in the Pacific Northwest region of North America . Historically , they were found in the prairie areas of the Valley and , though many of these areas have been converted for agricultural purposes , these animals remain common . For reasons that remain unclear , vole population densities in any area may fluctuate widely from season to season and year to year . They are preyed upon by owls , hawks , and carnivorous mammals , and their parasites include fleas and ticks . These voles build underground burrows and complex tunnel networks , which they sometimes share with other burrowing animals . Relatively little is known about their behavior in the wild , because they are elusive and unlikely to enter traps . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The scientific name of the gray @-@ tailed vole is Microtus canicaudus . The generic name Microtus derives from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( small ) and <unk> ( ear ) . The species name canicaudus derives from the Latin <unk> ( gray ) and cauda ( tail ) . The gray @-@ tailed vole was first described in 1897 by Gerrit S. Miller in the Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington . The type specimen was collected in McCoy , Oregon , on December 1 , 1895 , by B.J. Bretherton . Miller 's initial examination included the type specimen and eleven others . Two from his collection had been obtained in Beaverton . The remaining specimens , collected in McCoy , were part of the US National Museum Biological Survey under C. Hart Merriam . 
 The gray @-@ tailed vole is monotypic , but there are some differences between specimens obtained on either side of the Columbia River . It appears to be a sibling species of the montane vole ( Microtus montanus ) or of Townsend 's vole ( M. townsendii ) . It was classified as a geographic race or subspecies of the montane vole by Hall and Kelson in 1951 , but laboratory analyses , including electrophoresis and karyotype evaluations , subsequently confirmed that they are two separate species . The karyotypes of the montane vole and the gray @-@ tailed vole are dissimilar in terms of homology in 6 of 22 autosomal arms . The quantity and distribution of heterochromatin among both X chromosomes and autosomes is different as well . The two species are allopatric , but not <unk> so . 
 = = Description = = 
 The gray @-@ tailed vole is a small mammal in the middle of the size range for voles in general . The fur on the back is yellowish @-@ brown or yellowish @-@ gray . They have a short tail , black or brown above and grayish below . The young have gray fur on the underside and a darker , " sooty " gray on the back . The feet of the young are dusky , and they have a gray tail with a black stripe . They are similar in size and overall appearance to the montane vole , but with a more yellowish fur and a grayer tail . The type specimen measured 135 mm ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) in total length . The tail vertebrae measured 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) and the hind foot measured 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) . Typical adults average 141 mm ( 5 @.@ 6 in ) in total length , with a 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) tail . The feet measure 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) and the ears 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) . On each side they have an upper and lower incisor and three upper and lower molars , for a total of 16 teeth . 
 Gray @-@ tailed voles are sympatric with Townsend 's vole ( M. townsendii ) , with which they share many similarities . They can be distinguished by appearance , because Townsend 's vole has darker colorings , a longer tail , and differences in the structure of the hard palate . Gray @-@ tailed and montane voles also differ in some aspects of hard palate structure , especially the incisive foramina . The gray @-@ tailed vole shares its geographic range with the creeping vole ( Microtus <unk> ) as well . The gray @-@ tailed vole has a sturdier build , larger eyes , and some differences in the upper molars . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The gray @-@ tailed vole is endemic to the Willamette Valley , Oregon , and to Clark County , Washington . Its range in Oregon extends from <unk> and Gresham in the north , through the Willamette Valley to around Eugene . Reports of the species east of the Cascades have been called into question . Gray @-@ tailed voles are prevalent in agricultural areas : they are found in and around pastures , hayfields , grain fields , and disturbed habitats . They once inhabited grassy prairies of the valley . These prairies were burned annually by Native Americans , with uncertain effects on vole populations . 
 Vernon Orlando Bailey describes the Willamette Valley as part of the humid division of the Transition Zone . Annual precipitation there is 40 in ( 100 cm ) , falling mostly in the winter . The valley is warmer and drier than the surrounding hills , less heavily forested , and better suited to agricultural use . In 1901 , zoologist Edmund Heller visited McCoy , where the type specimen of the gray @-@ tailed vole had been collected . The account of his journey is relayed by Daniel Giraud Elliot , referring specifically to the terrain inhabited by the gray @-@ tailed vole . 
 Heller described the area around McCoy as " much the same kind of country as Beaverton , but more level and forested . The coast range is about fifteen miles distant . In some places , forests of Douglas fir occur , but the land is chiefly open and grassy . White oaks and a few yellow pine occur also , and the region I should judge was more Transition than that at Beaverton . " He described Beaverton as : " low and rolling , but hills are entirely lacking in the immediate vicinity of the town . The timbered land is covered with forests of yellow pine ( Pinus <unk> ) , Douglas fir ( Pseudotsuga taxifolia ) , white oak ( Quercus <unk> ) , etc . The soil is chiefly black adobe except on the higher parts , where it is largely clay . The region evidently is Transition in character of its vegetation as shown by the presence of the yellow pine and white oak . " 
 Mammals sharing the Transition Zone with the gray @-@ tailed vole include : Roosevelt elk , Columbian black @-@ tailed deer , Columbian white @-@ tailed deer , Washington rabbit , brush rabbit , silver gray squirrel , Douglas 's squirrel , Townsend 's chipmunk , Douglas 's ground squirrel , Oregon flying squirrel , dusky wood rat , ruddy deer mouse , California red @-@ backed mouse , red tree vole , white @-@ footed <unk> , Townsend 's vole , Oregon creeping mouse , mountain beaver ( <unk> rufa ) , jumping mice including <unk> princeps and <unk> <unk> , Camas pocket gopher , Mazama pocket gopher , and northwest coast bobcat ( Lynx rufus fasciatus ) . Birds in the range include : sooty grouse , Oregon ruffed grouse , band @-@ tailed pigeon , California pygmy owl , Harris 's woodpecker , northern pileated woodpecker , Lewis 's woodpecker , Vaux 's swift , Steller 's jay , Townsend 's warbler , western winter wren , California creeper , Oregon chickadee , chestnut @-@ backed chickadee , <unk> , western golden @-@ crowned kinglet , and black @-@ headed grosbeak . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Gray @-@ tailed voles are burrowing rodents that construct complex networks of tunnels and burrows . They may also nest above ground , sheltered under wood , abandoned equipment , or other agricultural debris . They are known to use the tunnel networks of the Camas pocket gopher . The tunnels are built to provide shelter during wet periods , which are frequent throughout their range . When the tunnels flood , the voles swim to dry areas or chambers in which air has been trapped . If the networks flood completely , they will head for higher ground . As many as 20 – 30 voles have been seen gathered on dry fence posts in flooded areas . When approached , they swam to safer ground nearby . Where tunnels intersect , they sometimes establish middens 8 – 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) long by 3 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide by 8 – 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) deep . 
 Gray @-@ tailed voles are difficult to capture live in the wild , as they are unlikely to enter enclosure type traps . The most effective traps are laid inconspicuously along commonly used runways , so that the voles run directly into them . Much of what is known about the voles has been obtained from observing them in captivity . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Information about the reproductive habits of gray @-@ tailed voles is based on studies of captive animals . In captivity , female voles as young as 18 days , weighing only 12 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 44 oz ) are capable of reproducing . Litters produced by these younger females result in larger litters , newborns of smaller mass , and lower rates of newborn survival . The gestation period is 21 – 23 days . The newborns weigh around 2 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 088 oz ) . The average litter size is around 4 @.@ 5 . It is uncertain how frequently gray @-@ tailed voles breed . Breeding likely occurs year round . 
 Gray @-@ tailed voles recognize relatives based on familiarity . Under laboratory conditions , gray @-@ tailed voles familiar with one another produced fewer litters than unfamiliar ones . <unk> of related voles resulted in lower pup survival than did pairings of unrelated individuals . Common foods of the gray @-@ tailed vole in the wild are thought to be grasses , clover , wild onion , and false dandelion . Published claims that the voles are omnivorous lack references or evidence . 
 Although gray @-@ tailed voles are now described as common , Bailey reported them to be so scarce that few specimens were available . He also claimed that they were present east of the Cascades , but subsequent authorities have refuted this . Their population density fluctuates widely during the year . There is not much data available to calculate population density in the field , but studies in more controlled settings yield estimates of around 600 animals per 1 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Gray @-@ tailed voles are have been used in laboratory research projects . They have been used to study the effects of mineral deficiencies , such as selenium , which is lacking in Willamette Valley soils . They have also been used in studies on livestock feed modifications , including pretreatment of feeds by fermentation , sprouting the grains in the feeds , and clearance of radioactive isotopes from contaminated food . 
 Gray @-@ tailed voles can become so abundant within their range that humans may take measures to control populations . Trapping them is challenging . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The gray @-@ tailed vole is listed as " least concern " by the IUCN ( International Union for Conservation of Nature ) . No major threats to this common species are recognized . While its range is limited ( less than 20 @,@ 000 km ² ) , it thrives in agricultural environments , so land conversion for such purposes is not problematic . This species is listed as secure by NatureServe . 
 = Nur Muhammad Taraki = 
 Nur Muhammad Taraki ( 15 July 1917 – 14 September 1979 ) was an Afghan politician and statesman during the Cold War . Taraki was born near Kabul and educated at Kabul University , after which he started his political career as a journalist . He later became one of the founding members of the People 's Democratic Party of Afghanistan ( PDPA ) and was elected as the party 's general secretary at its first congress . He ran as a candidate in the 1965 Afghan parliamentary election but failed to secure himself a seat . In 1966 he published the first issue of Khalq , a party newspaper , but it was closed down shortly afterwards by the Afghan Government . The assassination of Mir Akbar Khyber led Taraki , along with Hafizullah Amin ( the organiser of the revolution ) and Babrak Karmal , to initiate the Saur Revolution and establish the communist Democratic Republic of Afghanistan . 
 The presidency of Taraki , albeit short @-@ lived , was always marked by controversies . Taraki launched a land reform on 1 January 1979 which proved to be highly unpopular and , along with his government 's other reforms , led to a popular backlash which initiated the Afghan civil war . Despite repeated attempts throughout his reign , Taraki proved unable to persuade the Soviet Union to intervene in support of the restoration of civil order . 
 At the beginning of his rule , the government was divided between two PDPA factions : the Khalqists ( which Taraki was the leader of ) , the majority , and the Parchamites , the minority . In 1978 , shortly after his rule began , Taraki started a purge of the government and party which led to several high @-@ ranking Parchamite members being sent into de facto exile by being assigned to serve overseas as ambassadors . His reign was marked by a cult of personality centered on himself that had been cultivated by Amin . His relationship with Amin turned sour during his rule , ultimately resulting in Taraki 's murder on 14 September 1979 , upon Amin 's orders . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Taraki was born on 15 July 1917 to a Ghilzai Pashtun peasant family in Nawa District of Ghazni Province , Afghanistan . He was the oldest of three children and attended a village school in Nawa before leaving in 1932 , at the age of 15 , to work in the port city of Bombay , India . There he met a <unk> merchant family who employed him as a clerk for the Pashtun Trading Company . Taraki 's first encounter with communism was during his night courses , where he met several Communist Party of India members who impressed him with their discussions on social justice and communist values . Another important event was his encounter with Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan , a Pashtun nationalist and leader of the Red Shirt Movement in neighboring India , who was an admirer of the works of Vladimir Lenin . 
 In 1937 Taraki started working for Abdul Majid <unk> , the Minister of Economics , who introduced him to several Russians . Later Taraki became Deputy Head of the <unk> News Agency and became known throughout the country as an author and poet . His best known book , the De Bang <unk> , highlights the socio @-@ economic difficulties facing Afghan workers and peasants . His works were translated into Russian language in the Soviet Union , where his work was viewed as embodying scientific socialist themes . He was hailed by the Soviet Government as " Afghanistan 's Maxim Gorky " . On his visit to the Soviet Union Taraki was greeted by Boris Ponomarev , the Head of the International Department of the Central Committee , and other Communist Party of the Soviet Union members . 
 Under Mohammad Daoud Khan 's prime ministership , suppression of radicals was common . However , because of his language skills , Taraki was sent to the Afghan Embassy in the United States in 1952 . Within several months Taraki began denouncing the Afghan government under King Zahir Shah and accused it of being autocratic and dictatorial . His denunciation of the Afghan government earned him much publicity in the United States . It also attracted unfavorable attention from authorities back home , who relieved him of his post and ordered him repatriated but stopped short of placing him under arrest . After a short period of unemployment Taraki started working for the United States Overseas Mission in Kabul as an interpreter . He quit that job in 1958 and established his own translation company , the Noor Translation Bureau . Four years later , he started working for the U.S. Embassy in Kabul , but quit in 1963 to focus on the establishment of the People 's Democratic Party of Afghanistan ( PDPA ) , a communist political party . 
 At the founding congress of the PDPA , held in his own home , Taraki won a competitive election against Babrak Karmal to the post of general secretary on 1 January 1965 . Karmal became second secretary . Taraki ran as a candidate for the PDPA during the September 1965 parliamentary election but did not win a seat . Shortly after the election , he launched Khalq , the first major left @-@ wing newspaper in Afghanistan . The paper was banned within one month of its first printing . In 1967 , less than two years after its founding , the PDPA split into several factions . The largest of these included Khalq ( Masses ) led by Taraki , and Parcham ( Banner ) led by Karmal . The main differences between the factions were ideological , with Taraki supporting the creation of a Leninist @-@ like state , while Karmal wanted to establish a " broad democratic front " . 
 On 19 April 1978 a prominent leftist named Mir Akbar Khyber was assassinated and the murder was blamed on Mohammed Daoud Khan 's Republic of Afghanistan . His death served as a rallying point for the pro @-@ communist Afghans . Fearing a communist coup d 'état , Daoud ordered the arrest of certain PDPA leaders , including Taraki and Karmal , while placing others such as Hafizullah Amin under house arrest . On 27 April 1978 the Saur Revolution was initiated , reportedly by Amin while still under house arrest . Khan was killed the next day along with most of his family . The PDPA rapidly gained control and on 1 May Taraki became Chairman of the Revolutionary Council , a role which subsumed the responsibilities of both president and Chairman of the Council of Ministers ( literally prime minister in Western parlance ) . The country was then renamed the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan ( DRA ) , installing a regime that would last until April 1992 . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = Establishment and purge = = = 
 Taraki was appointed Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers while retaining his post as PDPA general secretary . He initially formed a government which consisted of both Khalqists and Parchamites ; Karmal became Deputy Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council while Amin became Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers . Internal problems soon arose and several prominent Khalqists accused the Parcham faction of conspiring against the Taraki government . A <unk> purge of the Parcham then began with the faction 's most prominent members being sent out of the country : Karmal became Afghan Ambassador to Czechoslovakia and Mohammad Najibullah became Afghan Ambassador to Iran . Internal struggle was not only to be found between the Khalqist and Parchamites ; tense rivalry between Taraki and Amin had begun in the Khalq faction with both vying for control . 
 Karmal was recalled from Czechoslovakia but rather than returning to Afghanistan he went into hiding with Anahita Ratebzad , his friend and former Afghan ambassador to Yugoslavia , as he feared execution if he returned . Muhammad Najibullah followed them . Taraki consequently stripped them of all official titles and political authority . 
 = = = Socio @-@ economic changes = = = 
 = = = = Land reform = = = = 
 Taraki 's Government initiated a land reform on 1 January 1979 which attempted to limit the amount of land a family could own . Those whose landholdings exceeded the limit saw their property requisitioned by the government without compensation . The Afghan leadership believed the reform would meet with popular approval among the rural population while weakening the power of the bourgeoisie . The reform was declared complete in mid @-@ 1979 and the government proclaimed that 665 @,@ 000 hectares ( approximately 1 @,@ 632 @,@ 500 acres ) had been redistributed . The government also declared that only 40 @,@ 000 families , or 4 percent of the population , had been negatively affected by the land reform . 
 Contrary to government expectations the reform was neither popular nor productive . Agricultural harvests plummeted and the reform itself led to rising discontent amongst Afghans . When Taraki realized the degree of popular dissatisfaction with the reform he quickly abandoned the policy . However , the land reform was gradually implemented under the later Karmal administration , although the proportion of land area impacted by the reform is unclear . 
 = = = = Other reforms = = = = 
 In the months following the coup , Taraki and other party leaders initiated other radical Marxist policies that challenged both traditional Afghan values and well @-@ established traditional power structures in rural areas . Taraki introduced women to political life and legislated an end to forced marriage . However , he ruled over a nation with a deep Islamic religious culture and a long history of resistance to any type of strong centralized governmental control , and consequently many of these reforms were not actually implemented nationwide . Popular resentment of Taraki 's drastic policy changes triggered surging unrest throughout the country , reducing government control to only a limited area . The strength of this anti @-@ reform backlash would ultimately lead to the Afghan civil war . 
 Under the previous administration of Mohammad Daoud Khan , a literacy program created by UNESCO had been launched with the objective of eliminating illiteracy within 20 years . The government of Taraki attempted to reduce this time frame from 20 to four years , an unrealistic goal in light of the shortage of teachers and limited government capacity to oversee such an initiative . The duration of the project was later lengthened to seven years by the Soviets in the aftermath of the Soviet intervention . The cultural focus of the UNESCO programme was declared " rubbish " by Taraki , who instead chose to introduce a political orientation by utilizing PDPA leaflets and left @-@ wing pamphlets as basic reading material . 
 = = = Afghan – Soviet relations = = = 
 Taraki signed a Twenty @-@ Year Treaty of Friendship with the Soviet Union on 5 December 1978 which greatly expanded Soviet aid to his regime . Following the Herat uprising , Taraki contacted Alexei Kosygin , chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers , and asked for " practical and technical assistance with men and armament " . Kosygin was unfavorable to the proposal on the basis of the negative political repercussions such an action would have for his country , and he rejected all further attempts by Taraki to solicit Soviet military aid in Afghanistan . Following Kosygin 's rejection Taraki requested aid from Leonid Brezhnev , the general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and Soviet head of state , who warned him that full Soviet intervention " would only play into the hands of our enemies – both yours and ours " . Brezhnev also advised Taraki to ease up on the drastic social reforms and to seek broader support for his regime . 
 In 1979 , Taraki attended a conference of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement in Havana , Cuba . On his way back he stopped in Moscow on 20 March and met with Brezhnev , foreign minister Andrei Gromyko and other Soviet officials . It was rumoured that Karmal was present at the meeting in an attempt to reconcile Taraki 's Khalq faction and the Parcham against Amin and his followers . At the meeting , Taraki was successful in negotiating some Soviet support , including the redeployment of two Soviet armed divisions at the Soviet @-@ Afghan border , the sending of 500 military and civilian advisers and specialists , and the immediate delivery of Soviet armed equipment sold at 25 percent below the original price . However , the Soviets were not pleased about the developments in Afghanistan and Brezhnev impressed upon Taraki the need for party unity . Despite reaching this agreement with Taraki , the Soviets continued to be reluctant to intervene further in Afghanistan and repeatedly refused Soviet military intervention within Afghan borders during Taraki 's rule as well as later during Amin 's short rule . 
 = = = Taraki – Amin break = = = 
 In the first months after the April 1978 revolution , Hafizullah Amin and Taraki had a very close relationship . Taraki reportedly remarked , " Amin and I are like nail and flesh , not separable " . Amin set about constructing a personality cult centered on Taraki . In party and government meetings Amin always referred to Taraki as " The Great Leader " , " The Star of the East " or " The Great Thinker " among other titles , while Amin was given such titles as " The True Disciple and Student " . Amin would later come to realize he had created a monster when the Kim Il @-@ sung @-@ like personality cult he had created inspired Taraki to become overly confident and believe in his own brilliance . Taraki began discounting Amin 's suggestions , fostering in Amin a deep sense of resentment . As their relationship turned increasingly sour , a power struggle developed between them for the control of the Afghan National Army . Their relations came to a head later that year when Taraki accused Amin of nepotism after Amin had appointed several family members to high @-@ ranking positions . 
 Taraki could count on the support of four prominent army officers in his struggle against Amin : Aslam Watanjar , Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy , <unk> Mazdoryar and Assadullah Sarwari . These men had joined the PDPA not because of ideological reasons , but instead due to their lofty political ambitions . They also had developed a close relationship with Alexander Puzanov , the Soviet ambassador in Afghanistan , who was eager to use them against Amin . After the Herat city uprising on 17 March 1979 , the PDPA Politburo and the Revolutionary Council established the Homeland Higher Defence Council , to which Taraki was elected its chairman while Amin became its deputy . At around the same time , Taraki left his post as Council of Ministers chairman and Amin was elected his successor . Amin 's new position offered him little real influence , however ; as Chairman of the Council of Ministers , Amin had the power to elect every member of the cabinet , but all of them had to be approved by the head of state , Taraki . In reality , through this maneuver Taraki had effectively reduced Amin 's power base by forcing him to relinquish his hold on the Afghan army in order to take on the supposedly heavy responsibilities of his new but ultimately powerless post . 
