 During Taraki 's foreign visit to the non @-@ aligned conference in Cuba , his Gang of Four had received an intelligence report that Amin was planning to arrest or kill them . This report , it turned out , was incorrect . Nonetheless , the Gang of Four were ordered to assassinate Amin , its leader Sarwari selecting his nephew Aziz Akbari to conduct the assassination . However , Akbari was not informed that he was the chosen assassin or that it was a secret mission , and he confided the information to contacts in the Soviet embassy . The embassy responded by warning Amin of the assassination attempt , thereby saving him from certain death . 
 = = = = Fall from power = = = = 
 Taraki was greeted by Amin at the airport on his return to Kabul . The flight was scheduled to land at 2 : 30 but Amin forced the delay of the landing by an hour as a demonstration to Taraki of his control over the government . Shortly afterward , Taraki sought to neutralize Amin 's power and influence by requesting that he serve overseas as an ambassador . Amin turned down the proposal , shouting " You are the one who should quit ! Because of drink and old age you have taken leave of your senses . " The following day Taraki invited Amin to the presidential palace for lunch with him and the Gang of Four . Amin turned down the offer , stating he would prefer their resignation rather than lunching with them . Soviet Ambassador Puzanov managed to persuade Amin to make the visit to the palace along with Sayed Daoud Tarun , the Chief of Police and Nawab Ali ( an intelligence officer ) . Upon arriving at the palace , unknown individuals within the building opened fire on the visitors . Tarun was killed , while Ali sustained an injury and escaped with an unharmed Amin . Shortly afterward , Amin returned to the palace with a contingent of Army officers and placed Taraki under arrest . The Gang of Four , however , had " disappeared " and their whereabouts would remain unknown for the duration of Amin 's 104 @-@ day rule . 
 After Taraki 's arrest , Amin reportedly discussed the incident with Leonid Brezhnev in which he said , " Taraki is still around . What should I do with him ? " Brezhnev replied that it was his choice . Amin , who now believed he had the full support of the Soviets , ordered the death of Taraki . Taraki was subsequently suffocated with pillows . The Afghan media would report that the ailing Taraki had died , omitting any mention of his murder . 
 = The Triumph of Cleopatra = 
 The Triumph of Cleopatra , also known as Cleopatra 's Arrival in Cilicia and The Arrival of Cleopatra in Cilicia , is an oil painting by English artist William Etty . It was first exhibited in 1821 , and is now in the Lady Lever Art Gallery in Port Sunlight across the River Mersey from Liverpool . During the 1810s Etty had become widely respected among staff and students at the Royal Academy of Arts , in particular for his use of colour and ability to paint realistic flesh tones . Despite having exhibited at every Summer Exhibition since 1811 he attracted little commercial or critical interest . In 1820 he exhibited The Coral Finder , which showed nude figures on a gilded boat . This painting attracted the attention of Sir Francis Freeling , who commissioned a similar painting on a more ambitious scale . 
 The Triumph of Cleopatra illustrates a scene from Plutarch 's Life of Antony and Shakespeare 's Antony and Cleopatra , in which Cleopatra , Queen of Egypt , travels to Tarsus in Cilicia aboard a magnificently decorated ship to cement an alliance with the Roman general Mark Antony . An intentionally cramped and crowded composition , it shows a huge group of people in various states of undress , gathering on the bank to watch the ship 's arrival . Although not universally admired in the press , the painting was an immediate success , making Etty famous almost overnight . Buoyed by its reception , Etty devoted much of the next decade to creating further history paintings containing nude figures , becoming renowned for his combination of nudity and moral messages . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Etty was born in York in 1787 , the son of a miller and baker . He showed artistic promise from an early age , but his family were financially insecure , and at the age of 12 he left school to become an apprentice printer in Hull . On completing his seven @-@ year indenture he moved to London " with a few pieces of chalk @-@ crayons in colours " , with the aim of emulating the Old Masters and becoming a history painter . Etty gained acceptance to the Royal Academy Schools in early 1807 . After a year spent studying under the renowned portrait painter Thomas Lawrence , Etty returned to the Royal Academy , drawing in the life class and copying other paintings . He was unsuccessful in all the Academy 's competitions , and every painting he submitted for the Summer Exhibition was rejected . 
 In 1811 , one of his paintings , Telemachus Rescues Antiope from the Fury of the Wild Boar , was finally accepted for the Summer Exhibition . Etty was becoming widely respected at the Royal Academy for his painting , particularly his use of colour and his ability to produce realistic flesh tones , and from 1811 onwards had at least one work accepted for the Summer Exhibition each year . However , he had little commercial success and generated little interest over the next few years . 
 At the 1820 Summer Exhibition Etty exhibited The Coral Finder : Venus and her Youthful Satellites Arriving at the Isle of Paphos . Strongly inspired by Titian , The Coral Finder depicts Venus Victrix lying nude in a golden boat , surrounded by scantily @-@ clad attendants . It was sold at exhibition to piano manufacturer Thomas Tomkinson for £ 30 ( about £ 2 @,@ 200 in 2016 terms ) . 
 Sir Francis Freeling admired The Coral Finder at its exhibition , and learning that it had been sold he commissioned Etty to paint a similar picture on a more ambitious scale , for a fee of 200 guineas ( about £ 15 @,@ 100 in 2016 terms ) . Etty had for some time been musing on the possibility of a painting of Cleopatra , and took the opportunity provided by Freeling to paint a picture of her based loosely on the composition of The Coral Finder . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Triumph of Cleopatra is based loosely on Plutarch 's Life of Antony as repeated in Shakespeare 's Antony and Cleopatra , in which Cleopatra , Queen of Egypt , travels to Tarsus in Cilicia aboard a grand ship to cement an alliance with the Roman general Mark Antony . 
 Therefore when she was sent unto by divers letters , both from Antonius himself and also from his friends , she made so light of it and mocked Antonius so much that she disdained to set forward otherwise but to take her barge in the river of <unk> , the poop whereof was of gold , the sails of purple , and the oars of silver , which kept stroke in rowing after the sound of the music of flutes , <unk> , <unk> , viols , and such other instruments as they played upon in the barge . And now for the person of herself : she was laid under a pavilion of cloth of gold of tissue , apparelled and attired like the goddess Venus commonly drawn in picture ; and hard by her , on either hand of her , pretty fair boys apparelled as painters do set forth god Cupid , with little fans in their hands , with the which they fanned wind upon her . Her ladies and gentlewomen also , the fairest of them were apparelled like the nymphs <unk> ( which are the mermaids of the waters ) and like the Graces , some steering the helm , others tending the tackle and ropes of the barge , out of which there came a wonderful passing sweet savour of perfumes , that perfumed the wharf 's side , pestered with innumerable multitudes of people . 
 While superficially similar to The Coral Finder , Cleopatra is more closely related to the style of Jean @-@ Baptiste Regnault , with its deliberately cramped and crowded composition . The individual figures are intentionally out of proportion to each other and to the ship , while a large number of figures are tightly positioned within a relatively small section of the painting . 
 As well as from Regnault , the work borrows elements from Titian , Rubens and classical sculpture . The figures are painted as groups , and while each figure and group of figures is carefully arranged and painted , the combination of groups gives the appearance of a confused mass surrounding the ship when the painting is viewed as a whole . ( Etty 's 1958 biographer Dennis Farr comments that " [ Cleopatra ] contains elements enough for three or four paintings no less ambitious but more maturely planned . " ) The scene includes a number of images based on drawings Etty had sketched while out and about in London , such as the mother holding up her baby to see the view and the crowd on the roof of a temple in the background . It also includes elements of European painting that Etty had learned while copying Old Master artworks as a student , such as the putti in the sky . Etty greatly admired the Venetian school , and the painting includes obvious borrowings from Titian and other Venetian artists . It also contains a number of elements from the paintings of Rubens , such as the Nereids and Triton in the sea in front of the ship . 
 Unusually for an English painting of the period in its representation of a queen of an African country the group of Cleopatra 's attendants includes both <unk> and light @-@ skinned figures shown on equal terms and with equal prominence . From the earliest days of his career Etty had been interested in depicting variations in skin colour , and The Missionary Boy , believed to be his oldest significant surviving painting , shows a dark @-@ skinned child . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cleopatra caused an immediate sensation ; Etty later claimed that the day after the Summer Exhibition opened he " awoke famous " . The May 1821 issue of The Gentleman 's Magazine hailed Cleopatra as " belonging to the highest class " , and Charles Robert Leslie described it as " a splendid triumph of colour " . The painting did not meet with universal approval . Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine conceded that the painting had been " seen and admired at the Royal Academy " but condemned Etty 's taking a mythological approach to a historical subject : 
 The effect of this picture would have been much more intense had the painter treated it as a mere fact , and had not brought upon the scene those flying Cupids who turn the thing into a mythological fable . Real boys dressed like Cupids would have been proper , but aerial beings are <unk> , and put one out when one is thinking of the sex . If this amorous pageant had been a mere fiction , instead of having actually taken place , still the power of its delineation would have consisted in its probability . 
 Etty attempted to replicate the success of Cleopatra , and his next significant exhibited work was A Sketch from One of Gray 's Odes ( Youth on the Prow ) , exhibited at the British Institution in January 1822 . As with The Coral Finder and Cleopatra , this painting showed a gilded boat filled with nude figures , and its exhibition provoked condemnation from The Times : 
 We take this opportunity of advising Mr. Etty , who got some reputation for painting " Cleopatra 's Galley " , not to be seduced into a style which can gratify only the most vicious taste . Naked figures , when painted with the purity of Raphael , may be endured : but nakedness without purity is offensive and indecent , and on Mr. Etty 's canvass is mere dirty flesh . Mr. Howard , whose poetical subjects sometimes require naked figures , never disgusts the eye or mind . Let Mr. Etty strive to acquire a taste equally pure : he should know , that just delicate taste and pure moral sense are synonymous terms . 
 Despite the tone , Etty was pleased to be noticed by a newspaper as influential as The Times , and much later confessed how delighted he was that the " Times noticed me . I felt my chariot wheels were on the right road to fame and honour , and I now drove on like another Jehu ! " Possibly as a result of the criticism in The Times , Freeling asked Etty to overpaint the figures in the foreground of Cleopatra . In 1829 , after Etty had become a respected artist , Freeling allowed the restoration of the figures to their original condition . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The criticism did little to dissuade Etty from attempting to reproduce the success of Cleopatra , and he concentrated on painting further history paintings containing nude figures . He exhibited 15 paintings at the Summer Exhibition in the 1820s ( including Cleopatra ) , and all but one contained at least one nude figure . In so doing Etty became the first English artist to treat nude studies as a serious art form in their own right , capable of being aesthetically attractive and of delivering moral messages . 
 In 1823 – 24 Etty made an extended trip to study in France and Italy , and returned a highly accomplished artist . His monumental 304 by 399 cm ( 10 ft by 13 ft 1 in ) 1825 painting The Combat : Woman Pleading for the Vanquished was extremely well @-@ received , and Etty began to be spoken of as one of England 's finest painters . In February 1828 Etty soundly defeated John Constable by eighteen votes to five to become a full Royal Academician , at the time the highest honour available to an artist . On occasion he would re @-@ use elements from Cleopatra in his later paintings , such as the black soldier who squats on the side of the ship in Cleopatra and who also sits watching dancers in his 1828 The World Before the Flood . 
 Etty continued to produce paintings ranging from still lifes to formal portraits , and to attract both admiration for his technique and criticism for supposed obscenity , until his death in 1849 . In the years following his death Etty 's work became highly collectable , and his works fetched huge sums on resale . Changing tastes from the 1870s onwards meant history paintings in Etty 's style fell rapidly out of fashion , and by the end of the 19th century , the value of all of his works had fallen below their original prices . 
 Despite its technical flaws , Cleopatra remained a favourite among many of Etty 's admirers during his lifetime ; in 1846 Elizabeth Rigby described it as a " glorious confusion of figures " and " that wonderful ' Cleopatra ' of Etty 's " . 
 Following Freeling 's death in 1836 , Cleopatra was sold for 210 guineas , around the same price Freeling had paid for it , and entered the collection of Lord Taunton . While in Taunton 's ownership it was shown at a number of important exhibitions , including a major 1849 Etty retrospective , the Art Treasures Exhibition of 1857 and the 1862 International Exhibition . Following Taunton 's death in 1869 it was sold to a succession of owners for a variety of prices , peaking at 500 guineas ( about £ 47 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms ) in 1880 and dropping in price on each subsequent resale . In 1911 it was bought for 240 guineas ( about £ 23 @,@ 000 in 2016 terms ) by William Lever , 1st Viscount Leverhulme , who was a great admirer of Etty and had a number of his paintings hanging in the entrance hall of his home . It has remained in the collection Leverhulme assembled , housed from 1922 in the Lady Lever Art Gallery , ever since . 
 = Suwałki Agreement = 
 The Suwałki Agreement , Treaty of Suvalkai , or <unk> Treaty ( Polish : <unk> <unk> , Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> ) was an agreement signed in the town of Suwałki between Poland and Lithuania on October 7 , 1920 . It was registered in the League of Nations Treaty Series on January 19 , 1922 . Both countries had re @-@ established their independence in the aftermath of World War I and did not have well @-@ defined borders . They waged the Polish – Lithuanian War over territorial disputes in the Suwałki and Vilnius Regions . At the end of September 1920 , Polish forces defeated the Soviets at the Battle of the Niemen River , thus militarily securing the Suwałki Region and opening the possibility of an assault on the city of Vilnius ( Wilno ) . Polish Chief of State , Józef Piłsudski , had planned to take over the city since mid @-@ September in a false flag operation known as Żeligowski 's Mutiny . 
 Under pressure from the League of Nations , Poland agreed to negotiate , hoping to buy time and divert attention from the upcoming Żeligowski 's Mutiny . The Lithuanians sought to achieve as much protection for Vilnius as possible . The agreement resulted in a ceasefire and established a demarcation line running through the disputed Suwałki Region up to the Bastuny railway station . The line was incomplete and did not provide adequate protection to Vilnius . Although neither Vilnius or the surrounding region was explicitly addressed in the agreement , numerous historians have described the agreement as allotting Vilnius to Lithuania . 
 Shortly after the agreement was signed , the clauses calling for territorial negotiation and an end to military actions were broken by Poland . Polish general Lucjan Żeligowski , acting under secret orders from Piłsudski , pretended to disobey stand @-@ down orders from the Polish military command and marched on Vilnius . The city was taken on October 9 . The Suwałki Agreement was to take effect at noon on October 10 . Żeligowski established the Republic of Central Lithuania which , despite intense protests by Lithuania , was incorporated into the Second Polish Republic in 1923 . The Vilnius Region remained under Polish administration until 1939 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the aftermath of World War I both Poland and Lithuania gained independence , but borders in the region were not established . The most contentious issue was Vilnius ( Wilno ) , historical capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania with a population , according to the 1916 German census , divided about evenly between Jews and Poles , but with only a 2 – 3 % Lithuanian minority . The Soviet – Lithuanian Peace Treaty , signed in July 1920 between Lithuania and the Russian SFSR , drew the eastern border of Lithuania . Russia recognized large territories , including the Vilnius and Suwałki Regions , as belonging to Lithuania . That month , during the Polish – Soviet War , the Red Army pushed Polish forces from the contested territories , including Vilnius . In the meantime , Lithuanians secured some other areas <unk> by the Polish army , such as the town of Suwałki . On August 6 , Lithuania and Soviet Russia signed a convention regarding withdrawal of Russian troops from the recognized Lithuanian territory . However , there were indications that the Soviets planned a coup against the Lithuanian government in hopes of re @-@ establishing the Lithuanian SSR . The Soviet troops began to retreat only after the Red Army suffered a heavy defeat in Poland at the Battle of Warsaw in mid @-@ August . 
 The Polish Army pushed back and came in contact with the Lithuanians in the contested Suwałki Region . The diplomatic negotiations broke down . The Lithuanians claimed to be defending their borders , while Poland did not recognize the Soviet – Lithuanian Peace Treaty and claimed that the Lithuanians had no rights to these territories . Poland also accused the Lithuanians of collaborating with the Soviets and thus violating the declared neutrality in the Polish – Soviet War . In the ensuing hostilities , the towns of Suwałki , Sejny , and Augustów changed hands frequently . The diplomatic struggle , both directly between the two states and in the League of Nations , intensified . 
 = = Negotiations = = 
 = = = Pressure from the League of Nations = = = 
 On September 5 , 1920 , Polish Foreign Minister Eustachy Sapieha delivered a diplomatic note to the League of Nations asking it to intervene in the Polish – Lithuanian War . He claimed that Lithuania allowed free passage through its territory for Soviet troops and therefore violated its declared neutrality in the Polish – Soviet War . The next day Lithuania responded with a direct note to Poland in which Lithuanian Foreign Minister Juozas <unk> proposed to negotiate a demarcation line and other issues in <unk> . On September 8 , during a planning meeting for what later was the Battle of the Niemen River , the Poles decided to maneuver through the Lithuanian territory to the rear of the Soviet Army . In an attempt to conceal the planned attack , Polish diplomats accepted the proposal to negotiate . The negotiations started on September 16 in <unk> , but collapsed just two days later . 
 The League of Nations began its session on September 16 , 1920 . After reports by Lithuanian representative Augustinas Voldemaras and Polish envoy Ignacy Jan Paderewski , the League adopted a resolution on September 20 . It urged both states to cease hostilities and adhere to the Curzon Line . Poland was asked to respect Lithuanian neutrality if Soviet Russia agreed to do the same . A special Control Commission was to be dispatched into the conflict zone to oversee implementation of the resolution . The Lithuanian government accepted the resolution . Sapieha replied that Poland could not honor the Lithuanian neutrality or the demarcation line as Lithuania was actively collaborating with the Soviets . The Poles reserved the right of full freedom of action . The Lithuanian representative in London , Count <unk> <unk> , informed the secretariat of the League of Nations that Sapieha 's telegram should be regarded as a declaration of war ; he also asked that the League of Nations take immediate intervention in order to stop new Polish aggressive acts . 
 On September 22 , 1920 , Poland attacked Lithuanian units in the Suwałki Region as part of the Battle of the Niemen River . The Polish army took prisoner 1 @,@ 700 Lithuanian troops who had surrendered . Polish forces then marched , as planned during the September 8 meeting , across the Neman River near <unk> and Merkinė to the rear of the Soviet forces near Hrodna and Lida . The Red Army retreated . This attack , just two days after the League 's resolution , damaged both Poland 's and the League 's reputation . Some politicians began to view Poland as an aggressor while the newly formed League realized its own shortcomings in light of such defiance . On September 26 , urged by the League , Sapieha proposed new negotiations in Suwałki . Lithuania accepted the proposal on the following day . 
 = = = Negotiations in Suwałki = = = 
 At the time of the negotiations , the military situation on the ground was threatening Lithuania not only in the Suwałki Region , but also in Vilnius . The Polish leader , Józef Piłsudski , feared that the Entente and the League might accept the fait accompli that had been created by the Soviet transfer of Vilnius to Lithuania on August 26 , 1920 . Already on September 22 , Sapieha asked Paderewski to gauge the possible reaction of the League in case military units in the Kresy decided to attack Vilnius , following the example of the Italian Gabriele D 'Annunzio , who in 1919 staged a mutiny and took over the city of Fiume . By agreeing to the negotiations , the Poles sought to buy time and distract attention from the Vilnius Region . The Lithuanians hoped to avoid new Polish attacks and , with help of the League , to settle the disputes . 
 The conference began in the evening of September 29 , 1920 . The Polish delegation was led by colonel Mieczysław Mackiewicz ( who originated from Lithuania ) , and the Lithuanian delegation by general <unk> <unk> . Lithuania proposed an immediate armistice , but the Polish delegation refused . Only after the Lithuanian delegation threatened to leave the negotiation table did Poland agree to stop fighting , but only to the east of the Neman River ( the Suwałki Region ) . Fighting to the west of the river continued . The Polish delegates demanded that the Lithuanians allow the Polish forces to use a portion of the Warsaw – Saint Petersburg Railway and the train station in Varėna ( <unk> ) . The Lithuanians refused : their major forces were concentrated in the Suwałki Region and moving them to protect Vilnius without the railway would be extremely difficult . The Lithuanian side was ready to give up the Suwałki Region in exchange for Poland 's recognition of the Lithuanian claims to Vilnius . 
 The Lithuanian delegation , after consultations in Kaunas on October 2 , proposed their demarcation line on October 3 . The line would be withdrawn about 50 – 80 km ( 31 – 50 mi ) from the border determined by the Soviet – Lithuanian Peace Treaty . On October 4 , the Polish delegation , after consultations with Piłsudski , presented a counter @-@ offer . In essence , the Lithuanians wanted a longer demarcation line to provide better protection for Vilnius and the Poles pushed for a shorter line . While Vilnius was not a topic of debate , it was on everybody 's mind . On the same day the Control Commission , sent by the League according to its resolution of September 20 , arrived in Suwałki to mediate the talks . The commission , led by French colonel Pierre <unk> , included representatives from Italy , Great Britain , Spain , and Japan . 
 On October 5 , 1920 , the Control Commission presented a concrete proposal to draw the demarcation line up to the village of <unk> on the Neman River , about 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) south of Merkinė ( <unk> ) , and to establish a 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) wide neutral zone along the line . On October 6 , negotiations continued regarding an extension of the demarcation line . The Poles refused to move it past the village of Bastuny , claiming that the Polish army needed freedom to maneuver against the Soviet troops , even though a provisional ceasefire agreement had been reached with Soviet Russia on October 5 . The Poles proposed to discuss further demarcation lines in Riga , where Poland and Russia negotiated the Peace of Riga . On the same day fighting west of the Neman River ceased as Polish troops captured the Varėna train station . On October 7 , at midnight , the final Suwałki Agreement was signed . On October 8 , the Control Commission stated that they could not see why the demarcation line could not be extended further than Bastuny and urged another round of negotiations . 
 = = Provisions of the agreement = = 
 The agreement was finally signed on October 7 , 1920 ; the ceasefire was to begin at noon on October 10 . Notably , the treaty made not a single reference to Vilnius or the Vilnius Region . The agreement contained the following articles : 
 Article I : on the demarcation line ; besides setting it out , it also stated that the line " in no way prejudices the territorial claims of the two Contracting Parties . " The demarcation line would start in the west following the Curzon Line until it reached the Neman River . It would follow the Neman and Merkys Rivers , leaving the town of Varėna to the Lithuanians , but its train station on the Polish side . From Varėna the line would follow <unk> – <unk> – <unk> – <unk> – Bastuny ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The train station in Bastuny also remained in Polish hands . The demarcation line east of Bastuny was to be determined by a separate agreement . 
 Article II : on the ceasefire ; notably the ceasefire was to take place only along the demarcation line , not on the entire Polish – Lithuanian frontline ( i.e. not east of Bastuny ) . 
 Article III : on the train station in Varėna ( <unk> ) ; it was to remain under Polish control but the Polish side promised unrestricted passage of civilian trains , but only two military trains per day 
 Article IV : on prisoner exchange . 
 Article V : on the date and time the ceasefire would start ( October 10 at noon ) and expire ( when all territorial disputes are resolved ) and which map was to be used . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The demarcation line drawn through the Suwałki Region for the most part remains the border between Poland and Lithuania in modern times ; notably the towns of Sejny , Suwałki and Augustów remained on the Polish side . In the 21st century , the Suwałki Region ( the present @-@ day Podlaskie Voivodeship ) remains home to the Lithuanian minority in Poland . 
 The most controversial issue – the future of the city of Vilnius – was not explicitly addressed . When the agreement was signed , Vilnius was garrisoned by Lithuanian troops and behind the Lithuanian lines . Yet this changed almost immediately when the staged Żeligowski 's Mutiny began on October 8 . Soon after the mutiny , Léon Bourgeois , President of the Council of the League of Nations , expressed strong disapproval , asserting that Żeligowski 's actions were a violation of the engagements entered into with the Council of the League of Nations , and demanding the immediate Polish evacuation of the city . 
 In Piłsudski 's view , signing even such a limited agreement was not in Poland 's best interests , and he disapproved of it . In a 1923 speech acknowledging that he had directed Żeligowski 's coup , Piłsudski stated : " I tore up the Suwałki Treaty , and afterwards I issued a false communique by the General Staff . " Żeligowski and his mutineers captured Vilnius , established the Republic of Central Lithuania , and after a disputed election in 1922 , incorporated the republic into Poland . The conflict over the city dragged on until World War II . In the 21st century , the Vilnius Region ( <unk> ) is the major center of the Polish minority in Lithuania . 
 = = Evaluations and historiography = = 
 While the Lithuanian side considered the agreement to be an enforceable political treaty , the Polish side considered it to be a minor military agreement , later superseded by a ceasefire agreement between Lithuania and Żeligowski reached on November 29 . American historian Alfred Erich Senn has argued that it was not a regular political treaty , as it did not require ratification , but the presence of political representatives of both sides indicated that it was not a mere military agreement . Poland and Lithuania also disagreed about the agreement 's relation to the Vilnius question , which was not explicitly addressed in the treaty . The Lithuanian side considered that the agreement assigned Vilnius to Lithuania , while the Polish side argued that it did not concern Vilnius or other territorial claims . Senn has described the agreement as tacitly leaving Vilnius to Lithuania . 
 Finally , the Lithuanian side considered the Żeligowski 's attack on Vilnius a violation of the Suwałki agreement and as a major argument in international mediation . Poland disagreed and protested such interpretation of the document . At first Poland claimed that Żeligowski was a rebel who acted without approval from the Polish government . Later Piłsudski 's role in the attack was acknowledged , but the Polish side argued that the agreement was not violated , as the attack was held to the east from the demarcation line . The League of Nations considered the Polish attack a violation of the agreement , but placed emphasis on resumption of the hostilities and not subsequent territorial changes . Senn said the view that the agreement has not been violated was " specious " . In his opinion , Piłsudski himself did not seem to share that view , as evidenced by his attempt to pretend that the attacking forces were " rebels " . 
 In most cases historians tend to summarise the issue by saying that the agreement assigned Vilnius to Lithuania and Polish attack violated it . However , Piotr <unk> argued that such summaries are inadequate and misleading . 
 = Trent Daavettila = 
 Trent Daavettila ( born September 3 , 1984 ) is an American professional ice hockey player who currently plays for the Colorado Eagles of the ECHL . After beginning his college hockey career with Finlandia University , he transferred to Michigan Technological University , but failed to gain a place on their team . He remained at Michigan Tech and played for an upper @-@ level men 's amateur team while earning a civil engineering degree . Daavettila tried out for numerous minor league hockey teams after graduating from college , but was not accepted by any . Months later , however , he was signed to a professional tryout contract by the Kalamazoo Wings . Daavettila remained with the team , and two seasons later he tied for the team scoring lead and was named a second @-@ team all @-@ star by the ECHL . Through the 2012 – 13 season , he has also played in 19 American Hockey League games . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Daavettila was born on September 3 , 1984 . He grew up in Howell , Michigan , as the second oldest in a family of eleven children . His first exposure to ice hockey was in his backyard , where his family had constructed a rink . Through crowded pick @-@ up games , Daavettila learned to stickhandle . " You 'd always want to stickhandle your way down . It was never cool to score from far out " , he said . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Daavettila graduated from Howell High School in 2002 and enrolled at Finlandia University in Hancock , Michigan . He played in ten games for Finlandia 's varsity hockey team , a member of the Midwest Collegiate Hockey Association in Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association , and scored three goals and ten assists before moving on . Daavettila transferred to Michigan Technological University , just across Portage Lake from Finlandia , and attempted to join the Division I Michigan Tech Huskies hockey team as a walk @-@ on , but failed to do so . He continued to study civil engineering at Michigan Tech while playing for the Portage Lake Pioneers , a high @-@ level men 's amateur team playing in the Great Lakes Hockey League . During his five years with the Pioneers , Daavettila scored at a rate of more than a point per game and in 2005 he won a national championship with them . 
 Daavettila graduated from Michigan Tech in 2008 and tried out for the Flint Generals of the International Hockey League ( IHL ) . He appeared in two games for the Generals at the end of the season ( for only about three shifts ) , and did not register a point . Daavettila had not originally planned to pursue a professional hockey career , but said " When I got one skate with Flint , it kind of sparked my interest and I decided to give it a try " . During the off @-@ season , Daavettila worked for a structural engineering firm in Saginaw , Michigan . He used vacation time at the start of the next hockey season later in 2008 to try out for the Grand Rapids Griffins of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) and the Muskegon Lumberjacks ( IHL ) , though he was rejected by both teams . <unk> with two more IHL teams , the Kalamazoo Wings and the Bloomington <unk> , did not result in a contract either . Daavettila assumed his hockey career was over and went back to his engineering job , but he continued to skate a couple times a week . He had left an impression on Kalamazoo coach Nick Bootland , however , who called Daavettila back in March 2009 after his team was depleted by injuries . " You could see he had a skill set , " said Bootland . " But I thought the way he held on to the puck , he was going to get himself killed . ... You kept thinking he was going to make a mistake . Then he 'd pop a guy for a breakaway . " 
 Bootland played Daavettila for two shifts in his first game with the Wings and more in his second game . Daavettila responded with his first professional hockey goal and went on to score 9 goals and 9 assists in 20 games for the Wings that season . During the off @-@ season , the New York Rangers of the NHL invited Daavettila to participate in a development camp for their recent draftees and other prospects . " It was the hardest I 've ever had to push myself as far as conditioning and the longevity of it " , said Daavettila . Also during the off @-@ season , the Kalamazoo Wings left the IHL to become members of the ECHL , and Daavettila was one of the first players the team signed to play in their new league . " It was a weird feeling knowing you had a ... plan for next year , somebody actually wants you " , he said . 
 Daavettila scored 8 goals among 14 points in the Wings ' first 14 games of the 2009 – 10 ECHL season , helping the team to achieve the best record of the league 's 25 teams at that point . His performance prompted the Adirondack Phantoms ( AHL ) to sign Daavettila to a professional tryout contract when the team was beset by injuries early in the season . Daavettila played eleven games for the Phantoms , as center of the third and fourth lines , and collected two assists before being sent back to Kalamazoo . Shortly thereafter , he was signed to another professional tryout by the Grand Rapids Griffins , for whom he played in two games and scored his first AHL goal by deflecting a shot by Andy Delmore . Daavettila was later called up again and played in two more games for Adirondack . Meanwhile , while with Kalamazoo , he scored 19 goals and added 30 assists in 51 games to finish fourth on the team in scoring . In the playoffs , Daavettila continued his point @-@ per @-@ game scoring rate , but the Wings lost their first @-@ round series to the Reading Royals . In July , he was one of the first players signed by the Wings for the following season . 
 Daavettila began the 2010 – 11 season at the Grand Rapids Griffins training camp , but again did not make the team . Back with the Wings , he centered a line with Brady <unk> and Andrew Fournier and had a 12 @-@ game point @-@ scoring streak early in the season . In early January , Daavettila was loaned to the Griffins , where he played in one game before being returned . He was named ECHL Player of the Week for the week ending on February 13 after scoring five goals and two assists in four games , including his first professional hat trick on February 12 against the Greenville Road Warriors . He was on a seven @-@ game point streak at the end of the month and was named ECHL Plus Performer of the Month for having the best plus @-@ minus in February and ECHL Player of the Month for scoring 8 goals and 14 assists in his team 's 14 games . Now on a line with Fournier and Darryl Lloyd , Daavettila extended his point streak to eleven games and helped Kalamazoo gain a place in the playoffs in March . He finished the season with 80 points to tie with Kory <unk> as Kalamazoo 's lead scorers ; the pair tied for fourth in league scoring . Daavettila was also named an ECHL second @-@ team all @-@ star and shared the ECHL Reebok Plus Performer Award with Brendan Connolly of the Greenville Road Warriors . In the playoffs , Daavettila scored 6 goals and 22 assists in 18 games , leading the league in playoff scoring , and helped the Wings defeat the Florida <unk> , Reading Royals and Wheeling Nailers on their way to the Kelly Cup Finals . In that series , Kalamazoo lost to the Alaska Aces 4 – 1 . 
 After completing his fourth season with the Wings in 2011 – 12 , Daavettila signed his first European contract as a free agent , agreeing to a one @-@ year deal with Frederikshavn White Hawks of the Danish AL @-@ Bank <unk> on June 13 , 2012 . However a little over a month later , due to personal reasons , Daavettila sought a release from his contract and was granted on July 30 , 2012 . On September 13 , Daavettila agreed to remain in the ECHL , defecting from the Wings to fellow competitor the Colorado Eagles on a one @-@ year deal . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Daavettila married his wife Wendy on August 7 , 2010 . During the 2009 and 2010 off @-@ seasons , he worked for Tetra Tech in Howell , Michigan . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Statistics as of the end of the 2015 – 16 season . 
 = I , Borg = 
 " I , Borg " is the 23rd episode of the fifth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , the 123rd overall . It was originally released on May 10 , 1992 , in broadcast syndication . The episode was written by René Echevarria , with an uncredited assist from executive producer Jeri Taylor . It was directed by Robert Lederman , the film editor for The Next Generation , one of two directing credits he received during the course of the season . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Federation starship Enterprise . In this episode , an injured Borg drone ( Jonathan Del Arco ) is found amid a crashed scout ship . As they restore him to health , the crew must decide whether or not to develop him as a weapon of mass destruction against the Borg , but when he demonstrates free will , they must question that decision . 
 The writers had problems bringing back the Borg due to their apparent near @-@ invincibility . The idea for " I , Borg " was well received among the staff , with Taylor comparing it to the film Edward Scissorhands . The episode also saw a development in the make @-@ up design for the Borg by Michael Westmore 's team . Del Arco was deliberately antisocial prior to his audition in order to enter Hugh 's mindset , but at the same time sought to use the innocence and wonderment generated by a friend 's death as Hugh 's voice . He was pleased when the character later returned in the two @-@ part episode " Descent " . The episode received Nielsen ratings of 12 @.@ 8 percent , and critics were positive with praise directed at both Del Arco and Whoopi Goldberg , as well as the general nature of the plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The crew discover a wrecked Borg scout ship with a single survivor : a young Borg drone . Dr. Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) insists on treating the surviving Borg despite the concerns of Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) . On Picard 's orders , the drone is confined and monitored by security forces at all times and is prevented from contacting the Borg Collective . Chief Engineer Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) and Lt. Commander Data assist Crusher in bringing the Borg back to health . As they come to understand the workings of the Borg , La Forge and Data postulate an idea of using the Borg drone as a weapon of mass destruction . By implanting an unsolvable geometric formula into his mind and returning him back to the Collective , the formula should rapidly spread ( similar to a computer virus ) and disable the Borg . Crusher is aghast at this suggestion , considering it equivalent to genocide , while Picard and the other senior crew deliberate on the ethics of this plan . 
 The Borg drone initially calls himself " Third of Five " , but ends up referring to and understanding himself as " Hugh " – the name given to him by La Forge . Hugh discusses how the Borg only wish to learn about other cultures through assimilation , but La Forge counters this argument , discussing aspects of individuality that make them human and unique . In further debates , La Forge finds himself becoming a friend to Hugh , and begins to doubt his previous idea . This is further complicated when Hugh shows elements of individualism . The crew now debate whether it is appropriate to sacrifice one individual to protect the majority , though Picard is still insistent on destroying the Collective . Crusher and La Forge arrange to have Guinan ( Whoopi Goldberg ) , who has a similar loathing for the Borg because they destroyed her homeworld , speak to Hugh . 
 She finds Hugh to be not a mindless drone but a confused young man , and she agrees Hugh is no longer a Borg . Guinan convinces Picard to meet with Hugh , as well , and Picard comes to the same conclusion , in part because Hugh refers to himself as " I " instead of the Borg 's collective " we " during their discussion . Picard abandons the proposed plan and instead offers Hugh asylum within the Federation . Hugh expresses enthusiasm at the prospect of remaining with La Forge but ultimately refuses , recognizing that the Borg will still come looking for him . He offers to be returned to the crash site , where he will be found and re @-@ assimilated by the Borg . Picard hopes that , once Hugh is reconnected , the sense of individualism Hugh has learned will spread throughout the Collective . La Forge accompanies Hugh to the crash site and , from a safe distance , watches the Borg recover him . Just as the Borg transport out , Hugh turns to give La Forge a parting glance . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the Borg @-@ based two @-@ part episode " The Best of Both Worlds " , the production team were having difficulty in introducing the Borg to the series due to their unstoppable nature . The story idea for " I , Borg " was well received by the production staff , with executive producer Rick Berman saying that he " fell in love " with the characterisations of Guinan , Picard , La Forge and Hugh which resulted in a series of two character scenes in the episode . Story editor René Echevarria wrote the script , with a uncredited assist from executive producer Jeri Taylor . She compared the idea to the 1990 film Edward Scissorhands , saying that she felt it would become a " classic " and that the Borg " would never be the same again " . Michael Piller , who wrote the " The Best of Both Worlds " , described " I , Borg " as having a " great premise which forces Guinan and Picard to face their own prejudices " . He said it was his favourite of the season . 
 The episode was directed by Robert Lederman , his first of the series and the only new director during the fifth season . Lederman was also the film editor on the series , and would go on to also direct the episode " Force of Nature " . " I , Borg " also marked the first time that Jay Chattaway scored a Borg related episode , but would continue to do so for the rest of the series and during Star Trek : Voyager . 
 = = = Design and casting of Hugh = = = 
 The design of the Borg prosthetics as used in " I , Borg " was an evolution from those previously seen in the series . Michael Westmore 's make @-@ up team developed a removable eye @-@ piece for Hugh , using magnets to allow the actor to remove it as required by the script . The team wanted the eye @-@ piece to be dramatic , but decided against using a laser as this had been previously used for <unk> of Borg . They instead opted for a hologram and a series of LEDs that were powered by a battery pack built into the costume and mounted on the actor 's back . The arm piece was also redeveloped ; rather than a single " club " piece as previously used for the Borg , it was built from a foam @-@ rubber glove with attachments . 
 Jonathan Del Arco had no concept of what a Borg was prior to the audition . He received his script on the evening prior to meeting with the producers and felt that it gave him a decent sense of the character . Instead , Del Arco later explained that he was deliberately anti @-@ social towards the other actors at the audition in order to get into Hugh 's mindset . When he performed for the producers , someone else read the lines assigned to Picard and La Forge , and he felt like he immediately got a positive result . He received a call back , and returned to audition once more . 
 He said that his performance in " I , Borg " was driven by the memories of watching a childhood friend die , and the innocence that he felt given to his friends memory over time ; " When I first read the script . I heard his voice , that 's what it sounded like – full of wonderment and confusion about everything . That , to me , was Hugh . " Following his appearance in the episode , he later pitched a couple of story ideas to the producers to feature the return of Hugh . He was happy when the character later returned in the sixth season finale / seventh season opener " Descent " , which he felt was similar to his previous ideas . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 The episode aired during the week commencing May 10 , 1992 , in broadcast syndication . According to Nielsen Media Research , it received ratings of 12 @.@ 8 percent . This means that it was watched by 12 @.@ 8 percent of all households watching television during its timeslot . It was the seventh most watched episode of the season , behind both parts of " Unification " , " A Matter of Time " , " Power Play " , " Cause and Effect " and " The Game " . 
 Keith DeCandido in his review for Tor.com gave the episode a score of 8 out of 10 , and described Goldberg 's appearance as " particularly good " , while Del Arco was said to be " spectacular " in his " subtle , powerful performance " . DeCandido criticised the " <unk> " of the Borg , but understood why the writers took the approach they did as a near @-@ unstoppable enemy is difficult to write for . He praised the characterisations , specifically for Crusher , and added " it ’ s never a bad thing when TNG actually remembers its character continuity " . James van Hise , in his book The Complete Trek : The Next Generation , said that the episode " enriched the creative tapestry of the series " and gave the writers a number of possibilities for following it up . 
 Sven Harvey included " I , Borg " in a list of 25 " must watch " episodes of the series compiled for Den of Geek , describing it as " a wonderfully written and executed episode which lays a path for later developments " . Zack Handlen gave " I , Borg " a grade of A- in his review for the A.V. Club , and while he was disappointed that the Borg were made less " nightmarish " , the question of genocide that hung over the episode and the expansion of potential story ideas from the plot made it worth it . 
 " I , Borg " was first released on VHS cassette in the United States and Canada on October 7 , 1997 . The episode was later released in the United States on September 3 , 2002 , as part of the Star Trek : The Next Generation season four DVD box set . It was subsequently released as part of the Star Trek : Fan Collective – Borg collection on DVD , which brought together the Borg @-@ themed episodes from The Next Generation , Voyager and Star Trek : Enterprise . The first Blu Ray release was in the United Kingdom on July 29 , 2013 , followed by the United States on July 30 . 
 = 3 ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " 3 " is the seventh episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . First broadcast on the Fox network on November 4 , 1994 , the episode was written by Glen Morgan , James Wong and Chris Ruppenthal , directed by David Nutter , and featured guest appearances by Perrey Reeves and Malcolm Stewart . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . Following on from the abduction of Dana Scully in the previous episode , " Ascension " , " 3 " was the first episode of The X @-@ Files not to feature series star Gillian Anderson . The episode earned 9 million households during its first broadcast , and received mixed reviews from both critics and the show 's cast and crew . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder is brought in to investigate a series of ritualistic murders in Los Angeles , which he first believes were the work of a cult . However , it turns out that the perpetrators are a group of vampires . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Los Angeles , Garrett Lorre , a middle @-@ aged businessman , embarks on a one night stand with an anonymous woman he has met at a corporate party . However , as they are having sex in his hot tub , the woman bites Lorre to drink his blood . Two other men join the woman , helping her kill Lorre by repeatedly stabbing him using hypodermic needles . 
 The following day , before departing for Los Angeles , Fox Mulder stores the missing Dana Scully 's FBI badge in an X @-@ File and files it under her name . At the crime scene , Mulder meets with the LAPD detectives investigating the case , explaining that Lorre 's murder is the latest in a series of seemingly vampiric serial killings that have spanned two other states . Because the killers write biblical passages in the victims ' blood , Mulder believes that they view themselves as an " Unholy Trinity " . 
 Mulder visits a local blood bank where a night watchman has been recently hired . Mulder has him arrested after he is caught drinking blood in the facility 's storeroom . During his interrogation , the suspect tells Mulder that he belongs to a trio of vampires who desire immortality ; he is known as " The Son " while the other two , a man and a woman , are called " The Father " and " The Unholy Spirit " . Mulder does not believe The Son 's claims . However , at sunrise , The Son is burned to death when sunlight from the window touches his flesh . Mulder is taken aback , having previously assumed vampires to be purely mythological . 
 During an examination of The Son 's body , Mulder discovers a tattoo for Club Tepes , a local vampire club . There , he comes across a young woman named Kristen <unk> who partakes in the consumption of blood . Mulder , having his suspicion aroused , follows Kristen after she and another club patron , David Yung , leave for an erotic liaison ; he initially fears that Kristen is targeting Yung , but is beaten by Yung when he catches the agent spying on them . After Mulder leaves , Yung is murdered by the three killers , although the reason is not known . 
 Mulder runs a background check into Kristen , discovering that she formerly lived in Memphis and Portland — both the previous locations of earlier murders . Mulder assists the LAPD in searching Kristen 's home , where he finds various blood @-@ related paraphernalia . When Kristen arrives later , Mulder is waiting for her . Kristen tells Mulder that she met The Son in Chicago and that they had engaged in " blood sports " together . Later , Kristen fled The Son as he formed the Unholy Trinity with his accomplices and began their killing spree , following her across the country . Mulder and Kristen kiss while The Son , who has returned from the dead , looks on . 
 The next morning , The Son confronts Kristen and tells her that by killing Mulder and drinking the blood of a " believer " , she will become one of them . Kristen approaches Mulder with a knife but instead stabs The Father , who is hiding in the bedroom . The Son attacks Mulder but is subdued . Mulder and Kristen try to escape using a car parked in the garage , but the The Unholy Spirit jumps onto the car hood and attacks them . Kristen drives into her , impaling her on a wooden peg on the wall . Kristen tricks Mulder into running outside of the house while she goes back inside and pours gasoline around herself and The Son . Kristen lights a match , blowing up the house and taking her own life in order to kill the other vampires . Firefighters and police find four bodies in the wreckage while Mulder stares at Scully 's cross necklace . 
 = = Production = = 
 Howard Gordon was originally supposed to write the seventh episode of the season , but when he became unavailable Glen Morgan and James Wong , who were working on writing the eighth episode of the season , agreed to rewrite a freelance script provided by Chris Ruppenthal . The writers had to do significant edits , but retained the main plot surrounding three vampires . 
 Club Tepes , named after Prince Vlad Tepes — better known as Vlad the Impaler , who was the inspiration for Dracula — was shot inside a closed @-@ down and redecorated nightclub , with extras recruited from other Vancouver clubs . The location for Kristen 's house was the mansion of hockey player Pavel Bure , then the leading name of the Vancouver Canucks . The producers had an agreement for the late filming from all but one of Bure 's neighbors , who was absent during the petitioning . Said neighbor later tried to sue Fox , only agreeing to let production continue after receiving an <unk> . 
 Perrey Reeves , who played Kristen , was David Duchovny 's real @-@ life girlfriend at the time . Speaking of Mulder 's possible sexual encounter with Kristen , series creator Chris Carter said , " I thought , ' This guy 's a monk . Let 's let him be a human . Especially in [ Scully 's ] absence , it seemed like a perfect opportunity to do it . " Duchovny had previously acted alongside another real @-@ life girlfriend , Maggie Wheeler , in the first season episode " Born Again " . Gillian Anderson is absent from the episode as she was on leave to give birth to her daughter Piper at the time . This episode was the first in which Scully did not appear . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " 3 " premiered on the Fox network on November 4 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 9 , 1995 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 9 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " 3 " received mixed reviews from critics . Sarah Stegall , in The Munchkyn Zone , gave the episode a 5 out of 5 rating . Stegall referred to it as a " compelling story " with " excellent special effects " . She commended Duchovny 's performance , saying he is " definitely at the top of his form in this episode " . While writing about vampire @-@ related television shows for Metacritic , Zeenat Burns described the episode as " wretched " . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a C , criticizing the fact that it did not explore enough the " promising premise " of Scully 's absence . Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club also considered that without said premise " deserve [ d ] better than to be background noise for a by @-@ the @-@ numbers erotic thriller " . Handlen described Mulder and Kristen 's " tedious romance " as " all kinds of misguided " , and felt the episode indulged in " lazy writing " regarding the over @-@ explored theme of vampires which resulted in " terrible dialogue and heavy @-@ handed attempts at mood " . He still praised David Duchovny 's performance and felt the first twenty minutes were " endurable trash " with a " serious USA Up All Night vibe " . 
 Co @-@ writer Glen Morgan felt doing an episode on vampires was a mistake , and said that they also took heat for having Mulder fall for Kristen . Co @-@ writer James Wong was also disappointed , saying that the script was a lot better than the show and that the episode was weakened when Fox censors had problems with the episode . Actor David Duchovny thought the episode had style , but suffered some lapses in logic , including the scene where Kristen shaves Mulder before the two kiss . 
 = Cryptic Writings = 
 Cryptic Writings is the seventh studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . Released on June 17 , 1997 through Capitol Records , it was the band 's last studio album to feature drummer Nick Menza . His departure would mark the end of the band 's longest lasting lineup to date , having recorded four studio albums . Megadeth decided to produce the record with Dann Huff in Nashville , Tennessee , because they were not satisfied with their previous producer Max Norman . The album features 12 tracks with accessible song structures , specifically aimed for radio airplay . The lyrics were also altered , in order to make the music more inclusive for wider audience . These changes were met with mixed opinions from music critics , who noted the band moving away from their thrash metal roots . 
 The album debuted at number 10 on Billboard 200 chart and was certified platinum in 1998 by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping one million copies in the United States . The first 500 @,@ 000 copies of Cryptic Writings in the U.S. were released with silver background album cover . A remixed and remastered version , featuring four bonus tracks , was released in 2004 . Two years after its original release , the album sold 850 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and won widespread praise from rock radio programmers . The song " Trust " was nominated for a " Best Metal Performance " at the 1998 Grammy Awards and became the band 's highest charting song on the Billboard 's Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1992 Megadeth released Countdown to Extinction , which contained songs with compact , accessible structures that resulted with strong sales and significant radio airplay . 1994 's Youthanasia and 1997 's Cryptic Writings followed a similar route , receiving platinum and gold certification respectively , with the latter spawning three rock @-@ radio hits . Frontman Dave Mustaine , speaking about the band 's commercial breakthrough , said : " I think a lot of our success now has to do with the fact that we 're willing to study the marketplace and educate ourselves . Most musicians don 't get the opportunity to go into the market with educated strategy . Fortunately , for us , our management educated us on how to study what 's current without losing our integrity and to keep on edge while staying at the forefront of what 's important right now . " 
 According to guitarist Marty Friedman , it took the band a year to prepare the record " from note one to mixing " . A lot of the material was written during the tour and some of it afterwards . As Friedman said , the songs came together naturally because the band wasn ’ t rushed to get a record out . The album was produced by Dann Huff , who had his producing debut with Megadeth . The band chose to work with Huff because they were not satisfied with Max Norman , the producer of their previous record . Mustaine explained why he decided to quit the collaboration with Norman : " Max came up with this bullshit formula that every song had to be 120 beats per minute to get on the radio . When people make drastic decisions to do things like that and it backfires , it usually ends up , in one way or another , costing them their jobs . " 
 Before the start of the recording sessions , bassist David Ellefson stated that the band doesn 't want their seventh studio album to sound like anything they have already recorded . Instrumentally , the band introduced a more melodic mix than the previous albums , filled with crunchy riffs and speedy guitar solos . In addition , Mustaine re @-@ evaluated the band 's songwriting techniques , recasting some lyrics to better reflect the sales and radio airplay environment of then 's rock arena . According to him , many of the song 's lyrics were altered in order to make the music " a little more inclusive of people who aren 't into dying and evil " . Ellefson commented that this album was a natural progression in Megadeth 's sound . He further stated that they were not trying to leave behind their thrash metal and heavy metal roots , but to broaden their musical horizons . 
 = = Artwork and release = = 
 The symbol depicted on the cover is a veve , a voodoo sign . According to Ellefson , the original concept for the album 's cover was very different , however , it was changed at the last minute . The title derives from a lyric in " Use the Man " . Aside from being a lyric , Ellefson stated that there was not really any correlation between the title and the music on the album . The first 500 @,@ 000 copies of Cryptic Writings in the United States were released with an album cover featuring a silver background . These releases also included a Vic Rattlehead collectible card which promoted " The Cryptic Writings Of Megadeth " , an issue run by Chaos Comics . Later US pressings features the same artwork with a black background instead . The black background album cover is also featured in the remasters . 
 The album sold 75 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release and debuted at number 10 on Billboard 200 . Four months after its release , the record was certificated gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping half million copies in the US , of which 383 @,@ 000 were sold according to Nielsen Soundscan . Two years after its original release , the album sold 850 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and won widespread praise from rock radio programmers . However , Cryptic Writings did not enjoy particular chart success on international level . It only managed to peak at number two on the Finnish Albums Chart , where it charted for eleven weeks . Elsewhere , it didn 't enter into the top 10 . It eventually received a gold certification from the Canadian Music Association for shipping 50 @,@ 000 copies . 
 A remixed and remastered version , featuring four bonus tracks , was released in 2004 through Capitol Records as part of the group 's reissued back catalogue . According to the liner notes of the remastered version of Cryptic Writings , Dave Mustaine had to alter many lyrics at the request of their new manager , Bud Prager . The liner notes suggest that Mustaine was not a fan of the changes , but other interviews indicate the band actively sought and eventually accepted Prager 's advice for the album . " I figured maybe this guy ( Prager ) could help me get that intangible number one record I wanted so badly " , Mustaine wrote in the liner notes . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Mustaine pointed out that four of the album 's 12 tracks are " fast , hard and crunchy " . Referring to the musical direction of the album , MTV 's writer P.R. Flack noted that " The <unk> " and " <unk> " were rooted in the thrash metal genre , and ranked them among the fastest tracks on the record . Neil Arnold of Metal Forces highlighted the tune " Vortex " , which according to him , features some of the album 's best guitar work . However , a number of songs , particularly " I 'll Get Even " and " Use the Man " , carried a more rock @-@ oriented sound , which contributed to the album 's diverse style . Lyrically , the album does not have a distinct subject matter , but focuses on numerous themes instead . " She @-@ Wolf " tells of a " wicked temptress with mystic lips and lusting eyes " , while " Mastermind " has been stated by Mustaine as being about " the computerization of the world . " 
 " Trust " was released as the record 's lead single . The song was developed from " Absolution " , an instrumental track recorded on a demo during the studio sessions of their previous album . " Trust " peaked at number five on the US Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks , thus becoming the band 's highest charting song on that chart . It was nominated for " Best Metal Performance " at the 1998 Grammy Awards . " Almost Honest " was the second single of the album , and like its predecessor , it managed to enter the Top 10 on Billboard 's Mainstream Rock Chart . Mustaine stated that the song is about how people treat one another , which contains a message that " it 's difficult for people to be honest " . Billboard 's Chuck Taylor commented that the song contains catchy hooks and the band 's " signature guitar howl " and classified it " somewhere between Def Leppard and Bon Jovi " . " Use the Man " and " A Secret Place " were released as the third and fourth single , respectively . " Use the Man " ( which started with a snippet of The Searchers ' " Needles and Pins " , which was removed in the 2004 remaster ) is about drug addiction , while " A Secret Place " describes losing touch with reality . 
 Three extended plays were released in support of Cryptic Writings . Two of these featured live recordings from the ensuing tour while the other was a studio EP which featured instrumental versions of several album tracks . The live releases were entitled Live Trax and Live Trax II , the first being released on June 30 , 1998 , while the second was released as a bonus disc to Cryptic Writings in 1998 . An instrumental EP entitled Cryptic Sounds : No Voices in Your Head was released in Japan , Argentina and as a bonus disc to the album in Korea . The vocals on the tracks were replaced with extra guitar melodies , with the song " She @-@ Wolf " being performed in a Spanish acoustic style for the first half . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Music critics were divided on the record . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , reviewing the album for AllMusic , reacted unenthusiastically towards it . He criticized Mustaine 's ability to write more " ambitious " material and opined that the band " sounds better playing thrash . " However , Erlewine did admire the band 's desire to experiment with their sound . Rolling Stone was more generous towards Cryptic Writings . Reviewer Jon Wiederhorn commented that the album " should thrill Metallica fans who felt screwed by that band 's <unk> 1996 album , Load . " Dean <unk> of the Chicago Tribune panned the album for being " predictable and annoying " and assumed that Megadeth were " destined to follow Metallica 's leap into mainstream sounds " . Author Thomas Harrison also noted the album for not making much impact as their previous studio releases . 
 Westnet 's Simon <unk> wrote positively about the record , qualifying it as " pure , solid heavy metal " . He noted that the album contains various kinds of tunes and named it " one of the best metal records of 1997 " . Neil Arnold from Metal Forces observed that Cryptic Writings is not " a bad record " , though it comes " pale " in comparison to their 1994 opus Youthanasia . Arnold went on to comment that the album confirms Megadeth are " no longer a thrash band " . Wolfgang Schäfer , from the German metal magazine Rock Hard , stated that Cryptic Writings followed the musical direction of its predecessors . He described the album as a " balanced mix of typical Megadeth rockers and some experimental songs " . 
 = = Touring = = 
 Megadeth supported the album with a world tour that started in the summer of 1997 . The Misfits were the opening act of these live shows , one of which was the band 's first all @-@ acoustic performance that took place in South America . The following summer , the group participated in Ozzfest ' 98 for the dates in the United States . These live shows were the last for drummer Nick Menza , who was fired subsequently . Menza began to suffer knee problems and escalating pain during the tour . He was diagnosed with a tumor and underwent surgery which waylaid him briefly . However , the tumor was benign and Menza was eager to rejoin his bandmates , who had continued the tour with Jimmy DeGrasso . Although DeGrasso was hired as a temporary replacement , he stayed with the band for the recording of their next two studio albums . Menza stated that Mustaine had dismissed him from the band two days after his knee surgery via phone call telling him that his services " were no longer needed " . On the other hand , Dave Mustaine believed that Menza had lied about his injury . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Geoffrey Boycott = 
 Geoffrey Boycott OBE ( born 21 October 1940 ) is a former Yorkshire and England cricketer . In a prolific and sometimes controversial playing career from 1962 to 1986 , Boycott established himself as one of England 's most successful opening batsmen and since retiring as a player , he has found further success as a cricket commentator . Boycott made his international debut in a 1964 Test match against Australia . He was noted for his ability to occupy the crease and became a key feature of England 's Test batting line up for many years , although he was less successful in his limited One Day International ( ODI ) appearances . He accumulated large scores – he is the equal fifth highest accumulator of first @-@ class centuries in history , eighth in career runs and the first English player to average over 100 in a season ( 1971 and 1979 ) – but often encountered friction with his team mates . Journalist Ian Wooldridge commented that " Boycott , in short , walks alone " , while cricket writer John Arlott wrote that Boycott had a " lonely " career . Others , however , have stated that the extent of his introverted nature has been exaggerated , and that while he was " obsessed with success " he was not a selfish player . 
 After 108 Test match appearances for England , Boycott ended his international career in 1982 as the leading Test run scorer with over 8 @,@ 000 Test match runs , earning an OBE for services to cricket . When dropped from the Yorkshire team in 1986 he was the leading run scorer in first @-@ class cricket . In 1965 while still a young player he had been named as one of five Cricketers of the Year by Wisden , the cricket almanack , and he was inducted into the International Cricket Council 's Hall of Fame in 2009 . 
 After his playing career ended , Boycott became an often outspoken and controversial cricket commentator on both radio and television . In 1998 , he was convicted in France , of assaulting his former girlfriend Margaret Moore ; he was given a suspended sentence and fined . He always maintained his innocence . In 2002 , after being diagnosed with throat cancer , he underwent successful radiation treatment , and went into remission . He revived his commentating career in 2003 , and continues to attract both criticism and praise . He is currently a member of BBC Radio 4 long wave 's Test Match Special commentary team , and was President of Yorkshire County Cricket Club between March 2012 and March 2014 , succeeded by Dickie Bird . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Boycott was born in the mining village of Fitzwilliam , near Wakefield and Pontefract in the West Riding of Yorkshire . He was the eldest of three sons of Jane ( née Speight ) and Thomas Wilfred Boycott , a colliery worker from Shropshire . When Boycott was eight years old , he was impaled through his chest by the handle of a mangle after falling off an iron railing near his home . Boycott nearly died , and in the efforts to save his life , his spleen was removed . In March 1950 , Boycott 's father had a serious accident while working as a coalminer . His spine was severely damaged after he was hit by empty coal carts ; Thomas Boycott never fully recovered , and died in 1967 . 
 Boycott attended Fitzwilliam Primary School . There he won a Len Hutton batting award for scoring 45 runs and capturing six wickets for 10 runs in a school match . At age 10 , he joined <unk> Cricket Club , demonstrating " outstanding ability . " At the age of 11 he failed the examinations that would have taken him to grammar school , and instead went to the local Kinsley Secondary Modern School . A year later , however , he passed his late @-@ entry exams , and transferred to Hemsworth Grammar School . His cricket prowess was such that he captained the school 's Cricket First XI at the age of 15 . During winters he attended an indoor cricket school , where he was coached by former county professional Johnny Lawrence . 
 While studying for his O @-@ levels he began to have difficulties reading the blackboard and was initially devastated when told he would need glasses . At first , he played poorly at school , encumbered by the fragile spectacles , before a more robust pair was fashioned for him at the behest of his uncle , similar to those glasses worn by cricketer Roy Marshall . His uncle would go on to be a strong influence on Boycott 's early cricketing game whilst playing for Brierley Juniors Football Club . In 1958 , Boycott left school with seven O @-@ level passes and the school 's Individual Cricket Cup . That summer he played for the Leeds United under @-@ 18 football team alongside Billy Bremner and attracted the attention of Leeds United scouts . During the winter he continued to play nets with uncle Lawrence . 
 Boycott told the BBC in 1965 that he chose to leave school at 17 because he no longer wished to be a financial strain on his parents , and because he wanted to pursue his cricketing career . He worked as a clerk in the Ministry of Pensions and National Insurance in Barnsley from 1958 to 1963 , at the same time playing for a number of cricket clubs . Boycott captained the South <unk> district team , and achieved a batting average of 70 . He also played for the Yorkshire Federation 's Under @-@ 18 team , and for Barnsley , where he was noticed by Clifford Hesketh , a member of Yorkshire 's County Cricket team committee . 
 = = County career = = 
 Boycott began playing for his home county in 1962 after topping the averages for Leeds , Yorkshire Colts and Yorkshire Second XI . In 414 matches for Yorkshire he scored 32 @,@ 570 runs at an average of 57 @.@ 85 , with a highest score of 260 not out against Essex , and 103 centuries in all . He scored another 8 @,@ 699 runs in List A cricket , averaging 40 @.@ 08 . Boycott twice averaged over 100 in an English first @-@ class season : 100 @.@ 12 in 1971 , and 102 @.@ 53 in 1979 . He is one of only two players to have achieved this twice , Mark Ramprakash being the other . Boycott was appointed captain of Yorkshire in 1971 , but was sacked in 1978 after failing to win a trophy while in charge . He was then dismissed as a player , but reinstated after a members ' revolt . During his career Boycott frequently clashed with other strong personalities at the club , including Fred Trueman , Brian Close and Ray Illingworth , but remained popular with the Yorkshire crowds . 
 = = = First years = = = 
 Before he played in first @-@ class cricket , Boycott played for the successful Barnsley Cricket Club , making his debut in 1959 and becoming a regular team member in 1959 alongside Dickie Bird , Bill Foord and Michael Parkinson . In one match , Boycott faced a delivery from Foord which he dispatched to the boundary for four . Foord turned to Parkinson and asked : " Christ almighty , what 's this lad 's name ? " Bird remembered his " application , concentration and absolute belief in himself . He had one great gift , mental strength . You can have all the coaching in the world but the most important thing is to be mentally strong . " Though Bird later left Boycott out of his choice XI , he would write : " of all the great players I have seen , if I had to pick a batsman to bat for my life , I would go for Geoffrey . " He made his Yorkshire Second XI debut on 6 July 1959 against Cumberland at Penrith , scoring five and 15 . 
 Boycott made his Yorkshire first team debut on 16 June 1962 against the Pakistan touring team . He opened the batting , scoring four in both innings – the first from a boundary off of his first ball in first class cricket – and taking one catch , but he did not bowl . He then went on to play his first County Championship match the next day , on 20 June , against Northamptonshire . Batting at number four , he scored six and 21 * . 
 Early in his career , Boycott continued to play in his spectacles , and later switched to contact lenses . He feared his career would have ended had he not used such aids as his eyesight was poor . Boycott 's initial appearances for Yorkshire failed to impress , and he was compared unfavourably to his main rival , John Hampshire . When Brian Close took over from Vic Wilson as captain of Yorkshire in 1963 he persuaded the committee to keep Boycott on , and was rewarded when , on 2 June 1963 , Boycott scored 145 against Lancashire . His century was also part of a 249 @-@ run fourth wicket partnership which became a Yorkshire record . Boycott cemented his place in the Yorkshire XI in the 1963 season with successive scores of 76 , 53 , 49 not out and 50 , and on 29 August made a century partnership in both innings of a match against Leicestershire with Ken Taylor . Boycott handed in his notice to the Ministry of Pensions that same year . After a brief loss of form he kept his place with scores of 62 , 28 and 113 in the following matches . This second century again came against Lancashire , making Boycott the first Yorkshire cricketer to score his first two centuries in a Roses match , as the hotly contested Yorkshire versus Lancashire matches were termed . 
 Boycott went on to hit his highest score thus far , 165 not out , against Leicestershire , and ended his first full season with 1 @,@ 446 runs at an average of 46 @.@ 64 , placing him second in the 1963 national batting averages . He was awarded his county cap on 2 October . At the start of the 1964 season Boycott hit 151 against Middlesex , followed by another hundred against Lancashire in May , and then played for the MCC against the Australian touring side at Lord 's , where he scored 63 . On 16 May he completed a third consecutive century , and on 31 May he was called up for the First Test against Australia at Trent Bridge . By the end of the 1964 season , Boycott had topped the country 's domestic averages with 59 @.@ 45 . 
 Although he later became renowned for his ability to occupy the crease for hours of defensive play , he was capable of playing attacking cricket . His highest one day score , a match @-@ winning 146 , came in the 1965 Gillette Cup final against Surrey . In his previous Gillette Cup match , the quarter @-@ final against Somerset , Boycott took 32 overs to accumulate 23 runs . According to captain , Close , at Lord 's after Yorkshire had slowly reached 22 / 1 , Close promoted himself to number three in the batting order so that he could urge Boycott into action . " I joined Geoffrey in the middle and said to him : " Listen , if I call , you bloody well run . " Boycott later claimed this plan had been agreed on a fortnight previously , and denied such an incident ever occurring . Boycott subsequently hit 15 fours and three sixes , even though the modern @-@ day fielding restrictions , which facilitate rapid scoring , did not exist in 1965 . One shot , a lofted straight drive off England paceman Geoff Arnold was nearly caught by Boycott 's team mates on the players ' balcony in the pavilion . Close and Boycott added 192 runs for the second wicket , as Yorkshire posted a then record total of 317 . Cricket writer John Woodcock wrote in The Times that " his magnificent innings contained every stroke in the book . " 
 In the 1966 season Boycott scored two centuries in one match for the first time , against Nottinghamshire on 18 July . Against Leicestershire on 15 June 1968 he carried his bat through an entire Yorkshire innings of 297 all out , remaining unbeaten on 114 * . It was the first time he had been unbeaten at the end of an innings . He ended the season top of the national averages for the first time . On 27 July 1970 he scored 260 * , his highest first @-@ class score in England , against Essex . At the end of the season , Close was sacked by the club committee in what Boycott called in 1987 " one of the cruelest incidents in the history of sport . " Boycott , on tour in Australia , was awarded the captaincy . 
 = = = Captaincy = = = 
 Boycott captained Yorkshire for eight seasons from 1971 to 1978 , having been appointed following the sacking of Brian Close in 1970 . Despite well publicised conflict between the two players , Boycott recorded in 1987 that he regretted Close 's removal from the club , and wrote him a letter in admiration for his contributions to Yorkshire . To captain Yorkshire had been one of Boycott 's aims since he started county cricket in 1962 . Yorkshire 's scorer Ted Lester commented later that Boycott " never got the support he deserved from the committee . After the captaincy was decided on a casting vote , the half that didn 't want him never wanted him . " Some members of the committee wanted to remove him almost immediately . He also caused strife between his fellow players , including a reciprocated dislike for Richard Hutton , with many players leaving the club citing personal differences with Boycott as the reason for their departure . After his first season as captain he spent the winter of 1971 playing in South Africa for Northern Transvaal . He played only one match , however , scoring 107 and 41 . 
 Boycott 's eight seasons of captaincy were among Yorkshire 's least successful . The club failed to win any competitions and ranked low in the Championship table , in contrast to their one @-@ time dominance of English cricket . The beginning of the end of his captaincy came after BBC Radio Leeds interviews in which two Yorkshire committee members and former players , Don Brennan and Mel Ryan , said that a change in leadership was needed . Boycott himself did not suffer a loss of form to mirror that of his county ; in his first year as captain , he scored 2 @,@ 503 runs at an average of 100 @.@ 12 , included a century in his first match as captain . His success was cited by Trueman as evidence that his selfish nature was harming Yorkshire . Boycott headed the national batting averages in 1972 with 72 @.@ 35 , and was second in 1973 with 63 @.@ 62 . In 1973 , however , Yorkshire failed to win any of the 8 championship games with Boycott in charge , and Wisden called the season " disturbingly unsuccessful " . It led to further calls for Boycott to be stripped of the captaincy . He was also coming into increased conflict with Richard Hutton , Close , and several members of the committee and senior players . " Looking back , " Boycott wrote in 1987 " I wish I had given up the Yorkshire captaincy at the end of that year . " 
 In 1974 Boycott 's form dipped , when he scored only 75 runs in the first innings of the season , other than a non @-@ championship century against Cambridge University . He did , however , score 152 * against Worcestershire on 15 May to complete his tour of centuries against every first @-@ class county . Both he and Yorkshire suffered through 1975 and 1976 , as did his international career , since he refused to play for England from 1974 until 1977 . During the summer of 1978 Boycott broke a finger , so John Hampshire temporarily took over as captain . Boycott returned later in the season , scoring 968 runs at 50 @.@ 94 , but this was second to Hampshire 's 1 @,@ 463 at 54 @.@ 18 . A poll of the dressing room showed that 95 % of the players wanted a permanent change in the captaincy . On 15 September 1978 Boycott 's mother , to whom he was very close , died of cancer , placing further pressure on him . On 29 September , the Yorkshire club committee met with Boycott to discuss terminating his captaincy . A statement by the club outlined Yorkshire 's intention to retain Boycott as a player while giving the captaincy to Hampshire . Boycott , in response , attacked the Yorkshire club and its decision in an appearance on the BBC 's flagship chatshow Parkinson on 7 October , prompting both strong criticism from the club and strong public support for his own position . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Boycott , after much thought , continued as a player at Yorkshire , scoring 1 @,@ 941 runs at 61 @.@ 70 in 1979 , hitting six hundreds to pass Len Hutton 's record of 129 first @-@ class centuries . In 1980 he scored his ninth Roses century , equalling Herbert Sutcliffe 's record . He also finished the season with an average of over 50 @.@ 00 for a record eleventh consecutive year , surpassing the achievement of Jack Hobbs . He would experience growing friction with Hutton 's son , Yorkshire 's Richard , as well as with later Yorkshire captain John Hampshire . In the early 1980s Boycott continued his run of form , although a slow 347 @-@ ball knock of 140 * incensed captain , Ray Illingworth , and created friction between Boycott and the rest of the Yorkshire Committee . In 1982 Boycott and Graham Stevenson added a record 149 runs for Yorkshire 's tenth wicket against Warwickshire , Stevenson scoring 115 of these runs . 
 On 3 October 1983 the friction between Boycott and the committee culminated in a unanimous decision not to offer Boycott a contract for the next season . This generated much protest from Boycott supporters , who rallied , calling for his reinstatement at a meeting on 9 October in Ossett , Yorkshire . Bill Athey left the club at this time , and while Boycott in his biography maintained that he had no reason to believe that his actions had caused Athey 's departure , Athey later stated to biographer Leo McKinstry that " Boycott 's attitude and the atmosphere he created had everything to do with my decision to leave Yorkshire . " The " Members 84 Group " , consisting of strong supporters of Boycott , met regularly to clamour for the batsman 's reinstatement . Their leader , Peter Briggs , stated " Geoffrey Boycott is a giant playing among pygmies . " 
 On 21 January 1984 the Yorkshire Club committee , in the face of this rising pressure , agreed to offer Boycott a contract for 1984 . Several members of the committee , including Trueman , Billy Sutcliffe and Ronnie Burnet , resigned . Of the replacement members , 17 were from the Members 84 Group , and Boycott himself was elected , leaving him with both a position on the team and on the Yorkshire Club committee . The 1984 season was , however , not the most prolific for Boycott . McKinstry records that he scored slowly in several matches : 60 in 52 overs against Somerset ; 53 in 51 overs against Hampshire ; 17 in 26 overs against Leicestershire ; 77 in 67 overs against Sussex . This was coupled with continued friction between himself and both players and club members . In particular , Boycott 's place on both the team and the committee led to feelings of distrust from both – though Boycott denies this – which led to the loss of support from long @-@ term ally Sid Fielden . 
 His success on the field resumed in 1985 , where he scored 1 @,@ 657 runs at 75 @.@ 31 , second only to Viv Richards in the national averages . He also shared a record opening partnership of 351 with Martyn Moxon . In contrast to the poor relations between Boycott and the senior players , many junior members of the team remember 1985 and 1986 as pleasant times to be around Boycott , who often coached them on their technique . 1986 saw Boycott score 890 runs at 52 @.@ 35 , his season cut short by injuries which were becoming more frequent as he passed the age of 45 . This season was the first since 1962 that he had not hit an overall total of 1 @,@ 000 runs ; he finished eight short in his final match , when he was run out for 61 . He advised the then captain to enforce the follow @-@ on , and did not bat again . Since 1984 , support for Boycott had waned in light of his slow scoring , multiple injuries and the general atmosphere around him . Both Brian Close and Ray Illingworth increasingly advocated his removal to Yorkshire 's committee , and on 23 September 1986 it was confirmed that he would not be offered a contract for the following year . A few months later , captain David Bairstow , a long term ally of Boycott whose leadership had Boycott 's support , was ruled out of the running for captaincy for the following season , which was instead given to Phil Carrick , of whom Boycott disapproved . Boycott paid tribute to the Reform Group in 1987 , describing them as " dedicated Yorkshire members with a heartfelt stake in their club . " He suggests that Close and Illingworth feared his popularity . Boycott was offered contracts by other counties , including Derbyshire and Glamorgan , but he never took these offers up , nor played professional cricket again . At the time of his retirement he had scored more first @-@ class runs than any other player . 
 = = Test Match career = = 
 Over Boycott 's 18 @-@ year career he scored 8 @,@ 114 runs in 108 Test matches for England . He was the first England cricketer to pass 8 @,@ 000 Test runs and , as of 2015 , is sixth on England 's all @-@ time run scoring list ( behind Alastair Cook , Graham Gooch , Alec Stewart , David Gower and Kevin Pietersen ) . His average of 47 @.@ 72 runs over 193 innings is the highest completed career average among England players since 1970 . His Test career included 22 centuries ( an England record held jointly with Wally Hammond , Colin Cowdrey , Kevin Pietersen , and current England captain Alastair Cook until December 2012 when Cook made his 23rd England century ) . England did not lose a Test match in which he scored a century and only 20 of his 108 Tests ended in defeat . John Arlott wrote in 1979 that " any expectation of an English win , except in freak bowling conditions , is based on a major innings from Boycott . " 
 = = = Debut year = = = 
 Boycott began his Test career on 4 June 1964 , only two years after his first @-@ class debut , in the first Test against Australia . He top scored with 48 runs from 118 deliveries before he was bowled by Grahame <unk> . The match ended as a rain @-@ affected draw , and Boycott did not bat in the second innings as he had suffered a cracked finger . He made 58 at Old Trafford , and then hit 113 at The Oval , his maiden Test century . He finished his first Test series with 291 runs at 48 @.@ 50 . In the winter of 1964 , Boycott was selected for the England team touring South Africa . After a series of low scores during the warm up matches , he was more successful in the Test series . His innings included scores of 73 runs in the opening Test , 76 in the fourth , and 117 in the fifth and final match . He averaged 49 @.@ 66 in all first @-@ class cricket during the tour , and took five wickets with the ball as England won the Test series 1 – 0 . He made a mixed impression on the other England players , who were impressed by his talent but perplexed by his introverted attitude each time he was dismissed . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 England hosted New Zealand and South Africa in 1965 . Against New Zealand , Boycott scored 23 and 44 not out in the first Test at Edgbaston and 76 in the second at Lord 's , but missed the third Test owing to injury . He returned against South Africa at Lord 's , but after scores of 31 and a slow 28 in 105 minutes , the press began to speculate that his may lose his place in the team . In the second Test , Boycott made a duck in the first innings and later took 140 minutes to score 16 runs when England needed to score quickly ; Wisden described the latter innings as a " dreadful effort when courage was needed " . Subsequently , Boycott was dropped and replaced by Eric Russell . Boycott returned to the team at the end of the season for the tour to Australia . In the 1965 @-@ 66 Ashes series , illness dogged his performance initially . He then hit a form of " brighter cricket " during the First and Second Tests . Uncharacteristically , he hit a four from his very first delivery at Perth , and put on 98 in 16 overs with Bob Barber in the Second Test . In the Third Test , Boycott and Barber shared an opening partnership of 234 in four hours ; Boycott hit 84 , his highest score of the series . But in the Fifth Test he monopolised the strike , ran out Bob Barber and took 75 minutes to make 17 runs . His form deserted him again when the MCC went on to tour New Zealand . 
 In 1966 , England faced the West Indies . Boycott was omitted from the first Test , but shared a partnership of 115 with Tom Graveney . However , he struggled during the series , and managed an average of 26 @.@ 57 . It was a disappointing year for Boycott both for England and Yorkshire , and his average for the former fell to 36 @.@ 60 . Furthermore , he had only passed 50 twice in his last 12 first @-@ class innings . The following summer , he rediscovered his form . On 8 and 9 June 1967 , he made his highest Test score of 246 not out against India on his home ground of Headingley . Batting for 573 minutes , Boycott struck thirty fours and a six at a strike rate of 44 @.@ 32 . He began his innings slowly , taking six hours over his first 106 runs ; he scored 17 in the first hour and 8 in the second . This particularly frustrated the England selectors as the pitch was excellent for batting , and the Indian attack was weakened by injury . Their frustration was exacerbated when Boycott added 140 runs in four hours on the second day . Ian Wooldridge wrote in the Daily Mail that Boycott " could not be excused by his nearest and dearest relations . " He did not bat in the second innings and England won by six wickets . 
 Boycott 's slow scoring led to increasing media pressure , and owing to his perceived selfish attitude , he was dropped from the team after the match . He remembered in 1987 that " the decision stunned me at the time , though looking back now I see that it had become inevitable . I was mortified with embarrassment and filled with an angry , burning sense of injustice which I can remember clearly and painfully to this day . " A combination of low confidence and a throat infection limited Boycott to two further Test appearances , playing once more against India and once against Pakistan , for the rest of the year . He nevertheless again topped the domestic averages with 1260 at 48 @.@ 46 . In 1967 , Boycott toured the West Indies with England , where he hit a rich seam of form . He scored 463 runs at 66 @.@ 14 in a series England won 1 – 0 . 
 Over the next two years , Boycott appeared only intermittently in the Test team . A back injury forced him to miss half of the 1967 season , and an average of 32 @.@ 40 against the Australians during the 1968 Ashes was unspectacular . Domestically , his injury also limited his contribution ; however , he did hit five centuries before he was forced to stop playing in June 1968 . Health problems with his spleen and trouble adjusting to wearing contact lenses meant that Boycott missed the tour of Pakistan in 1967 – 68 , but he returned to the team by the summer of 1969 , scoring 128 against the West Indies at Old Trafford , and another century at Lord 's . However , he lost form in the rest of the season ; he scored 12 and 0 in the third Test and averaged only 20 @.@ 20 , with two ducks , in the three Tests against New Zealand . 
 Boycott was left out of the first three Tests against the World XI in 1970 , he played in the fourth and scored 15 and 64 , and in the final Test of the summer scored 157 . He won the Walter Lawrence Trophy for this century . He was selected for the 1970 – 71 tour of Australia , and averaged 95 @.@ 93 over all first @-@ class matches . He scored 173 in the opening first @-@ class game , followed by 124 against Queensland . In the third Test match , having hit good partnerships in the first two , Boycott made 77 and 142 not out . During the second match , Boycott allegedly told Basil D 'Oliveira , the latter having just announced that he had worked out the action of Australian spinner Johnny Gleeson , that he had " sorted that out a fortnight ago . " This incident was used as evidence for Boycott 's selfish attitude for many years after . His highest score was 142 not out in the second innings of the Fourth Test at Sydney , in a 299 @-@ run victory . The Fifth Test was drawn , Boycott making 12 and 76 * , and in the Sixth Test he was run out for 58 . Boycott initially refused to leave the ground in disbelief , and eventually walked off to jeering from the crowd . He made 119 in the second innings but injured his arm against fast bowler Garth McKenzie in a following one day match and missed the final Test , when England retained the Ashes . He later maintained that the injury permanently affected his wrist , and that he carried a squash ball in a sock in his pocket , which he could squeeze to keep his wrist strong . He ended the series with 657 Test runs at 93 @.@ 85 . 
 In 1971 , Boycott made his One Day International debut against Australia , the press by then touting him as the best batsman in the world . He was the first batsman to receive a ball in a one @-@ day international and his was the first wicket to fall , after he had scored eight runs from 37 balls . In the summer of 1971 he enjoyed an average of over 100 in domestic cricket , and scored 121 not out against Pakistan at Lord 's . He played only two Tests in 1972 owing to a series of injuries , but rejoined the team in the West Indies under Denness ' captaincy . Boycott was dismissed for 99 in the first innings against the West Indies at Port @-@ of @-@ Spain in 1973 – 74 and scored 112 in the second , followed by a career @-@ best first @-@ class score of 261 not out against a West Indies Board President 's XI . Boycott and Denness did not get on well , and at the end of the tour they clashed over Boycott 's preference for a one @-@ day match over a three @-@ day game against Bermuda . Boycott recalled in his autobiography that when Denness confronted him on the issue he replied " Get out of here before I do something I 'll regret . " Boycott had " no confidence in Denness 's professional ability and no respect for him as a man and another tour like the previous one to the West Indies was the last thing I wanted . " 
 = = = Exile = = = 
 Between 1974 and 1977 , Boycott elected to make himself unavailable for England . He claimed in 2006 that he had simply lost his appetite for Test cricket and the stress became too much for him . Boycott 's biographer , McKinstry , speculates that the self @-@ imposed exile may also have been linked to the appointments of Mike Denness and then Tony Greig to the England captaincy , in preference to Boycott . Boycott was very critical of Denness 's captaincy and his standard of batting in his autobiography in 1987 , citing it as a factor in his decision , along with the pressures at Yorkshire . His weak immune system was a recurring motivation for not touring the Indian subcontinent . This period of exile coincided with the peaks of several fast bowlers ' careers , including Dennis Lillee , Jeff Thomson , Andy Roberts , and Michael Holding . However , he later came back to face the West Indies pace battery at its most fearsome in the late 70s and early 80s . 
 Boycott has responded to these accusations by pointing out that Lillee had been out of cricket for 21 months suffering from a serious back complaint and that Thomson had not played in Tests for 23 months before the 1974 – 5 Ashes series , since an unsuccessful debut Test against Pakistan ( Thomson 's match figures were 0 – 110 ) . Furthermore , he was dismissed for 99 in the first innings against the West Indies at Port @-@ of @-@ Spain in 1973 – 74 and scored 112 in the second , followed by a career @-@ best 261 not out against a West Indies Board President 's XI . All of these teams included Roberts , with a young Holding representing the Board XI . 
 In the mean time , " When An Old Cricketer Leaves The Crease " was released by Roy Harper in 1975 , and again in 1978 , dedicated to Boycott and John Snow . 
 = = = Comeback Tests = = = 
 When Boycott returned to the Test side against Australia at Trent Bridge in 1977 he ran out Derek Randall in front of his home crowd before going on to make a century . In this match , in which Ian Botham made his England debut , Boycott batted on each of the five days of the match : his first innings 107 started at the end of the first day , he batted throughout the second day and was dismissed on the third day ; he started his second innings at the end of day four and batted throughout England 's successful run chase scoring 80 not out , scoring the winning runs in partnership with Randall . Among England batsmen , only Allan Lamb and Andrew Flintoff have emulated this feat of batting on all five days , and both subsequent to Boycott . He also had a 215 @-@ run partnership with Alan Knott . Botham later remarked that " The Aussies , shell @-@ shocked at having to bowl at Boycott for twenty @-@ two and a half hours , capitulated without much of a fight . " 
 On 11 & 12 August 1977 he scored 191 against Australia in the fourth Test in front of a full house at his home ground of Leeds , becoming the first cricketer to score his one hundredth first @-@ class century in a Test match . Boycott reached the milestone from the bowling of Greg Chappell with an on drive for four . In the match , Boycott became the fourth English player to be on the field for the entire duration of a Test . Boycott ended the series 442 runs at an average of 147 @.@ 33 . 
 Appointed vice @-@ captain for the tour of Pakistan and New Zealand that winter , Boycott assumed the captaincy in 1978 for two Tests when Mike Brearley was injured , and brought with him his successful summer form . However , he was replaced upon Brearley 's return . While the rest of the England team took part in warm @-@ up matches , Boycott remained in Lahore and organised a special warm up match where the team would play itself . However he went on to occupy the crease for a long period of time , limiting the amount of time other players had to practice . He later stated that , as the number one batsman , he should have the most time in the middle . In the second Test match , he scored 79 and 100 not out , increasing his statistics since his return to the England team to 684 runs at 136 @.@ 80 . It was between this match and the third Test that Brearley broke his arm , giving Boycott the captaincy . Boycott led England to a draw in the third match , his leadership meeting mixed reviews . 
 Following Pakistan , Boycott and the England team travelled to New Zealand . England were defeated in the opening Test for the first time in 48 years . Boycott took seven hours and 22 minutes to score 77 runs , and England were bowled out for 64 when chasing 137 to win . In the second match , Botham 's first Test century took England to 418 , but by the end of the match England needed to score quickly to force a win . Boycott , however , told his team that he would play the way he always had , and proceeded to accumulate runs very slowly . Derek Randall was run out , and Botham went out to bat with his captain , informing the dressing room that " <unk> will be back in here before the end of the over . " Botham then ran Boycott out , later claiming in his autobiography that he had done it deliberately . Indeed , some have suggested that this was a team order . Boycott disputes the suggestion that the run @-@ out was deliberate in his autobiography , referring to Botham 's account as " a story that gets bigger and more fanciful with every telling " . The tale does nevertheless remain a renowned story . Boycott then delayed his declaration , much to the frustration of England bowler Bob Willis . England did eventually declare , and Willis took 4 / 14 . New Zealand were bowled out for 105 and England won by 174 runs . Boycott suffered a scratch on his cornea and missed the last two days of the final match , and by the start of the 1978 season , Brearley had taken the captaincy back from Boycott . 
 = = = Ashes series , West Indies and India = = = 
 During the 1978 – 79 Ashes series , Boycott unusually went in at No. 11 in the second innings of a match against state side South Australia ( not due to injury ) . At Perth on 15 December , he also scored 77 runs without hitting a boundary – the highest total of this nature – though it did include an all @-@ run four . England went on to win the six @-@ Test series 5 – 1 , with Boycott struggling overall through three of the Tests with 263 runs at 21 @.@ 91 . Boycott then played in the 1979 Cricket World Cup held in England , taking two wickets in the opening match against Australia , which England won . The hosts then went on to win their next two games and topped their table for the opening round . Reaching the final after a close victory against New Zealand in which Boycott scored only two , he hit 57 from 105 balls as England chased Viv Richards 138 not out @-@ inspired 286 to win , falling 92 runs short at 194 all out . Boycott ended the competition with the sixth highest strike rate of 42 @.@ 99 and an average of 23 @.@ 00 . 
 Following the World Cup , against Australia during a Test match at Perth in 1979 – 80 , Boycott became the first man to be marooned on 99 not out in a Test when he ran out of partners . England then toured the West Indies . Here , Boycott again faced the West Indies ' feared pace attack , but succeeded in scoring centuries off the likes of Holding , Roberts , Colin Croft and Joel Garner , despite having passed the age of 40 the previous year . Other batsmen , such as David Gower found the attack difficult to cope with , and the later England captain stated that Boycott often had no sympathy . Boycott was the third most successful batsman , behind Gooch and Gower , during a tour where England went down 2 – 0 . He scored 70 in the opening match , the only England player to pass 50 . In the third match , in Bridgetown , Barbados , Boycott was to face what was later said to be Holding 's greatest over . Boycott was hit on the gloves by the first delivery , played @-@ and @-@ missed the second outside off stump , was hit on the thigh by the third , fended the next two deliveries away with his bat , and was then bowled by the final delivery . Though in 1987 Boycott would claim a 1966 delivery by Gary Sobers to be the best he ever faced in cricket , he noted of Holding 's over that " for the first time in my life I can look at a scoreboard with a duck against my name and not feel a profound sense of failure . " Boycott led an England fight back in the fourth Test . Having watched Holding 's over several times on video , and worked in the nets on his game , Boycott came out and made 38 in the first innings and then hit his twentieth Test century . His career run total was now 7 @,@ 410 , gaining on Gary Sobers ' record of 8 @,@ 032 . 
 Boycott was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 1980 Queen 's Birthday Honours " for services to Cricket . " He then played in the 1981 Ashes series , despite being aged 40 . During the second Test at Lord 's Cricket Ground Boycott was dismissed 40 short of a hundred by Dennis Lillee , and was " crushed " given that , as it was his hundredth Test match , he wished to score a century . Forever keen on the England captaincy , Boycott 's hopes were cut short when Botham 's 149 not out secured victory in Boycott 's 101st Test match , and Mike Brearley 's position as captain was made secure . During the series , Boycott became concerned with his form and that he may be dropped before he could chase Sobers ' record in the upcoming tour of India . He had scored only 10 and 37 in the Fifth Test , however in the drawn Sixth Test at The Oval he scored 137 , passing Colin Cowdrey 's record of <unk> runs and becoming England 's highest run @-@ scorer . He ended the series behind only Botham , with 392 runs at 32 @.@ 66 . 
 = = = " Bye bye Boycott " = = = 
 By now , Boycott 's fame and constant attention from the media had begun to affect his personal life . He was again refused the captaincy for the next Test series against India over the winter of 1981 – 82 . Angered by this decision , he stated that " even the Yorkshire Ripper got a fair trial in the dock but I 've not been given a single chance . " He later battled Keith Fletcher over his slow scoring rate , playing Fletcher 's comments to him during a press conference using a tape recorder . The series against India was to be his last . In his final ODI match during England 's tour he scored 6 from 12 deliveries . During the following Test series he passed Sobers ' career run record , hitting 60 in the first Test , 36 and 50 in the second to take him 81 runs short , and in the third Test he overtook the record with a flick off his pads for four . He thus became the leading Test run @-@ scorer . In his last Test match , the fourth of the tour , taking place in January 1982 , he scored 18 and six . During the tour , Boycott claimed that he was too ill to field in a Test Match , but it was later discovered that he was playing golf while his team mates were still out on the field . 
 This led to Boycott being dropped from the side and forced to return to England , despite apologising via a note to the England dressing room . He claimed in his autobiography , however , that he went to the golf course following medical advice to get fresh air . Later in 1982 he was instrumental in organising , in defiance of a United Nations and a TCCB ban , a so @-@ called " rebel " tour of apartheid South Africa by 13 current and former England Test cricketers , who were almost all nearing the end of their careers . All the players were banned from international cricket for three years as a result . By the mid @-@ 1980s , with Boycott in good county form and physical shape , there was speculation that he might return to the England side . David Gower , England captain of the time , however , stated that " Geoffrey 's been a marvellous servant for England but we have to look to the future and , in view of his age , it wouldn 't make an awful lot of sense to pick him again . " This was confirmed by the return of Graham Gooch and Tim Robinson 's 175 against Australia at Leeds , which prompted Botham , who had once remarked that Boycott was " totally , almost insanely , selfish " , to sing " Bye bye Boycott " from the England balcony . 
 = = Commentator , controversy and personal life = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Cricket commentator and statistician Simon Hughes states that Boycott is fastidious in the commentary box , always immaculately dressed , and never <unk> with the other commentators or production staff . Bill <unk> , an official of Trans World International , commented that Boycott " fulfilled all our hopes . He was animated , intelligent , informed , with opinions that got the attention of most people . " Boycott claims to have invented the phrase " corridor of uncertainty " as a reference to the area outside the off stump where a batsman is unsure whether he should leave or hit the ball and was noted for using a key to measure the hardness of the pitch , until this was outlawed by the International Cricket Council . He is especially known for several stock phrases that have become his recognised trademarks in the cricket @-@ watching world , notably ( of dropped catches ) that his mother or grandmother " could have caught that in her <unk> " or ( of an easy batting miss ) that they could have " hit the ball with a stick of rhubarb . " These two phrases in particular inspire much affectionate spoofing of his style . 
 Boycott was offered a role by talkSPORT . He continued to commentate for the station , along with various satellite and Asian channels , until 2003 , when his career was further threatened by throat cancer . Having successfully undergone treatment , Boycott enjoyed a renaissance in his career as he returned to high @-@ profile commentating with Channel 4 , which had meanwhile taken over from the BBC in televising England 's home Test games . In November 2005 , Boycott rejoined the BBC 's Test Match Special to provide commentary for England 's 2005 tour of Pakistan . In January 2006 , Boycott joined Asian channel Ten Sports . He delivered the Colin Cowdrey Lecture in 2005 , speaking about the need for cricket to adapt to changing circumstances and embrace innovations like Twenty20 . 
 Boycott worked on Cricket on Five with Mark Nicholas and Simon Hughes as co @-@ commentators , and was a member of the BBC Cricket Team for commentary on the 2006 / 7 Ashes series . His role , as in his other commentary @-@ related work , was to contribute to discussion of the main talking points . During England 's 5 – 0 whitewash by Australia , Boycott stated that the team were undeserving of their MBEs and that he felt " so bad about mine I 'm going to tie it round my cat . It doesn 't mean anything any more . It 's a joke " . Boycott has been credited as having a high level of influence in the game , with Yorkshire 's Chief Executive Stewart Regan crediting Boycott over the completion of a deal for Younis Khan to play county cricket for Yorkshire in the 2007 season . On a larger scale , Boycott has worked towards scrapping the rule at Yorkshire regarding the number of overseas players . He stated that he believed Brian Close and the other selectors to be living in past times , and that he wished to encourage a growth in the number of players from Pakistan , the West Indies or India . 
 His on air commentary has caused controversy . As a commentator , Boycott has renewed his ' pull @-@ no @-@ punches ' style in contrast to most of his fellow commentators . In particular he is known for criticising players , often in a caustic and strident style . In 2005 he mocked the Australian captain Ricky Ponting for electing to bowl first on a batsman @-@ friendly pitch , saying he was a " nice man " for being so generous to the England team . In 2006 , he was initially receptive to the difficulties endured by Marcus Trescothick during his periods of stress @-@ related illness ; however , he was not always as amiable . In March 2008 , recently dropped Steve Harmison attacked Boycott in an article in the Mail on Sunday where he referred to Boycott as a " waste of space . " This was in response to Boycott 's statement a few days previously on 19 March 2008 that if Harmison " gets a central contract this summer then a lot of us will be screaming favouritism and a total waste of money . England should forget him " . 
 Nevertheless , Boycott has enjoyed a successful commentating career , and his opinions are sought across a number of cricketing media . As well as newspaper columns , Boycott contributes to several online blogs , podcasts and question and answer sessions , notably on the BBC News website and CricInfo . He is also popular among cricket pundits and biographers , being the subject of three significant biographies from 1982 to 2000 , while his comments are reproduced across a number of published cricketing quotes collections . 
 = = = Relationships , court case = = = 
 Boycott ( then 18 ) met Anne Wyatt ( then 32 ) while they were both working at the Ministry of Pensions in Barnsley in 1958 . For 20 years they lived in the village of Woolley , near Wakefield , West Yorkshire . They bought a house in Sandbanks , Dorset in 1996 , though Boycott remained in Yorkshire and the relationship disintegrated . Wyatt died from lung cancer at the age of 82 in 2009 . 
 In 1996 , Boycott assaulted Margaret Moore , a former lover . Boycott denied the charges , claiming she had fallen over and injured herself . He pointed to the fact that Moore was in financial difficulties and said that he would never hit a woman . However , in the second trial beginning on 20 October 1998 , Boycott , having missed the first trial in January where his conviction had been set , appeared before a French Magistrates court and was given a three @-@ month suspended sentence , and his £ 5 @,@ 300 fine was confirmed . He was criticised by the Magistrate for the way he conducted his case and for " rudely interrupting " Mrs Moore 's barrister . According to Boycott , Moore had grown angry when he refused to marry her , stating that " he was not the marrying kind " and had fallen when throwing his clothing from the window , hitting her head on the carpet . However , when he again appealed against his conviction , Moore 's version of events that Boycott had attacked her by punching her in the face , causing bruising , was upheld , in the light of photographs of her injuries shown to the court and the testimony of a doctor that the injuries could not have been caused in the way described by Boycott . Boycott nevertheless later married Margaret Rachel <unk> on 26 February 2003 at Wakefield Register Office , and they have a daughter , born October 1988 . They lived in Woolley , and Boycott and his family currently divide their time between Boston Spa , Jersey in the Channel Islands and Cape Town , South Africa . 
 At the time of the conviction he was working for BSkyB and BBC Radio , commentating on England 's tour of the West Indies . He was sacked from both roles . He was also sacked from his columnist 's job in The Sun , which announced the dismissal in an article on the front page with the headline " Sun Sacks Boycott the Brute " , although the Sun gave Boycott an undertaking in writing that they would continue to employ him regardless of the result of the court case , as did Talk Sport . A BBC television spokesman said " Geoffrey Boycott is not under contract with the BBC [ television ] and there are no plans to use him in the future . " 
 Boycott 's commentating career continued , however , as he was able to carry on working overseas , particularly in India . He hosted The Sunny and <unk> Show with Sunil Gavaskar and he hosted the touring Indian team at his home in August 2002 . He also worked in South Africa and coached the Pakistan cricket team upon request . In 2001 , as resentment towards him in the British media following the court case died down , he was reinstated as a writer for British newspapers , and there was speculation that he would lead Lancashire Cricket Club following the departure of Bobby Simpson , though Mike Watkinson eventually took the role . 
 = = = Throat cancer = = = 
 talkSPORT , as well as both Indian and South African television programmes , continued to use Boycott as a commentator in 2002 , during which he suffered a continual sore throat . Finding a lump while shaving , Boycott returned to England , and on 20 August 2002 was examined at Leeds General Infirmary . By 3 September , he was informed that he had four cancerous tumours in his throat . Initially , surgeons recommended an eight @-@ hour procedure to remove the tumours ; however , their size and proximity to his voice box eventually persuaded them to recommend radiotherapy , of which Boycott had 35 sessions from 22 October . By December , scans revealed that the majority of the tumours had disappeared , and the final tumour 's disappearance was confirmed in early 2003 . Although initially reluctant to discuss his health with the public , he spoke privately with his daughter , Emma , and then released a statement publicly , which evoked a significant emotional response . On 16 August 2003 , he was given his own standing ovation by the crowd at Trent Bridge as he and a number of other cricketers did a lap of the ground in vehicles to celebrate Trent Bridge 's 50th Test match . 
 = = = Return to commentary = = = 
 Following this public support , Boycott resumed writing for the Daily Telegraph and commentating on Channel Four for the Cheltenham and Gloucester Championship Final and the following summer 's cricket . Radio Five Live then hired Boycott in early 2004 . His fellow commentators state that his illness has altered his voice and led to a more pleasant personality , but that he is still prone to unpleasant behaviour . Channel Four producer Gary Francis stated " I think Geoff is a lot more mellow now . He still has his moments , like when the taxi does not arrive and he is not happy , as he makes extremely clear . But overall he 's great fun to work with . " In September 2004 , Boycott wrote for the Daily Telegraph a posthumous tribute to lifelong friend Brian Clough . 
 In 2004 it was reported in the Yorkshire Post and subsequently the Daily Mail that Boycott was supporting the United Kingdom Independence Party in that year 's election for the European Parliament . He stated that " I am not a political animal . But I am concerned at the way governments of all colours have handed powers to Brussels without the British people having a say in the matter . " 
 In early 2008 there was speculation that Boycott would be awarded a role amongst the England coaching staff , pertaining in particular to the coaching of Andrew Flintoff back from injury . On 8 May 2008 , however , the ECB revealed that Boycott would not hold such a position . The two had been involved in the past , and while Flintoff is an admirer of Boycott , the ECB stressed any coaching relationship would only be informal . Boycott , however , used to give informal talks to younger cricket players during his career , and the media speculated that he might find a place coaching the England U19s . Boycott continued in his commentating career for TMS , criticising the England team 's approach to the ODI matches under Pietersen in India in November 2008 . Also in November , Daily Mail contributor Leo McKinstry published a new biography on Boycott . On 2 January 2009 , Boycott , along with 54 others , was inducted into the ICC Hall of Fame . He continued to be an active member of the cricket community , voicing his support in late April 2009 for Pakistan player Saeed Ajmal , and calling for the legalisation of the doosra spin @-@ bowling delivery . 
 Boycott continued to be vocal in matters cricket . He levelled criticism in July 2009 against Kevin Pietersen for his captaincy difficulties and in September against Andrew Flintoff for his apparent favour of club cricket over internationals . On 29 November 2009 , he was commentating an ODI between England and South Africa when he was heard swearing on air following a catch taken by Paul Collingwood dismissed Ryan McLaren . The BBC released a statement on 30 November which read : " An off @-@ air comment made by Geoffrey Boycott in a live broadcast was heard by some listeners which we apologised for as soon as we realised it had been audible . " 
 = = = Presidency of Yorkshire , Corridor of Certainty = = = 
 In March 2012 Boycott was elected President of Yorkshire County Cricket Club . Elected at an annual meeting , he gained 91 @.@ 09 % of the vote . He election came on the back of Yorkshire 's relegation from the first to the second division of the County Championship , the reversal of which Boycott targeted immediately upon taking up the post . He remarked to the media that " The only thing that really matters to the membership is that Yorkshire do well in Championship cricket . " His tenure also presided over the club 's 150th anniversary in 2013 . In February 2014 it was revealed that former Test umpire and Yorkshire player Dickie Bird would replace Boycott . 
 In March 2013 Boycott and his partner Rachel <unk> purchased the Grade II listed Boston Hall in Boston Spa , West Yorkshire , citing a desire to be closer to family , friends , and Yorkshire County Cricket Club . They later married , and have a daughter named Emma . Later in 2014 he also released a book entitled Geoffrey Boycott : The Corridor of Certainty with Simon & Schuster . ESPNcricinfo reviewed the piece in October , commenting on Boycott 's more amiable personality since his recovery from cancer : " we have a much more rounded and nuanced book , full of self @-@ awareness and a willingness , even eagerness , to acknowledge errors , failings and regrets ... This a complex , driven man , whom we all recognise and admire for his achievements , revealing aspects of his life and survival that have hitherto been kept close to his chest . " 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Boycott 's playing style revolved around intense concentration , solid defence and attention to detail , while avoiding heavy hitting or slogging . He was described in The Complete Encyclopaedia of Cricket as " one of the greatest opening batsman that the game has known . He dedicated his life to the art of batting , practising assiduously and eschewing any shot that might even hint at threatening the loss of his wicket . " Through his Test career , he scored 15 @.@ 4 % of England 's runs , and England won 32 @.@ 41 % of the Tests in which Boycott played . This compares with England 's 34 @.@ 76 % victory rate over all Test cricket history . Richard Hutton , Yorkshire and England batsman and son of Len Hutton described Boycott as a " one @-@ pace player " , suggesting that he was unable to alter his playing pace as the match circumstances dictated . Nevertheless , Boycott maintained an " impeccable " defensive technique , and possessed a temperament ideally suited for five @-@ day Test matches . Arlott wrote that " his technique is based on a defence organised as near <unk> as may be . " Boycott himself remarked , in 1981 , that : " Given the choice between Raquel Welch and a hundred at Lord 's , I 'd take the hundred every time . " His careful batting is reflected in his 22 centuries for England , of which only two had a strike rate of over 51 @.@ 00 . Former England bowler Frank Tyson wrote in 1987 , in The Test Within , that " the greatness of Boycott the batsman and the gaffes of Boycott the man had common roots in an unceasing quest after perfection . " 
 While this style facilitated his solid defensive play , it inhibited him as a stroke player and made him susceptible to hand and arm injuries . Such injuries would be common throughout his career . One such injury almost required the tip of a broken finger to be amputated . He was occasionally vulnerable to left @-@ arm bowlers , either due to his inability to adjust his line of stroke or because during his career there were few fast left @-@ hand bowlers for him to practise against in the nets . Boycott himself disputes this . In spite of that , he was never vulnerable to any one particular bowler . Pace bowler Dennis Lillee was the most successful against him in Test matches , with seven dismissals . Gary Sobers also dismissed him seven times , but Lillee did so in fewer matches . Peter Lever , a Test colleague , discussed with Boycott his vulnerability when playing the hook stroke , which was to get him out on more than one occasion . Overall in Test cricket , 54 % of Boycott 's dismissals were by being caught , with lbw and bowled taking 14 % and 16 % respectively . 
 Boycott was also a very occasional medium @-@ pace inswing bowler . He was never a genuine all @-@ rounder , but took seven wickets at Test level at an average of 54 @.@ 57 , often bowling wearing his cap turned back @-@ to @-@ front to assist his vision . At the start of his career , Boycott was a below average fielder , having received no coaching on this from Yorkshire and with little inclination to rectify it when concentrating on his batting . A fellow Yorkshire batsman Ken Taylor worked with Boycott , who was " limited in [ fielding ] ability , " but had " tremendous determination " . With further help from his two brothers Boycott 's fielding improved . He became a safe pair of hands generally at cover point , though he continued to lack power and pace in the field , never taking more than two catches in a Test innings , and averaging 0 @.@ 170 dismissals per innings with 33 career catches in all . He would remark in his autobiography that his usual fielding positions depended not on the tactical situation but on whether the captain was one of Boycott 's critics , who would therefore banish him to a remote part of the field . 
 = = Written works = = 
 Throughout his career in international cricket and well into retirement , Boycott has written a number of works on cricket , including his own autobiography and a joint project on the biography of umpire Dickie Bird : 
 Geoff Boycott 's Book for Young Cricketers , 1976 . 
 Put to the Test , 1979 . 
 Opening up , 1980 . 
 In The Fast Lane , 1981 
 Sir Geoffrey . 21 Years of Yorkshire Cricket , 1984 . 
 Boycott : The Autobiography , 1987 . 
 Free as a Bird : Life and Times of Harold " Dickie " Bird with David Hopps , 1997 . 
 Boycott on Cricket , 1990 . 
 Geoffrey Boycott on Cricket , 1999 . 
 The Best XI , 2008 
 Geoffrey Boycott : The Corridor of Certainty , 2014 
 = = Records = = 
 Wisden , a Cricketer of the Year for 1965 , when he played nine Test matches , scoring 617 runs with one century and four fifties at an average of 47 @.@ 46 . 
 Winner of the Walter Lawrence Trophy in 1970 . 
 = = = Test matches = = = 
 Boycott 's abilities in the Test match theatre during his career of 17 years and 216 days have left him with a number of Test cricket records . He is the seventh most capped player for England in Tests , and has the sixth highest career runs total in Tests for an England player , <unk> . He was the fourteenth quickest player to reach 8 @,@ 000 runs , taking 190 innings . He topped the national averages for six seasons , the highest of any post @-@ World War II player , and is tied for second in the list of centuries for England behind Alastair Cook . Boycott was also the first player to score 99 not out , and the first to score 99 and then a century in a Test match . The forty @-@ eight century partnerships he was involved in remains a record for any England player . In 1977 against Australia , Boycott became the first England player to bat on all five days of a Test match . He spent the 629 minutes at the crease for 191 runs in 1977 . 
 = = = = Opening partners = = = = 
 Such was Boycott 's longevity in the game that he had 16 opening partners for England . ( Note that the figures in the Innings column below show all his Test Match partnerships with his opening partners ( not just his partnerships with them for the first wicket ) . For example , he did have 46 partnerships with John Edrich but only 35 were opening partnerships ) . 
 = = = = Career performance = = = = 
 = = = = Test centuries = = = = 
 = = = One Day Internationals = = = 
 Boycott 's ODI career was noticeably less productive than his Test . He did , however , face the first One Day International ball ever bowled , and was the first batsman to be dismissed in what was the first ever ODI game . The match , considered a one @-@ off at the time due to ODI cricket being in its infancy , was hastily arranged to cover a washed out 1970 @-@ 71 Ashes Test . 
 Career performance : 
 = = = = ODI century = = = = 
 = = = Printed sources = = = 
 = = = Online articles = = = 
 = Petitcodiac River = 
 The Petitcodiac River / <unk> / , known informally as the Chocolate River , is a Canadian river in south @-@ eastern New Brunswick . The river has a meander length of 79 kilometres ( 49 miles ) and is located in Westmorland , Albert , and Kings counties , draining a watershed area of about 2 @,@ 071 square kilometres ( 800 sq mi ) . The watershed features valleys , ridges , and rolling hills , and is home to a diverse population of terrestrial and aquatic species . Ten named tributaries join the river in its course toward its mouth in Shepody Bay . Before the construction of a causeway in 1968 , the river had one of the world 's largest tidal bores , which ranged from 1 to 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in height and moved at 5 to 13 kilometres per hour ( 3 @.@ 1 – 8 @.@ 1 mph ) . With the opening of the causeway gates in April 2010 , the river is flushing itself of ocean silts , and the Bore is returning to its former glory . 
 The Mi 'kmaq were the first to settle near the river , and used it as part of a portage route between Shubenacadie and the village of Petitcodiac , where they had a winter camp . Acadians from Port Royal , Nova Scotia colonised the region in 1698 , but were expelled in 1755 during the Seven Years ' War . Acadian resistance fighters in Village @-@ des @-@ Blanchard ( now Hillsborough ) fought under the command of French leader Charles Deschamps de Boishébert in the Battle of Petitcodiac to fend off British troops and suffered the destruction of most of their settlement . The British troops revisited the river three years later and conducted the Petitcodiac River Campaign . In the 1840s , the Greater Moncton area saw a shipbuilding boom , but this was halted following the arrival of the steam train , and forced the town to <unk> . These changes eventually marginalised the Petitcodiac River . 
 In 1968 , a controversial rock @-@ and @-@ earth fill causeway was built between Moncton and Riverview to prevent agricultural flooding and to carry a crossing between the two communities . The causeway caused many problems for the river and its surrounding ecosystem . An estimated 10 million cubic metres ( 13 million cubic yards ) of silt was deposited in the 4 @.@ 7 km ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) of river downstream from the causeway in the first three years following construction . The causeway restricted the movement of fish and reduced the region 's salmon catches by 82 percent . Water quality has also dropped thanks to industrial expansion around the area . In 2003 , <unk> International designated the Petitcodiac River as the most endangered river in Canada because of these problems . On 14 April 2010 , the causeway 's gates were opened permanently as part of a $ 68 million three @-@ phase project designed to restore the river , to be completed by 2015 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 A popular belief suggests that the name derives from the French term " petit <unk> " , meaning " little elbow " . In fact , the name derives from an indigenous word , probably Maliseet or , possibly Mi 'kmaq . According to Maliseet Elder and linguist Dr. Peter Paul of Woodstock Reserve , the name refers to a wall of water rushing in : " now they call that <unk> . [ It ] means ' sound of thunder , ' well , the rush of water coming in like a thunderstorm . " If the term has a Mi 'kmaq origin , it could have been derived from the word <unk> , meaning " the river that bends like a bow " , a reference to the right angle bend near Moncton . Acadians transformed this to <unk> or <unk> , which was modified to Petitcodiac by British settlers . The river 's heavy sedimentation led to the nickname " Chocolate River " , due to the resulting brown tint . When the Petitcodiac River Causeway was built , an additional 10 million cubic metres ( 13 million cubic yards ) of this sediment began to accumulate in the 4 @.@ 7 km ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) of river downstream from it . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Course = = = 
 The river measures about 79 km ( 49 mi ) from its source near Petitcodiac to its mouth at Shepody Bay ; its source derives from the confluence of the Anagance and North rivers in western Westmorland County . The Anagance River arises from its tributaries , Hayward Brook and Holmes Brook , and drains 81 km2 ( 31 sq mi ) from the south @-@ east of the Petitcodiac River , while the North River drains 264 km2 ( 102 sq mi ) from the north . From the confluence , the river passes under the bridge on Route 106 in Petitcodiac , The road then follows the river to Moncton on the left side of the river . Route 1 crosses the river a few kilometres downstream to join Trans @-@ Canada Highway 2 . The community of River Glade precedes Petitcodiac River 's right tributary , Pollett River , with a watershed of 314 km2 ( 121 sq mi ) . As the waterway runs past Salisbury , its final major right tributary , Little River ( formerly known as Coverdale River ) , joins it . Little River 's watershed is 275 km2 ( 106 sq mi ) . The river passes Coverdale and is joined by Turtle Creek before widening as it approaches Moncton . 
 The causeway , built in 1968 , formed a wall blocking all but 100 m ( 330 ft ) of water as the river flowed downstream toward the Gunningsville Bridge . Before the causeway 's construction , the river 's area would expand through Moncton , attaining a width of 1 @.@ 6 km ( one mile ) . A series of banks to both sides precede the 90 @-@ degree turn to the south , a feature that gave Moncton its original name , Le Coude ( The Elbow ) . The river passes Dieppe on its eastern side and Hillsborough on its western side before it approaches its mouth . 
 The Memramcook River , which has a watershed area of 412 km2 ( 159 sq mi ) joins the Petitcodiac River near its mouth . The Petitcodiac River then widens and drains into Shepody Bay , where there is a 122 km2 ( 47 sq mi ) wetland . Once past the Hopewell Rocks , Shepody Bay merges with the Cumberland Basin , which runs south @-@ west toward Chignecto Bay . Chignecto Bay drains into the Bay of Fundy , which flows into the Gulf of Maine , which proceeds south @-@ east into the Atlantic Ocean through the Northeast Channel . 
 = = = Watershed = = = 
 The Petitcodiac River watershed is about 2 @,@ 071 km2 ( 800 sq mi ) . The average yearly precipitation in the watershed is 1 @,@ 100 millimetres ( 43 in ) , with average temperatures of 17 @.@ 5 ° C ( 63 @.@ 5 ° F ) in the summer and − 7 @.@ 5 ° C ( 18 @.@ 5 ° F ) in the winter . The watershed is located in the Kings , Westmorland , and Albert counties in south @-@ east New Brunswick , with some of it crossing into the Caledonian Highlands to the south @-@ east . It borders the Bay of Fundy and three other designated watersheds in the province : the lower Saint John River to the north @-@ west , the Shediac Bay to the north @-@ east , and the <unk> River to the south . Although the Petitcodiac River 's watershed is geographically distinct from that of the nearby Memramcook River , some groups merge the two for <unk> purposes . 
 The area has been occupied by Europeans since the late 17th century . Moncton 's population has grown rapidly since the 19th century , rising from fewer than 100 people in 1825 , to over 15 @,@ 000 people in 1917 , and to 126 @,@ 000 people in 2006 . In spite of this growth , most of the area remains relatively undisturbed : 80 percent of the watershed is covered with forest , a tenth is used for agriculture and three percent is occupied by wetlands . Only four percent of the area is used for commercial , residential , or private usage . Nevertheless , the Petitcodiac Watershed Monitoring Group noted in 2001 that this growth is one of the main factors for the ongoing " environmental degradation " of the river . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 = = = Water quality = = = 
 The Petitcodiac River was listed in 2003 as the most endangered river in Canada by <unk> International , and was listed second , behind Quebec 's Rupert River , in 2002 . The causeway was cited as one of the major factors behind the river 's degraded health . The Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment 's Water Quality Index gave two study sites an " excellent " rating , 20 sites a " good " rating , 27 sites a " fair " rating , and five sites a " marginal " rating . 
 Since 1999 , the Petitcodiac Watershed Alliance ( known as the Petitcodiac Watershed Monitoring Group at the time ) has collected water samples from May to October to study bacteria , nutrient , pH , dissolved oxygen ( DO ) , and sediment levels . Two sampling sites , one upstream from the causeway and one downstream , were used during the 2009 study . The river had an average temperature of 27 ° C ( 81 ° F ) in August at the upstream location , in contrast to the average of 20 @.@ 1 ° C ( 68 @.@ 2 ° F ) at the same site over the total period of the study . E. coli levels were high upstream , and above recreationally safe levels downstream in June , July , and August . Nitrates and phosphates failed to meet the safe quality threshold on occasion . A publication by the New Brunswick Department of Environment in 2007 showed that the watershed did not meet the quality guidelines for E. coli in 10 percent of samples , for dissolved oxygen in 5 percent of samples , and pH in 3 percent of samples ; in contrast , the river was always within safe nitrate levels . 
 During their 2001 study , the Petitcodiac Watershed Alliance noted the effects of agriculture on the river 's water quality , and recommended to work with local farmers to install cattle fencing around streams which run through their properties , and " eventually phase out " cosmetic pesticide usage . The Petitcodiac Riverkeeper holds a stronger position on the issue : the organisation notes that pesticides " find their way into the surface and ground water by leaching into the soil or as part of stormwater runoff . " They request that , while measures have been taken in 2009 by the provincial government to regulate cosmetic pesticide usage , the province must forbid its usage altogether and require chemical manufacturers to disclose health warnings and all ingredients on labels . The New Brunswick Department of Environment also warned of the erosion caused by the removal of the river 's riparian zones , which is a common " land use practice " . 
 Although mining around the area essentially stopped with the closure of the gypsum mines in 1982 , uranium mining has surfaced as a potential problem for the river . The province was the subject of a controversy in 2007 when it gave Vale Limited ( formerly known as <unk> <unk> ) the right to mine for uranium at Turtle Creek , where the Greater Moncton water reservoir is maintained . Environmentalists warned of the dangers related to the move , fearing that contaminants could be pushed into the surrounding water . The Petitcodiac Riverkeeper also noted uranium mining 's " irreversible effects to the health of ecosystems , watersheds , wildlife , agriculture , recreation , and public health " , and joined 30 other environmental groups in asking the provincial government to establish a ban on the act . The province would later restrict uranium mining to 300 m ( 980 ft ) from residential areas and ban it from protected drinking water areas . Another controversy in 2006 involved exploration for oil and gas deposits in the same area , but access was blocked by the municipal government . 
 Shortly after the building of the causeway , a 35 ha ( 86 @-@ acre ) landfill was built near the river . Various materials were disposed of in the area , including petroleum waste oil , pipe and foam insulation , sewage sludge , and medical waste . While the landfill was shut down in 1992 , samples by the Environmental Bureau of Investigation and the Petitcodiac Riverkeeper showed that ammonium levels around the leachate exceeded Canadian quality guidelines by as much as 15 times , and contained heavy metals , petroleum hydrocarbons , and PCBs . A mortality rate of 100 percent was found for test trout and <unk> when exposed to water samples . Gemtec Limited , the company responsible for planning and closing the landfill , and the City of Moncton were charged on 12 March 2002 , for offences relating to the Canadian Environmental Protection Act ( 1999 ) and the Fisheries Act . The city pleaded guilty on 23 September 2003 , paid a $ 35 @,@ 000 fine , and was ordered to help reduce the leachate flow from the landfill . Three years later , Gemtec Limited was fined a total of $ 6 @,@ 000 and was ordered to contribute a total of $ 22 @,@ 000 to the federal Environmental Damages Fund and the Jonathan Creek Committee . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 The river aids in the drainage of ten significant bodies of water : Weldon Creek , Fox Creek , Mill Creek , Halls Creek , Jonathan Creek , Turtle Creek , Little River , Pollett River , Anagance River , and North River . A report in 2000 showed that it handles an average discharge of 27 @.@ 3 m3 / s ( 960 cu ft / s ) into its mouth yearly , with a recorded high of 730 m3 / s ( 26 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ) in 1962 and a low of 0 @.@ 36 m3 / s ( 13 cu ft / s ) in 1966 . The same report estimated mean values for the minimum and maximum discharges for every two @-@ year , 10 @-@ year , and 100 @-@ year flood events , and minimum discharges for every two @-@ year , five @-@ year , and 100 @-@ year " drought " events : 
 = = = Tidal bore = = = 
 The Petitcodiac River tidal bores — retrograde waves moving upstream over downstream waves — occur twice a day and come from the world 's highest tides in the Bay of Fundy . The first European mention of the bore was by British Lieutenant Colonel George Scott on 17 November 1758 , during a downstream voyage from Moncton to Fort Frederick , near Saint John . The Admiralty referred to the tidal bore in a hydrographic chart published in 1861 , observing that " [ after ] its passage the rise of the tide is very rapid until high water is attained " , and that " [ during the lowest tides ] the Bore still appears but its broken front usually is only a few inches high . " 
 The bores ranged from 1 to 2 m ( 3 @.@ 3 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in height , with speeds from 5 to 13 km / h ( 3 @.@ 1 – 8 @.@ 1 mph ) . In 1825 , Peter Fisher noted that the " noise of the Bore is heard a great distance , and animals immediately take to the highland , and manifest visible signs of terror if near it . " Before the causeway ( 1968 ) , values were compared with the tidal bores of the Qiantang , Hooghly and Amazon rivers . After the causeway was built , the bores reached heights from about 5 to 75 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 29 @.@ 5 in ) . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 Before the construction of the causeway , the Petitcodiac River was home to many aquatic species . Fish originally included hundreds of thousands of Atlantic <unk> and rainbow smelt , tens of thousands of <unk> and American shad , thousands of American eel , Atlantic salmon , brook trout , lamprey , and striped bass and hundreds of Atlantic sturgeon . Other fish include the blueback herring , the brown bullhead , the chain pickerel , the smallmouth bass , the white perch , and the white sucker . Marine mammals were uncommon , but normally consisted of pilot whales , Atlantic white @-@ sided dolphins , harbour porpoise , harbour seals , and porbeagles . Freshwater mollusc species included the brook floater , the dwarf <unk> , the eastern <unk> , the eastern floater , the eastern <unk> , and the triangle floater . Many other aquatic organisms are thought to have once entered the watershed due to the low salinity of the water . 
 Six species have disappeared from the river since the mid @-@ 1980s . The Petitcodiac River was the only known Canadian habitat of the dwarf <unk> , and was later isolated to just nine American watersheds after its elimination from the Petitcodiac . The Atlantic salmon is no longer present in the watershed , and has since been listed as an endangered species in Canada . The American shad was a favourite with fishermen , and represented two @-@ thirds of the entire Canadian shad landings from 1870 to 1900 ; catches peaked at 0 @.@ 91 to 2 @.@ 72 million kilograms ( two to six million pounds ) per year . Three other species have been eliminated from the river : the striped bass , the Atlantic sturgeon , and the Atlantic <unk> . However , a project of the Petitcodiac Riverkeeper , funded by the Government of Canada 's Environmental Damage Fund in 2005 , noted that the removal of the causeway would result in a " good " chance of bringing back the eliminated species , and an " excellent " chance of increasing the numbers of species deemed to have been reduced in numbers . No data has been released for the Atlantic salmon or the striped bass . 
 Various insects and arachnids reside around the Petitcodiac River . Among them is the stonefly , the mayfly , the caddisfly , the <unk> , the subfamily of <unk> , and the <unk> . Non @-@ native species , such as the black @-@ footed spider , the beech scale , the white @-@ marked tussock moth , and the mountain ash sawfly have also made their home in the Petitcodiac River watershed . At the southern extremities of the watershed , 50 to 90 percent of the world 's semipalmated sandpipers feed on the mud shrimp at Shepody Bay . Around 269 @,@ 445 stop there before migrating to South America , a number which accounts for at least 7 @.@ 7 percent of the total population . Among others , the semipalmated plover ( around 2 percent of the North American population ) , the short @-@ billed <unk> , the red knot , the sanderling , and the least sandpiper are also known for migrating through the Important Bird Area . 
 A diverse number of plant species reside in the watershed as well . Red , white , and black spruce , red maple , white birch , and trembling aspen are the most common . Jack pine is commonly found in regions that fires have repeatedly ravished , while cedar is found in bogs and areas where gypsum and limestone are present . Higher altitude slopes and <unk> house sugar maple , beech , and yellow birch trees . Zelazny et al. note that " [ the ] high frequency of disturbed sites dominated by aspen stands reveals the degree of historical and recent human disturbance along the Petitcodiac River . " The Petitcodiac River 's riparian zone houses a number of trees , including willows , white spruce , white pine , and speckled alder . Other trees , such as the tamarack and white pine , can also be found in the watershed . Plants such as the rufous bulrush tend to grow near calcareous areas , and hemlock can be found in small , pure stands . Alien plant species include the mother @-@ of @-@ thyme , the Japanese barberry , the Scotch broom , the yellow flag , and Canada bluegrass . 
 In 1937 , the 37 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old skeleton of a mastodon was discovered by workers near Hillsborough . It was in near perfect condition and was transported to the New Brunswick Museum in Saint John , where it has been displayed ever since . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Petitcodiac River watershed covers an area north and east of the Caledonian Highlands ; a low @-@ elevation ( on average 67 m ; 220 ft ) region with rolling hills , valleys , and ridges . In fact , most of the region was below sea level , beneath the former <unk> and Goldthwait seas , during the quaternary period . Non @-@ calcareous Pennsylvanian ( and younger ) sandstones , conglomerates , silt , and red- to grey @-@ tinted mudstone now compose the majority of the bedrock . The northern shore of the Petitcodiac River , including the Anagance and North rivers , is primarily made up of shale with volcanic rocks , mixed igneous rocks , and felsic pebble conglomerates . The southern shore , including the Little and Pollett rivers , is composed of Precambrian or Lower @-@ Palaeozoic sedimentary , igneous , and volcanic rocks , and limestone . Both shores include red to grey Mississippian sandstone . Red beds , or red @-@ tinted sedimentary rocks , have a higher occurrence around Port Elgin . Other significant Mississippian @-@ era rock patches appear in two areas around the watershed . The first is located near the north @-@ western border of the watershed , near Lutes Mountain and Cornhill . The second ranges from the east of the Memramcook River to the west of Hillsborough , in Beech Hill . The Petitcodiac River watershed also features karst topography , where gypsum and limestone around Mississippian rocks dilute into the circulating groundwater . This creates sinkholes , depressions , and caves . Examples of rare karst occurrences appear west of the village of Petitcodiac , where large sinkholes alternate between small ridges to form honeycomb @-@ shaped patterns . Hillsborough is the home of one of the longest gypsum cave networks in eastern Canada , and is a key habitat for bats in hibernation . 
 The majority of the watershed 's topsoil is composed of sand , clay , and silt , under which normally lies a layer of ablation moraines . Fairly rich soils made of alluvium and tidal deposits are found along the Petitcodiac and Memramcook rivers , and have often been exploited for agricultural purposes . A publication by the New Brunswick Department of Natural Resources notes that the soils in Salisbury , made from calcareous sandstone and mudstone , are fine @-@ textured and , when properly drained , " are the most fertile glacial tills " in the watershed . In contrast , they note , soils deriving from local conglomerates are more coarse and sandy , and are less fertile . 
 <unk> , a type of asphalt , was first found in Albert County in 1849 by the Canadian physicist Abraham Gesner , inventor of kerosene . Over 200 @,@ 000 tonnes of the mineral were shipped to Boston within 30 years . Large deposits of gypsum found eight kilometres ( five miles ) from the mining site were shipped around the globe as well . The Petitcodiac River was used as the primary means for transporting the minerals at the time . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Colonisation ( 1604 – 1698 ) = = = 
 The Petitcodiac River region was first settled by the Mi 'kmaq , who used the river 's upstream current as part of a portage route between Shubenacadie and a winter camp at the confluence of the Anagance and North rivers . The first Europeans arrived in early 1604 , when a French expedition to Acadia ( now Nova Scotia and New Brunswick ) , led by the explorer Pierre Dugua de Mons and accompanied by cartographer Samuel de Champlain and future Acadian governor Jean de <unk> , sailed into the Bay of Fundy . Hoping to find an ideal site for a settlement , they passed Advocate Harbour and the Saint John River before Dugua chose to settle on Saint Croix Island in present @-@ day Maine . Although they did not explore the Petitcodiac region , they returned to the coasts of eastern Nova Scotia , where they founded Port Royal . In 1676 , Jacques Bourgeois , a colonist from the Nova Scotian settlement , settled in the area of Beaubassin ( now the <unk> Marshes ) . By 1685 , its population had grown to 129 , with 19 out of the 22 families living permanently in the region . Pierre <unk> , also from Port Royal , founded <unk> ( now Shepody , New Brunswick ) near Shepody Bay in 1698 . At this time , the inhabitants often referred to the Petitcodiac , Memramcook , and Shepody River area as " Trois @-@ Rivières " ( Three Rivers ) ( not to be confused with Trois @-@ Rivières , Quebec ) . 
 = = = Acadian history ( 1698 – 1763 ) = = = 
 The French and Indian War erupted in 1754 amid tensions between the British and the French over control of the Ohio Valley . Initially , the inhabitants of Acadia were uninvolved in the conflict because the French had already ceded the land to Britain under the Treaty of Utrecht ( 1713 ) . The Acadians were asked to take an oath declaring complete fidelity toward the British monarch on several occasions , but they refused . At first , they were not punished for doing so . A declaration of neutrality was signed in 1730 and was accepted by Nova Scotia governor Richard Philipps . This earned the Acadians the nickname the " neutral French " . At the outbreak of war in 1754 , the British again demanded unconditional oaths of fealty , perceiving the Acadians as a possible threat . In spite of resistance led by Jean @-@ Louis Le Loutre , representatives eventually agreed to sign , but their reluctance persuaded Governor Charles Lawrence to order the Acadian population expelled from British territory . 
 About 1 @,@ 100 Acadians living around the Petitcodiac River were affected by this decision . Two hundred British troops led by Major Joseph Frye were sent to destroy the settlements of the Three Rivers , beginning with Shepody and Village @-@ des @-@ Blanchard ( now Hillsborough ) . French resistance commander Charles Deschamps de Boishébert , hoping to evacuate as many Acadians as possible , was unable to march the distance between <unk> and the Shepody settlement in time , but fought at the second threatened village on 28 August 1755 . Boishébert 's troops , composed of inhabitants from the area and from Shepody , counter @-@ attacked , suffering only one loss to twenty @-@ three British casualties . This defeat is thought to have been the reason for the British abandonment of the campaign at the Three Rivers . The commander and the evacuated Acadians , whom Edward <unk> estimated to total around 700 , suffered a massive famine from 1756 to 1758 , largely caused by the scarce resources following the battle . 
 In 1758 , Joseph Broussard , also known as Beausoleil by the locals , led raids against British vessels sailing in the Bay of Fundy and the Cumberland Basin . This provoked the British into initiating two raids of their own . The first took place in February in Shediac , where Lieutenant Colonel George Scott tried to find Boishébert . When they were returning , Boishébert ambushed them , killing two of Scott 's gunmen . The second raid took place at the settlement of Shepody in March , where the British were shocked to find that the Acadians had already begun rebuilding their homes . On 28 June , Scott learned of reports that cattle were stolen outside of Fort Beausejour ; the British issued an order for Captain <unk> Danks to send 75 men up the Petitcodiac River . They arrived in Moncton the following night , and about 30 Acadians began firing at their vessel . However , Danks held his offensive position , and the British killed 19 Acadians , taking nine others prisoner . He and his troops continued to sail up the river the next day ; they sent 60 men to burn a settlement 9 @.@ 7 km ( 6 mi ) west of Moncton . Historians presume that the area had already been deserted . 
 Acadians continued to survive in the region , overcoming the results of the raids . Scott sailed back to the region to search for Beausoleil and to weaken the Acadians before the winter . He arrived in Moncton near midnight on 12 November , but the tide of the Petitcodiac River prevented him from sending more than twelve men . They came back the next morning with 16 prisoners . Scott was told that the area was virtually defenceless , so he sent three parties to La Chapelle ( now Bore Park in Moncton ) , <unk> ( now Lewisville ) , and <unk> ( now Dieppe ) . Scott recorded no deaths or prisoners , but all buildings in sight were burned , and cattle were brought back onto the vessel . Additional raids by Scott between 14 and 17 November captured a dozen Acadian prisoners , burned settlements , and uncovered Beausoleil 's own schooner . The crew sent an Acadian prisoner on the 17th to request the surrender of the remaining residents , but when he returned , he reported that they had all begun to flee to Cocagne , Shediac , and the settlements around the Miramichi River . This prompted Scott to return to Fort Frederick in Saint John . 
 A few of the Acadians migrating to the Miramichi River probably died of hypothermia during the trip due to the 1758 – 59 winter . Those who survived joined the refugees already present , who had been persuaded by Boishébert to seek refuge there . Inadequate housing and supplies , among other reasons , led to the deterioration of the reputation of the French commander , and only 700 Acadians remained there by late 1759 . Meanwhile , the raiding rapidly took its toll on the residents who stayed around the Three Rivers , as food supplies became scarce and reconstruction became impossible . The fall of Quebec City in September 1759 also eliminated the possibility of assistance from that area . On 16 November 1759 , the 190 Acadians in the region sent a delegate to Fort Beauséjour ( which had been renamed Fort Cumberland ) to announce their surrender to the newly promoted Colonel Frye . The settlements of Miramichi , <unk> , and <unk> surrendered the next day , with a delegate sent to the fort to represent their 700 refugees . Frye requested and received permission from Governor Lawrence to take them in for the winter . The Acadian refugees were offered land on the Isthmus of Chignecto in early 1760 , but most requested their original lands around the Three Rivers , which the governor granted . 
 = = = Resettlement and modern history ( 1763 – present ) = = = 
 After the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) , exiled Acadians began to return to the area , but their numbers around the Three Rivers remained under 200 by 1769 . Settlers from Philadelphia began to migrate to the Petitcodiac River area in 1766 : the <unk> , Jones and <unk> families moved to present @-@ day Moncton , but the <unk> family ( now <unk> ) , later moved south @-@ east to Hillsborough . Nine families bought land up to 21 km ( 13 mi ) west from the bend of the river , ranging from 1 @,@ 718 to 2 @,@ 193 acres ( 695 – 887 ha ) per grant . In 1829 , the population of Moncton reached 100 , composed mainly of descendants of these settlers . 
 Moncton 's shipbuilding era began in 1840 with the arrival of Stewart Russell , a shipbuilder from Hopewell . Russell built the <unk> , which sailed down the Petitcodiac River to trade at the ports in Saint John and New England . The ship and its crew sank in a storm on 24 December 1850 , during a trip to Boston for Christmas . A ferry service on the Petitcodiac River was launched around 1841 , thanks to a license obtained by Simon Outhouse . The Larch , built by Stephen Binney in 1845 , was another important vessel , becoming the largest to sail on the river . But it was not until the arrival of Joseph Salter in 1846 that the shipbuilding boom began : a shipyard founded by Binney and Salter produced 24 vessels from 1847 to 1859 , and employed almost 500 of the 1 @,@ 000 inhabitants in Moncton . Salter would become the first mayor of Moncton in April 1855 , the year the town was incorporated . 
 The European and North American Railway was extended to link Pointe @-@ du @-@ Chene to Moncton in 1857 , with an eventual goal of reaching Saint John in 1860 . The move , according to <unk> , caused the town to become " but a station stop along a railway line " . This coincided with the failure of Moncton 's shipbuilding industry and a population drop from a peak of 2 @,@ 000 to about 500 . The town declared bankruptcy and was unincorporated in 1862 , but it later regained its status in 1875 , after it became the Intercolonial Railway 's headquarters for its shops in 1871 . While the Petitcodiac River continued to aid in the shipping of goods into the 20th century , shipbuilding essentially ended in the 1890s . The final vessel built in Moncton was the <unk> II on 14 May 1980 , while the final ship to sail up the Petitcodiac River was the Inox from France , which arrived on 12 July 1986 , ( and was , ironically , stranded in Moncton until 3 November due to the river 's tidal fluctuations ) . 
 In 1924 , the Petitcodiac Tidal Power Company proposed a tidal power project . This called for a dam to be built between Hopewell Cape and Fort Folly Point . The company sold shares to raise funds for the project and a series of on @-@ site and airborne studies were conducted by the federal government , but the project fell through by 1928 . As rail transport became more common , it displaced river transportation around the Great Depression . In addition , the Greater Moncton International Airport offered an airmail service from Moncton to Montreal by 29 December 1929 . These factors further marginalised the Petitcodiac . 
 The Gunningsville Bridge , which crosses the Petitcodiac River to link Moncton and Riverview , was built in 1867 . It was damaged and rebuilt on four different occasions . The first was following the Saxby Gale of 1869 , which forced the town to rebuild the bridge in 1872 . It went under " extensive repairs " mid @-@ 1892 , but ice build @-@ up from the Petitcodiac continued to pose a threat for the wooden structure , leading to the construction of a new steel version from 1915 to 1919 . This fourth bridge would suffer through many collisions , including one with the Mayflower in September 1929 , which caused the ship to capsize and drown two men . The Gunningsville Bridge would last 86 years before it would be demolished a final time , making way for a 425 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 394 ft ) four @-@ lane bridge crossing . Covered bridges were also built over the Petitcodiac River , the final extant one being " Hasty " , built in 1929 . 
 = = = Causeway controversy ( 1968 – present ) = = = 
 In 1968 , the provincial and federal governments completed the construction of a causeway between the communities of Moncton and Riverview to provide a crossing over the river , and to keep water levels from impeding agricultural production . This was a benefit for the federal government at the time , which had constantly maintained the dykes in the area . It also benefited the provincial government , as the federal government was willing to fund the $ 3 million project , but not a bridge . Although the causeway was equipped with a fishway , problems arose when fish were unable to cross it freely due to sedimentation build @-@ up ; some 82 percent of the salmon were prevented from travelling upstream by the structure . The sediment accumulated in the 4 @.@ 7 km ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) of river downstream from the causeway , with over 10 million cubic metres ( 13 million cubic yards ) of silt deposited in the first three years following construction . Several reports from 1969 to 1971 described its impact on the aquatic ecosystem , and proposals for amendments to the causeway gates were released , but no action was taken . In 1976 and 1977 , reports pointed out several problems related to the gates ' function due to erosion , winter ice jams , and " unsatisfactory fishway operation " . 
 It was not until 1978 that New Brunswick 's Department of Transportation commissioned a study of the problems . The final report recommended three alternatives for action : to continue operation " as @-@ is " , to continue operation without the gates , or to eliminate gate leakage and amend the operation protocol . The third alternative was chosen two years later , but did not substantially improve fish migration as expected . The provincial government decided to open the gates between 15 April and 7 July 1988 , to allow fish to migrate up the stream . This was repeated from 26 September to 31 October 1988 , and in the spring of 1989 and 1990 during low tides . In 1991 , New Brunswick 's Department of Oceans and Fisheries recommended opening the gates from April to December each year . A provincial government committee report recommended an additional seven options for the modification of the causeway in May 1992 , but the government did not act upon any of these options due to the low " cost @-@ benefit " factor . More reports documented problems related to the passage of fish in the river until 1995 , when the Department of Transportation agreed to open one gate from April to December , as suggested four years earlier . A project was then organized in December 1996 to begin a trial for the systematic opening of the gates during the year , but conditions could not be physically met , and it was terminated on 1 June 1999 . 
 In February 2001 , the Niles Report proposed an additional four modifications to the causeway project : to either replace the fishway , open the gates during peak fish migration , open the gates permanently , or replace the entire causeway with a bridge . An Environmental Impact Assessment study was commissioned in 2003 to develop and summarise these options , and on its completion in 2005 , it announced the recognition of " Option 3 " and " Option 4 " as possible solutions . The first option had been ruled out following the evaluation of other fish passage models , which were deemed inapplicable to the river . The second , suggesting systematic gate @-@ opening periods , was ruled out because of the inability to cater to every marine species ' migration periods . Option 4 was split into three sub @-@ options , mainly to list possible bridge lengths : 170 , 280 , and 315 metres ( 190 , 310 , and 344 yards ) . The provincial government later accepted the proposal on 6 December 2006 , and selected " Option 4B " on 7 August 2007 , which called for a 280 m ( 310 yd ) bridge in the place of the causeway . 
 The project was divided into three phases , expected to cost a total of $ 68 million . Phase 1 consisted of the prevention of erosion along the shorelines , improvements to the nearby drainage system , and the construction of dikes and <unk> ; the work was carried out from 7 July 2008 , to 14 April 2010 . Phase 2 consists of opening the gates to monitor river flow , both upstream and downstream , for two years . Phase 3 , commenced in 2012 , consisted of the bridge 's development and the removal of the causeway , and is anticipated to be completed in 2015 . Confusion arose as to whether or not the project would be funded by the federal government . They refused , in spite of an earlier comment from the Department of Fisheries and Oceans , which had hinted at a possible negotiation . Unwilling to wait , the provincial government came forward with an initial $ 20 million on 7 July 2008 , to begin the first phase . 
 The approach of Phase 2 was met with various complaints . A biology professor at the Université de Moncton noted that $ 200 @,@ 000 – $ 250 @,@ 000 worth of pesticide would be required to keep the mosquito population around the city of Moncton from doubling once the gates open . Flood warnings were issued by the provincial Department of Supply and Services for the town of Riverview , warning that high river tides could lead to the flooding of over 3 hectares ( 7 @.@ 4 acres ) of sport fields and structures built in low @-@ lying areas ; however , they added that the causeway 's flood gates were able to descend if required , eliminating the chances of such repercussions from a possible inundation . Residents near the headpond west of the causeway criticized the project , citing the decrease in property values of about 480 homes ( by approximately 30 percent , according to the EIA report ) , the $ 68 million price tag , unstable ice conditions , and a lower water quality . In spite of legal threats by the Lake Petitcodiac Preservation Association ( <unk> ) and various residents , the causeway opened its gates on 14 April 2010 , coinciding with the beginning of various studies . 
 Since the opening , the river improved significantly , surpassing original expectations for the project . An AMEC engineer participating in the firm 's studies , Jacques Paynter , said that the banks of the river had begun widening " at a noticeable pace " , with the tidal bore growing closer to its pre @-@ 1968 levels : " We were actually anticipating a fairly modest increase in height . It seems to be already exceeding what we might have expected . " He noted that an estimated 40 @,@ 000 <unk> had returned to the river , and called for more studies to determine the impact of the causeway 's opening . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Residents around the Petitcodiac have used the river for various recreational purposes . Trips were made annually via the river from Moncton to Beaumont for Feast of Saint @-@ Anne celebrations with the locals . The <unk> , a towboat owned by <unk> and Sons , offered " moonlight cruises " in the early 1930s for 50 cents ( approximately $ 6 @.@ 50 in 2010 values ) . The service was popular until the towboat capsized in front of embarking passengers , causing them to lose interest . During their Environmental Impact Assessment in September 2005 , AMEC cited recreational fishing and birdwatching as major pre @-@ causeway activities . A fishery for Atlantic salmon existed downstream from the causeway for several years post @-@ 1968 . The Moncton Naturalists ' Club also publishes their Birding in the Moncton Area , a birdwatching guide covering sites from Sackville to Mary 's Point . Other activities downstream from the causeway include boating , canoeing , kayaking , seal and harbour @-@ porpoise viewing , and tour boating . On 24 July 2013 , the North American record for surfing a single river wave was set by Wessels and Whitbread of California , who rode the Petitcodiac River 's tidal bore 29 km ( 18 mi ) . 
 Before the opening of the causeway gates on 14 April 2010 , the Petitcodiac River 's 21 km ( 13 mi ) headpond ( west of the causeway ) , colloquially known as Lake Petitcodiac , was promoted by <unk> as a recreational haven for residents in the area . According to the association , over 10 @,@ 000 estimated hours of boating took place on the lake , in addition to canoeing , kayaking , motor boating , water skiing , jet skiing , sailing , and swimming . Fishing tournaments , dragon boat <unk> , dog sledding , and snowmobiling were popular at the time as well . However , a study by the <unk> showed that fecal coliform levels in the headpond from June , July , and September 2009 exceeded 2 @,@ 419 parts per 100 millilitres ; more than 12 times the 200 / 100 ml recommended by the Canadian Water Quality Guidelines for recreational purposes . 
 Bore Park , located in the area formerly known as La Chapelle , became a popular tourist location by 1907 for watching the Petitcodiac 's tidal bore move up the river twice a day . The area features information about the wave , as well as a clock indicating the time of its next appearance . Bore Park is a part of Riverfront Park , Greater Moncton 's 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) section of the Trans Canada Trail , where tourists may walk , bike , or skate along the riverfront . The trail continues west to Hillsborough and Fundy National Park , and east to Sackville , Nova Scotia , and Prince Edward Island . Jonathan Creek , Fox Creek , Halls Creek , and Mills Creek also offer trails that run along their streams . 
 = = Lists = = 
 The following lists are ordered from the mouth of the river to its source . 
 = = = Crossings = = = 
 The river runs under ten bridges , excluding the causeway . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 The Petitcodiac River features ten named tributaries , which drain a total of 28 additional streams . 
 = Abyss ( roller coaster ) = 
 Abyss is a steel roller coaster located at the Adventure World amusement park in Perth , Western Australia . The $ 12 @-@ million attraction was announced in April 2013 , and construction began the following month . Six months later , the ride opened to the general public on 1 November 2013 . 
 The Abyss is a Euro @-@ Fighter , a roller coaster model from Gerstlauer that features a " beyond @-@ vertical " first drop which exceeds 90 degrees . In addition to several inversions , the Abyss reaches a top speed of 85 kilometres per hour ( 53 mph ) along the two @-@ minute , 630 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 070 ft ) ride . The roller coaster has been well received by the public . 
 = = History = = 
 In mid @-@ 2012 , the 15 @-@ month phase of planning and construction of Abyss began . In April 2013 , Adventure World announced on their Facebook page that they would be adding a $ 12 million , world @-@ class attraction in 2013 . By May 2013 construction had begun . In June 2013 , a concrete slab was poured prior to the construction of a show building . Shortly after track arrived in July 2013 , Adventure World officially announced that the ride would be a Gerstlauer Euro @-@ Fighter , similar to Saw – The Ride . The ride was manufactured at the company 's facilities in Germany before being shipped to Australia in forty @-@ five 40 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 12 m ) shipping containers . Construction of the ride was completed by Gerstlauer crews over seven weeks . The name of the attraction was revealed on the Friday the 13th of September 2013 as Abyss . The announcement was made on Friday the 13th due to the ride 's horror theme . Abyss officially opened to the public on 1 November 2013 as the single biggest investment in the park 's history . 
 Adventure World 's CEO Mark Shaw stated the addition of the Abyss was an attempt to elevate the park " from adventure park to theme park " . The park expected double @-@ digit attendance growth following the addition of the ride . Prior to the 2013 opening of Abyss , Adventure World 's only roller coaster was Dragon Express , a small junior roller coaster by Zamperla . Adventure World previously operated the Anton Schwarzkopf @-@ designed Turbo Mountain , before its closure and removal in 2009 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Abyss is a custom Gerstlauer Euro @-@ Fighter with 630 metres ( 2 @,@ 070 ft ) of track . The ride 's vertical lift hill takes riders to a height of 30 metres ( 98 ft ) before dropping 30 @.@ 5 metres ( 100 ft ) in a 100 ° , beyond @-@ vertical drop . The two @-@ minute ride features a top speed of 85 kilometres per hour ( 53 mph ) and exerts up to 4 @.@ 5 times the force of gravity on its riders . Abyss contains three inversions including an inline twist enclosed in the ride 's show building , as well as an Immelmann loop and a dive loop outdoors . The ride features four trains which each seat riders four @-@ abreast in two rows . The theming around the ride was manufactured in the Philippines and includes thirty 3 @-@ metre @-@ tall ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) ancient druid guardians , exposed tree roots , upturned trees , and an entrance archway . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 The ride begins at the station inside the show building . Once the train departs the station , it makes a slow turn to the right . A quick drop follows , before the train rounds a series of left turns into the first inversion , an inline twist . The train emerges from the show building and makes a slight left towards the 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) chain lift hill . Once at the top of the hill , riders drop down 30 @.@ 5 metres ( 100 ft ) at an angle of 100 ° . The second inversion of the ride , an Immelmann loop , is followed by an overbanked turn around . An air @-@ time hill , where riders experience the feeling of weightlessness , and a right turn leads into the mid @-@ course brake run . The train exits the brake run with a left turn into a dive loop . A left turn leads the train into the final brake run , before returning to the enclosed station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Abyss has been well received . Edwin Dickinson of the Australian Coaster Club praised Abyss for its smoothness , intensity and pacing . He described the ride as better than Superman Escape at Warner Bros. Movie World , stating Adventure World " certainly lifted the bar for roller coasters in Australia " . The Australian Associated Press commended the ride 's ability to continue to be thrilling after multiple rides . Natalie <unk> of Today Tonight stated she didn 't " know whether to laugh or cry " at the end of Abyss , describing the ride as unbelievable . Local MP Joe Francis described the ride as an " amazing piece of mechanical engineering " . 
 = SS Batavier V ( 1902 ) = 
 SS Batavier V was a steam packet for the Batavier Line that sailed between Rotterdam and London for most of her career . The ship was built in 1897 by the Gourlay Brothers of Dundee . The Dutch ship could carry a limited amount of freight and up to 428 passengers . She was rebuilt in 1909 which increased her length by over 5 metres ( 16 ft ) . 
 During World War I , the Batavier Line attempted to maintain service , but in March 1915 , Batavier V was seized as a prize by German submarine U @-@ 28 and sailed into Zeebrugge in German @-@ occupied Belgium . The ship was released by a German prize court in September . In May 1916 , Batavier V struck a mine laid by German submarine UC @-@ 6 off the British coast and sank with the loss of four lives . 
 = = Career = = 
 Batavier V and sister ship Batavier IV were built for William Müller and Company by the Gourlay Brothers of Dundee , Scotland . The ship was launched on 28 November 1902 . She was 79 @.@ 3 metres ( 260 ft 2 in ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 10 @.@ 7 metres ( 35 ft 1 in ) abeam . Batavier V was powered by a single 3 @-@ cylinder , triple @-@ expansion steam engine of 2 @,@ 300 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 700 kW ) that moved her at a speed of up to 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ) . She could carry a maximum of 428 passengers : 75 in first class , 28 in second , and up to 325 in steerage . She was listed at 1 @,@ 562 gross register tons ( GRT ) . 
 Upon completion in February 1903 , she joined Batavier I , Batavier II , Batavier III , and Batavier IV in packet service between Rotterdam and London . In Rotterdam , the ships docked at the <unk> ; in London , the ships docked at the Customs House and Wool Quays near the Tower Bridge . The Batavier Line service between Rotterdam and London was offered daily except Sundays , with each ship making multiple round trips per week . 
 After the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the Batavier Line continued service on the Rotterdam – London route . Batavier V was frequently stopped by German warships , examined and allowed to proceed . On 17 March 1915 , however , Batavier V left Rotterdam and proceeded to Hook of Holland , passing there in the early morning hours of 18 March . At about 05 : 00 , 6 nautical miles ( 11 km ) southwest of the Maas Lightship , German submarine U @-@ 28 hailed Batavier V. Kapitänleutnant Georg @-@ Günther von <unk> , U @-@ 28 's commanding officer , made clear his intent to seize Batavier V and sail it to German @-@ occupied Zeebrugge . While the captains of the two vessels argued the legalities of seizing a vessel flagged under a neutral country , lookouts on the submarine spotted another Dutch steamer , Zaanstroom . U @-@ 28 left an officer and a sailor on board Batavier V , and proceeded to stop and similarly seize Zaanstroom . U @-@ 28 and a pilot boat , W2 , led both of the Dutch ships through minefields and into Zeebrugge . 
 According to Popular Mechanics , one of Batavier V 's passengers was a photographer who was able to snap pictures of the ship 's encounter with the U @-@ boat . In April , the International News Service copyrighted eight images from the photographer , and deposited them with the Library of Congress . According to Popular Mechanics , which published one of the photos in its July 1915 edition , the photographs give a sense of the " enormous size and power of the latest German submarines " . 
 At Zeebrugge , Batavier V 's Dutch crew , and all the Dutch citizens , women , and children among the ship 's passengers were released ; fourteen Belgian men of fighting age and two priests were taken prisoner by the Germans . Batavier V 's cargo of fresh meat and Zaanstroom 's 300 long tons ( 340 short tons ) of fresh eggs were confiscated and unloaded by German personnel . The women and children were fed what one woman called " unpalatable black bread " before being sent to Ghent and on to Terneuzen in the Netherlands . The Dutch government requested explanation from Germany over the seizure of the neutral vessels and their cargoes . Batavier V was released by a German prize court in September . 
 Batavier V resumed Rotterdam – London passenger service after her release from German control at Zeebrugge . On 16 May 1916 , while outbound from London for Rotterdam , Batavier V struck a mine near the north buoy at Inner Gabbard . The mine had been recently planted by the German coastal minelaying submarine UC @-@ 6 . According to one witness , the ship 's decks were awash within three minutes of the explosion , which blew the rear cargo hold hatch and sent a great deal of cargo flying through the air . Batavier V sank within twenty minutes , taking with her three members of the crew and one American passenger . 
 = Nevado del Ruiz = 
 The Nevado del Ruiz ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ) , also known as La Mesa de Herveo ( English : Mesa of Herveo ( the nearby town ) ) , or <unk> in the language of the local pre @-@ Colombian indigenous people , is a volcano located on the border of the departments of Caldas and Tolima in Colombia , about 129 kilometers ( 80 mi ) west of the capital city Bogotá . It is a stratovolcano , composed of many layers of lava alternating with hardened volcanic ash and other pyroclastic rocks . Nevado del Ruiz has been active for about two million years , since the early Pleistocene or late Pliocene epoch , with three major eruptive periods . The current volcanic cone formed during the present eruptive period , which began 150 thousand years ago . 
 The volcano usually generates Plinian eruptions , which produce swift @-@ moving currents of hot gas and rock called pyroclastic flows . These eruptions often cause massive lahars ( mud and debris flows ) , which pose a threat to human life and the environment . The impact of such an eruption is increased as the hot gas and lava melt the mountain 's <unk> , adding large quantities of water to the flow . On November 13 , 1985 , a small eruption produced an enormous lahar that buried and destroyed the town of Armero in Tolima , causing an estimated 25 @,@ 000 deaths . This event later became known as the Armero tragedy — the deadliest lahar in recorded history . Similar but less deadly incidents occurred in 1595 and 1845 , consisting of a small explosive eruption followed by a large lahar . 
 The volcano is part of Los Nevados National Natural Park , which also contains several other volcanoes . The summit of Nevado del Ruiz is covered by large glaciers . The volcano continues to pose a threat to the nearby towns and villages , and it is estimated that up to 500 @,@ 000 people could be at risk from lahars from future eruptions . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Nevado del Ruiz , which lies about 129 kilometers ( 80 mi ) west of Bogotá , is part of the Andes mountain range . The volcano is part of the Ruiz – Tolima volcanic massif ( or Cordillera Central ) , a group of five ice @-@ capped volcanoes which includes the Tolima , Santa Isabel , <unk> and Machin volcanoes . The massif is located at the intersection of four faults , some of which still are active . 
 Nevado del Ruiz lies within the Pacific Ring of Fire , a region that encircles the Pacific Ocean and contains some of the world 's most active volcanoes . It is the third most northerly of the volcanoes lying in the North Volcanic Zone of the Andean Volcanic Belt , which contains 75 of the 204 Holocene @-@ age volcanoes in South America . The Andean Volcanic Belt is produced by the eastward subduction of the oceanic Nazca Plate beneath the South American continental plate . As is the case for many subduction @-@ zone volcanoes , Nevado del Ruiz can generate explosive Plinian eruptions with associated pyroclastic flows that can melt snow and glaciers near the summit , producing large and sometimes devastating lahars ( mud and debris flows ) . 
 Like many other Andean volcanoes , Nevado del Ruiz is a stratovolcano : a voluminous , roughly conical volcano consisting of many strata of hardened lava and tephra including volcanic ash . Its lavas are andesitic – dacitic in composition . The modern volcanic cone comprises five lava domes , all constructed within the caldera of an ancestral Ruiz volcano : Nevado El <unk> , Alto de la Laguna , La <unk> , Alto la <unk> , and Alto de <unk> . It covers an area of more than 200 square kilometers ( 77 sq mi ) , stretching 65 kilometers ( 40 mi ) from east to west . The mountain 's broad summit includes the Arenas crater , which is one kilometer in diameter and 240 meters ( 790 ft ) deep . 
 The summit of the volcano has steep slopes inclining from 20 to 30 degrees . At lower elevations , the slopes become less steep ; their inclination is about 10 degrees . From there on , foothills stretch almost to the edge of the Magdalena River north of the volcano and the Cauca River to the west . On the two major sides of the summit , headwalls show where past rock avalanches occurred . At times , ice on the summit has melted , generating devastating lahars , including the continent 's deadliest eruption in 1985 . On the volcano 's southwest flank is the pyroclastic cone La <unk> , which is not currently active , but may have erupted in historical times . 
 = = = Glaciers = = = 
 The summit of Nevado del Ruiz is covered by glaciers ( <unk> means " snow @-@ covered " in Spanish ) , which formed over many thousands of years , and have generally retreated since the last glacial maximum . From 28 @,@ 000 to 21 @,@ 000 years ago , glaciers occupied about 1 @,@ 500 square kilometers ( 600 sq mi ) of the Ruiz – Tolima massif . As late as 12 @,@ 000 years ago , when the ice sheets from the last glacial period were retreating , they still covered 800 square kilometers ( 300 sq mi ) . During the Little Ice Age , which lasted from about 1600 to 1900 CE , the ice cap covered approximately 100 square kilometers ( 40 sq mi ) . 
 Since then the glaciers have retreated further because of atmospheric warming . By 1959 , the massif 's glaciated area had dropped to 34 square kilometers ( 13 sq mi ) . Since the 1985 eruption , which destroyed about 10 % of the summit ice cover , the area of Nevado del Ruiz covered by glaciers has halved — from 17 to 21 square kilometers ( 6 @.@ 6 to 8 @.@ 1 sq mi ) just after the eruption to about 10 square kilometers ( 3 @.@ 9 sq mi ) in 2003 . The glaciers reached altitudes as low as 4 @,@ 500 meters ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) in 1985 but have now retreated to elevations of 4 @,@ 800 – 4 @,@ 900 meters ( 15 @,@ 700 – 16 @,@ 100 ft ) . 
 The ice cap is approximately 50 meters ( 160 ft ) thick on average . It is thickest in parts of the summit plateau and under the <unk> Glacier on the southwestern slopes , where it is as deep as 190 meters ( 620 ft ) . Glaciers on the northern and , to a lesser extent , the eastern slopes lost the most ice in the 1985 eruption , and therefore reach only up to 30 meters ( 100 ft ) deep . The deep ice covering the summit plateau may hide a caldera . Five domes ringing the summit plateau have emerged as the ice has retreated . 
 The meltwater from the glaciers drains primarily to the Cauca River and Magdalena River via the western and eastern flanks of the volcano , respectively . Runoff from these glaciers and those on the surrounding volcanoes is a source of fresh water for forty surrounding towns , and Colombian scientists and government officials are concerned about the towns ' water supply should the glaciers melt completely . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Nevado del Ruiz is generally poorly forested because of its high elevation , and its forest cover decreases with increasing elevation . At lower elevations , well @-@ developed mesic forests ( 20 – 35 meters / 66 – 110 ft high ) are present . Above these but below the tree line , parts of the volcano are covered with dwarf forests 3 – 8 meters ( 10 – 30 ft ) high . Above the tree line , in the <unk> zone , the vegetation is dominated by plants such as bunchgrass and <unk> . Regional vegetation consists of different families of woody plants , including Rubiaceae , Leguminosae , Melastomataceae , Lauraceae , and Moraceae . Flowers such as <unk> s.l. , <unk> , Poaceae , Asteraceae , <unk> , and Orchidaceae are also present in the region . 
 Animals living on the volcano include the mountain tapir and spectacled bear , both of which are designated as threatened . Other animals inhabiting the surrounding region include the rufous @-@ fronted parakeet , bearded <unk> , and Herveo plump toad . The volcano is home to 27 species of birds endemic to Colombia , with 14 of these species confined to the region around the volcano . 15 bird species in the area are considered threatened . 
 = = Los Nevados National Park = = 
 Nevado del Ruiz is one of several stratovolcanoes within Los Nevados National Natural Park , a national park located west of Bogotá in the centre of the Colombian Andes . The park is a popular tourist destination and contains several tourist shelters . The slopes of the volcano are used for winter sports , and nearby Lake <unk> offers trout fishing . A number of commercially operated spas can be found nearby . In 1868 – 1869 , German geologists Wilhelm Reiss and <unk> Stübel were the first to attempt to climb Ruiz . In 1936 , W. <unk> and Augusto <unk> @-@ <unk> made the first successful ascent , partly by ski ; they repeated the ascent in 1939 . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 The first eruptions of Nevado del Ruiz occurred about 1 @.@ 8 million years ago at the beginning of the Pleistocene epoch . Three primary eruption periods in the history of the massif have been identified : ancestral , older and present . During the ancestral period between one million to two million years ago , a complex of large stratovolcanoes was created . Between 1 @.@ 0 million and 0 @.@ 8 million years ago , they partially collapsed , forming large ( 5 – 10 km wide ) calderas . During the older period , which lasted from 0 @.@ 8 million to 0 @.@ 2 million years ago , a new complex of large stratovolcanoes developed ( including Older Ruiz , Tolima , <unk> , and Santa Isabel ) . Once again explosive summit calderas formed from 0 @.@ 2 million to 0 @.@ 15 million years ago . 
 The present period began about 150 @,@ 000 years ago and involved the development of the present volcanic edifice through the emplacement of lava domes made of andesite and dacite ( igneous rocks ) inside older calderas . During the past 11 @,@ 000 years , Nevado del Ruiz passed through at least 12 eruption stages , which included multiple slope failures ( rock avalanches ) , pyroclastic flows and lahars leading to partial destruction of the summit domes . During the past several thousand years , eruptions of the volcanoes in the Ruiz – Tolima massif have mostly been small , and the pyroclastic flow deposits have been much less voluminous than during the Pleistocene . Since the volcano 's earlier eruptions are not recorded , volcanologists have used tephrochronology to date them . 
 During recorded history , eruptions have consisted primarily of a central vent eruption ( in the caldera ) followed by an explosive eruption , then lahars . Ruiz 's earliest identified Holocene eruption was about 6660 BC , and further eruptions occurred in 1245 BC ± 150 years ( dated through radiocarbon dating ) , about 850 BC , 200 BC ± 100 years , 350 AD ± 300 years , 675 AD ± 50 years , in 1350 , 1541 ( perhaps ) , 1570 , 1595 , 1623 , 1805 , 1826 , 1828 ( perhaps ) , [ b ] 1829 , 1831 , 1833 ( perhaps ) , [ b ] 1845 , 1916 , December 1984 – March 1985 , September 1985 – July 1991 , and possibly in April 1994 . [ b ] Many of these eruptions involved a central vent eruption , a flank vent eruption , and a phreatic ( steam ) explosion . Ruiz is the second @-@ most active volcano in Colombia after Galeras . 
 = = = 1595 lahar = = = 
 On the morning of March 12 , 1595 , Nevado del Ruiz erupted . The episode consisted of three Plinian eruptions , which were heard up to 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) from the summit of the volcano . A large amount of ash was ejected , which completely darkened the surrounding area . The volcano also erupted lapilli ( a form of tephra ) and pumice bombs . In total , the eruption produced 0 @.@ 16 km3 of tephra . The eruption was preceded by a large precursor earthquake three days before . The eruption caused lahars , which traveled down the valleys of the nearby Gualí and Lagunillas rivers , clogging up the water , killing fish and destroying vegetation . More than 600 people died as a result of the lahar . The 1595 eruption was the last major eruption of Nevado del Ruiz before 1985 . The 1595 and 1985 eruptions were similar in many respects , including in the chemical composition of the erupted material . 
 = = = 1845 lahar = = = 
 On the morning of February 19 , 1845 , a large earthquake resulted in a substantial mudflow . This mudflow flowed down the valley of the Lagunillas River for approximately 70 kilometers ( 43 mi ) , spilling out of the river channel and killing much of the local population . After reaching an alluvial fan , the mudflow split into two branches . The larger portion of it joined the Lagunillas River and flowed into the nearby Magdalena River , while the smaller portion was diverted by hills in front of Lagunillas Canyon , turned 90 degrees to the north until it reached the Sabandija River , and then flowed east with the Sabandija River , until it rejoined the other branch of the mudflow at the junction of the Sabandija and the Magdalena . It is estimated that 1000 people were killed in the mudflows . 
 = = = Eruption ( 1985 ) = = = 
 Beginning November 1984 , geologists observed an increasing level of seismic activity near Nevado del Ruiz . Other signs of a forthcoming eruption included increased fumarole activity , deposition of sulfur on the summit of the volcano , and small phreatic eruptions . In the latter , hot magma came in contact with water , resulting in explosions as the water was almost instantly turned into steam . The most notable of these events was an ash ejection on September 11 , 1985 . The activity of the volcano decreased in October 1985 . The most likely explanation of the events is that new magma rose into the volcanic edifice before September 1985 . 
 An Italian volcanological mission analyzed gas samples from fumaroles along the Arenas crater floor and proved them to be a mixture of carbon dioxide and sulfur dioxide , indicating a direct release of magma into the surface environment . The mission 's report , delivered on October 22 , 1985 , judged the risk of lahars to be very high . The report proposed various simple preparedness techniques to local authorities . 
 In November 1985 , volcanic activity once again increased as magma neared the surface . The volcano began releasing increasing quantities of gases rich in sulfur dioxide and elementary sulfur . The water content of the fumaroles ' gases decreased , and water springs in the vicinity of Nevado del Ruiz became enriched in magnesium , calcium and potassium , which were leached from the magma . The thermodynamic equilibration ( stationary heat energy ) temperatures , corresponding to the chemical composition of the discharged gases , were from 200 ° C ( 400 ° F ) to 600 ° C ( 1 @,@ 000 ° F ) . The extensive degassing of the magma caused pressure to build up inside the volcano , which eventually resulted in the explosive eruption . 
 = = = = Eruption and lahars = = = = 
 At 3 : 06 pm , on November 13 , 1985 , Nevado del Ruiz began to erupt , ejecting dacitic tephra more than 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) into the atmosphere . The total mass of the erupted material ( including magma ) was 35 million tonnes — only 3 % of the amount that erupted from Mount St. Helens in 1980 . The eruption reached a value of 3 on the Volcanic Explosivity Index . The mass of the ejected sulfur dioxide was about 700 @,@ 000 tonnes , or about 2 % of the mass of the erupted solid material , making the eruption atypically sulfur @-@ rich . 
 The eruption produced pyroclastic flows that melted summit glaciers and snow , generating four thick lahars that raced down river valleys on the volcano 's flanks . It also destroyed a small lake that was observed in Arenas crater several months before the eruption . Water in such volcanic lakes tends to be extremely salty and contain dissolved volcanic gases . The lake 's hot , acidic water significantly accelerated the melting of the ice ; this effect was confirmed by the large amounts of sulfates and chlorides found in the lahar flow . 
 The lahars , formed of water , ice , pumice , and other rocks , mixed with clay as they travelled down the volcano 's flanks . They ran down the volcano 's sides at an average speed of 60 km per hour , eroding soil , dislodging rock , and destroying vegetation . After descending thousands of meters down the side of the volcano , the lahars were directed into all of the six river valleys leading from the volcano . While in the river valleys , the lahars grew to almost 4 times their original volume . In the Gualí River , a lahar reached a maximum width of 50 meters ( 200 ft ) . 
 One of the lahars virtually erased the small town of Armero in Tolima , which lay in the <unk> River valley . Only one quarter of its 28 @,@ 700 inhabitants survived . The second lahar , which descended through the valley of Chinchiná River , killed about 1 @,@ 800 people and destroyed about 400 homes in the town of Chinchiná , in the department of Caldas . In total , over 23 @,@ 000 people were killed and approximately 5 @,@ 000 were injured . More than 5 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed . The Armero tragedy , as the event came to be known , was the second @-@ deadliest volcanic disaster in the 20th century , being surpassed only by the 1902 eruption of Mount Pelée , and is the fourth @-@ deadliest volcanic eruption in recorded history . It is also the deadliest known lahar , and Colombia 's worst natural disaster . 
 The loss of life during the 1985 eruption was due partly to the fact that scientists did not know precisely when the eruption would occur , and the authorities would not take costly preventative measures without clear warnings of imminent danger . Because the volcano 's last substantial eruption occurred 140 years ago , it was also hard for many to accept the danger the volcano presented ; locals even called it the " Sleeping Lion " . Hazard maps showing Armero would be completely flooded after an eruption were distributed more than a month before the eruption , but the Colombian Congress criticized the scientific and civil defense agencies for scaremongering . Local authorities failed to alert people to the seriousness of the situation , with Armero 's mayor and a priest both reassuring the populace after an ash eruption on the afternoon of November 13 and the consequent ashfall early that evening . Another factor was the storm that hit that evening , causing electrical outages and hindering communications . Civil defense officials from four nearby towns tried to warn Armero the lahar was approaching in the hour or so before it reached Armero , but failed to make radio contact . 
 Scientists later looked back to the hours before the eruption and noticed that several long @-@ period earthquakes , which start out strong and then slowly die out , had occurred in the final hours before the eruption . Volcanologist Bernard Chouet said that , " the volcano was screaming ' I 'm about to explode ' " , but the scientists who were studying the volcano at the time of the eruption were not able to read this signal . 
 = = Current threats and preparedness = = 
 The volcano continues to pose a serious threat to nearby towns and villages . The most likely hazard is small @-@ volume eruptions , which might destabilize glaciers and trigger lahars . Despite the significant retrenchment of the volcano 's glaciers , the volume of ice atop Nevado del Ruiz and other volcanoes in the Ruiz – Tolima massif remains large . Melting merely 10 % of the ice would produce mudflows with a volume of up to 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 70 @,@ 629 @,@ 333 cu ft ) — similar to the mudflow that destroyed Armero in 1985 . Such lahars can travel up to 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) along river valleys in a matter of few hours . Estimates show that up to 500 @,@ 000 people living in the Combeima , Chinchiná , Coello @-@ Toche , and Guali valleys are in danger , and 100 @,@ 000 of these are considered to be at high risk . Lahars poses a threat to nearby towns of Honda , Mariquita , <unk> , Chinchiná , Herveo , Villa Hermosa , <unk> and La Dorada . Although small eruptions are more likely , the two million @-@ year eruptive history of the Ruiz – Tolima massif includes numerous large eruptions , indicating that the threat of a large eruption cannot be ignored . A large eruption would have more widespread effects , including the potential closure of Bogotá 's airport due to ashfall . 
 As the Armero tragedy was exacerbated by the lack of early warnings , unwise land use , and the unpreparedness of nearby communities , the government of Colombia created a special program ( Oficina Nacional para la <unk> de Desastres , 1987 ) to prevent such incidents in the future . All Colombian cities were directed to promote prevention planning in order to mitigate the consequences of natural disasters , and evacuations due to volcanic hazards have been carried out . About 2 @,@ 300 people living along five nearby rivers were evacuated when Nevado del Ruiz erupted again in 1989 . When another Colombian volcano , the Nevado del <unk> , erupted in April 2008 , thousands of people were evacuated because volcanologists worried that the eruption could be another " Nevado del Ruiz " . 
 In 2006 , heavy rains on Ruiz sent a mudslide down the Chinchiná River , killing nine youths aged 12 – 19 on a scouting expedition near the volcano . 
 = = = Recent activity = = = 
 During September and October 2010 , INGEOMINAS ( Colombian Institute of Mining and Geology ) noted gradual increases in seismic activity near the Arenas crater . <unk> odors and phreatic eruptions reported at Nevado del Ruiz prompted an alert level of Yellow on October 1 . Chemical analysis of the volcano demonstrated <unk> changes and geochemical alterations . Over the next four months a smattering of long @-@ period earthquakes , considered pseudo @-@ Tornillo events , raised worries that the volcano might erupt . In 2010 , tilt increased , and on average 890 volcanic tremors were recorded monthly , roughly eight times as many as had been recorded from 2009 – 2010 . 2010 marked the beginning of increases in sulfur dioxide emissions accompanying small eruptions at the volcano , which both peaked in February 2012 correspondent to a dramatic increase in earthquakes . 
 Scientists flying over the volcano on March 8 , 2012 noted fresh ash deposits on the east flank of the volcano near the crater , likely from an phreatic eruption on February 22 . Later that day , a small ash plume erupted from the crater ; by March 13 , scientists detected ash deposits at the head of the Gualí River . After seismicity continued to increase , the alert level was raised to Orange , and in April Nevados National Natural Park authority closed the reserve , fearing lahars and ashfall hazards . The sudden activity peak in March did not culminate in a major eruption , and activity declined enough that the alert level was lowered to Yellow on May 3 . On May 29 , seismicity rapidly increased , and the alert level was restored to Orange because ash fell into more than 20 nearby communities . Over the next few months ash fell frequently until earthquakes increased again in June . Because of the severity of these tremors , evacuations were ordered by the Emergency Committee of Caldas on news media for 300 – 1500 people near the volcano . The alert level was raised to Red , indicating an imminent major volcanic event , and an eruption 7 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) in diameter took place on July 2 , 2012 , continuing intermittently until the end of August . Ash plumes and sulfur dioxide emissions recurred until January 2013 . 
 = Christopher Smart = 
 Christopher Smart ( 11 April 1722 – 21 May 1771 ) , also known as " Kit Smart " , " Kitty Smart " , and " Jack Smart " , was an English poet . 
 He was a major contributor to two popular magazines and a friend to influential cultural icons like Samuel Johnson and Henry Fielding . Smart , a high church Anglican , was widely known throughout London . 
 Smart was infamous as the pseudonymous midwife " Mrs. Mary Midnight " and widespread accounts of his father @-@ in @-@ law , John Newbery , locking him away in a mental asylum for many years over Smart 's supposed religious " mania " . Even after Smart 's eventual release , a negative reputation continued to pursue him as he was known for incurring more debt than he could repay ; this ultimately led to his confinement in debtors ' prison until his death . 
 Smart 's two most widely known works are A Song to David and Jubilate Agno , both at least partly written during his confinement in asylum . However , Jubilate Agno was not published until 1939 and A Song to David received mixed reviews until the 19th century . To his contemporaries , Smart was known mainly for his many contributions in the journals The Midwife and The Student , along with his famous Seaton Prize poems and his mock epic The Hilliad . Although he is primarily recognised as a religious poet , his poetry includes various other themes , such as his theories on nature and his promotion of English nationalism . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Christopher Smart was born in Shipbourne in Kent , England on the Fairlawn estate of William , Viscount Vane , younger son of Lord Barnard of Barnard Castle . He was , according to his nephew , " of a delicate constitution having been born earlier than the natural period " . He was baptised in Wrotham parish on 11 May 1722 . Smart 's father was Peter Smart , steward or bailiff of <unk> . His mother was Winifred Smart of the Griffiths family of Radnorshire , Wales . 
 Winifred was born c 1691 , given that when she died in 1766 she was 75 years of age : " 15 May 1766 <unk> : <unk> , Widow Surname : Smart Age : 75 Place : St John in Thanet ( Margate ) , St John the Baptist County : Kent Archive Reference : U3 / 140 / 1 / 3 " This was near Margate where she had been living " Dr. John Hawkesworth visited him ( Christopher Smart ) in October 1764 , and found him silently hostile towards his mother , Winifred Smart , and his sister , Margaret Hunter , at Margate " ( The Poetry of Christopher Smart by Moira Dearnley ) . 
 Winifred 's parentage " Of the Griffiths family of Radnorshire " has not been unequivocally established before . However , she now appears to have been the daughter of a <unk> Griffiths and the sister of Jeremiah Griffith <unk> @-@ <unk> ; <unk> Inner Temple admission records ; " First Name : Jeremiah Last Name : Griffith Occupation Given : gentleman Admission Date : 12 / 02 / 1713 Call Date : 18 / 06 / 1716 Father 's Details Name : <unk> Griffith Occupation : gentleman Father / Son Relationship : son and heir apparent Address : <unk> Radnorshire Notes : Referred to as Jeremy Griffith in the Bar Book . Father 's address described as in " Parish of <unk> Wales " . 
 She was also of the Inner Temple at her marriage , where she presumably had lodged with her brother before he was called to the Bar . " Winifred Griffith of The Inner Temple , London , Spinster , Spouse : Peter Smart of Fair <unk> , Kent , Batchelor ; source Parish Register St Benet Paul ´ s Wharf City of London Marriage Date : 7 Apr 1716 " 
 Jeremiah Griffith , Christopher Smart 's uncle , is recorded as having married twice . First Marriage : 19 May 1715 Jeremiah Griffith of the Inner Temple , London , Bach . , and Sarah <unk> of St Andrew , Holborn , <unk> . , S ( <unk> ) . St Benet Pauls Wharf . His second marriage ; Jeremiah Griffith Marriage Date : 17 Jan 1746 Place : St James , Piccadilly , Middlesex Spouse 's Name : Charlotte Walker ( widow and executrix of John Walker DD deceased , she was natural daughter of Sheffield Duke of Buckingham and Francis Lambert , wife of Hon Oliver Lambert ( 2nd son of Charles [ Lambert ] , 3rd Earl of Cavan ) . Jeremy died <unk> Copy of the will of Jeremiah Griffiths of Downton , New Radnor Esq . , 12 Sep 1747 probate 17 May 1759 is held at Powys <unk> ref RX / 11 / 400 . 
 Before giving birth to Christopher , Winifred had two daughters , Margaret and Mary Anne . 
 During Smart 's younger years , <unk> was the residence of Christopher Vane , 1st Baron Barnard and Lady Barnard , who bequeathed £ 200 to Smart . He is supposed to have received so much money due to his father 's closeness to the Vane family , his being named after Christopher Vane , and the young boy was considered " the pride of Fairlawn " . However , there is some controversy over the exact nature of this inheritance ; while some cynically disagree with the reasons for his inheritance , no other explanation has been specified . In 1726 , three years after Christopher Vane died , Peter Smart purchased Hall @-@ Place in East Barming , which included a mansion house , fields , orchards , gardens , and woodland , a property that was influential throughout Smart 's later life . From the age of four until eleven , he spent much time around the farms , but did not participate , leading to speculations that he suffered from asthma attacks . However , not all scholars agree that he was a " sickly youth " . The only written record of events during his childhood comes from his writing of a short poem , at the age of four , in which he challenges a rival to the affections of a twelve @-@ year @-@ old girl . 
 While at Hall @-@ Place , Smart was sent to the local Maidstone Grammar School where he was taught by Charles Walwyn , a scholar from Eton College who had received an MA from King 's College , Cambridge in 1696 . It was here that Smart received an intensive education in Latin and Greek . He did not complete his education at Maidstone however , as his father died on 3 February 1733 , and his mother took Smart and his siblings to live near relatives in Durham after selling off a large portion of the estate to pay off Peter Smart 's debts . 
 Smart then attended Durham School , where the Reverend Mr. Richard <unk> was headmaster ; it is not known whether he lived with his uncle , John Smart , or with a school master . He spent vacations at Raby Castle , which was owned by Henry Vane , 1st Earl of Darlington , the grandson of Christopher Vane . Henry Vane and his wife Grace , sister to William and Henrietta Fitzroy the Duke and Duchess of Cleveland , had four children , Henry , Frederick , Anne , and Mary . They were only a few years younger than Smart and became playmates , with Anne and Henry " pairing off " with Christopher and his sister Margaret respectively . Although nothing resulted from the match , Anne has been traditionally described as being his " first love " . During his time with the Vane family , Smart dedicated many poems to Henrietta , the Duchess of Cleveland . It was his closeness with the Vane family along with his skill for learning that encouraged Henrietta to allow him a pension of 40 pounds yearly , continued by her husband after her death in 1742 . This allowed Smart to attend Pembroke College , Cambridge . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Smart was admitted to Pembroke College on 20 October 1739 as a sizar under Leonard Addison . Although it is unclear why he chose Pembroke College , Addison was named in Peter Smart 's trust deed ( 1729 ) . As a sizar , he occasionally had to wait on the " Fellows ' table " and perform other menial tasks . On 12 July 1740 , he was awarded the " Dr. Watt 's Foundation scholarship " , which granted him six pounds a year until he gained a Bachelor of Arts degree . In addition to this income , he was also granted four pounds a year for scholarship . Although he was successful academically , he began to run up debt in order to pay for his extravagant lifestyle while at the college . 
 During his time at Pembroke , Smart borrowed numerous books spanning the fields of literature , religion , and science . These works helped when he wrote the three " Tripos Verse " at the end of each year . These poems were written in Latin and they , along with his other Latin poems like his translation of Alexander Pope 's Ode on St. Cecilia 's Day , led to him being awarded the " Craven scholarship for classics " on 10 June 1742 , which paid ₤ 25 a year for 14 years . These scholarships , combined with his becoming a fellow in 1743 , justified Smart calling himself " Scholar of the University " . 
 In 1743 , Smart pushed his translation of Pope 's Ode on St. Cecilia 's Day as Carmen Cl . <unk> Pope in S. <unk> Latine <unk> and paid for the publication himself . With this translation , he wanted to win Pope 's favour and translate Pope 's Essay on Man , but Pope rejected the idea and , after a lettered response and a possible meeting between the two , Smart translated Pope 's An Essay on Criticism ( De Arte Critica ) instead . The initial letter sent from Pope recommending the future translation was prized by Smart . In response to this letter and his budding relationship with Pope , the Pembroke Fellows honoured him with a portrait showing him holding the letter from Pope and allowed him to write a poem in celebration of Jubilee of Pembroke 's 400th year in 1744 . 
 In October 1745 , Smart was elected Praelector of Philosophy , which paid one pound a year , and made one of three Keepers of the Common Chest . The next year , on 11 February 1746 , he became a Master of Arts and was later elected on 10 October 1746 , to Praelector of Philosophy , Praelector of Rhetoric , and Keeper of the Common Chest . However , he had run up more debt of over twice his annual income , and he was not re @-@ elected in 1747 to the <unk> and was denied his control over the Common Chest accounts . However , he was made a " Preacher before the Mayor of Cambridge " at the college under the title " <unk> Coram <unk> <unk> " , and his modest living during this year allowed him to regain <unk> in Philosophy along with being made a catechist , which suggests that he was ordained in the Anglican church . 
 In 1746 , Smart became tutor to John Blake Delaval , but this was abruptly cancelled and Delaval eventually removed from Pembroke over various broken rules and mischief . After recovering from this , Smart returned to studying . In April 1747 , a comedy he wrote just months before , A Trip to Cambridge , or The Grateful Fair , was performed in Pembroke College Hall , with many parts , including female roles , played by Smart himself . The prologue was printed in The Cambridge Journal Weekly Flying @-@ Post , which claimed that the play received " Universal Applause " . 
 During his final years at Pembroke , Smart was writing and publishing many poems . On 9 January 1748 , there were three proposals for " A Collection of Original Poems , By Christopher Smart , M.A. , Fellow of Pembroke Hall , in the University of Cambridge " that would include " The Hop Garden " , " The Judgment of Midas , a Masque " , his odes , his translations into Latin , and some original Latin poems . Thomas Gray , on 17 March 1747 , referred to this work as Smart 's " Collection of Odes " . This collection was not printed in 1748 but was delayed until 1752 , and was re @-@ titled Poems on Several Occasions . 
 Between 1740 and 1746 , he was introduced to Harriot Pratt , and he began to write poetry about her . By 1749 , he was in love with her and wrote to his friend Charles Burney ( father of Fanny Burney ) , " I am situated within a mile of my <unk> & Love has <unk> Friendship of her just dues ... There was a great musical crash at Cambridge , which was greatly admired , but I was not there , being much better pleased with hearing my <unk> on her <unk> & organ at her ancient mansion " , suggesting that he was living permanently in Market Downham , London . Although he wrote many poems dedicated to Harriot , his poem " The Lass with the Golden Locks " ( 1752 ) claims that he was done with both Harriot , Polly , and other women . The " lass with the golden locks " who replaced Smart 's previous fancies was Anna Maria Carnan . Anna would be Smart 's future wife and she was the stepdaughter of John Newbery , Smart 's future publisher . 
 = = = London = = = 
 Although Smart seemed to turn his life around at Pembroke , he slowly abandoned the college for London . During 1749 , Smart listed himself on Pembroke 's " Liber <unk> " and would occasionally return to Pembroke throughout 1749 and 1750 . Because of his relationship with those at Pembroke , he was allowed to keep his name in the college 's records , which allowed him to participate and be charged as a member of the college . By 1750 he was living near St. James 's Park and was busy familiarising himself with Grub Street . It was this year that Smart developed a business relationship with John Newbery . It is unknown how Smart and Newbery met , but Smart 's daughter claimed Charles Burney introduced the two . Newbery was looking for a contributory to his The Midwife and The Student magazines , and it is possible that Smart 's winning of Cambridge 's " Seatonian Prize " on 25 March 1750 brought his poetic abilities to Newbery 's attention . 
 The " Seatonian Prize " was a contest for one English poem each year on the topic of " the <unk> or Attributes of the Supreme Being " and the prize would be the " Rent of the [ <unk> , Northamptonshire ] estate " It was established by the will of Thomas Seaton , an " Anglican divine and hymn writer " . Smart wrote in the " poetical essay " tradition using Miltonic blank verse . In 1750 , the poem he won the prize with was On the Eternity of the Supreme Being . The prize was only worth 17 pounds each year before 7 pounds were deducted for the publication of the poem . However , after the publication of the poem , Smart became a regular contributor in The Student . 
 The Student , before Smart 's work , was a serious magazine that included a few poems and critical essays . However , once he joined and began writing under many pseudonyms , the magazine became filled with satire , parody , and humorous essays and poems . Along with him composing 15 of the essays and the majority of the poems published in the two volumes of the magazine , he decided to append three of The Inspector , a " humorous news report " , to the second of the volumes . These reports included many " puff pieces " promoting Smart 's works along with various stories written by his friends and associates , including the famous writers / poets Henry Fielding , Samuel Johnson , William Collins , and Tobias Smollett . However , this was not the only important publication produced by him during this time . 
 = = = The Midwife = = = 
 The Midwife , first published on 16 October 1751 and lasting until April 1753 , was produced primarily by Smart while he worked on The Student . This magazine was popular enough to be published in four editions . To hide his identity for practical and humorous reasons , he adopted the persona of a midwife , also known as a " Mrs. Midwife " in slang , and called this persona " Mrs. Mary Midnight " . 
 When his poem " Night Piece " was attacked by William Kenrick in <unk> , or Poetical Ordinary , possibly out of a prearranged publicity stunt , Smart used The Midwife in December , 1750 , to attack back at Kenrick and promised an Old Woman 's Dunciad to be written against the other poet . However , Kenrick beat Smart to the use of the title and printed his own in January , 1751 . This feud lasted as attacks published in a few issues of The Midwife , but it soon died out when Smart focused his attention to writing a prologue and epilogue for a production of Othello and using the magazine to promote it . 
 His attention slowly shifted away from The Midwife when he wrote for , and won , the " Seatonian Prize " for his On the <unk> of the Supreme Being and when he began working with Newbery 's children 's magazine , The Lilliputian Magazine . However , Smart returned to this character full force when he established The Old Woman 's Oratory ; or Henley in Petticoats in December 1751 . The Oratory included Smart playing as Mrs. Midnight , various songs and dances , animal acts , and " miscellany " acts . The Oratory was successful , and was completely redone on 21 January 1752 . However , not everyone enjoyed the show , and Horace Walpole described the performance as " the lowest buffoonery in the world even to me who am used to my uncle Horace . " Late in 1752 , Smart finished and published a collection of his works as Poems on Several Occasions , which resulted in the end of the Oratory and The Midwife . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In 1752 , Christopher Smart was slowly dragged into a large " paper war " that involved many of London 's writers . After the publication of Poems on Several Occasions , including The Hop @-@ Garden , in June 1752 , John Hill launched a major attack upon Smart 's poetry . Smart responded with his mock @-@ epic , The Hilliad . Before the release of Smart 's poem , Hill was engaged in a large literary battle between various members of Grub Street 's and London 's writing community , especially Henry Fielding . This battle may have been for publicity only and lasted over many months before Smart involved himself . However , even with such a late entry , his Hilliad was the " loudest broadside " of the war . 
 Smart was incurring many debts , and started publishing as much as possible during this time to support his family ; he was married to Anna Maria Carnan around mid @-@ 1752 , and in 1754 already had two daughters , Marianne ( 3 May 1753 ) and Elizabeth Anne ( 27 October 1754 ) . As a married man , he could no longer stay enrolled at Pembroke and collect his scholarship money when his marriage and children were made apparent to the heads of the college . Newbery allowed Smart , along with his wife and their children , to live at Canonbury House , Islington . Although Newbery had a strong reputation for charity , he was determined to have complete control over his writers . It is likely that such an attitude combined with monetary problems led to a rift forming between the two in 1753 . 
 Between 1753 and 1755 , Smart published or republished at least 79 works . However , even if he received money from each of these publications , these publications were unable to provide enough of an income to support a family , especially to his standard of living . While he was producing a poem each year for the Seatonian Prize , this amounted to very little of his writing ; he was forced into a life of " hack work " , which was described by his contemporary , Arthur Murphy , as " a bookseller is his only friend , but for that bookseller , however liberal , he must toil and drudge . " In December of 1755 , he finished The Works of Horace , Translated Literally into English Prose , a translation of Horace , which was widely used but brought him little profit . 
 He signed a 99 @-@ year contract in November 1755 to produce a weekly paper entitled The Universal Visitor or Monthly <unk> for Thomas Gardner and Edmund Allen . However , the strain of publishing caused Smart to suffer from a fit , and he was unable to keep up with the publishing of the paper . Allen was a friend of Samuel Johnson , and it was Samuel Johnson , along with many other friends of Smart , who contributed to the magazine in order to help Smart keep up with his contract . In March 1756 , Newbery published without Smart 's authority Smart 's final " Seatonian Prize " poem , On the Goodness of the Supreme Being , and later , on 5 June , Newbery published without Smart 's authority Smart 's Hymn to the Supreme Being , a poem which thanked God for recovery over an illness of some kind , possibly a " disturbed mental state " . The Hymn to the Supreme Being marks the time in Smart 's life after the mysterious " fit " was resolved and the beginning of Smart 's obsession with religion and his praying " without ceasing " . 
 = = = Asylum confinement = = = 
 A " Commission of Lunacy " was taken out against Smart , and he was admitted to St Luke 's Hospital for Lunatics on 6 May 1757 as a " <unk> Patient " . It is possible that Smart was confined by Newbery over old debts and a poor relationship between the two ; Newbery had previously mocked Smart and his immorality in his A Collection of Pretty Poems for the Amusement of Children six Foot High . Regardless of the exact reasons , there is evidence suggesting that Newbery 's admittance of Smart into the mental asylum was not based on " madness " . However , there is also evidence that an incident of some kind took place in St. James 's Park in which Smart started to pray loudly in public until he had " routed all the company " ( Jubilate Agno <unk> ) . 
 It is not known what exactly happened during his confinement , but Smart did work on two of his most famous poems , Jubilate Agno and A Song to David . What is known is that he may have been in a private madhouse before St Luke 's and that he was later moved from St Luke 's to Mr. Potter 's asylum until his release . At St Luke 's , he transitioned from being " curable " to " incurable " , and was moved to Mr. Potter 's asylum for monetary reasons . During this time , Anna left and took the children with her to Ireland . His isolation led him into writing religious poetry , although he abandoned the traditional genres of the 18th century that marked his earlier poetry when he wrote Jubilate Agno . Although it is debated as to whether his turning inward to examine himself in his poetry represents an evangelical type of Christianity , his poetry during his isolation does show a desire for " unmediated revelation " . There is an " inner light " that serves as a focal point for Smart and his poems written during this time , and that inner light connects him to the Christian God . 
 Smart was left alone , except for his cat Jeoffrey and the occasional <unk> . It is very possible that he felt " homeless " during this time and surely felt that he was in a " limbo ... between public and private space " . In London , only a few of his works were still being published . However , not everyone viewed Smart 's " madness " as problematic , and Johnson defended him , sometimes seriously and sometimes comically , many times . A century later , Robert Browning later remarked that A Song to David was great because Smart was mad , and that the poem allowed him to rank alongside of Milton and Keats . It is no wonder that a few of his loyal friends did come to Mr. Potter 's and free him . 
 Little is known as to how and why Smart was released from asylum , but Elizabeth , his daughter , claimed : " He grew better , and some misjudging friends who misconstrued Mr Newbery 's great kindness in placing him under necessary & salutary restriction which might possibly have eventually wrought a cure , invited him to dinner and he returned to his confinement no more . " Although this may be a misstatement of the events , Smart did leave the asylum on 30 January 1763 . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 A Song to David was printed on 6 April 1763 along with a proposal for a new translation of the Psalms . The poem was received harshly , which was possibly just thinly veiled personal attacks over Smart being freed from the asylum just weeks before . However , Kenrick , Smart 's former rival , praised the poem in one of his own printed on 25 May 1763 . Also , John Lockman followed on 21 June 1763 , with his own poem in praise of Smart 's and Samuel Boyce followed this on 15 July 1763 with another . Along with this support , Smart responded to his critics at the Critical Review ; in regards to Smart 's response , the Critical Review claimed that they would " say no more of Mr. Smart " . 
 After A Song to David , he tried to publish a collection of his Psalms translations , and Newbery sought to ruin him by hiring James Merrick to produce his own translations . Newbery then hired Smart 's new publisher , James Fletcher , which in turn forced Smart to find a new publisher , delaying the printing of his Psalms . Finally , on 12 August 1765 , he printed A Translation of the Psalms of David , which included Hymns and Spiritual Songs and a second edition of A Song to David . This work was criticised by Tobias Smollett who was working with Newbery at the time , and Newbery 's edition by Merrick was constantly compared with Smart 's . However , modern criticism has received Smart 's version in a more favourable light . While working on this project , he was also working on a translation of the Phaedrus and a verse translation of Horace . His verse Horace was published in July 1767 including a preface in which he attacked Newbery , but the attack was in vain because Newbery died soon after . 
 On 20 April 1770 , Smart was arrested for debt . On 11 January 1771 , he was tried by Lord Mansfield , the gentleman who originally introduced Smart to Alexander Pope , and he was soon recommended to the King 's Bench Prison . Although he was in prison , Charles Burney purchased the " Rules " ( allowing him some freedom ) , and Smart 's final weeks may have been peaceful although pathetic . In his final letter , Smart begged for money from Rev. Mr. Jackson , saying : " Being upon recovery from a fit of illness , and having nothing to eat , I beg you to send me two or three shillings which ( God willing ) I will return , with many thanks , in two or three days . " On 20 May 1771 , Smart died from either liver failure or pneumonia shortly after completing his final work , Hymns , for the Amusement of Children . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In response to his uncle 's death , Christopher Hunter wrote , " I trust he is now at peace ; it was not his portion here . " Fanny Burney , in her journal , wrote : 
 But now I speak of authors , let me pay the small tribute of regret and concern due to the memory of poor Mr. Smart , who died lately in the King 's Bench Prison ; a man by nature endowed with talents , wit , and vivacity , in an eminent degree ; and whose unhappy loss of his sense was a public as well as private misfortune . I never knew him in his glory , but ever respected him in his decline , from the fine proofs he had left of his better day , and from the account I have heard of his youth from my father , who was then his intimate companion ; as , of late years , he has been his most active and generous friend , having raised a kind of fund for his relief , though he was ever in distress . His intellects , so cruelly impaired , I doubt not , affected his whole conduct . 
 On 22 May 1771 , a jury of twelve fellow inmates of the King 's Bench Prison declared that Smart " upon the Twentieth day of May Instant died a Natural Death within the Rules of the Prison . " He was buried on 26 May in St Paul 's Covent Garden . 
 = = Literary themes and styles = = 
 Christopher Smart received occasional mentions by critics and scholars after his death , especially by Robert Browning , but analysis and commentary on his works increased dramatically with the " discovery " of Jubilate Agno in 1939 . Many recent critics approach Smart from a religious perspective ( Neil Curry , Harriet Guest , Clement Hawes , Chris Mounsey ) . However , some also favour a psychology / sexual analysis of his works ( Lance Bertelsen , <unk> Hawes , Alan Liu ) . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Although Smart wrote the " Seatonian Prize " poems early on , there is a contrast between the mimicked Miltonic blank verse and the intense exploration of religion found in his later works . His first " Seatonian Prize " poem , On the Eternity of the Supreme Being is part of two traditional types of religious writing : " authoritative discourse of religious poetry " and " tentative and self @-@ critical discourse of an apparently more personal devotion " In connecting the two , he redefines " the role of the religious poet . " By establishing a debate between these two forms , Harriet Guest claims that Smart creates " a poetic space which allows the poet to make provisional , even questionable statements " , which are important to his later works . To Guest , Smart , in his religious poems , " is not concerned to offer instruction in Christian conduct . " Besides the greater theological debate , the poems also are the origins of Smart 's belief that all of creation is constantly praising God , and that a poet must " give voice to mute nature 's praise of God . " 
 Jubilate Agno reflects an abandonment of traditional poetic structures in order to explore complex religious thought . His " Let " verses join creation together as he seemingly writes his own version of Biblical poetry . Smart , in Jubilate Agno , plays on words and the meaning behind words in order to participate with the divine that exists within language . Although the original manuscript divided the " Let " and " For " verses onto opposing sides of the manuscript , Karina Williams claims that " Dr W. H. Bond then discovered that some of the LET and FOR folios were numbered and dated concurrently , and that these chronologically parallel texts were further connected by verbal links . " This justified her combing the two sides to follow each other . Using this as a model , Guest claims that the " For " verses explore religion with a " personal tone " and the " Let " are " unambiguous " and deal with public matters . Jeanne Walker goes further than Guest and claims that the " Let " and " For " sections are united with the Hebrew tradition and " iterate both present and future simultaneously , that is , they redeem time . " 
 Words and language connect the poet to divine revelation , and God is the " great poet " who used language in order to create the universe . Through words and language , Smart attempted to capture the creative power of those words . By relying on the power of words , Smart is , according to Clement Hawes , subverting " Anglican control over religious functions and services . " In essence , Smart 's approach to religion in Jubilate Agno is comparable to John Wesley 's theological dictum and to the writings of John Perro and William Bowling . He also creates his own natural philosophy and criticises science , like that established by Isaac Newton , for their ignoring " the glory of Almighty God . " 
 To Smart , each piece of matter is alive because it is connected to God , and matter cannot be described in a cold manner that disconnects it from this reality . However , Smart accomplished his new science by relying on Newtonian empiricism . As part of his desire to bring back the divine language to poetry and science , he creates an " Ark of Salvation " in order to describe a prophetic and apocalyptic future which emphasises the importance of Christ and England . Along with being prophetic , the poem itself is modelled after the canticles and follows the form of the Benedicite . The Benedicite is not the only model however , and there is a strong link between Jubilate Agno and the psalm tradition . 
 Smart 's A Song to David is an attempt to bridge poetry written by humans and Biblical poetry . The Biblical David plays an important role in this poem just as he played an important role in Jubilate Agno However , David in Jubilate Agno is an image of the creative power of poetry whereas he becomes a fully realised model of the religious poet . By focusing on David , Smart is able to tap into the " heavenly language . " Many critics have focused on the role of David as planner of Solomon 's Temple and his possible role with the Freemasons . However , the true life of the poem comes later when Christ is introduced as the major subject . After Christ is introduced , Smart attempts to " reach to heaven " and the final passages , to Neil Curry , represent a " final rush for glory . " 
 According to Mounsey , A Song to David and Smart 's Psalms is an attempt to " Christianize " the Old Testament through writing an 18th @-@ century psalter . However , the Psalms perform a secondary function : they allow Smart to relate to the suffering of David and to reinforce his own religious convictions by following his Biblical model . As part of Smart 's " Christianizing " of the Psalms , Jesus becomes a divine form of suffering , and Smart becomes further juxtaposed with his Biblical model as both praise God for Jesus 's ultimate sacrifice and for the beauty of all creation . The Hymns and Psalms form their own sort of liturgy and attempt to reform Anglican liturgy by emphasising God 's place in nature . 
 Smart 's Hymns are modelled after a tradition exemplified by Robert Nelson . They are steeped in Anglican tradition and also emphasise English patriotism and England 's divine favour . The Hymns , according to Guest , " [ express ] a delight in creation that is largely absent from the work of other hymn @-@ writers of the century , unless they are paraphrasing the words of David . " To Hawes , the Hymns exemplify an evangelical spirit that separates Smart from the traditional Anglican church . Although he wrote his second set of hymns , Hymns for the Amusement of Children , for a younger audience , Smart cares more about emphasising the need for children to be moral instead of " innocent " . These works have been seem as possibly too complicated for " amusement " because they employee ambiguities and complicated theological concepts . In essence , the Hymns for the Amusement of Children is intended to teach children the specific virtues that make up the subject matter of the work . Like the Hymns for the Amusement of Children , Smart 's The Parables of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ were designed to teach morals . However , these Parables alter the original Biblical parables in order to simplify them and help them " make sense " As such , Todd Parker claims that the Parables , and the other religious works of Smart , are part of his final push for the " evangelization of London 's reading public . " 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The language and commentary on language is of particular emphasis in Jubilate Agno . To Alan Jacobs , Smart 's use of language represents his attempt to connect to the " Ur language " , allowing Smart to connect to " the Word calling forth the world . " This is similar to David and Orpheus 's ability as poets to create through their song . In his constant emphasis on the force of poetry , Jubilate Agno takes on the qualities of the Ars Poetica tradition . As such , Smart is attempting to develop a poetic language that will connect him to the " one true , eternal poem . " The poetic language that he creates is related to Adam 's " <unk> " tradition , or the idea that names hold significant weight in the universe and that Adam was able to join in with creation by naming objects . 
 In Jubilate Agno , he describes his writing as creating " impressions " . To accomplish this task , he incorporated puns and <unk> in order to emphasise the theological significance of his poetic language . In addition to these techniques , he relied on repeated language and allusions to traditional works and to scripture for a source of authority in various works , especially in his Hymns . Along with scriptural authority , he relies on prophetic rhetoric to gain his audience 's sympathy . 
 During the 18th century , there was a debate over poetic language and the translations of Smart , especially of Horace , positioned him as one who sought to redeem traditional forms and understanding of language . However , some critics , like Alan Liu , believe that translations are effectively forced to compete against the original works , and that Smart 's language , at least in his translations , must constantly seek to undermine the original authors , like Horace . Not all critics agree with Liu , and those like Donald Davie believe that the Smart 's translations cannot be compared to the original works , but are part of a system of Smart competing against the language of his contemporaries . Thomas Keymer further verified this point about Smart 's translations by revealing that the poet claims , in William <unk> 's The History of Two Orphans , " But what heaven @-@ exciting harmony might we not expect from that exalted genius , who can produce such lines as these following ! " in anticipation of replacing the previous flawed translations of the Psalms . 
 Regardless of where he stood on the specific issue of translation Smart believed that there was an importance to language , which carried over to his constant revising of his poems to slowly correct them . Many of Smart 's poems served a dual purpose , and when put to music were altered to meet various standards . By constantly revising , he ensured that his poems were always the " authentic " version . 
 = = = Gender = = = 
 Smart 's role as Mrs. Midnight along with his gendered comments in Jubilate Agno form the focal point for analysing his understanding of sexuality and gender . With Mrs. Midnight , Smart challenges the traditional social order found in 18th @-@ century England . However , some , like Lance Bertelsen , claim that the Mrs. Midnight persona reveals Smart 's schizophrenia in which he is torn between masculine and feminine roles . Fraser Easton claims that the existence of Mrs. Midnight proves that Smart identified a female connection to poetry and her character was used to defy popular 18th @-@ century notions of who is able to attain knowledge . This role allowed Smart to focus on " social and sexual dimensions " in his satire . However , there is a potentially darker side to Mrs. Midnight , and she could represent his feelings that he was " emasculated by economic pressures . " 
 The image of " horns " in Jubilate Agno is commonly viewed as a sexual image . Easton puts particular emphasis on the image of horns as a phallic image and contends that there are masculine and feminine horns throughout Smart 's poem . Hawes picks up this theme and goes on to claims that the poem shows " that [ Smart ] had been ' feminized ' as a cuckold . " In response to this possible cuckolding , Jubilate Agno predicts a misogynistic future while simultaneously undermining this effort with his constant associations to female creation . 
 = = = Environmental = = = 
 Smart had a reputation for being a " dedicated gardener " . His poem the Hop @-@ Garden helped to further this reputation , and even during his stay in a mental asylum he convinced others of his bond with nature . Johnson witnessed Smart 's time in asylum and stated , " he has partly as much exercise as he used to have , for he digs in the garden . " Gardening , to Smart , was a way in which humans could interact with nature and actually " improve " on the natural landscape . 
 However , Smart did not only write about gardens and vegetation , and his focus on his cat Jeoffry is widely known and his focus on nature connects him to those mistreated and neglected by 18th @-@ century society . The first fragment of Jubilate Agno is a poetic " Ark " that pairs humans with animals in order to purify all of creation . The whole work relies on his extensive background in botany and his knowledge of taxonomy . Smart actively participated in the 18th @-@ century taxonomy systems established by Carl Linnaeus ; however , Smart is mythologising his view of nature and creation when he adds information from Pliny the Elder into his work . 
 By using this knowledge , Smart was able to give a " voice " to nature ; he believed that nature , like his cat Jeoffry , is always praising God but needs a poet in order to bring out that voice . As such , the themes of animals and language are merged in Jubilate Agno , and Jeoffry is transformed into a manifestation of the Ars Poetica tradition . 
 = = = Freemasonry = = = 
 Many critics have focused on the role of David as planner of Solomon 's Temple and his possible role with the Freemasons . Although it is not known for sure whether Christopher was a Freemason or not , there is evidence suggesting that he was either part of the organisation or had a strong knowledge of its belief system . Based on personal admittance to contributing to A Defence of Freemasonry , contemporary verification of his participation in the volume and with Masonic meetings , there is enough to confirm " his participation in Masonic affairs . " Furthermore , there are accounts of Smart attending meetings at the Bell Tavern in Westminster . The information available has led Marie Roberts to declare in her 1986 book British Poets and Secret Societies , " It has been universally accepted by scholars that Christopher Smart ... was a Freemason yet no record of his membership has been traced . " However , in the notes to Chris Mounsey 's 2001 book Christopher Smart : Clown of God , Marie Roberts ' 1986 book is referred to as " an account of Smart 's work which accepts his association with the Freemasons , " but in Mounsey 's view , " Since neither Smart 's name nor his pseudonyms appear in the records of the Freemasons , it is highly unlikely he was ever one of their number . " 
 Smart 's involvement with Masonry can be traced through his poems , including Jubilate Agno and A Song to David , with his constant references to Masonic ideas and his praise of Free Masonry in general . In Jubilate Agno , Smart declares " I am the Lord 's builder and free and accepted <unk> in <unk> <unk> " ( B 109 ) . This declaration of being a " free and accepted <unk> " has been interpreted to define his connection to speculative Masonry . The " in Christ Jesus " declaration places Smart within a Christian version of Masonry . He also declares himself as " the Lord 's builder " and this connects his life with the building of King Solomon 's Temple , an important Masonic idea . In A Song to David , Smart returns to the building of Solomon 's Temple and incorporates many of the Masonic images that he uses in Jubilate Agno . 
 It was this detail that encouraged many critics to try and decode the " seven pillar " section of A Song of David along the lines of Masonic imagery . The poem follows two traditional sets of motions common to Freemason writing that mimic the image of Jacob 's Ladder : movement from earth to heaven and movement from heaven to earth . This image further connects Freemason belief surrounding the relationship of David to Solomon 's Temple . While these images , and further images in A Song to David are related also to depictions of the Temple in Isaac Newton 's Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended ( 1728 ) , the John Bunyan 's Solomon 's Temple <unk> 'd ( 1688 ) , and to the Geneva Bible , these works were relied on by the Freemasons . 
 Based on this theory , the first pillar , the Greek alpha , represents the mason 's compass and " God as the Architect of the Universe . " The second , the Greek gamma , represents the mason 's square . In addition , the square represents the " vault of heaven . " The third , the Greek eta , represents Jacob 's ladder itself and is connected to the complete idea of seven pillars . The fourth , the Greek theta , is either " the all @-@ seeing eye or the point within a circle . " The fifth letter , the Greek iota , represents a pillar and the temple . The sixth letter , the Greek sigma , is an incomplete hexagram , otherwise known as " the blazing star or <unk> " to the Freemasons . The last , the Greek omega , represents a lyre and David as a poet . 
 = = Works = = 
 Smart , throughout his career , published many known works . Although his works are far too many to list , a few of his most famous and important publications during his life include : 
 A Song to David 
 Poems on Several Occasions ( including the Hop @-@ Garden ) 
 The Hilliad 
 The Hop @-@ Garden 
 Hymns and Spiritual Songs 
 Hymns for the Amusement of Children 
 The <unk> Hannah and Abimelech 
 The Parables of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ 
 A Poetical Translation of the Fables of Phaedrus 
 The " Seatonian Prize " poems 
 A Translation of the Psalms of David 
 The Works of Horace Prose and Verse 
 One of his most famous poems , Jubilate Agno , was not published until 1939 , by William Force Stead . In 1943 , lines from this poem were set to music by Benjamin Britten with the translated title Rejoice in the Lamb . 
 He is also credited with the writing of A Defence of Freemasonry ( 1765 ) , also known as A Defence of Freemasonry as practised in the regular lodges , both foreign and domestic , under the Constitution of the English Grand Master , in which is contained a refutation of Mr. Dermott 's absurd and ridiculous account of Freemasonry , in his book entitled ' <unk> <unk> ' and the several <unk> therein reflecting on the regular Masons , briefly considered and answered , that response to Laurence Dermott 's <unk> <unk> . Although there is no direct attribution on the text 's <unk> , it was established as his work since its publication , and it includes a poem directly attributed to him . 
 A two @-@ volume edition of the Complete Poems of Christopher Smart was published in 1949 by Norman Callan , Professor of English at Queen Mary College , London ( now University ) . There have been numerous reprints . 
 = Al MacInnis = 
 Allan MacInnis ( born July 11 , 1963 ) is a retired Canadian ice hockey defenceman who played 23 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Calgary Flames and St. Louis Blues . A first round selection of the Flames in the 1981 NHL Entry Draft , he went on to become a 13 @-@ time All @-@ Star . He was named the Conn Smythe Trophy winner as the most valuable player of the playoffs in 1989 after leading the Flames to the Stanley Cup championship . He was voted the winner of the James Norris Memorial Trophy in 1999 as the top defenceman in the league while a member of the Blues . 
 MacInnis was most famous for having the hardest shot in the league . He tied Bobby Orr 's Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) record for goals by a defenceman , and won two OHL championships and a Memorial Cup with the Kitchener Rangers as a junior . He famously split goaltender Mike Liut 's mask with a shot , and became only the fourth defenceman in NHL history to score 100 points in a season . Internationally , he was an all @-@ star on defence as Canada won the 1991 Canada Cup and twice participated in the Winter Olympics . He was a member of the 2002 team that won Canada 's first gold medal in 50 years . 
 An eye injury suffered early in the 2003 – 04 NHL season forced MacInnis into retirement . He finished his career third all @-@ time among defencemen in goals , assists and points and was named to seven post @-@ season all @-@ star teams . He was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2007 , and his jersey number 2 was retired by the Blues and is honoured by the Flames . MacInnis remains a member of the Blues organization , currently serving as the team 's Vice President of Hockey Operations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 MacInnis was born in Inverness , Nova Scotia , and grew up in Port Hood , Nova Scotia , a fishing village on Cape Breton Island . He is the seventh of eight children born to Alex and Anna Mae MacInnis , and one of six brothers . His father worked as a coal miner and later as the assistant manager of the arena in Port Hood when the mine closed while his mother was a school teacher . The brothers all played hockey in Port Hawkesbury during the winter . MacInnis often assisted his father 's work at the arena , collecting pucks that he used to shoot repeatedly against a sheet of plywood set against the family barn during the summer . It was through this practice , which occasionally left him with blistered fingers , that he developed his powerful slapshot . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 MacInnis left home in 1979 to join the Regina Pat Blues of the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League ( SJHL ) . He appeared in 59 games , scoring 20 goals and 48 points with the Pat Blues , and appeared in two Western Hockey League ( WHL ) games with the Regina Pats . He then moved to Ontario and joined the Kitchener Rangers of the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) . Following a season in which he scored 39 points in 47 games and winning the league Championship with Kitchener in the 1980 – 81 OHL season , MacInnis was rated as the second best defensive prospect at the 1981 NHL Entry Draft . He was selected by the Calgary Flames in the first round , 15th overall . The Flames invited him to their training camp , although they did not expect him to play for them immediately , and he was returned to junior . 
 Most of his season was spent with Kitchener where MacInnis was named to the OHL First All @-@ Star Team after scoring 75 points for the Rangers . The team won its second consecutive OHL title , and captured the 1982 Memorial Cup . He played a third season in Kitchener in 1982 – 83 , and was again named a First @-@ Team All @-@ Star after an 84 @-@ point season . Additionally , MacInnis was voted the winner of the Max Kaminsky Trophy as the OHL 's top defenceman . He tied Bobby Orr 's OHL record for goals by a defenceman in one season with 38 ( subsequently broken by Bryan Fogarty 's 47 in 1988 – 89 ) , and holds the Canadian Hockey League record of five goals in one game by a defenceman . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 MacInnis made his NHL debut with the Flames on December 30 , 1981 , against the Boston Bruins . He appeared in two games that season , and an additional fourteen in 1982 – 83 in seasons spent primarily with Kitchener at the junior level . He scored his first NHL point against the Toronto Maple Leafs on October 23 , 1982 . MacInnis began the 1983 – 84 season with the Colorado Flames of the Central Hockey League , scoring 19 points in 19 games before joining Calgary full @-@ time . With the Flames , he scored 11 goals and 34 assists in 51 games and appeared in his first 11 post @-@ season games during the 1984 Stanley Cup playoffs . 
 A point @-@ per @-@ game pace in 1984 – 85 ( 66 points in 67 games ) earned MacInnis his first All @-@ Star Game appearance , playing in front of his hometown fans at the 1985 game in Calgary . He was voted a Second @-@ Team All @-@ Star for the 1986 – 87 NHL season , and started his first All @-@ Star Game in 1988 . He was a finalist for the James Norris Memorial Trophy as top defenceman in the league in three consecutive seasons , 1989 , 1990 and 1991 , but failed to win the award each time . 
 Led by MacInnis ' 31 points , the Flames won the first Stanley Cup championship in their history in 1989 . He had four goals and five assists in six games in the final series against the Montreal Canadiens en route to winning the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs . MacInnis became the first defenceman to lead the league in post @-@ season scoring , and he finished with a 17 @-@ game scoring streak , the longest by a defenceman in NHL history . 
 MacInnis finished second amongst NHL defencemen in scoring in 1989 – 90 with 90 points and was named a First Team All @-@ Star for the first time . He improved to a career high 103 points the following year , becoming the first Flames ' defenceman and only the fourth in NHL history to record a 100 @-@ point season . He scored his <unk> career point in a January 8 , 1991 , game against Toronto , to surpass Kent Nilsson as the franchise 's all @-@ time scoring leader . MacInnis missed three months of the 1992 – 93 season when he suffered a dislocated hip during a game on November 11 , 1992 , against the Hartford Whalers . While chasing a puck at high speed , he lost control and crashed into the end boards after Hartford rookie Patrick Poulin shoved MacInnis with his stick . Three weeks after his return to action , on February 23 , 1993 , MacInnis set a Flames franchise record when he appeared in his <unk> career game . 
 Following five consecutive seasons where the Flames failed to advance past the first round of the playoffs , both MacInnis and the team were looking for a change in the summer of 1994 . Though the Flames made an offer of C $ 2 @.@ 5 million per season for MacInnis , he instead signed an offer sheet with the St. Louis Blues for US $ 3 @.@ 5 million a season for four years , making him the fourth highest player in the NHL . As MacInnis was a restricted free agent , the Blues sent defenceman Phil Housley and two second round draft picks to the Flames in compensation while also receiving a fourth round selection back . 
 MacInnis said his decision to leave Calgary was not easy to make given his family was from the city . He claimed money was not the only reason he signed with the Blues , stating that he wanted a new challenge . He left Calgary after 11 full NHL seasons as the franchise 's all @-@ time leader in scoring with 822 points , and led in assists ( 603 ) , games played ( 803 ) , playoff assists ( 77 ) and playoff points ( 103 ) . He appeared in six All @-@ Star Games with Calgary and was named a league all @-@ star five times : twice on the first team and three times on the second . The team honoured MacInnis as the first player inducted into their " Forever a Flame " program in 2012 . His jersey number 2 was raised to the Saddledome rafters on February 27 , 2012 , but was not formally retired . 
 = = = St. Louis Blues = = = 
 Pneumonia and a late @-@ season shoulder injury limited MacInnis to 28 points in 32 games in 1994 – 95 , a season itself reduced to 48 games by a labour dispute . While he returned to play in the postseason , MacInnis required off @-@ season surgery to repair the damage to his shoulder . He returned to health in 1995 – 96 , appearing in all 82 games for the Blues . Early in his third season with the Blues , MacInnis played his 1,000th game in an October 23 , 1997 match @-@ up against the Vancouver Canucks . However he again suffered a separation of his surgically repaired shoulder in December 1997 , an injury that forced him out of the Blues lineup for three weeks . 
 MacInnis scored a goal and an assist in a 5 – 3 loss to the Detroit Red Wings on April 7 , 1998 to become just the sixth defenceman in NHL history to score 1 @,@ 000 points . After coming close several times , MacInnis finally won the Norris Trophy as the league 's top defenceman in 1998 – 99 . Early in the 2000 – 01 season , MacInnis recorded four assists in a 5 – 2 victory over the Florida Panthers to set a Blues franchise record for scoring by a defenceman . He reached the mark with his 300th point , scored in his 424th game with the organization . 
 When Chris Pronger broke his arm early in the 2002 – 03 NHL season , MacInnis was named interim captain for the remainder of the season . He completed the season as the league 's leader in scoring amongst defencemen with 68 points . Pronger insisted that MacInnis remain captain permanently when he returned for the 2003 – 04 season . MacInnis played only three games that season as vision problems he suffered during an October 2003 game against the Nashville Predators were diagnosed as being the result of a detached retina in one eye – the same eye in which he suffered a serious injury after being struck by a high stick in 2001 . He missed the remainder of the season as a result and after the 2004 – 05 NHL season was canceled due to a labour dispute , MacInnis felt that he could not return to the game at a high enough level to compete . 
 MacInnis announced his retirement as a player on September 9 , 2005 , but remained with the Blues organization as part of its marketing and hockey operations departments . Ending his career with 1 @,@ 274 points , MacInnis ranked third all @-@ time in goals , assists and points amongst defencemen , and played in six additional All @-@ Star Games as a member of the Blues . The team retired his jersey number 2 on April 9 , 2006 , and honoured him with a bronze statue out front of the Scottrade Center in 2009 . MacInnis was inducted to the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2007 . He was the first player from Nova Scotia so honoured , and was also inducted into the Nova Scotia Sport Hall of Fame and the St. Louis Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = = = International = = = 
 MacInnis was a member of the Canadian national team on four occasions . He first represented Canada at the 1990 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships where he scored one goal and four points . One year later , he played in his only Canada Cup tournament . He scored two goals and four assists and was named a tournament all @-@ star as Canada won the title over the United States . He suffered a separated shoulder shortly before the 1998 Winter Olympics , and while it was feared he would be unavailable for the tournament as a result , recovered in time to be cleared to play . MacInnis scored two goals during the tournament , but Canada finished in fourth place after losing the bronze medal match to Finland following a semi @-@ final loss to the Czech Republic . MacInnis also participated in the 2002 Winter Olympics . Though he scored no points in the tournament , Canada defeated the United States to win the nation 's first gold medal in hockey in 50 years . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 MacInnis was best known for the power and strength of his slapshot . The Flames selected him in the 1981 Draft on the strength of his shot alone ; his skating ability was so poor when he arrived for his first training camp in Calgary he earned the nickname " Chopper " . While some reporters expected he would be a bust as a result , MacInnis said the patience the Flames showed him in his early days as a professional allowed him to develop into a more complete defenceman . 
 The power of his shot grew into legend on January 17 , 1984 , in a game against St. Louis . In his first full season with the Flames , MacInnis took a slapshot from just outside the Blues ' defensive zone that struck goaltender Mike Liut on the mask . The shot split Liut 's helmet while the puck fell into the net for a goal . The power of his shot , and the fear it inspired in his opposition , led to MacInnis ' success as an offensive @-@ defenceman , especially as a threat on the power play . He won the " Hardest Shot " competition at All @-@ Star Game skills competitions seven times between 1991 and 2003 . He occasionally topped 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , including his win in the 2000 All @-@ Star Game . 
 Used primarily as a power play specialist in his first years as a professional , MacInnis worked at improving his overall game such that he was named a Norris Trophy finalist three consecutive seasons between 1989 and 1991 , and was the runner @-@ up to Ray Bourque in 1991 . He finally won the Norris Trophy as the league 's top defenceman in 1999 with the Blues . Former teammate Doug Gilmour praised MacInnis ' passing ability . MacInnis 's play developed to the point where he was as valued for his defensive ability on the penalty kill as he was his offence on the power play . 
 = = Off the ice = = 
 MacInnis married his wife Jackie shortly after winning the Stanley Cup in 1989 , and the couple have four children , Carson , Ryan , Lauren and Riley . MacInnis settled in St. Louis following his retirement , and in 2006 was named the Blues ' Vice President of Hockey Operations . He coaches his children 's minor hockey teams , and in 2008 – 09 coached the St. Louis Junior AAA Blues to a 73 – 3 – 2 record and the championship title at the 50th Quebec International Pee @-@ Wee Hockey Tournament . His son Ryan is a member of the Kitchener Rangers , and was drafted by the Arizona Coyotes in the 2014 NHL Entry Draft . 
 Though his career took him away from Nova Scotia , MacInnis remains involved with his hometown . In 2001 , he committed C $ 100 @,@ 000 towards a major renovation of the Port Hood Arena . The arena was renamed the Al MacInnis Sports Centre in his honour , and he hosts an annual golf tournament to help raise funds for the arena commission . On the day he was inducted into the Nova Scotia Sport Hall of Fame , he donated $ 100 @,@ 000 to the Inverness County Memorial Hospital in the memory of his parents . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 Regular season and playoffs 
 International 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Delaware Route 100 = 
 Delaware Route 100 ( DE 100 ) is a state highway in New Castle County , Delaware . The route runs from DE 4 near Elsmere to the Pennsylvania border near Montchanin , where it continues into Pennsylvania as State Route 3100 ( SR 3100 , Chadds Ford Road ) . The road runs through suburban areas of northern New Castle County . It intersects with DE 2 in Elsmere and DE 34 north of Elsmere before forming separate concurrencies with DE 48 and DE 141 from west of Wilmington north to Greenville . In Greenville , there is an interchange with DE 52 . North of Greenville , DE 100 continues by itself to the Pennsylvania border , intersecting DE 92 in Montchanin . DE 100 was first designated in the 1930s to run from DE 52 to the Pennsylvania border , where it originally connected to Pennsylvania Route 100 ( PA 100 ) . By the 1970s , it was extended south to DE 4 . The route was realigned to follow parts of DE 48 and DE 141 by 1990 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 100 begins at an intersection with DE 4 southwest of Wilmington , heading north on the one @-@ way pair of Race Street northbound and South Dupont Road southbound . The one @-@ way pair , which carries two lanes in each direction , passes through suburban residential areas . Both directions of the route join , with the route continuing northwest as South Dupont Road , a four @-@ lane divided highway . DE 100 curves north and enters Elsmere , where it runs through industrial areas and comes to a bridge over CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision . A short distance later , the route crosses DE 2 and becomes North Dupont Road , where it becomes an undivided road and passes over an East Penn Railroad line on a bridge . The road continues through wooded residential areas , leaving Elsmere and becoming South Dupont Road . The route reaches an intersection with the eastern terminus of DE 34 . Following this intersection , DE 100 passes to the east of a cemetery before reaching an intersection with DE 48 south of the Cab Calloway School of the Arts and Charter School of Wilmington . 
 At this point , DE 100 turns northwest to form a concurrency with DE 48 on four @-@ lane undivided Lancaster Pike , passing through business areas before crossing the East Penn Railroad . The road continues through residential and commercial areas , widening into a divided highway as it comes to an intersection with DE 141 . Here , DE 100 splits from DE 48 by turning northeast to join DE 141 on four @-@ lane divided Centre Road . The road runs through industrial areas , curving north and becoming a freeway past the Barley Mill Road intersection . The freeway curves northeast and passes under the East Penn Railroad before coming to a partial cloverleaf interchange with DE 52 in Greenville . Past this interchange , the road curves east and the freeway ends , with DE 100 splitting from DE 141 at an at @-@ grade intersection by heading north on two @-@ lane undivided Montchanin Road . 
 DE 100 continues north through wooded areas with fields and homes , crossing the East Penn Railroad line again . The road runs through Montchanin and passes to the east of the Wilmington Country Club and the Winterthur Museum and Country Estate before crossing the railroad tracks again . The route intersects the western terminus of DE 92 on the western edge of Brandywine Creek State Park . At this point , the road continues straight as DE 92 , with DE 100 turning north to remain on Montchanin Road . The road crosses under the East Penn Railroad again and curves northwest . DE 100 bends to the north again before reaching its northern terminus at the Pennsylvania border , where the road continues into that state as SR 3100 ( Chadds Ford Road ) . The Montchanin Road portion of DE 100 is part of the Brandywine Valley National Scenic Byway , a National Scenic Byway and Delaware Byway . 
 DE 100 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 41 @,@ 949 vehicles at the Barley Mill Road intersection along the DE 141 concurrency to a low of 2 @,@ 040 vehicles at the Pennsylvania border . The portion of DE 100 concurrent with DE 141 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 100 existed as a county road . The route north of Kennett Pike was proposed as a state highway by 1924 . The highway was paved by 1931 . By 1932 , the state highway had been completed from Elsmere north to the Kennett Pike while the remainder was still a county route . DE 100 was designated by 1938 to run from DE 52 in Greenville north to the Pennsylvania border , where it continued as PA 100 . The route was extended south to DE 4 by 1971 , following Dupont Road . DE 100 was realigned to bypass a portion of Dupont Road by following DE 48 and DE 141 by 1990 . In 2002 , the Montchanin Road portion of DE 100 was designated as part of the Brandywine Valley Scenic Highway in the Delaware Scenic and Historic Highways system ; it was designated a National Scenic Byway in 2005 . In 2003 , PA 100 was truncated in Pennsylvania . However , DE 100 remains unchanged . On February 24 , 2015 , the bridge carrying DE 100 over the East Penn Railroad in Elsmere was closed after concrete fell from the bridge deck onto the railroad tracks below . Emergency repairs took place and the bridge was expected to be reopened by the end of March . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in New Castle County . 
 = Rudy Kay = 
 Jean @-@ Louis Cormier ( June 24 , 1942 – May 25 , 2008 ) was a Canadian professional wrestler best known by his ring name Rudy Kay . Cormier competed primarily in Canada and often formed a tag team with his brothers ; together , they are known as the Cormier wrestling family . He also worked behind the scenes , operating both the Eastern Sports Association ( ESA ) and its television program , International Wrestling . Kay held seven championships while wrestling for the ESA : five tag team titles while wrestling alongside his older brother Yvon ; the short @-@ lived Taped Fist Championship ; as well as the promotion 's most prestigious singles title , the North American Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Career = = 
 Cormier competed in boxing as a teenager . He was then trained for a professional wrestling career by Yvon , who was known professionally as The Beast , and another wrestler named <unk> the Spinner . During his early career , Cormier used the ring name Rudy LaBelle while touring Australia with The Beast . Back in North America , he was given the ring name Rudy Kay by a promoter who thought that Cormier looked almost identical to a retired wrestler who had used the name . 
 In 1969 , Cormier and Al Zinck formed the Eastern Sports Association ( ESA ) , which promoted a television program named International Wrestling ( IW ) . Several years later , Atlantic Grand Prix Wrestling , operated by Emile Dupré , took over the time slot from IW . In the ESA , the four Cormier brothers ( Yvon ; Leonce , who wrestled as Leo Burke ; Jean @-@ Louis , who used the ring name Rudy Kay ; and Romeo , who was inspired by Jean @-@ Louis to create the moniker Bobby Kay ) often aligned with each other in feuds . The opponent would face one brother , and then move on to face the rest in succession . Jean @-@ Louis also wrestled on occasional trips to Australia with his brother The Beast . 
 Cormier won his first title on July 29 , 1969 when he teamed with The Beast to win the ESA International Tag Team Championship . They defeated The Fabulous Kangaroos ( Al Costello and Don Kent ) to win the title but soon dropped it to Jos and Paul LeDuc . They won the title back later that summer in a rematch and held it until the end of the 1969 ESA season . Two years later , they regained the championship with a victory over Eric Pomeroy and Fred Sweetan . Their final reign together began on October 28 , 1975 with a win over Bob Brown and The Patriot . Once again , the brothers held the title until the end of the ESA wrestling season . 
 On November 18 that year , Rudy Kay also won the IW North American Heavyweight Championship by defeating Bob Brown . He was stripped of the title , however , because the ESA operated only during the summer months and the season ended without notice . He was unable to fulfill his obligation to defend it within 30 <unk> ESA , which promoted shows until 1976 , operated during the summer because the venues were used for ice hockey during the other months . The following year , he won the vacant ESA Taped Fist Championship with a victory over Mad Dog Martel . When the ESA closed in 1977 , the title became part of Romeo Cormier ( Bobby Kay ) ' s Trans @-@ Canada Wrestling ( TCW ) . TCW closed later the same year , and the Taped Fist Championship was retired . His final championship win came in September 1976 ; he teamed with The Beast again and defeated The Mercenaries ( Mad Dog Martel and Frenchy Martin ) to win the ESA Maritimes Tag Team Championship . Later that month , Martel and Martin regained the title in a rematch . Cormier retired as a professional wrestler in 1982 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 After retiring from wrestling , Cormier took a job with Federal Express , which he held for five years . He also underwent knee surgery to fix problems resulting from his wrestling career . Cormier had a wife , Claudette , and four children : daughters Monique and Michelle , and sons Jamie and Jason . On May 25 , 2008 , Cormier died of septicemia in Moncton , New Brunswick . 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Eastern Sports Association 
 ESA International Tag Team Championship ( 4 times ) – with The Beast 
 ESA Maritimes Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with The Beast 
 ESA Taped Fist Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IW North American Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Brown honeyeater = 
 The brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) belongs to the honeyeaters , a group of birds found mainly in Australia and New Guinea which have highly developed brush @-@ tipped tongues adapted for nectar feeding . It is a medium @-@ small brownish bird , with yellow @-@ olive panels in the tail and wing and a yellow tuft behind the eye . 
 Widespread across western , northern and eastern Australia , the brown honeyeater occupies a range of habitats from mangroves to eucalypt woodlands . It is seasonally nomadic within its local area , following flowering food plants . While it usually forages alone , it also feeds in small groups , or flocks of mixed honeyeater species . Nectar and insects form its diet . It occupies the same breeding territory each year , and lays two or three eggs in a cup @-@ shaped nest woven from grass and soft bark . Both sexes contribute to nest building and feeding the young . It has a loud , clear , musical song , described as the best of all the honeyeaters . 
 While the brown honeyeater is declining in some areas such as the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia , overall its population levels and distribution are sufficient to have it described by the IUCN as being of least concern for conservation . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The brown honeyeater was originally described by Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield in 1827 as Meliphaga indistincta . The species name indistincta is from the Latin word meaning " obscure " . Vigors and Horsfield were working from the bird collection of the Linnean Society in London , and they said of the brown honeyeater specimen , " It is however in very bad condition , and scarcely admits of a description . " Later included in the " catch @-@ all " genus Gliciphila , the brown honeyeater is now classified as a member of the genus Lichmera , from the Greek word meaning " to lick " or " to dart the tongue " , following Schodde ( 1975 ) , Sibley and Monroe ( 1990 ) and Christidis and Boles ( 1994 ) . As well as the nominate race Lichmera indistincta indistincta , a number of other sub @-@ species are recognised : <unk> ( derived from the Medieval Latin word " oculus " meaning eye ) , melvillensis ( named for Melville Island where it is found ) , limbatus ( from the Latin for " fringed " ) and nupta ( from the Latin " <unk> " meaning to marry , or be married to ) . The Indonesian honeyeater Lichmera <unk> is treated as a sub @-@ species of L. indistincta by some taxonomic authorities . 
 Molecular analysis has shown honeyeaters to be related to the Pardalotidae ( pardalotes ) , Acanthizidae ( Australian warblers , scrubwrens , thornbills , etc . ) , and the Maluridae ( Australian fairy @-@ wrens ) in a large Meliphagoidea superfamily . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The brown honeyeater is a medium @-@ small , plain grey @-@ brown honeyeater with a body length of 12 – 16 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) , a wingspan of 18 – 23 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 1 in ) , and an average weight of 9 – 11 grams ( 0 @.@ 32 – 0 @.@ 39 oz ) . The female is slightly smaller than the male , but the sexes differ only slightly in appearance . The head , back , rump , and upper tail @-@ coverts are brown , and the wings a darker brown . The only distinguishing features are a small yellow patch behind the eye , which is indistinct in some birds , and dull yellow @-@ olive panels in the folded wings and tail . The brown honeyeater ’ s sexual dimorphism is slight . The adult male has a dark brownish @-@ grey forehead and crown , contrasting with a brownish nape . The forehead and crown of the adult female is a similar olive @-@ brown to the rest of the upper body . A juvenile bird is similar to the female , but may lack or show only a trace of the yellow tuft behind the eye . The bill is black , and is long , slender and curved slightly downwards , well adapted for probing deep tubular flowers . The gape in the male is black when breeding , and pale yellow at other times . The gape of the female is always pale yellow , and in the juvenile bright yellow and swollen . The iris is brown , and the feet and legs grey @-@ black . 
 The appearance of the various subspecies is uniform , with other races similar in size and plumage to the nominate race with slight variations in degrees of colouration and small differences in the length of the bill and the tail . Compared with L. i. indistincta , the male L. i. <unk> has slightly darker feathers on the top of the head with a greater contrast between crown and nape , and a longer bill . L. i. melvillensis has a moderately darker throat and breast than indistincta , and the female has a shorter tail . In L. i. nupta the differences between the sexes are even slighter than in the nominate race . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 The nondescript brown honeyeater has a noteworthy song , usually described in superlatives . " A glorious voice , easily the best songster among Australian honeyeaters , " is how one study of West Australian birds noted . " As a singer it has no superior among the honeyeater family , or for that matter , among Australian birds , " said another report . It has a clear , rolling , musical call , rendered as sweet @-@ sweet @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , which is very loud for the size of the bird . Both sexes call , usually early in the morning , though the male calls throughout the day during the breeding season . The alarm call is a harsh ke @-@ ke given several times at short intervals . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The brown honeyeater is found in a wide range of wooded habitats , and is widespread across Australia . The nominate race ranges across a broad band from Newcastle on the New South Wales coast north and west to Queensland and the Top End to south @-@ western Western Australia . It is rarely seen in Sydney , where populations have declined since the late 1950s , though it is being recorded in suitable habitats such as Homebush Bay and <unk> in small numbers , and is a vagrant to the Illawarra region . It is rare in South Australia , and not present in Victoria and Tasmania . Population densities range from 2 @.@ 3 birds per 1 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) in the Kakadu National Park , to 0 @.@ 26 birds per hectare in Wellard in Western Australia . 
 L. i. <unk> is found in New Guinea , the Torres Strait Islands , and Cape York intergrading with the nominate race along the Gulf of Carpentaria river system . L. i. melvillensis inhabits the Tiwi Islands , while L. i. <unk> is found in Bali and the Lesser Sundas , and L. i. nupta on the Aru Islands . 
 The brown honeyeater is seasonally nomadic across its local area in response to flowering food plants . For example , there are marked increases in numbers in Toowoomba in south @-@ east Queensland during winter , and in the Northern Territory the range contracts during the dry season . It is commonly found among mangroves in coastal areas including black mangroves ( Rhizophora <unk> ) . It is often in woodlands that merge into the mangroves , such as those dominated by Banksia , Melaleuca or Callistemon , and widespread in sclerophyll forests and eucalypt woodlands . In the arid and semi @-@ arid inland of Australia it is most often recorded in Acacia , Grevillea and Hakea shrubland along watercourses , and at bores , springs and drainage lines . It visits flowering shrubs in parks and gardens , and occurs in remnant patches of trees on travelling stock routes . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 A busy , acrobatic bird , the brown honeyeater is frequently on the wing , hovering over flowers and pursuing insects in flight . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The brown honeyeater feeds mainly in the foliage and flowers in the canopy of trees and shrubs , though it does use all levels of the habitat including the ground . It feeds singly and in pairs , but will gather in small groups or in mixed @-@ species feeding flocks with other honeyeaters , such as banded , yellow @-@ tinted , black @-@ chinned and rufous @-@ throated . Observations of foraging birds record the brown honeyeater feeding primarily on nectar , and taking some insects . Main sources of nectar include flowering mistletoe and mangroves , bloodwood , woollybutt , <unk> , and Banksia and Grevillea species . Nectar is primarily taken from flowers with cups of stamens , brush @-@ shaped inflorescences , or tubular flowers . The brown honeyeater will hover above small flowers while extracting nectar , perch on a stem for large single flowers , and , in the case of Banksia flowers , perch on unopened florets at the top of the inflorescence . 
 Insects were most often gleaned from leaves or bark , and sometimes caught by sallying or taken from the ground . Insects eaten include beetles , flies , ants , wasps and bees . 
 The brown honeyeater is more active in the early morning than at other times of the day ; flying more when visiting flowers at the time when nectar is most abundant . Its body mass decreases during the night , and then increases during the day with the greatest increase occurring during the important first hour of early morning foraging . It seems to make up around half of the overnight water loss during this hour . The energy that the brown honeyeater can potentially get from nectar exceeds its requirements in all seasons except winter , when it needs to be selective in the plants that are used , to balance energy intake and expenditure . It compensates for any lessening in nectar concentration by increasing the frequency of feeding . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 No courtship displays of the brown honeyeater have been recorded , other than increased singing from vantage points by the male . The pair usually nests solitarily in areas of low population density . In an area near Newcastle , New South Wales with a number of breeding pairs , all nests were at least 20 metres ( 66 ft ) apart . The same nesting territories are occupied each year , however it is not known if the territories , or the nests , are used by the same birds each year . 
 The breeding season varies markedly across the brown honeyeater ’ s range , with breeding recorded in one location or another in every month of the year . Breeding can occur two or more times a year if conditions are favourable . The nest is built in a variety of vegetation types , usually in dense foliage in the fork of a horizontal branch , often near water , and rarely more than 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) above ground . The nest is a small , deep , round cup , woven from small pieces of grass and soft bark , especially Melaleuca bark , bound with spider web and lined with plant down , such as from Banksias , or cow hair or wool . Both sexes contribute to the nest building , though the male also stands guard while the female is building the nest . 
 The eggs vary in shape , but most often are a rounded oval . They are white and lustreless , and sometimes have a pinkish or brownish tinge . They can be un @-@ marked , or spotted with faint reddish or brownish flecks . The eggs are approximately 17 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 67 in ) long and 13 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 51 in ) across , and laid in a clutch of two or three . The female incubates the eggs and broods the chicks alone , but both sexes feed the young and remove faecal sacs . The fledging period is thirteen or fourteen days , with around 44 % of nests where the outcome was known successfully fledging young . 
 Nests are known to be predated by green tree ants , which attack the newly hatched nestlings , and the pied currawong , which takes young from the nest . Nests are parasitized by the brush cuckoo , pallid cuckoo , and Horsfield 's bronze @-@ cuckoo . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The brown honeyeater population is declining in the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia as a result of the clearing of native vegetation . Numbers are increasing in urban areas , particularly in parks and gardens and around farms ; however , the new habitats have increased the incidences of death from cats , cars and collisions with windows . Overall the population is sufficiently large and widespread for the brown honeyeater to be considered by the IUCN to be of least concern for conservation . 
 = Old Louisville = 
 Old Louisville is a historic district and neighborhood in central Louisville , Kentucky , USA . It is the third largest such district in the United States , and the largest preservation district featuring almost entirely Victorian architecture . It is also unique in that a majority of its structures are made of brick , and the neighborhood contains the highest concentration of residential homes with stained glass windows in the U.S. Many of the buildings are in the Victorian @-@ era styles of Romanesque , Queen Anne , Italianate , among others ; and a large number of blocks have had few or no buildings razed . There are also several 20th @-@ century buildings from 15 to 20 stories . 
 Old Louisville consists of about 48 city blocks and is located north of the University of Louisville 's main campus and south of Broadway and Downtown Louisville , in the central portion of the modern city . The neighborhood hosts the renowned St. James Court Art Show on the first weekend in October . 
 Despite its name , Old Louisville was actually built as a suburb of Louisville starting in the 1870s , nearly a century after Louisville was founded . It was initially called the Southern Extension , and the name Old Louisville did not come until the 1960s . Old Louisville was initially home to some of Louisville 's wealthiest residents , but saw a decline in the early and mid @-@ 20th century . Following revitalization efforts and gentrification , Old Louisville is currently home to a diverse population with a high concentration of students and young professionals . 
 = = History = = 
 Old Louisville is not actually the oldest part of Louisville . In fact , large @-@ scale development south of Broadway did not begin until the 1870s , nearly a century after what is now Downtown Louisville was first settled . The area was initially part of three different military land grants issued in 1773 , and throughout the early and mid @-@ 19th century the land passed through the hands of several speculators , meanwhile much of it was used as farmland . Some of the land south of Broadway was still in its natural state during this time , such as the 50 @-@ acre ( 200 @,@ 000 m2 ) tract between Broadway and Breckenridge , known as Jacob 's Woods , a popular picnic ground as late as 1845 . A major attraction was Oakland Race Track , near today 's Seventh and Ormsby , built in 1839 and an early forerunner to Churchill Downs . 
 Country estates had been built in the area as early as the 1830s , and some of Louisville 's great early mansions , predominantly in the Italianate style , were built along Broadway , very near Old Louisville , before the Civil War . Development from 1850 to 1870 occurred between Broadway and Kentucky Street , the northern extreme of what came to be called Old Louisville . North @-@ south city streets were extended throughout the area in the 1850s , and a <unk> line was extended down Fourth to Oak in 1865 . 
 The land south of Broadway that became Old Louisville was annexed by the city in 1868 , as a part of larger expansion efforts . This annexation moved the southern boundary of the city as far south as the city 's House of Refuge , an area which is now the University of Louisville campus and the southern border of Old Louisville . A year later , architect Gideon <unk> called the area " a growing and beautiful suburban locality " . By 1876 about a quarter of the area was occupied . 
 Development continued as lots were sold southward to present day Oak Street , about a third of the way between Broadway and the House of Refuge . The principal road through the suburb at this time was Central Plank Road , which became Third Street . The emerging area was called the Southern Extension by this time . Growth south of Oak was very slow until the Southern Exposition was held annually in the area from 1883 to 1887 . 
 At the urging of Courier @-@ Journal editor Henry Watterson , the city held the Southern Exposition , which in the words of Watterson , was meant to " advance the material welfare of the producing classes of the South and West . " It was held on 45 acres ( 180 @,@ 000 m2 ) at the heart of Old Louisville , where St. James Court and Central Park ( originally Dupont Square ) would eventually be located , and included a 600 by 900 @-@ foot ( 270 m ) enclosed exhibition building . The Exposition was opened by President Chester Arthur and attracted nearly one million visitors in its first year . The exhibition featured the first public display of Thomas Edison 's light bulb , as well as what was billed as the largest artificial lighting display in history with 4 @,@ 600 lamps , in a time when electric lighting was considered a novelty . 
 During the 1880s , after the exposition ended , the area between Oak and Hill Streets rapidly developed and became one of the city 's most fashionable neighborhoods . According to historian Young E. Allison , 260 homes valued at a total of $ 1 @.@ 6 million were constructed in Old Louisville from 1883 to 1886 . The dominant styles by this time were Queen Anne and Richardsonian Romanesque . An example of the latter , which was known for its turrets , towers and bay windows , was the Conrad house at St. James Court . 
 These styles became less prevalent in the 1890s as the remaining southern portions of Old Louisville , between Ormsby and the House of refuge , were filled in , predominantly with buildings in the Chateauesque and Renaissance Revival styles . This included one of Old Louisville 's most famous sections , St. James Court , developed starting in 1890 and envisioned as a haven for the upper class , and was completely occupied by 1905 . Described as " the epitome of Victorian eclecticism " , the area included houses in such styles as Venetian , Colonial , Gothic and others . 
 From 1890 to 1905 the area was home to the Amphitheatre Auditorium , which claimed the second largest stage in the United States and showcased many of the day 's best actors . The structure , located at the corner of 4th and Hill Streets , was razed after its owner , William Norton , Jr . , died . Another form of entertainment in the area was baseball , with the game first being played by 1860 and an early ballpark at Fourth and Ormsby emerging after the Civil War . By 1875 , a new park had been built near St. James Court . 
 Old Louisville is also home to the Ferguson Mansion , built by Edwin Hite Ferguson . Ferguson commissioned the Louisville architectural firm of Cobb and Dodd — the same firm responsible for designing the Seelbach Hotel and the new capitol building in Frankfort — to design his home in 1901 . Construction of the mansion took four years ( 1901 – 1905 ) and cost $ 100 @,@ 000 , which was approximately ten times the cost of the neighboring Victorian homes . At the time , the mansion was the most expensive home in Louisville . In the 1920s , the Fergusons sold the home to the Pearson family , and it served as the Pearson Funeral Home until the mid @-@ 1970s . The house also provided the headquarters for John Y. Brown , Jr . ' s successful 1979 gubernatorial campaign . In 1986 , the mansion became the headquarters of The Filson Historical Society . 
 In its peak in the late 19th century , Old Louisville was the center of Louisville 's social life , with nearly all persons listed in the Society Directory of Louisville having Old Louisville addresses . The directory even listed the reception days and hours of Old Louisville 's leading ladies , which varied by street , such as Tuesdays on Fourth Street or Thursdays on Second . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The area gradually declined as the affluent moved to newer streetcar suburbs , such as Cherokee Triangle , or built estates in areas east of Louisville recently connected by railroad , such as Anchorage and Glenview . Accelerated by the Great Depression , many of the large homes in Old Louisville were converted to boarding houses during the 1930s . The Ohio River flood of 1937 caused a great number of the remaining wealthy households to move above the flood plain . 
 The gradual abandonment of Old Louisville by the wealthy was a reflection of changing lifestyles brought on by technology . Many homes of Old Louisville were originally built as mansions that would require several servants to maintain . Because of the relatively high wages offered by manufacturing jobs , servants were no longer affordable to all but the wealthiest families by the mid @-@ 20th century . Interurban rail lines , and increasingly automobiles , meant that the wealthy no longer had to live so close to their businesses , and many chose to live in what had previously been summer homes in the county 's east end . The lifestyle that created Old Louisville was effectively obsolete . 
 During the years between World War I and World War II , many of the old mansions were hastily converted into apartments to house the growing labor supply , a practice encouraged by the federal government at the time through low @-@ interest loans . However , after World War II , with the housing shortage solved by large @-@ scale suburban development affordable to the middle class , vacancy rates in Old Louisville surged . To attract renters , landlords had to lower rents dramatically , attracting less affluent tenants with less funds to maintain the homes . 
 A large section of the neighborhood , from around Kentucky Street to Broadway , was razed . Many buildings south of Lee Street , and nearly all south of Avery Street ( renamed Cardinal Boulevard ) were razed for the construction of Noe Middle School , expansions to Manual High School and a major expansion of the University of Louisville , as well as to expand local industry east of Floyd Street . From 1965 to 1971 , 639 buildings were razed as a part of this effort . However , the plan did spur the restoration of over 100 buildings in other parts of Old Louisville . 
 During the 1960s many low income residents downtown who were displaced as a result of urban renewal moved into the newly converted apartments , especially on the north side of the neighborhood . The area was now considered drug ridden and undesirable by most <unk> . The very term Old Louisville , first becoming associated with the area in the 1940s , had mostly negative connotations initially , as historian Samuel W. Thomas put it , " In an Era where architectural styles were changing dramatically , old meant out of fashion " . 
 = = = Revitalization = = = 
 One of the first to take an active role in preserving and revitalizing Old Louisville was Courier @-@ Journal writer J. Douglass Nunn . In 1960 he began a vigorous public information campaign concerning the area . Nunn compared it to neighborhoods like D.C. ' s Georgetown and Boston 's Beacon Hill . In 1961 Nunn took a leave of absence from his job and started " Restoration , Inc . " , a group that restored ten homes in Old Louisville 's St. James Court in 1961 , spurring interest in preservation that would lead many local activists to move to the area . This effort also led to the first use of the name Old Louisville in print in that year , as a reflection of the interest in preservation . With the activists ' efforts the area was made into a historic preservation district in 1975 . The area has continued to improve , with new restaurants and shops opening and many students , and young professionals moving into the area . Property owners , who once cheaply converted the old houses to apartments , have invested more in improvements since the 1980s , and several properties have been converted into luxury condominiums . The median home value more than doubled between 1990 and 2000 , increasing at a faster rate than Louisville as a whole . This overall process of improvement and rising property values has been described as gentrification . 
 The area is now one of the most ethnically and economically diverse in Louisville . Crime is becoming less of a problem . While in 2003 there were 11 @.@ 5 crimes per 1 @,@ 000 residents , over twice the average for the city of Louisville as a whole , which was 5 @.@ 0 crimes per 1 @,@ 000 residents Old Louisville now has a similar number of calls for police assistance as other parts of Louisville . The Louisville Metro Police 4th Division is responsible for a large portion of Louisville beyond Old Louisville , but is conveniently located in Central Park in Old Louisville . It had 134 officers assigned to it in 2006 . Most calls are related to car break @-@ ins and non @-@ violent crimes . Murders are still rare , with one or two per year . Overall crime rates for both Old Louisville and the city as a whole increased sharply in 2005 over the 2004 rate , although there was a decline again the first half of 2006 . 
 = = Features and attractions = = 
 Old Louisville features the largest collection of pedestrian @-@ only streets of any U.S. neighborhood . Eleven such " courts " , where houses face each other across a grass median with sidewalks , were built in the neighborhood from 1891 to the 1920s . Most of the courts are centered off of 4th Street . Belgravia Court and Fountain Court were the first ones to be built in 1891 and are the most well known . Later ones included Reeser and Kensington ( 1910 ) , which were built with large Victorian styled apartments instead of single family homes ; and Eutropia and Rose Courts , which were the last ones built in the 1920s and featured small , single story houses . Belgravia and St. James Court were completely rehabilitated as a part of the urban renewal that began in the 1960s . These developments are apparently unique to Louisville . 
 Two of the three major four @-@ year universities in Louisville are located adjacent to Old Louisville , with Spalding University to the north and the University of Louisville to the south . DuPont Manual High School , a public magnet school , and Presentation Academy , an all @-@ girls Catholic high school , are two other well @-@ known schools located in Old Louisville . 
 The neighborhood contains The Filson Historical Society , Louisville 's Central Park , which features the Kentucky Shakespeare Festival every summer , the Actors Theatre of Louisville Production Studio , and the Conrad @-@ Caldwell House . The area of 6th and Hill Streets in the neighborhood was the setting of the best selling novel Mrs. Wiggs of the Cabbage Patch by <unk> Alice Hegan Rice . Today there is a non @-@ profit counseling and services center , named Cabbage Patch Settlement House for the novel , on 6th Street at Magnolia Avenue , which serves children of low @-@ income families . During the Christmas holiday season a number of private homes are toured in the Old Louisville Holiday Home Tour . With the publication of books about the spirited past of Old Louisville , the area has recently gained a reputation for being " the most haunted neighborhood in the country . " 
 Old Louisville 's boundaries are Kentucky Street to the north , Avery Street ( Cardinal Boulevard ) to the south , I @-@ 65 to the east , the CSX railroad tracks to the west . Originally , the neighborhood extended all the way to Broadway on the north , Attwood Street on the south , and Floyd Street on the East ; but the northern part was mostly razed for parking lots and light industry , the southern area between Attwood and Avery Streets ( now Cardinal Blvd ) was razed when the University of Louisville doubled the size of its main campus , and I @-@ 65 was built through the area in the 1960s , which created a physical barrier between it and Shelby Park neighborhood . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 Old Louisville is well known for its architecture , with styles ranging from Federal to Queen Anne . Very few antebellum buildings remain , and the most impressive buildings were built in the late 19th century . There are a few Italianate , Beaux @-@ Arts and Second Empire @-@ style houses , but Victorian styles dominate . Victorian Gothic styles are commonly seen . Many styles in Old Louisville are united by their use of red sandstone trim , which became popular by the 1880s to the point that the Courier @-@ Journal said " few new residences are going up in Louisville in which it is not being used " . Another common Victorian style is the Richardsonian . 
 Aside from the best represented styles of architecture listed above , Old Louisville also has several great examples of the Chateauesque style of architecture in select buildings throughout the area . For example , one of these examples is a residential building , a mansion , at 400 Belgravia Court , which is a " walking court " where the mansions face a park like walk rather than a street . This specific building was completed in 1897 and one of its first residents was William H. Wathen , M.D. , an eminent medical educator in Louisville from a family of successful distillers . 
 Although some portions have been razed , many entire blocks remain almost untouched , and historian Theodore M. Brown said " it remains the only nineteenth @-@ century segment of the city that is mostly intact " . As <unk> , some American Craftsman style houses can be found in Old Louisville . 
 = = = Tallest buildings = = = 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of 2000 , the population of Old Louisville was 11 @,@ 043 , of which 55 @.@ 9 % are white , 35 @.@ 0 % are black , 6 @.@ 3 % are listed as other , and 2 @.@ 3 % are Hispanic . College graduates are 24 @.@ 5 % , people without a high school degree are 22 @.@ 6 % , and people with college experience without a bachelor 's degree are 28 @.@ 4 % . Females are 52 @.@ 3 % of the population , males are 47 @.@ 7 % . Households making less than $ 15 @,@ 000 a year are 40 @.@ 8 % ; although that is largely a function of the 27 % of residents who are full @-@ time college students . Ironically , Old Louisville has the youngest median age of any Louisville neighborhood and the highest percent of people between the ages of 20 @-@ 29 ( 25 % ) . 
 Old Louisville 's area is about 1 @.@ 7 square miles ( 4 @.@ 4 km2 ) , and its population density is 7 @,@ 800 persons per square mile . The best preserved portions , between Kentucky and Hill streets , have a density of over 10 @,@ 000 persons per square mile . 
 = = Regions = = 
 Old Louisville is broken up into five different census tracts by the US Census Bureau . There are stark differences revealed by the different tracts from North to South 
 In addition , there are eight different neighborhood associations , each of which provides different levels of infrastructure on each street . For example , on 4th Street the street lights are designed as old lamp posts and there are ornamented trash cans with a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis symbol at frequent intervals , while on St. James Court there are gas lamp posts , 3rd and 2nd Streets have small light posts on the sidewalks , <unk> Court has cast iron decorative gates , and several other streets have basic infrastructure . 
 = = Culture = = 
 After years of decline with abandoned buildings and high elderly populations , the demographics of Old Louisville began to change noticeably in the 1990s . New residents were not just college students using the area as housing , but also young professionals who wanted to live in Old Louisville . The Courier @-@ Journal 's Velocity weekly has reported the area as a hip , emerging center of culture in Louisville . This change is reflected in numerous coffeehouses , restaurants and bars opening in Old Louisville in the 1990s and early 2000s targeting at the younger crowd . 
 Old Louisville is one of the most liberal neighborhoods in Louisville , as evidenced by the General Election results in 2004 , where it voted for John Kerry by a 60 % margin and against a proposal to amend the state constitution to define marriage as " between one man and one woman " by a 66 % margin ( the proposal passed 75 % to 25 % in Kentucky ) . 
 = = Images = = 
 = The Making of the English Landscape = 
 The Making of the English Landscape is a 1955 book by the English local historian William George Hoskins . It is illustrated with 82 monochrome plates , mostly photographs by Hoskins himself , and 17 maps or plans . It has appeared in at least 35 editions and reprints in English and other languages . 
 The book is a landscape history of England and a seminal text in that discipline and in local history . The brief history of some one thousand years is widely used in local and environmental history courses . 
 Hoskins defines the theme of the book in the first chapter , arguing that a landscape historian needs to use botany , physical geography and natural history as well as historical knowledge to interpret any given scene fully . The remaining chapters describe how the English landscape was formed from the Anglo @-@ Saxon period onwards , starting c . 450 AD , and looking in detail at the mediaeval landscape , the depopulation following the Black Death , the Tudor period through to the splendour of the Georgian period , the parliamentary enclosures that affected much of the English midlands , the industrial revolution , the development of road , canal , and railway transport networks , and finally the growth of towns from Norman times onwards . There is little mention of cities . The concluding chapter however laments the damage done to the English countryside by " the villainous requirements of the new age " such as military airfields and arterial roads , describes the new England as barbaric , and invites the reader to contemplate the past . 
 The work has been widely admired , but also described as grandly emotive , populist , and openly anti @-@ modernist . Writers have praised the book for helping them understand and interpret the landscape in which they lived . 
 = = Book = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The introduction sets out Hoskins ' stall with " No book exists to describe the manner in which the various landscapes of this country came to assume the shape and appearance they now have " , mentioning geology ( " only one aspect of the subject " ) , the clearing of woodlands , the reclaiming of moor and marsh , the creation of fields , roads , towns , country houses , mines , canals and railways : " in short , with everything that has altered the natural landscape . " 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 The first edition was published by Hodder and Stoughton in 1955 . They reprinted the book in 1956 , 1957 , 1960 , 1963 , 1965 , 1967 , 1969 , 1970 , 1971 , 1974 , 1977 . They issued a new edition in 1988 , a revised edition in 1992 , and a new edition in 2005 , reissued in 2006 . They published Korean and Japanese editions in 2008 . 
 In 1970 , Penguin Books published a paperback Pelican edition in England and a Penguin edition in the United States . Penguin reprinted in 1973 , 1974 , 1975 , 1977 , 1978 , 1979 , 1981 , 1983 , 1985 , 1986 , 1988 , 1991 , 2005 . 
 In 1977 , Book Club Associates published an edition in England . 
 In 1988 , Coronet Books and Guild Publishers published editions in England . 
 In 1992 , Teach Yourself Books published a paperback edition in England . 
 In 2005 , the Folio Society published an edition in England . 
 In 2013 , Little Toller books published a paperback edition in England . 
 = = = Illustrations = = = 
 The book is illustrated with 82 monochrome plates and 17 maps or plans , all uncredited except for some use of Ordnance Survey maps , and so apparently the work of Hoskins himself . These are closely integrated into the text ; for example , the text in chapter 1 is accompanied by a pair of diagrams showing how a <unk> ( ' hollow way ' ) could be formed by the digging of a ' double ditch ' , i.e. a pair of raised earth banks either side of a ditch to mark the boundary of two estates , and supported by a photograph ( Plate 13 ) of a sunken lane in Devon , explained by Hoskins as a boundary , from probably the seventh century , between the Saxon estates of ( royal ) Silverton and Exeter Abbey . The photograph shows high hedgebanks in bright sunshine , dwarfing the figure of a woman in the middle distance . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The book covers its subject in 10 chapters : 
 = = = 1 . The Landscape before the English Settlement = = = 
 Hoskins uses the first few pages of this chapter as an introduction , beginning with praise for William Wordsworth 's A Guide through the District of the Lakes ( 1810 ) , and from which he quotes a passage in which the reader is asked to envisage " an image of the tides visiting and revisiting the <unk> , the main sea dashing against the bolder shore " . Hoskins writes that on a desolate moor one can feel oneself imaginatively back in time to the Bronze Age , but that there are now few such unaltered places left . He argues that the landscape historian " needs to be a botanist , a physical geographer , and a naturalist , as well as an historian " to understand a scene in full : 
