 For what a many @-@ sided pleasure there is in looking at a wide view anywhere in England , not simply as a sun @-@ drenched whole , fading into unknown blue distances , like the view of the West Midland plain from the top of the Malvern Hills , or at a pleasant rural miniature like the crumpled Woburn ridge in homely Bedfordshire ; but in recognizing every one of its details name by name , in knowing how and when each came to be there , why it is just that colour , shape , or size , and not otherwise , and in seeing how the various patterns and parts fit together to make the whole scene . 
 The rest of the chapter covers Pre @-@ Roman , Western ( i.e. Celtic ) and Roman Britain . He estimates very roughly that 750 @,@ 000 acres at most were in use as arable or grassland in Roman times , compared to 27 million acres in 1914 . 
 = = = 2 . The English Settlement = = = 
 Hoskins describes how England was settled with Anglo @-@ Saxon people between c . 450 and 1066 AD , making the country a land of villages . Estate boundaries from this period survive in features such as sunken lanes and banks . The Scandinavian conquest of much of England from the late 9th century added more villages , though many with Scandinavian placename elements such as -by ( ' village ' ) may simply have been renamed Saxon settlements . 
 Many English villages were given their shape in this period , and almost all are described in some detail in the eleventh century Domesday Book . Hoskins identifies three major types of village : those around a green or central square , as at <unk> in Essex ; those along a single street , like Henley in Arden in Warwickshire ; and those consisting of apparently haphazardly scattered dwellings , like Middle Barton near Hoskins 's home in Oxfordshire . 
 = = = 3 . The Colonization of Mediaeval England = = = 
 This chapter looks at the mediaeval landscape from the Domesday Book onwards , with the section ' The Landscape in 1086 ' . The country had almost every village that exists today ; a typical one , Hoskins writes , had a small watermill and a church without a spire . 
 In ' The Clearing of the Woodlands ' , Hoskins argues that before the 15th century England must have looked like one great forest , but most of the woods were cleared for arable or pasture in the 12th and 13th centuries . Under Henry II perhaps a third of the country was royal forest . 
 Hoskins begins the section on ' Marsh , Fen , and Moor ' with the words " There are certain sheets of the one @-@ inch Ordnance Survey maps which one can sit down and read like a book for an hour on end , with growing pleasure and imaginative excitement " . One such section is of The Wash , rich in mediaeval detail . Marshes such as those in Lincolnshire , Norfolk and the Pevensey Levels were reclaimed at this time , whole communities working together , often under the Danelaw . 
 <unk> in the landscape ' briefly describes abbeys , churches , mills , bridges and castles built to serve the growing population , which just before the Black Death had tripled since Domesday . 
 = = = 4 . The Black Death and after = = = 
 Hoskins describes the abandonment of villages from the bubonic plague of 1348 , the Black Death , which killed a third to a half of the population ( he states ) , and the subsequent new colonisation and building as the population eventually recovered . Marginal land such as the Breckland of Norfolk and Suffolk , never thickly populated , was abandoned . Many villages in counties such as Leicestershire were deserted . Villages such as Lower <unk> in Gloucestershire can be seen today only as a ground @-@ plan from the air . 
 Between 1350 and 1500 , many new buildings appeared , especially churches with towers like Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire . Some fine bridges as at Wadebridge in Cornwall are from this period . 
 = = = 5 . Tudor to Georgian England = = = 
 Hoskins starts this chapter by observing that in 1500 in Tudor times there were roughly three sheep for every human being in England , perhaps 8 million sheep to two and a half million people . There were four million acres of hardwood forest , remembered now as Epping Forest , the Forest of Arden , Sherwood Forest , the Forest of Dean , Wychwood and many others . A village might be surrounded by a single enormous thousand acre field , shared amongst all the village 's farmers . There were extensive heaths and wild places , largely uninhabited , with " no industrial smoke , nothing faster on the roads than a horse , no incessant noises from the sky " . The first enclosures and the flowering of rural England , country houses and parks such as the magnificent Burghley House and Knole date from this period up to Georgian times . 
 = = = 6 . Parliamentary Enclosure and the Landscape = = = 
 In this chapter Hoskins describes the effects of enclosure on the landscape and on fields , hedgerows and trees , roads and farmhouses . He begins by quoting the rural poet John Clare : " Inclosure , thou <unk> a curse upon the land , and tasteless was the wretch who thy existence <unk> 'd " . 
 Parliamentary enclosures accounted for about 4 @.@ 5 million acres of what had been open fields , not counting the enclosure of common land and wild ' waste ' . In 1700 roughly half England 's arable land was already enclosed ; by the end of the enclosure process , almost all of it was . The revolution in the landscape began in about 1750 , affecting about 3 @,@ 000 parishes , especially in the English midlands . Between 1760 and 1800 there were 1 @,@ 479 enclosure acts , covering 2 @.@ 5 million acres ; another 1 @.@ 5 million acres were enclosed by 1844 , by more than a thousand further acts . Some counties such as Kent , Essex and Devon were little affected , having largely been enclosed much earlier , often directly from forest or moorland . Many miles of new straight hedgerows were laid to mark out the newly enclosed fields of the midlands ; in some areas such as Derbyshire , straight limestone walls were used instead . Many straight new roads were created at the same time . <unk> remained in the old villages at first , but new red @-@ brick Victorian ones were often built in the middle of their now enclosed land in due course . 
 = = = 7 . The Industrial Revolution and the Landscape = = = 
 Hoskins begins his chapter on industrialisation with the remark " England was still a peaceful agricultural country at the beginning of the seventeenth century . " He describes the early industrial landscape , water power and early mills , steam power and slums . He names transformative inventions such as Kay 's flying shuttle of 1733 and Hargreaves 's spinning jenny of 1767 , and comments that Matthew Boulton opened his steam engine factory " in the still unravished country " outside Birmingham in 1765 . He quotes a poem by Anna Seward lamenting the ravishing of Coalbrookdale , c . 1785 , and one by Wordsworth from The Excursion . He is critical of the industrial slums and the smoke and dirt of the Staffordshire Potteries . He emphasises the rapid growth of industrial towns like Preston , and of new towns like Middlesbrough , which went from a single farm in 1830 to over 50 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 1880 . However he appreciates the mining landscapes of Cornwall , including the gleaming white china clay pits of St Austell and the abandoned tin mines of St <unk> , commenting that " there is a point , as Arthur Young saw , when industrial ugliness becomes sublime " . 
 = = = 8 . Roads , Canals , and Railways = = = 
 Hoskins describes roads and trackways from the Iron Age ( like the Jurassic Way across the midlands , near his Oxfordshire home ) and Roman times ( like Akeman Street in the same area ) . He notes that the Fosse Way runs for miles in Gloucestershire away from any village , as the Anglo @-@ Saxons built villages away from large roads for safety . Still in his home area , he records that " the wide green track now called <unk> Lane " was built in the 10th century for supplies to be carted from the Anglo @-@ Saxon kings ' own estate at Barton . He goes on to describe the building of the canal network between roughly 1760 and 1825 , noting that just one town was created by the canals , Stourport . Soon afterwards , a much more widespread transport network transformed the English landscape : the railways . Hoskins devotes over a page to each of two quotations from Charles Dickens 's <unk> and Son , describing the construction in 1836 of a railway in Camden Town . He mentions , too , that Wordsworth campaigned against the railway from Kendal to Windermere , bringing trains into the heart of the Lake District , and that conservatives like Wordsworth " lost all along the line " . 
 = = = 9 . The Landscape of Towns = = = 
 The last chapter of the body of the book – if Chapter 10 is considered more or less an epilogue – covers towns seen as part of the English landscape . Hoskins justifies this on the grounds that understanding towns brings pleasure . He describes in turn planned towns , the open @-@ field town , and the market town . Towns were planned as early as Norman times , Abbot Baldwin planning Bury St Edmunds between 1066 and 1086 ; Stratford @-@ on @-@ Avon was laid out in 1196 . Another burst of town planning came with the spa towns in the late 18th century , and of new industrial towns like Middlesbrough and Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness in the mid 19th century . Open @-@ field towns like Nottingham , Leicester , and Stamford grew naturally in their own open fields , but were trapped by pasture rights from growing in the 19th century , giving Nottingham slums , and Leicester a problem that it just managed to solve , growing across its fields : while Stamford stopped growing entirely , becoming fossilised as what Hoskins calls a museum piece of a beautiful 17th and 18th century town . Finally , the market towns like Marlborough grew up around their often large and handsome market places , which are however of any number of shapes . 
 = = = 10 . The Landscape Today = = = 
 Hoskins concludes with a brief chapter , with one image , Plate 82 , " The completed English landscape " showing a tall tree in a wide open field , a strip of hedges and villages just visible in the distance . The chapter laments the damage caused to parts of the English landscape , mentioning bulldozers and tractors , nuclear bombers and by @-@ passes , and ends by celebrating again the wealth of detail within a few hundred yards of Hoskins ' study window at Steeple Barton . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 The geographer E. G. R. Taylor , reviewing the book for the Royal Geographical Society in 1955 , wrote that Hoskins made the case for getting a strong pair of boots to learn landscape history clearly enough . Taylor compared the book to Dudley Stamp 's Man and the Land , published a few months earlier in 1955 , saying that Hoskins seemed to have missed it , but that given the differences in their approaches , they could be read side by side . She noted also that Hoskins did not talk about London though he covered town landscapes , and appeared unaware of urban geography . Her review ended by remarking that Hoskins " views the industrial revolution with mounting horror , and the industrialists themselves are bitterly chastised as ' completely and grotesquely insensitive . No scruples weakened their lust for money ; they made their money and left their muck . ' " She noted however that Hoskins had happily moved to " a quiet spot in Oxfordshire where he can forget the ' barbaric England of the scientists , the military men and the politicians ' and look out of his study window on to the past " , where , she wrote , he " draws for us a last tender and evocative picture of the ' gentle unravished English landscape . ' " Dr. Hoskins , she wrote , forgetting all the horrors , " reaches back through the centuries one by one and rediscovers Eden " . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Penelope Lively , writing in The Guardian , describes the book as 
 a marvellous , robust , opinionated account of the landscape as narrative , whether rural or urban , the visible record of what has gone before , once you know how to read it – or once he has told you how . You were to put on your walking boots and understand the country in which you lived . Plenty did , or tried to ; I did . 
 William Boyd , also in The Guardian , described the book as " an absolute trailblazer , a revolution . " He notes that W. H. Auden " revered " the book , and that reading Hoskins had enabled him to ' read ' a landscape as a " historical palimpsest " : 
 The familiar English countryside , in whatever regional variation , became a form of historical palimpsest – its evolving history there to be decoded and discerned for those who could look at it through the innovative lens that Hoskins provided . It was as if the landscape was all of a sudden an archaeological dig – hills and dales , woods and copses , fields and rivers , villages and roads ceased to be simple features of a view . Instead the whole history of English humankind and husbandry was on display , from the Holocene age to the latest horrors of agribusiness . And the book in which that history was written was the very land itself . 
 Local historian Graeme White , in The Medieval English Landscape , 1400 – 1540 , calls Hoskins ' book " brilliantly @-@ crafted " and observes that " Although this famously railed against the ' England of the arterial by @-@ pass , treeless and stinking of diesel oil ' – alone with much else belonging to the mid @-@ twentieth century – the fact that national car ownership more than doubled during the 1950s made this a subject whose time had come . " 
 Paul Johnson , writing in The Spectator , said that the book " was for me an eye @-@ opener , as it was for many people . It told us of the extent to which our landscape had been made by man , not God , and taught us to look much more <unk> at it . " 
 = = = An assessment = = = 
 Matthew H. Johnson , writing a chapter on English culture and landscape in the edited book The Public Value of the Humanities , identifies " six key points " established by Hoskins : 
 1 . The landscape is of great antiquity ( " everything is much older than we think " ) 
 2 . Landscapes often changed suddenly , as in the 18th century enclosures . 
 3 . Hoskins , following O. G. S. Crawford 's 1953 Archaeology in the Field , stressed we had to read the landscape using research to reveal its cultural value . 
 4 . Hoskins thus told a " grand and emotive story about that landscape . " Johnson compares this to J.R.R. Tolkien 's account in The Lord of the Rings when the hobbits return to a " despoiled and industrialized landscape of the Shire " . 
 5 . The narrative is populist , to be disseminated " to anyone who would listen . " The result was that it became part of English post @-@ war culture . 
 6 . It was " openly anti @-@ modernist " . In evidence , Johnson cites Hoskins 's " most famous passage " from the concluding chapter : 
 What else has happened in the immemorial landscape of the English countryside ? Airfields have flayed it bare … Poor devastated Lincolnshire and Suffolk ! And those long gentle lines of the dip @-@ slope of the Cotswolds , those misty uplands of the sheep @-@ grey oolite , how they have lent themselves to the villainous requirements of the new age ! Over them drones , day after day , the obscene shape of the atom @-@ bomber , laying a trail like a filthy slug upon Constable 's and Gainsborough 's sky . England of the Nissen @-@ hut , the " pre @-@ fab " , and the electric fence , of the high barbed wire around some unmentionable devilment ; England of the arterial by @-@ pass , treeless and stinking of diesel oil , murderous with lorries ; England of the bombing @-@ range wherever there was once silence … Barbaric England of the scientists , the military men , and the politicians ; let us turn away and contemplate the past before all is lost to the vandals . 
 = = Television = = 
 In 1972 the BBC broadcast an episode of the television programme Horizon on The Making of the English Landscape produced by Peter Jones , and featuring Hoskins as presenter . Although the programme was inspired by the original book , Hoskins wrote an 84 @-@ page illustrated BBC book , English Landscapes , to accompany the programme . Later in the 1970s , Jones went on to produce a series of 12 TV programmes for BBC2 , Landscapes of England , in which additional areas of the country were studied , leading to a further title , One Man 's England to accompany the series . 
 = Seeing Red ( Dexter ) = 
 " Seeing Red " is the tenth episode of the first season of the American television drama series Dexter , which first aired on December 3 , 2006 on Showtime in the United States . The episode was written by Kevin R. Maynard and was directed by Michael Cuesta . In the episode , the Miami Metro Homicide Department team investigate a blood @-@ soaked crime scene , where blood spatter analyst Dexter Morgan ( Michael C. Hall ) is confronted by a repressed memory of a traumatic incident from his childhood . Meanwhile , Dexter 's girlfriend Rita Bennett ( Julie Benz ) is charged with assaulting her ex @-@ husband Paul Bennett ( Mark Pellegrino ) and risks losing custody of their children , while Det . Angel Batista ( David Zayas ) investigates a hunch that the Ice Truck Killer has an amputee fetish . 
 Scenes for " Seeing Red " were shot at several locations around Long Beach , California . Particular attention was paid to the cinematography and filming of the sequence of Dexter 's flashbacks to make them feel like " fragments of memory " . The episode received positive reviews from critics , with particular mention made to the scene in which Dexter hits Rita 's ex @-@ husband , Paul , in the head with a frying pan because of his threats about the lengths he will go to in order to protect his children . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When a key to a room at the Marina View Hotel is delivered inside a jar of blood to the Homicide Department , Sgt. James Doakes ( Erik King ) and Debra Morgan ( Jennifer Carpenter ) visit the hotel , where they find a room completely covered in blood . Dexter is sent in first to investigate , but seeing the blood @-@ covered room brings back a repressed memory from his childhood — Dexter at the age of three years sitting in a pool of blood — and he collapses and runs from the room . The forensics team surmises that the blood in the hotel room came from at least five different bodies , although none were in the room . Since there were only one set of footprints in the room , they assume that the victims were killed elsewhere and their blood spread around the room by the killer . Debra suggests that the Ice Truck Killer , who had five bloodless victims , may have been responsible . 
 Angel finds that he cannot stop talking about his divorce when trying to meet new women at a bar . After he meets a woman recovering from her own divorce , he has to leave her to speak to a prostitute whom he sees across the room with a prosthetic hand and fingernails painted in the same way as the Ice Truck Killer 's first victim . Working on a hunch that the Ice Truck Killer is an <unk> , Angel decides to speak to Debra 's boyfriend , Rudy Cooper , a prosthetics specialist and ( unbeknownst to anyone else ) the actual Ice Truck Killer . Rudy cooperates with the interview upon realizing that Angel does not know his identity . Later , Angel is stabbed in a parking lot by a masked man . Angel manages to elbow him in the face before two men scare the attacker off . Minutes later , Rudy - who had earlier fallen out with Debra due to secretly having dinner with Dexter - arrives with flowers . They kiss , but Rudy backs away complaining of a cut lip , suggesting that he was Angel 's attacker . 
 Rita finds out from a county sheriff that Paul , her abusive ex @-@ husband who attacked her the night before , is pressing charges against her for assault . She talks with a lawyer , who tells her that since she invited Paul into her house , she cannot prove that her intent was to defuse the situation . At a hearing , it is revealed that Rita violated her and Paul 's custody agreement , making Paul 's case against her even stronger . When Paul drops by Rita 's house to return their children , he threatens Dexter when the two are alone in the kitchen , and Dexter responds by hitting him with a frying pan . Paul loses consciousness , so Dexter drives his body back to Paul 's hotel and frames him for drug abuse . Dexter alerts the police and Paul is sent back to prison . 
 With encouragement from Rudy , Dexter decides to dig up his repressed memory rather than avoid it . He returns to the bloody hotel room , where he relives the memory , which he realizes was of the murder of his mother with a chainsaw , right in front of him , when he was three . 
 = = Production = = 
 Since Dexter 's producers try to shield the child actors as much as possible from the show 's dark subject matter , executive producer Daniel Cerone urged the mother of his son 's friend not to let her son audition to play a young Dexter , who is filmed sitting in a pool of blood . Erik King found the shot of the boy crying in the blood to be the creepiest moment of the first season . He described it as " very uncomfortable to watch , even when you know it 's not real and you know these kids are actors . " Cinematographer Romeo Tirone tightened the camera 's shutter angle when filming these scenes to make them " feel like fragments of memory - subjective , with tight close @-@ ups against an indistinct background . You don 't see all the details of the environment . " Series director Keith Gordon found these flashbacks " incredible " because he thought they were " like a Stanley Kubrick movie " . 
 Several scenes from the episode were filmed on September 28 , 2006 with a crew of 200 people in Long Beach , California at the Seaport Marina Hotel , along the Pacific Coast Highway , and on San <unk> Avenue . The Seaport Marina Hotel was used as the setting for Paul 's motel , while a house on San <unk> Avenue was used as Rita 's house . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . Eric Goldman of IGN reviewed " Seeing Red " warmly and gave the episode an " Outstanding " rating of 9 @.@ 0 / 10 . He thought that the scene wherein Dexter hits Paul was " one of the most jaw @-@ dropping , intense scenes yet " , and he liked that Angel 's " seeming separate " subplot was well @-@ linked to the main plotline of the episode . He noted the " fascinating dynamic " between Dexter and Rudy , sensing " interesting psycho @-@ sexual undercurrents " developing . TV Guide 's Paula Paige felt that " Seeing Red " proved that each episode of Dexter was a constant improvement on the last . She enjoyed Dexter 's manipulation by Rudy and found his solution to Paul 's threats " perfect " . Jonathan Toomey of TV Squad wrote that he was " in awe " of the episode . He was particularly impressed with Dexter 's choice to frame Paul rather than kill him , and a minor storyline involving Lt. María LaGuerta ( Lauren Vélez ) and her betrayal of her superior , Capt. Tom Matthews ( Geoff Pierson ) . 
 = Parachutes ( album ) = 
 Parachutes is the debut studio album by the British alternative rock band Coldplay . It was released by Parlophone on 10 July 2000 in the United Kingdom . The album was produced by the band and British record producer Ken Nelson , excluding one track , " High Speed " , which was produced by Chris Allison . Parachutes has spawned the hit singles " Shiver " , " Yellow " , " Trouble " , and " Don 't Panic " . 
 The album was a commercial success , and was met with positive reviews . Upon release , the album quickly reached number one in the United Kingdom , and has since been certified 8 × Platinum . In the United States , the album peaked at number 51 on the Billboard 200 , and has since been certified 2 × Platinum . It won the Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album in 2002 , and has earned the band various accolades since its release . Parachutes is also the 19th best @-@ selling album of the 21st century in the United Kingdom , and won the Best British Album award at the 2001 Brit Awards . As of 2011 , it has sold around 8 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band started working on the album in 1999 and produced an EP with British record producer Chris Allison . Allison was asked to ' come in and give the band a bit of a direction sound wise . Both the band and the A & R department – both parties wanted that ' . Things got off to a productive start with the song ' High Speed ' , which ultimately proved good enough to make it onto the Parachutes album . Allison describes it thus : ' You 'll notice it is quite a bit different to the other tracks , because there are other sounds going on in it : we wanted to mix a soundscape in with the classic rock sound on that particular track . I thought ' High Speed ' was a really good marriage between the classic rock sound and the new sound that was developing out of it , something that was more atmospheric ' . Seven tracks in all were recorded during the sessions at Orinoco studios in London , three of them ended up on The Blue Room EP . 
 The band took a break to write more songs for the album . A few months later it was arranged that Allison and the band meet at a rehearsal room to start on the album proper . " They started up playing in the rehearsal room and they really weren 't together at all . And I was very honest with them , I just sort of said ' Look this simply isn 't good enough ' " . Allison adds , " The interesting , the most significant thing that did occur out of the fact that we didn 't end up starting the album on that day of the rehearsal was that Chris Martin had not written ' Yellow ' by that time " . 
 Several months later British record producer Ken Nelson was chosen , producing all but one song on Parachutes . He was introduced to Coldplay by his manager Pete Byrne ( who gave him a copy of the band 's Fierce Panda @-@ distributed debut single in 1999 ) . Nelson has claimed that , as soon as he heard vocalist Chris Martin 's voice on the song " Bigger Stronger " , he " realised that he was something special " . Nelson was offered the job while Coldplay were performing in Liverpool with English indie rock band Gomez ( whose debut album , Bring It On , was what he had produced at the time ) . 
 Coldplay initially planned to record Parachutes in the space of two weeks . However , tours and other live performances caused the recording to spread out between September 1999 and April – May 2000 . The band began work on the album at Rockfield Studios in Wales , Matrix Studios , and Wessex Sound Studios , although the majority of Parachutes ' tracks were recorded at Liverpool 's Parr Street Studios . The band worked in three studio rooms at Parr Street , and tracked much of the album in one of these rooms — the project studio which producer Ken Nelson describes as " basically a demo room " . The Chris Allison @-@ produced track " High Speed " was also included on the album , and originates from earlier sessions at <unk> Studios in London . The album was mixed by American engineer Michael Brauer in New York . Coldplay 's record label , Parlophone , had originally intended to use a mixing engineer for the tracks they picked as singles , but eventually hired Brauer to work on all songs on Parachutes except the song " High Speed " which was mixed by Chris Allison . 
 At the Liverpool concert where he was offered the production job Nelson had noted that Coldplay 's performance was " very very uptight [ ... ] they rushed through the set and it was quite difficult to listen to " . Once in the studio Nelson and the band went through each song , learning how to play the piece live and deciding what tempo to play it at in an attempt to get the group to " calm down " ( " Trouble " , for example , had to be reworked to eliminate the cacophony included in its early versions ) . 
 The album 's cover features a photograph of a globe taken with a disposable Kodak camera . The globe had been purchased from W H Smith for £ 10 ; it was featured in the music videos for " Shiver " and " Don 't Panic " , and also accompanied the band on their tours . The album was dedicated to drummer Will Champion 's mother , Dr. Sara Champion , who died of cancer in 2000 . 
 = = Music and style = = 
 Champion has explained that Nelson 's production style was liberating and allowed the band to feel at ease during the recording of Parachutes ( many songs from the album often featured slow tempos ) . The ensuing album was " a record 's worth of moody and atmospheric tunes " . As a nod to the moods created by the album , Champion has compared the song lyrics to the 1972 song " Perfect Day " by American rock singer @-@ songwriter Lou Reed , stating that the " lyrics are beautiful and they 're really , really happy , but the music is really , really sad . It 's that kind of thing , where you can create [ differing ] moods through the music and lyrics . " 
 Parachutes was recognised to have an alternative rock sound similar to English band Radiohead in their Bends era . In fact , it has been suggested that the album 's commercial success was due in part to a portion of Radiohead 's audience being alienated by the band 's experimental and more electronic @-@ influenced Kid A album . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Parachutes was released on 10 July 2000 in the United Kingdom via record label Parlophone . In the United States , it was released on 7 November 2000 by record label Nettwerk . The album has been made available on various formats since its initial release ; both Parlophone and Nettwerk released it as a CD in 2000 , and it was also released as a cassette by newfound US label Capitol in 2001 . In the following year , Parlophone issued the album as an LP . 
 The main version of the album contains 10 tracks ; the tenth track , " Everything 's Not Lost " , segues to a hidden short track called " Life Is for Living " , clocking in for a total of 7 : 15 . The Japanese version of the album contains all main tracks , and the additional tracks " Careful Where You Stand " and " For You " . 
 Four singles were released from the album : " Shiver " , " Yellow " , " Trouble " , and " Don 't Panic " . " Shiver " served as lead single in the United Kingdom while " Yellow " was used in the United States . Upon the release of " Trouble " , Coldplay abandoned their initial plan of releasing " Don 't Panic " as the album 's fourth single , after they deemed three singles were enough for an album . Despite this , however , it was released as a single in some European regions . 
 Since its wide release , Parachutes has earned the band a large array of awards . The album won Best Album at the 2000 Q Awards , and was nominated at the 2000 Mercury Music Prize . The following year , the band earned Best Alternative Music Album at the Grammy Awards and Best British Album at the BRIT Awards . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Parachutes was released to generally favorable reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on 20 reviews . In a contemporary review of the album , Michael Hubbard of musicOMH called it " an album of remarkable depth , especially when one considers the youthful ages of the band members . " NME stated that " all told , it 's incredible this is a debut album " and concluded that " accomplished , yet subtle , it works perfectly as a whole in a way all the production skills in the world couldn 't replicate . " Melody Maker hailed Parachutes as a " masterpiece " and " a defining musical statement of 2000 " , while James Oldham of Uncut felt that the album " more than justifies the plaudits heaped upon [ the band ] by the weekly music press " . The Guardian described the album as " one of the year 's most uplifting albums " , adding that it features " elegant songs , classic guitars and gorgeous singing " . 
 While noting that Parachutes " brings nothing new to the table " and that its " musical reference points are immediately recognizable and difficult to overlook " , Billboard stated that the band " seems talented enough to transcend this early identity crisis . " Matt Diehl of Rolling Stone opined that the album " ultimately rises above its influences to become a work of real transcendence " . In a retrospective write @-@ up , MacKenzie Wilson of AllMusic commented that Parachutes introduced the band as " young musicians still honing their sweet harmonies " , adding that the album " deserved the accolades it received because it followed the general rule when introducing decent pop songs : keep the emotion genuine and real . " 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Spencer Owen of Pitchfork Media called the album " harmless and pretty ... [ but ] nothing else " . Barry Walters , writing in The Village Voice , similarly writes that " there 's little on Parachutes that demands attention or punctures the pensive spell , and , unlike Travis 's , Coldplay 's hooks are slight . " In his Consumer Guide column for The Village Voice , Robert Christgau selected " Yellow " and " Don 't Panic " as " choice cuts " , indicating good songs on " an album that isn 't worth your time or money . " <unk> <unk> of Stylus Magazine felt that " the finer moments of Parachutes are blended with some boring sappy songs " , with Martin 's " powerful voice " ultimately being " in many ways wasted on songs that are alright but not bewildering . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Parachutes performed well in the United Kingdom . The popularity of the songs in British clubs , pubs and sporting events bolstered the album to debut at number one on the UK Albums Chart . It has been certified eight @-@ times Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry , with sales of around 2 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 units , to date . In July 2011 , Parachutes climbed from No. 184 back to No. 48 in the album 's 318th charting week there . As of February 2012 , the album had sold 2 @,@ 559 @,@ 678 copies in the UK , making it the third biggest selling Coldplay album behind A Rush of Blood to the Head ( 2 @.@ 8 million ) and X & Y ( 2 @.@ 6 million ) . 
 Parachutes has reached number 51 on the US Billboard 200 , and has peaked at number one on the Billboard Heatseekers . Over two million copies have been shipped to the United States , leading to being certified two @-@ time Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . It has also been certified three @-@ time Platinum in Australia by the Australian Recording Industry Association , and two @-@ time Platinum in Canada by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 According to the British trade paper Music Week , Parachutes was one of the most @-@ impressive debut albums ever , spawning the hit singles " Shiver " , " Yellow " , and " Trouble " . With nearly 2 @.@ 4 million units sold in the United Kingdom alone , it has placed at number 12 on the country 's list of 20 biggest @-@ selling albums of the 21st century . The album was placed at number 25 in Channel 4 's 100 greatest albums of all time , and in 2006 at number 33 in NME 's 100 greatest British albums . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 Despite the album 's critical and commercial success , Chris Martin said that Coldplay didn 't like the album . He also commented that they look beyond Parachutes : " We know that 's terrible music and we always try to think about what we can do next . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Chris Martin , Jonny Buckland , Guy Berryman , and Will Champion . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Roach , Martin ( 2003 ) . Coldplay : Nobody Said it was Easy . Omnibus Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7119 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Retrieved 9 September 2008 . 
 = Joan of Arc ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Joan of Arc " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna from her thirteenth studio album Rebel Heart ( 2015 ) . It was written by Madonna , Toby Gad , Maureen McDonald and Larry Griffin Jr . , with production being done by Madonna , Gad , AFSHeeN and Josh Cumbee . The song 's demo was leaked onto the internet on December 17 , 2014 , with twelve other tracks from the album . Its final version was released on February 9 , 2015 with two other tracks on the iTunes store . " Joan of Arc " is the eighth track on Rebel Heart and has similarity to the demo version , but with a lift in its tempo during the chorus . It is a guitar @-@ led pop and electro @-@ folk ballad , with drums and guitars being added as the song 's instrumentation . 
 Lyrically , the song uses the metaphor of Joan of Arc to explain that even strong people have fragile hearts and can break down , showing that the air of self @-@ confidence that someone can carry through an entire life may be just a shield for insecurities . The lyrical content present on the song was compared to her compositions during her previous albums , Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) and Ray of Light ( 1998 ) , especially " Drowned World / Substitute for Love " from the latter . The song received positive reviews from most music critics , who commended her raw vocals , the revelatory lyrics that matched with the album 's thematic and noted it for being a highlight on the record . It charted in some European territories , peaking inside the top @-@ twenty in Hungary and the top @-@ forty in Spain and Sweden . Madonna performed the track in an acoustic version on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , where the performance received acclaim from critics , who noted an improvement on her vocals . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 During the recording process of her thirteenth studio album , Madonna enlisted several collaborators , with MoZella , Symbolyc One and Toby Gad being announced as new collaborators on the album in April 2014 . Madonna posted a photograph of the trio working with her in a recording studio on her Instagram account . She said on the photograph , " Having an Iconic Moment in the studio with Toby @-@ Mozilla and S1 . My throat hurts from singing , laughing and crying . " Gad worked with Madonna on fourteen songs , twelve appeared on the album 's multiple <unk> , with one being " Joan of Arc " . According to Gad , " The first week she was quite intimidating . It was like a test phase . You have to criticize , but you can 't really offend . But she also likes honest , harsh critics to say things as they are . It worked out really well and she got sweeter and sweeter . " In December 2014 , thirteen demos of tracks for the album , including " Joan of Arc " , were leaked to the Internet . The song was described as a " gentle ballad " . To avoid further leaks , Madonna released six completed tracks with the pre @-@ order for the album on the iTunes Store on December 20 , 2014 , as an " early Christmas gift " . On February 9 , 2015 , the singer released three other finished tracks , including the final version of " Joan of Arc " , as well as the album 's track list . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Joan of Arc " was written by Madonna , Toby Gad , MoZella and Symbolyc One ( S1 ) , with production being done by Madonna , Gad , AFSHeeN and Josh Cumbee . Gad was also responsible for programming , additional backing vocals and the song 's instruments , which were also played by AFSHeeN , Cumbee , Stephen Kozmeniuk , Dan Warner ( guitar ) and Lee Levin . The track was engineered and mixed by Demacio " Demo " Castellon with Gad and Angie Teo . " Joan of Arc " is a guitar @-@ led pop and electro @-@ folk ballad , which starts acoustic , similar to its demo version , but having a " new beat that lifts the BPMs considerably " in the chorus , with the added drums and guitars " turning [ it ] into a mid @-@ paced radio @-@ friendly pop [ song ] , " but preserving the " string @-@ laden bridge and acoustic denouement . " Madonna 's vocals were considered " hushed , vibrato @-@ tinged " , and " the rawest that [ her ] voice has sounded since ' Ray of Light ' during the opening lines . 
 Lyrically , the confessional song talks plainly and plaintively about the detachment and loneliness that Madonna feels in the face of the press , with the singer lamenting : " Each time they write a hateful word / dragging my soul into the dirt / I wanna die . " John Marrs of Gay Times compared the lyrical content of the song to Madonna 's " Drowned World / Substitute For Love " ( 1998 ) explaining that the lyrics are essentially autobiographical as well as talks about how her outspokenness had led to the media trying to " hurt her " . It also talks about how although Madonna is tough at heart , she still feels the " negativity " of the media . The chorus , which features skittering drums and strings , has Madonna simply saying : " I don 't wanna talk about it right now / even hearts made out of steel can break down . " In an interview for The New York Times , Madonna explained the lyrics that she did not have the conviction of Joan of Arc , and is still hurt by any negative words . She further elaborated for a Rolling Stone interview : 
 I 've always been drawn to her story . More than anything , drawn to her commitment to what she believed in . In the face of death , she did not back down . And that is a theme that resonates with me . And women need female role models like that . There 's not a lot . I mean , she was burned at the stake after leading her country to victory , after defeating the English . I mean , the idea that instead of celebrating her , they called her a heretic because she was dressed like a boy , and how could this person , this one girl , be so victorious and so clever to have the strategy and knowledge to wage , and win , a war ? There must be something wrong with her . OK , she 's a witch . Now we have to destroy her . And she didn 't back down , and I admire that . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Joey Lynch of Billboard compared the song 's demo to the studio versions , claiming that " The studio version of ' Joan of Arc ' is a massive improvement on the illegally leaked demo that preceded news of the album itself . [ ... ] Nowhere is this more apparent than on ' Joan of Arc , ' a solid album track that sounds 10 times better than the leaked version . " While reviewing the three tracks released prior to the album , Sam C. Mac of Slant Magazine called it " arguably the standout of the whole over @-@ blown affair , " noting that the song " sounded like a highlight even in its more acoustic demo form , but the album version is a full @-@ on stunner ... The song sounds a bit like a Cardigans leftover circa ' Long Gone Before Daylight ' . It 's the strongest ( anti- ) ballad of Madonna 's last few albums , and a strong argument for artists responding to the denigration of their art through the more considered medium of the art itself , rather than snap public statements . [ ... ] More than any of the previously released songs , ' Joan of Arc ' also establishes one of the foundational themes of Rebel Heart , albeit one not always evident when wading through the poorly sequenced album . " Adding to the previous review , Annie Zaleski of The A.V. Club praised the juxtapositions in the album 's lyrical content , which according to her , " make some of her most vulnerable , engaging work in years — in particular ' Joan of Arc ' . " 
 Ben Kelly of Attitude called it " a fresh sounding pop guitar tune treading new territory for her , and which could carry serious currency as a single , " while Nick Levine of Time Out labeled it " a sublime electro @-@ folk ballad . " Furthermore , Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times considered it " the kind [ of song ] that can lift spirits to emotional heights . " Reviewing Rebel Heart for Now , journalist Kevin Ritchie named " Joan of Arc " as one of " the most ambitious and interesting [ song ] lyrically . " Amy Pettifer of The Quietus pointed out that " It could be a Taylor Swift song and that 's a compliment . " She also analysed that the Joan of Arc metaphor is " a bit of a stretch " , but it 's " the sweetest and catchiest song on the album thus far . " Music critic Alexis Petridis wrote in The Guardian that the song is one of the " indispensable moments " on the album , " on which the singer genuinely seems to be revealing her personal feelings and frailties " , saying that it is " cut from the same emotional cloth as Like a Prayer 's ' Promise to Try ' or ' Ray of Light ' ' s ' Drowned World / Substitute for Love ' . " John Marrs of Gay Times agreed with the ' Like a Prayer ' -style influence , noting that " [ v ] <unk> and lyrically she could easily be channeling Eva Peron , so don ’ t cry for her too much . " 
 Digital Spy 's Lewis Corner reflected on the song 's lyrics that " [ Madonna ] is still very much a sensitive soul despite a hardened public persona . [ The singer ] acknowledging her mortality , for some reason , feels wholly more intriguing than suggestive rhetoric that belongs with her work back in the ' 90s . " Jamieson Cox of Time and Lauren Murphy of The Irish Times agreed that the song is one of the album 's highlights . Brennan Carley of Spin thought that the song " revels convincingly in its vulnerability " where as Lindsay Zoladz of New York cited " Joan of Arc " as one of the " most affecting songs " on the album for grappling with the feeling of being defeated and fatigued directly . Bradley Stern of MuuMuse was largely positive , declaring that the song " is possibly Madonna ’ s best ballad since ' Miles Away ' — or really since the Music or Ray of Light era . " On the other hand , Consequence of Sound 's Sasha Geffen had mixed feelings about the song , calling it a " lukewarm love [ track that ] couples easy , inoffensive melodies with historical Christian imagery . " Further criticism came from Saeed Saeed of The National about the " anaemic production " , while The New Zealand Herald 's Lydia Jenkin called it awfully pedestrian " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After " Joan of Arc " was released with " Iconic " and " Hold Tight " on February 5 , 2015 , the song managed to reach number twenty on the Hungarian charts , while in Spain and Sweden the song peaked inside the top @-@ forty , reaching numbers twenty @-@ seven and thirty @-@ eight , respectively . In France , nine songs from Rebel Heart managed to enter the SNEP charts , with " Joan of Arc " being the second highest charting non @-@ single from the album , managing to peak at number seventy @-@ six , and peaking higher than the single " Bitch I 'm Madonna " ( which reached number 90 ) . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna performed " Joan of Arc " in an acoustic version for the first time during her week on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on March 18 , 2015 . Madonna was dressed in a sequined heart blouse , with the performed track being " slightly slower than the studio version , while parts of the song [ had a minimal production ] " . Mike Wass of Idolator praised the performance , calling it " a little too good to be true — but it 's nice to see Madonna showing her softer side " . Digital Journal reviewer Markos Papadatos wrote that it was " an outstanding vocal performance " , where Madonna " showcased tremendous control over her voice , and allows the lyrics to speak for themselves . Her delivery is emotional , vulnerable yet delicate . " Writing for The Inquisitr , Daryl Deino praised her vocal performance , saying that she " showed the world once again just what her voice is made of " , calling the version " beautiful " . Furthermore , Bradley Stern of MuuMuse also applauded the performance , calling " [ r ] <unk> great . Super vulnerable , super emotional ... and that chilly guitar finish was a wonderful surprise " . Madonna also added the song to the set list of her Tears of a Clown free concert in Australia — an intimate show where the singer combined a mix of acoustic music , comedy and storytelling . It was considered a " gorgeous ballad " by Cameron Adams of News.com.au website . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Webo Girl Publishing , Inc . ( ASCAP ) / Atlas Music Publishing and Gadfly Songs ( ASCAP ) / EMI April Music , Inc. and Mo Zella Mo Music ( ASCAP ) / WB Music Corp. 
 Roc Nation Music and <unk> 's Soul Music Publishing WB Music Corp. ( ASCAP ) . 
 Personnel 
 Management and personnel adapted from Madonna 's official website . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = I Am ( Leona Lewis song ) = 
 " I Am " is a song by British singer and songwriter Leona Lewis from her fifth studio album , I Am ( 2015 ) . The song was written by Lewis , Toby Gad and Eg White , with Gad and White producing it . Lyrically , " I Am " is about the feelings and emotions experienced by Lewis following her departure from her former record label Syco and its boss , Simon Cowell . It is a dance @-@ influenced track which makes use of strings , piano and drums as part of its instrumentation . Its composition garnered comparisons to singers Avril Lavigne and Massive Attack . Island released " I Am " on 17 July 2015 as the lead single for the United Kingdom , but it is the second single to be released from the album overall . Remixes by Fastlane and DEVolution were also released . The track garnered a positive response from music critics , many of whom praised Lewis ' strong and emotive vocal performance and described it as a standout on the album . Lewis has performed the song live on The National Lottery : In It to Win It and at the BBC 's Radio 2 Live in Hyde Park festival . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " I Am " was written by Leona Lewis , Toby Gad and Eg White , with Gad and White producing the track , for Lewis 's fifth studio album of the same name ( 2015 ) . It was published by ASCAP and Atlas Music publishings ( on behalf of itself and Gadfly Songs ( ASCAP ) and Kobalt Music Group Ltd . White performed much of the song 's instrumentation , and is credited with playing the piano , drums , bass and bells , as well as the string and drum programming . The strings were recorded by White and Kristian Larsen in Studio A at <unk> Studios , and were arranged by White , transcribed by Clarissa Farran , and contracted by Hilary <unk> . The violins were played by <unk> Johnston , <unk> Sato , Max Baillie , Bea Lovejoy , Warren <unk> , Janice Graham , Helen Paterson and Hannah Dawson . Meghan Cassidy and James Boyd played the viola , while David Cohen and Ben Chappell played the cello . " I Am " was mixed by Wez Clarke , with additional mixing carried out by Gad at Kite Music Studios in Los Angeles . The track 's audio was mastered by Tom Coyne at Sterling Sound studios in New York City , with assistance from Randy Merrill . Lewis provided all of the vocals for the track . For the acoustic version of " I Am " , Gad undertook all of the instrumentation and also performed the mixing . 
 " I Am " is a dance @-@ influenced song . Some critics believe the lyrics allude to Lewis ' emotions and feelings following her departure from Syco Records and Simon Cowell , her former label boss and friend . Digital Spy writer Lewis Corner felt that the title track had very few barriers , exemplified by the lyrics " I am , with or without you / I am , breathing without you / I am , somebody without you . " Lewis performs the lyrics over an instrumentation of " rousing " strings and breakbeats . As she sings " I won 't change for you , " a heavy drum beat and occasional piano chimes reminiscent of songs by Avril Lavigne are played . 
 = = Release and remixes = = 
 On 30 June 2015 , Lewis released a three @-@ minute teaser video with snippets of " I Am " , " Ladders , " Power " and " Thunder " . " I Am " was released as the second single from the album and lead single for the United Kingdom ; it was not promoted in the United States due to the decision to release the album 's third overall single " Thunder " as its lead single instead . The full length version of " I Am " premiered on BBC Radio 2 on 17 July 2015 . The same day , the track was made available as an automatic download for anyone who had previously pre @-@ ordered the album . A two @-@ track remix EP with dance remixes by Fastlane and DEVolution was also made available as a digital download on 17 July in the United Kingdom , Australia , France , Germany , Ireland , and New Zealand . " I Am " was added to BBC Radio 2 's B @-@ list playlist on 15 August . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Kathy Iandoli of Idolator highlighted " I Am " as a " gorgeous standout " example of Lewis ' ability to " just [ sing ] " a song as opposed to using auto @-@ tune on " Power " and over @-@ singing on " I Got You " . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy felt that the track put " Simon [ Cowell ] in his place in a way Louis Walsh could only dream of . " Brad O <unk> for Popjustice likened the song to Massive Attack 's 1991 song " Unfinished Sympathy " " with a different song on top " , while Official Charts Company writer Rob Copsey described it as " gutsy and uplifting " . However , Michael Clemons of The Daily Reveille thought that while it was not a stand out track , it was a good listen . Chuck Campbell of Knoxville News Sentinel thought that the track 's lyrical theme , and the album 's theme as a whole , was flawed as a concept , writing " The problem with repeatedly declaring you don ’ t need the approval of someone who has wronged you is that your message is false . Clearly if Lewis indulges in six straight bitter songs about defiantly rebounding from a bad relationship ( which she does on “ I Am ” ) , she obviously craves validation from the very person ( or people ) who did her dirty . " 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Lewis performed " I Am " for the first time during a live showcase at the Hospital Club in London on 14 April 2015 . The singer premiered four other tracks from I Am including " Ladders " , " I Got You " , " Thank You " and " Fire Under My Feet " . Stefan Kyriazis of the Daily Star described " I Am " and " Ladders " as " instant crowd pleasers " . Lewis later performed the track live on The National Lottery : In It to Win It on 12 September 2015 , and again the following day at the BBC 's Radio 2 Live in Hyde Park festival . The set @-@ list also included performances of " Better in Time " , " Bleeding Love " , " Run " , " Fire Under My Feet " and " I Got You " . " I Am " is included as the opening song on her 2016 concert tour of the same name . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 " I Am " ( Album version ) – 3 : 42 
 " I Am " ( Acoustic album version ) – 3 : 26 
 " I Am " ( Fastlane remix ) – 4 : 44 
 " I Am " ( DEVolution remix ) – 4 : 51 
 = = Release history = = 
 = SMS Kaiserin = 
 SMS Kaiserin was the third vessel of the Kaiser class of battleships of the Imperial German Navy . Kaiserin 's keel was laid in November 1910 at the Howaldtswerke dockyard in Kiel . She was launched on 11 November 1911 and was commissioned into the fleet on 14 May 1913 . The ship was equipped with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets , and had a top speed of 22 @.@ 1 knots ( 40 @.@ 9 km / h ; 25 @.@ 4 mph ) . Kaiserin was assigned to the III Battle Squadron and later the IV Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of her career , including World War I. 
 Along with her four sister ships , Kaiser , Friedrich der Grosse , König Albert , and Prinzregent Luitpold , Kaiserin participated in all of the major fleet operations of World War I , including the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The ship was also involved in Operation Albion , an amphibious assault on the Russian @-@ held islands in the Gulf of Riga , in October 1917 . She later saw action during the Second Battle of Heligoland Bight in November 1917 . 
 After Germany 's defeat in the war and the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , the Royal Navy interned Kaiserin and most of the capital ships of the High Seas Fleet in Scapa Flow . The ships were disarmed and reduced to skeleton crews while the Allied powers negotiated the final version of the Treaty of Versailles . On 21 June 1919 , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . Kaiserin was raised in May 1936 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Hagen as a replacement for the obsolete coastal defense ship Hagen , Kaiserin was laid down at the Howaldtswerke dockyard in Kiel in November 1910 . She was launched on 11 November 1911 , after which fitting @-@ out work was completed . At the launching ceremony , Admiral Hans von Koester gave a speech and Princess Victoria Louise christened the ship . A dockyard crew delivered the ship to the Navy on 13 May 1913 ; she was commissioned into the fleet the following day . During trials the ship 's turbine engines were damaged , and Kaiserin did not join the fleet until 13 December 1913 . 
 The ship was 172 @.@ 40 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall and displaced a maximum of 27 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 27 @,@ 000 long tons ) . She had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 10 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 80 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft . Kaiserin was powered by three sets of Parsons turbines , each of which drove a single propeller shaft ; they were supplied with steam by 16 coal @-@ fired boilers . The powerplant produced a top speed of 22 @.@ 1 knots ( 40 @.@ 9 km / h ; 25 @.@ 4 mph ) . She carried 3 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 500 long tons ; 4 @,@ 000 short tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 600 km ; 9 @,@ 100 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . 
 Kaiserin was armed with a main battery of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . The ship dispensed with the inefficient hexagonal turret arrangement of previous German battleships ; instead , three of the five turrets were mounted on the centerline , with two of them arranged in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were placed en echelon amidships , such that both could fire on the broadside . The ship was also armed with fourteen 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in casemates amidships , eight 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 guns in casemates and four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . The ship 's armament was rounded out by five 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After joining the III Battle Squadron in December 1913 , Kaiserin participated in the routine fleet training exercises . Squadron exercises were conducted in February , followed by fleet maneuvers , both in the North Sea . The fleet trained again in May , in both the North and Baltic Seas . Kaiserin left Germany on 7 July for the annual summer cruise to Norway , but was recalled prematurely on 22 July because of rising international tensions following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand . Upon returning to Germany , Kaiserin steamed to Brunsbüttel on 24 July , where she was the first battleship to traverse the recently deepened Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . The voyage required lightening , and in just under twelve hours Kaiserin exited the locks at Holtenau in Kiel where she met the rest of her squadron . On 31 July , the entire squadron returned to the North Sea via the Canal . At midnight on 4 August , the United Kingdom , with its powerful Grand Fleet , declared war on Germany . 
 Kaiserin was present during the first sortie by the German fleet into the North Sea , which took place on 2 – 3 November 1914 . No British forces were encountered during the operation . A second operation followed on 15 – 16 December . This sortie was the initiation of a strategy adopted by Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet . Admiral Ingenohl intended to use the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group to raid British coastal towns to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . Early on 15 December the fleet left port to raid the towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby . That evening , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including Kaiserin and her four sisters — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany . 
 Kaiserin went into the Baltic for squadron training from 23 to 29 January 1916 . Upon returning to the North Sea , the ship went into drydock in Wilhelmshaven for periodic maintenance , which lasted from 31 January to 20 February . The Kaiser removed Ingenohl from his post on 2 February , following the loss of SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank the month before . Admiral Hugo von Pohl succeeded him as the commander of the fleet . Pohl continued the policy of sweeps into the North Sea to destroy isolated British formations . The fleet conducted a series of advances into the North Sea throughout 1915 ; Kaiserin was present for the sweeps on 17 to 18 May , 29 to 30 May , 10 August , 11 to 12 September , and 23 to 24 October . The III Squadron completed the year with another round of unit training in the Baltic from 5 to 20 December . 
 Pohl 's tenure as fleet commander was brief ; by January 1916 hepatic cancer had weakened him to the point where he was no longer able to carry out his duties . He was replaced by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer in January . Scheer proposed a more aggressive policy designed to force a confrontation with the British Grand Fleet ; he received approval from the Kaiser in February . The first of Scheer 's operations was conducted the following month , on 5 to 7 March , with an uneventful sweep of the Hoofden . Kaiserin was also present during an advance to the Amrun Bank on 2 to 3 April . The fleet conducted another sortie on 21 to 22 April . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Kaiserin was present during the fleet operation that resulted in the battle of Jutland which took place on 31 May and 1 June 1916 ; her commander at the time was Kapitän zur See ( KzS ) Karl Sievers . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . During the operation , Kaiserin was the second ship in the VI Division of III Squadron and the seventh ship in the line , directly astern of Kaiser and ahead of Prinzregent Luitpold . The VI Division was behind only the V Division , consisting of the four König @-@ class battleships . The eight battleships of the Helgoland- and Nassau classes assigned to the I and II Divisions in I Squadron followed the VI Division . The six elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the III and IV Divisions , II Battle Squadron , formed the rear of the formation . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of Vice Admiral David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . At 16 : 19 , Kaiserin was forced to temporarily stop the turbine on the center shaft , as the condenser had started leaking . The crew were able to restart the engine before Kaiserin came into action . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , the crew of the leading German battleship , König , spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later , the order to open fire was given . 
 At approximately 17 : 40 , the British light cruiser Nottingham fired a single torpedo at Kaiserin at the extreme range of at least 16 @,@ 500 yd ( 15 @,@ 100 m ) , which failed to find its target . After Scheer ordered the fleet to open fire , Kaiserin briefly engaged the battlecruiser New Zealand ; Kaiserin failed to score a hit and by 17 : 54 New Zealand and the rest of the British battlecruisers had increased speed and moved out of range . The British destroyers Nestor and Nomad , which had been disabled earlier in the engagement , lay directly in the path of the advancing High Seas Fleet . Kaiserin and her three sisters fired on Nomad with their secondary guns while the I Squadron battleships dispatched Nestor . At around 19 : 00 , the German battle line came into contact with the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; Kaiserin fired three salvos from her main battery at an unidentified four @-@ funneled cruiser but made no hits . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible disabled the German cruiser Wiesbaden ; Rear Admiral Behncke in König attempted to maneuver the III Squadron to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . The eight III Squadron battleships fired on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . The armored cruisers Defence , Warrior , and Black Prince joined in the attack on the crippled Wiesbaden . Between 19 : 14 and 19 : 17 , several German battleships and battlecruisers opened fire on Defence and Warrior . Kaiserin initially engaged one of the battleships in the British 5th Battle Squadron and scored a hit ; according to Kaiserin 's logs , the ship in question was Malaya . After three minutes firing at Malaya , Kaiserin shifted fire to Defence . In short succession , the German dreadnoughts hit Defence with several heavy caliber shells . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and , in a tremendous explosion , destroyed the cruiser . After Defence exploded , Kaiserin shifted her fire to a target believed to be the battlecruiser Tiger . Heavy haze forced Kaiserin to check fire after two salvos . 
 By 20 : 00 , Scheer ordered the German line to complete a 180 @-@ degree turn eastward to disengage from the British fleet . The maneuver , conducted under heavy fire , caused disorganization in the German fleet . Kaiserin had come too close to Prinzregent Luitpold and was forced to haul out of line to starboard to avoid a collision . The latter vessel came up alongside Kaiserin at high speed . As a result , Kaiserin had to remain out of line and could not return to her assigned position . The turn reversed the order of the German line ; Kaiserin was now the seventh ship from the rear of the German line . At around 23 : 30 , the German fleet reorganized into the night cruising formation . Kaiserin was the eleventh ship , in the center of the 24 @-@ ship line . 
 After a series of night engagements between the leading battleships and British destroyers , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British light forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later ; the I Squadron battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead and Kaiserin , Kaiser , Prinzregent Luitpold , and Kronprinz stood ready just outside the entrance to Wilhelmshaven . The remainder of the battleships and battlecruisers entered Wilhelmshaven , where those that were still in fighting condition replenished their stocks of coal and ammunition . In the course of the battle , Kaiserin fired one @-@ hundred and sixty 30 @.@ 5 cm shells and one @-@ hundred and thirty @-@ five 15 cm rounds . She emerged from the battle completely unscathed . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 In early August , Kaiserin and the rest of the operational III Squadron units conducted divisional training in the Baltic . On 18 August , Scheer attempted a repeat of the 31 May operation ; the two serviceable German battlecruisers — Moltke and Von der Tann — supported by three dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Kaiser , would trail behind and provide cover . On the approach to the English coast , Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Another fleet advance followed on 18 to 20 October , though it ended without encountering any British units . Two weeks later , on 4 November , Kaiserin took part in an expedition to the western coast of Denmark to assist two U @-@ boats , U @-@ 20 and U @-@ 30 , that had become stranded there . The fleet was reorganized on 1 December ; the four König @-@ class battleships remained in III Squadron , along with the newly commissioned Bayern , while the five Kaiser @-@ class ships , including Kaiserin , were transferred to IV Squadron . While transiting the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal on 14 March 1917 , Kaiserin became grounded . One of her bilge keels was damaged and some 280 t ( 280 long tons ; 310 short tons ) of water entered the ship . Repairs were conducted at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel from 15 to 18 March . Kaiserin returned to the North Sea on 30 March and remained there on guard duty until 8 June . On 9 June , she went to the Baltic for a month @-@ long series of exercises , which were completed on 2 July . She resumed guard duties in the German Bight on 3 July and continued in this role until 11 September , when Kaiserin was detached to join the special unit assigned to Operation Albion . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . By this time , the IV Battle Squadron had come under the command of Vice Admiral Wilhelm Souchon . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while Kaiserin and the rest of IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . Kaiserin , along with Kaiser and Prinzregent Luitpold , were tasked with silencing the Russian guns at Hundsort on Ösel , which had taken Moltke under fire . The ships opened fire at 05 : 44 , and by 07 : 45 , Russian firing had ceased and German troops were moving ashore . Two days later , Souchon left Tagga Bay with Kaiserin , Friedrich der Grosse , and Prinzregent Luitpold to support German ground forces advancing on the Sworbe Peninsula . Kaiserin was assigned to suppress a Russian battery at Zerel , though heavy fog delayed her from engaging her target . The Russians opened fire first , which was quickly returned by Kaiserin and König Albert . Friedrich der Grosse came to the two ships ' assistance ; the three battleships fired a total of 120 large @-@ caliber shells over the span of an hour . The fourth Russian salvo straddled Kaiserin , which began to steer erratically to avoid the Russian gunfire . The heavy firing prompted most of the Russian gun crews to flee their posts . 
 On the night of 15 October , Kaiserin and König Albert were sent to replenish their coal stocks in Putzig . On the 19th , they were briefly joined in Putzig by Friedrich der Grosse , which continued on to Arensburg with Moltke . The next morning , Vice Admiral Ehrhard Schmidt ordered the special naval unit to be dissolved and returned to the North Sea . In a communique to the naval headquarters , Schmidt noted that " Kaiserin and König Albert can immediately be detached from Putzig to the North Sea . " The two ships then proceeded to Kiel via Danzig ; after reaching Kiel , they transited the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal back to the North Sea . 
 = = = Final operations = = = 
 On 17 November 1917 , Kaiserin and Kaiser were assigned to provide cover for the II Scouting Group while it conducted a minesweeping operation in the North Sea . Significant British forces , including five battlecruisers and several light cruisers , attacked the II Scouting Group ; the two battleships immediately steamed to their assistance . In the ensuing Second Battle of Heligoland Bight , Kaiserin scored a hit on the light cruiser Caledon . The battlecruiser Repulse briefly engaged the German dreadnoughts , but both forces withdrew . After the action , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter criticized Kaiserin 's commander , KzS Kurt <unk> , for lagging too far behind the minesweepers to provide adequate protection . He was subsequently relieved of command of the ship . Kaiserin went into drydock for maintenance on 22 December , and work lasted until 5 February 1918 . The ship participated in the fruitless advance to Norway on 23 – 25 April 1918 , which had been intended to intercept a heavily defended convoy between Britain and Norway ; faulty German intelligence prevented the Germans from catching the convoy . After returning to port , she resumed guard duties in the German Bight . The IV Squadron undertook another training exercise in the Baltic from 18 June to 13 August . A final round of drills took place on 22 – 28 October . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Kaiserin and her four sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from its base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy . The goal was to improve Germany 's bargaining position in the imminent peace negotiations , despite the expected casualties . But many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt that the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated , " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , the Allies interned most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any circumstances . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive fleet consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and enlisted men . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Kaiserin sank at 14 : 00 ; she was subsequently raised on 14 May 1936 and broken up later that year in Rosyth . 
 = Betsimisaraka people = 
 The Betsimisaraka ( " the many <unk> " ) make up approximately fifteen percent of the Malagasy people and are the second largest ethnic group in Madagascar after the Merina . They occupy a large stretch of the eastern <unk> of Madagascar , from Mananjary in the south to Antalaha in the north . The Betsimisaraka have a long history of extensive interaction with European seafarers and traders that produced a significant subset with mixed European @-@ Malagasy origins , termed the zana @-@ malata . European influence is evident in the local valse ( waltz ) and basesa musical genres , which are typically performed on the accordion . Tromba ( spirit possession ) ceremonies feature strongly in Betsimisaraka culture . 
 Through the late 17th century , the various clans of the eastern seaboard were governed by <unk> who typically ruled over one or two villages . A zana @-@ malata named <unk> emerged to unite these clans under his rule in 1710 . His reign lasted 50 years and established a sense of common identity and stability throughout the kingdom , but his successors gradually weakened this union , leaving it vulnerable to the growing influence and presence of European and particularly French settlers , slave traders , missionaries and merchants . The fractured Betsimisaraka kingdom was easily colonized in 1817 by Radama I , king of Imerina who ruled from its capital at Antananarivo in the central highlands . The subjugation of the Betsimisaraka in the 19th century left the population relatively impoverished ; under colonization by the French ( 1896 @-@ 1960 ) a focused effort was made to increase access to education and paid employment working on French plantations . Production of former plantation crops like vanilla , ylang @-@ ylang , coconut oil and coffee remain the principal economic activity of the region beyond subsistence farming and fishing , although mining is also a source of income . 
 Culturally the Betsimisaraka can be divided into northern and southern sub @-@ groups . Many elements of culture are common across both groups , including respect for ancestors , spirit possession , the ritual sacrifice of zebu , and a patriarchal social structure . The groups are distinguished by linguistic sub @-@ dialects and various fady ( taboos ) , as well as certain funeral practices and other customs . The Betsimisaraka practice famadihana ( reburial ) and <unk> ( circumcision ) , and believe in sorcery and a wide range of supernatural forces . Many taboos and folktales revolve around lemurs and crocodiles , both of which are common throughout Betsimisaraka territory . 
 = = Ethnic identity = = 
 The Betsimisaraka constitute approximately 15 percent of the population of Madagascar and numbered over 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in 2011 . A sub @-@ set of the population , the zana @-@ malata , has partly European origins resulting from generations of intermarriage between the local Malagasy population and European pirates , sailors and traders who docked or settled along the eastern coast . Like the Sakalava to the west , the Betsimisaraka are composed of numerous ethnic sub @-@ groups that formed a confederation in the early 18th century . Most Betsimisaraka are of mixed Bantu African and Asian Austronesian descent . The Betsimisaraka occupy a long , narrow band of territory that stretches along the east coast of Madagascar from Mananjary in the south to Antalaha in the north , including the island 's main port at Toamasina and the major towns of <unk> Est and <unk> . They are often subdivided into northern Betsimisaraka ( <unk> ) and southern Betsimisaraka ( <unk> ) , separated by the Betanimena Betsimisaraka sub @-@ clan ( called the Tsikoa before around 1710 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Until the beginning of the 18th century , the peoples who would constitute the core of the Betsimisaraka were organized into numerous clans under the authority of chiefs ( <unk> ) who each typically ruled over no more than one or two villages . Those around Antongil Bay in the north held a comparatively more official position , with regalia of leadership attested since at least 1500 . The presence of natural bays along the northern coastline that became the port towns of Antongil , <unk> , Foulpointe , <unk> and Tamatave favored the economic and political development of the <unk> Betsimisaraka ; the southern portion of this coastline , by contrast , lacked any areas suitable for ports . Villagers in the areas surrounding the ports exported rice , cattle , slaves and other goods to the nearby Mascarene Islands . The eastern ports ' strategic position for regional trade attracted the heaviest settlement of Europeans to this portion of the island , particularly including British and American pirates whose numbers dramatically increased from the 1680s to the 1720s along the coast from modern day Antsiranana in the north to Nosy <unk> and Foulpointe to the east . Intermarriage between these European pirates and the daughters of local chiefs produced a large mixed population termed zana @-@ malata . 
 Around 1700 the Tsikoa began uniting around a series of powerful leaders . <unk> , the chief of Vatomandry , was elected in 1710 as the leader of the Tsikoa ( " those who are steadfast " ) and initiated invasions of the northern ports . According to oral histories , <unk> established an armed militia at <unk> which he sent on incursions to burn neighboring villages , desecrate local tombs , and enslave the women and children , contributing to his reputation as a cruel and unpopular leader . A northern Betsimisaraka zana @-@ malata named Ratsimilaho , who was born to the daughter of a local <unk> and a British pirate named Tom Tew around 1694 and had briefly traveled with his father to England and India , led a resistance to these invasions and successfully united his compatriots around this cause despite his young age . He captured <unk> in 1712 , causing the Tsikoa to flee across soggy red fields of clay that stuck to their feet , earning them the new name of Betanimena ( " Many of Red Earth " ) . Ratsimilaho was elected king of all the Betsimisaraka and given a new name , <unk> ( " Lord Served by Many " ) at his capital at Foulpointe . He gave his northern compatriots the name Betsimisaraka to reaffirm their unity in the face of their enemies . He then negotiated peace with the Betanimena by offering their king control over the port of Tamatave , but this settlement fell apart after six months , leading Ratsimilaho to recapture Tamatave and force the Betanimena king to flee south . He established alliances with the southern Betsimisaraka and the neighboring Bezanozano , extending his authority over these areas by allowing local chiefs to maintain their power while offering tribute of rice , cattle and slaves ; by 1730 he was one of the most powerful kings of Madagascar . By the time of his death in 1754 , his moderate and stabilizing rule had provided nearly forty years of unity among the diverse clans within the Betsimisaraka political union . He also allied the Betsimisaraka with the other most powerful kingdom of the time , the Sakalava of the west coast , through marriage with <unk> , the only daughter of Iboina king <unk> . 
 Ratsimilaho 's son Zanahary succeeded him in 1755 . A despotic leader , Zanahary launched a series of attacks against villages under his authority and was assassinated by his own subjects in 1767 . Zanahary was succeeded by his son Iavy , who was detested for continuing his father 's practice of attacking villages under his control , and for enriching himself by cooperating with French slave traders . During the reign of Iavy , an eastern European adventurer named Maurice <unk> established a settlement in Betsimisaraka country and proclaimed himself king of Madagascar , persuading several local chieftains to no longer pay tribute to Iboina . This action provoked Sakalava ire , and in 1776 Sakalava soldiers invaded the area to punish the Betsimisaraka inhabitants and kill <unk> , but were ultimately unsuccessful in the latter goal . Zakavolo , Iavy 's son , succeeded his father upon his death in 1791 . European accounts disparage Zakavolo for insisting that they provide him with gifts , and for insulting them when the Europeans refused to meet his demands . His subjects deposed him in 1803 with the assistance of then Governor General Magallon , who administered the French island territories ; Zakavolo was eventually assassinated by his ex @-@ subjects . Throughout the decades following Ratsimilaho 's death , the French established control over Ile Sainte Marie and had established trading ports throughout Betsimisaraka territory . By 1810 a French envoy named Sylvain Roux effectively had economic control over the port city , although it was nominally governed by Zakavolo 's uncle <unk> . A dispute among <unk> 's male relatives over control of the city led to further fracturing of Betsimisaraka political unity , weakening the ability of the Betsimisaraka to unite against increasing foreign encroachment . He lost power the following year to another zana @-@ malata , Jean Rene , who maintained close cooperation with the French . 
 The Kingdom of Imerina in the island 's center had been rapidly unifying and expanding since the late 18th century . In 1817 , Merina king Radama I led an army of 25 @,@ 000 soldiers from Antananarivo to successfully capture Toamasina . Although Jean Rene was not complicit and had been given no forewarning of the military campaign , when Radama arrived the Europeans and zana @-@ malata were not expelled ; rather , Radama developed a cooperation with them to develop diplomatic and economic relations with the French as he had already done over the past decade with British missionaries in the Merina homeland of the central highlands . The The area was effectively colonized , with Merina garrisons established at ports and across the Betsimisaraka interior . The Betsimisaraka resented Merina domination and , not receiving assistance from the French as they had hoped , mounted an unsuccessful rebellion in 1825 . As Merina presence and authority in the former Betsimisaraka kingdom grew , many local farmers migrated to areas outside Merina control or sought employment with European settlers on plantations where they might be afforded some protection . Any remnants of the ruling line in Betsimisaraka were eliminated under Merina queen Ranavalona I , who ordered many nobles to undergo the deadly tangena trial by ordeal . Throughout her reign , cultural practices associated with Europeans were forbidden , including Christianity and Western musical instruments ; eventually all Europeans were expelled from the island for the duration of her reign . Her son , Radama II , lifted these restrictions and gradually European presence re @-@ emerged in Betsimisaraka territory as French entrepreneurs established plantations for growing export crops like vanilla , coffee , tea and coconuts . The growing number of Merina colonists from the turn of the 19th century and Europeans from the 1860s onward created competition for use of the ports traditionally under Betsimisaraka control , to such an extent that the local population was prohibited from trading to maximize profits for the Merina and Europeans . This severe economic constraint , coupled with the heavy Merina imposition of fanampoana ( unpaid labor in lieu of taxes ) , severely undermined the prosperity of the local population , who resisted by refusing to grow surplus crops that would only further enrich the outside traders . Others fled the settled life of their ancestral villages to take refuge in the forest in order to live outside Merina authority . Some of these formed into groups of bandits who plundered Merina trading parties along the east coast and mounted occasional raids further into Merina territory ; these groups also periodically attacked Merina settlers , European missionaries , government outposts and churches . 
 When the French colonized Madagascar in 1896 , initial Betsimisaraka satisfaction with the fall of the Merina government rapidly evolved into displeasure with French control . This led to an uprising the same year among Betsimisaraka , particularly including the bandits and other outlaws who had long been living according to their own law in the eastern rainforests ; the movement extended to the broader Betsimisaraka population , who mounted a strong resistance to French rule between 1897 @-@ 1899 . These efforts were eventually subdued . After regaining control , the French colonial authority took steps to address the repercussions of historical subjugation of the Betsimisaraka by the Merina kingdom , providing increased access to basic education as well as opportunities for paid labor at plantations , but often on former Betsimisaraka land that the French authorities had forced local inhabitants to relinquish to colonists . 
 In 1947 , a nationwide uprising against French colonial rule was initiated in Moramanga , a town in Bezanozano territory neighboring the Betsimisaraka . During the conflict , Betsimisaraka nationalists fought French and Senegalese soldiers in an unsuccessful attempt to regain control of the port at Tamatave , the island 's most important trading port . Betsimisaraka fighters and civilians suffered very heavy losses and some of the worst human rights abuses , including execution by being thrown alive from airplanes . 
 The country gained independence in 1960 . It was led throughout the Second Republic ( 1975 @-@ 1992 ) by Admiral Didier Ratsiraka , a Betsimisaraka . He was democratically elected president and again led the country from 1995 to 2001 during the Third Republic before being forced from power following contested 2001 presidential election by followers of Merina businessman and opposition leader Marc Ravalomanana . He remains an influential and controversial political figure in Madagascar . Ratsiraka 's nephew , Roland Ratsiraka , is likewise a significant political figure , having run for president and serving as mayor of Toamasina , the country 's main commercial port . 
 = = Society = = 
 The Betsimisaraka inhabit the eastern coast between Nosy <unk> and Antalaha . The historic capital of the Betsimisaraka kingdom was located at Fenoarivo Atsinanana . Social life revolves around the agricultural year , with preparation of fields beginning in October , the harvest of rice in May , and the winter months from June to September set aside for ancestor worship and other major rituals and customs . 
 There are clear gender divisions among the Betsimisaraka . When traveling by foot in a mixed gender group , it is forbidden for women to walk before men . Women are traditionally the ones to act as porters , carrying light items on the head and heavy items on the back ; if a woman is present , it is considered ridiculous for a man to carry something . When eating , men use a single spoon to fill their plates from the communal bowl and to eat the food on their plates , whereas women are required to use two separate spoons to fill their plates and to eat . Men are generally responsible for tilling the rice fields , obtaining food , gathering firewood and building the family home and furniture , and they engage in discussion and debate about public affairs . Women 's tasks include growing crops , weeding the rice fields and harvesting and processing the rice , fetching water , lighting the hearth fire and preparing daily meals , and weaving . 
 = = = Religious affiliation = = = 
 Religious rites and customs are traditionally presided over by a <unk> <unk> . Betsimisaraka communities widely believe in various supernatural creatures , including ghosts ( <unk> ) , mermaids ( <unk> an @-@ <unk> ) and the imp @-@ like <unk> . Efforts to Christianize the local population began in the early 1800s but were largely unsuccessful at first . During the colonial period the influence of Christianity among the local population grew , but where it is practiced is often blended <unk> with traditional ancestor worship . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Although there are differences between the northern and southern Betsimisaraka , many major aspects of their culture are similar . Major customs among the Betsimisaraka include <unk> ( circumcision ) , <unk> ( the birth of a tenth child ) , ritual sacrifice of zebu for the ancestors , and celebrating the inauguration of a newly constructed house . Marriage , death , birth , the New Year and Independence Day are also communally celebrated . The practice of tromba ( ritual spirit possession ) is widespread among the Betsimisaraka . Both men and women act as mediums and spectators in these events . 
 The indigenous raffia plant was the base fiber for the clothing traditionally worn by the Betsimisaraka . Leaves of the raffia plant were combed to separate the fibers , which were knotted end to end to form strands that could then be woven together to form cloth . Among the various peoples who united under the Betsimisaraka confederation , women wore a short wrapper ( <unk> ) , typically with a bandeau top ( <unk> ) , while men wore smocks . Traditional raffia clothing is still worn by some Betsimisaraka today . 
 The Betsimisaraka hold lemurs in high regard and tell several legends in which lemurs come to the aid of prominent Betsimisaraka figures . According to one story , a lemur saved the life of a Betsimisaraka ancestor from a grave peril . In another tale , a group of Betsimisaraka sought refuge in a forest from a marauding enemy group . Their enemies followed them into the forest , tracking the Betsimisaraka by what they believed to be the sound of their voices . Upon reaching the source of the sound they discovered a group of ghostly @-@ looking lemurs and , believing the Betsimisaraka had been transformed into animals by magic , fled the area in terror . The spirits of Betsimisaraka ancestors are believed to reside inside the bodies of lemurs . Consequently , in general it is forbidden for the Betsimisaraka to kill or eat lemurs , and it is obligatory to free a trapped lemur and to bury a dead lemur with the same rites as a person . 
 Crocodiles are also viewed with reverence and fear . At river banks where they are known to gather , it is not uncommon for Betsimisaraka villagers to throw them zebu hindquarters ( the most favored cut ) , whole geese and other offerings on a daily basis . Amulets for protection against crocodiles are commonly worn or thrown into the water in areas where the animals congregate . It is commonly believed that witches and sorcerers are closely linked with crocodiles , being capable of ordering them to kill others and of walking among them without being attacked . The Betsimisaraka believe witches and sorcerers appease crocodiles by feeding them rice at night , and some are accused of walking crocodiles through Betsimisaraka villages at midnight or even being married to the crocodiles , which they then enslave to do their bidding . 
 = = = Fady = = = 
 Among some Betsimisaraka it is considered fady for a brother to shake hands with his sister , or for young men to wear shoes during their father 's lifetime . Among many Betsimisaraka , the eel is considered sacred . It is forbidden to touch , fish or eat eel . Although many coastal Malagasy communities have a fady against the consumption of pork , this is not universal or common among the Betsimisaraka , who often keep pigs in their villages . 
 Complex taboos and rites are associated with a woman 's first childbirth . When about to give birth she is secluded in a special birthing house called a komby . The leaves she eats from and the waste produced by the newborn are kept in a special receptacle for seven days , at which point they are burned . The ash produced is rubbed on the forehead and cheeks of the mother and baby and must be worn for seven days . On the fifteenth day both are bathed in water in which lime or lemon leaves have soaked , a ritual called <unk> @-@ <unk> ( bath of the leaves ) . The community gathers to drink rum and celebrate with wrestling matches , but the mother must stay in the komby is not allowed to consume anything other than <unk> greens and a chicken specially prepared for her . After this celebration she is required to leave the komby and can return to routine life . 
 Among the Betsimisaraka , like several other Malagasy ethnic groups , there is a fady against speaking the name of a chief after his death or any word that formed part of the name . The deceased leader was given a new name after death that all were required to use , and specific synonyms were selected to replace the words composing his name for use in regular conversation ; anyone who spoke the forbidden words would harshly punished or in some instances executed . 
 = = = Funeral rites = = = 
 Some Betsimisaraka , principally those living around Maroantsetra , practice the famadihana reburial ceremony , although in a simpler form than that practiced in the Highlands . Coffins are placed in tombs only in Southern Betsimisaraka ; in the north , they are placed under outdoor shelters . While in mourning , women will <unk> their hair and stop wearing their <unk> , while men no longer wear a hat ; the mourning period typically lasts two to four months depending on how closely related the individual was to the deceased . 
 = = = Dance and music = = = 
 The ceremonial dance music style most closely associated with the tromba among the Betsimisaraka is called basesa and is performed on accordion . The traditional basesa performed for tromba ceremonies uses <unk> shakers to accentuate the rhythm ; lyrics are always sung in local Betsimisaraka dialect . The accompanying dance is performed with arms to the sides of the body and heavy foot movements . Contemporary basesa , which has been popularized across the island , is performed using a modern drum kit and electric guitar and bass with keyboard or accordion accompaniment , and the associated dance style has been influenced by dances performed to sega and kwassa kwassa music from Reunion Island . <unk> is also performed by the Antandroy , but among Betsimisaraka the style is performed significantly more slowly . Another major musical style specific to the region is valse , Malagasy interpretations of traditional European seafarers ' waltzes performed on accordion ; this genre is never performed during tromba ceremonies . 
 = = Language = = 
 The Betsimisaraka speak several dialects of the Malagasy language , which is a branch of the Malayo @-@ Polynesian language group derived from the Barito languages , spoken in southern Borneo . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Betsimisaraka economy remains largely agricultural , with many cultivating vanilla and rice . Manioc , sweet potatoes , beans , taro , peanuts and a variety of greens are also commonly cultivated ; other staple crops include sugar cane , coffee , bananas , pineapples , avocado , breadfruit , mangoes , oranges and lychees . Cattle are not widely raised ; more commonly , the Betsimisaraka may catch and sell river crabs , shrimp and fish , small hedgehogs , various local insects or wild boar , birds and lemurs in the forest . They also produce and sell homemade sugarcane beer ( <unk> ) and rum ( <unk> ) . The production of spices for culinary use and for distillation into perfumes remains a major economic activity , with a perfume distillery located in Fenoarivo Atsinanana . Gold , garnet and other precious stones are also mined and exported from the Betsimisaraka region . 
 = Derek Jeter = 
 Derek Sanderson Jeter ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ) ( born June 26 , 1974 ) is an American former professional baseball shortstop who played 20 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the New York Yankees . A five @-@ time World Series champion , Jeter is regarded as a central figure of the Yankees ' success of the late 1990s and early 2000s for his hitting , baserunning , fielding , and leadership . He is the Yankees ' all @-@ time career leader in hits ( 3 @,@ 465 ) , doubles ( 544 ) , games played ( 2 @,@ 747 ) , stolen bases ( 358 ) , times on base ( 4 @,@ 716 ) , plate appearances ( 12 @,@ 602 ) and at bats ( 11 @,@ 195 ) . His accolades include 14 All @-@ Star selections , five Gold Glove Awards , five Silver Slugger Awards , two Hank Aaron Awards , and a Roberto Clemente Award . Jeter became the 28th player to reach 3 @,@ 000 hits and finished his career sixth all @-@ time in career hits and the all @-@ time MLB leader in hits by a shortstop . 
 The Yankees drafted Jeter out of high school in 1992 , and he debuted in the major leagues in 1995 . The following year , he became the Yankees ' starting shortstop , won the Rookie of the Year Award , and helped the team win the 1996 World Series . Jeter continued to contribute during the team 's championship seasons of 1998 – 2000 ; he finished third in voting for the American League ( AL ) Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award in 1998 , recorded multiple career @-@ high numbers in 1999 , and won both the All @-@ Star Game MVP and World Series MVP Awards in 2000 . He consistently placed among the AL leaders in hits and runs scored for most of his career , and served as the Yankees ' team captain from 2003 until his retirement in 2014 . Throughout his career , Jeter contributed reliably to the Yankees ' franchise successes . He holds many postseason records , and has a .321 batting average in the World Series . Jeter has earned the nicknames of " Captain Clutch " and " Mr. November " due to his outstanding play in the postseason . 
 Jeter is one of the most heavily marketed athletes of his generation and is involved in several product endorsements . His personal life and relationships with celebrities have drawn the attention of the media throughout his career . Teammates and opponents alike regard Jeter as a consummate professional and one of the best players of his generation . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jeter was born in Pequannock Township , New Jersey , on June 26 , 1974 . His mother , Dorothy ( née Connors ) , an accountant , is of Irish , as well as some German and English , ancestry . His father , Sanderson Charles Jeter , Ph.D. , a substance abuse counselor , is African @-@ American . They met while serving in the United States Army in Germany . His father played baseball at Fisk University in Tennessee as a shortstop . When Jeter was a child , his parents made him sign a contract every year that defined acceptable and unacceptable forms of behavior . Dorothy instilled a positive attitude in her son , insisting that he not use the word " can 't " . It was a baseball family , and Jeter 's younger sister Sharlee ( born c . 1979 ) was a softball star in high school . 
 The <unk> lived in New Jersey until Derek was 4 years old , at which point they moved to Kalamazoo , Michigan . Jeter and Sharlee lived in Kalamazoo with their parents during the school year and spent their summers with their grandparents in New Jersey . Attending New York Yankees games with his grandparents , Jeter became a passionate fan of the team . Watching Yankees player Dave Winfield inspired him to pursue a career in baseball . 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Jeter attended Kalamazoo Central High School , where he ran cross country in the fall , played basketball in the winter and baseball in the spring . Jeter posted high batting averages for the school 's baseball team ; he batted <unk> in his sophomore year and <unk> as a junior . In his senior year , he batted <unk> and compiled 23 runs batted in ( RBI ) , 21 walks , four home runs , a <unk> on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) , a <unk> slugging percentage ( SLG ) , 12 stolen bases ( in 12 attempts ) , and only one strikeout . 
 Jeter received several honors after his senior season . These included an All @-@ State honorable mention , distinguishing him as one of the best high school baseball players in Michigan , the Kalamazoo Area B 'nai B 'rith Award for Scholar Athlete , the 1992 High School Player of the Year Award from the American Baseball Coaches Association , the 1992 Gatorade High School Player of the Year award , and USA Today 's High School Player of the Year . Kalamazoo Central High School inducted Jeter into its Athletic Hall of Fame in 2003 and renamed its baseball field in his honor in 2011 . Jeter 's baseball talents drew the attention of the University of Michigan , which offered him a baseball scholarship to attend and play college baseball for the Michigan Wolverines baseball team . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 As a scout for the Houston Astros , Hal Newhouser evaluated Jeter extensively before the 1992 MLB draft . The Astros held the first overall pick in the draft , and Newhouser , convinced that Jeter would anchor a winning team , lobbied team management to select him . The Astros feared that Jeter would insist on a salary bonus of at least $ 1 million to forgo his college scholarship for a professional contract , so they passed on him , instead choosing Cal State Fullerton outfielder Phil Nevin , who signed with Houston for $ 700 @,@ 000 . Newhouser felt so strongly about Jeter 's potential that he quit his job with the Astros in protest after they ignored his drafting advice . 
 The Yankees , who selected sixth , also rated Jeter highly . Yankees scout Dick <unk> , assigned to scout in the Midwest , watched Jeter participate in an all @-@ star camp held at Western Michigan University . Though Yankees officials were concerned that Jeter would attend college instead of signing a professional contract , <unk> convinced them to select him , saying , " the only place Derek Jeter 's going is to Cooperstown " . The second through fifth picks were Paul Shuey , B. J. Wallace ( who never played in the majors ) , Jeffrey Hammonds , and Chad Mottola ( 125 career MLB at @-@ bats and over 5 @,@ 000 at @-@ bats at AAA ) ; those five would combine for two All @-@ Star Game appearances ( Nevin and Hammonds ) . The Yankees drafted Jeter , who chose to turn pro , signing for $ 800 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1992 – 95 ) = = = 
 Jeter played four seasons in minor league baseball , then known as the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues ( <unk> ) . Jeter began the 1992 season with the Gulf Coast Yankees of the Rookie @-@ level Gulf Coast League , based in Tampa , Florida . In his first professional game , Jeter failed to get a hit in seven at @-@ bats , going 0 @-@ for @-@ 7 , while striking out five times . Jeter continued to struggle during the rest of the season , batting .202 in 47 games . Manager Gary Denbo benched Jeter in the season 's final game to ensure his average would not drop below .200 , known in baseball as the Mendoza Line . Frustrated by his lack of success and homesick , Jeter accrued $ 400 @-@ per @-@ month phone bills from daily calls to his parents . 
 The Yankees promoted Jeter to the Greensboro Hornets of the Class A South Atlantic League ( SAL ) to give him more at @-@ bats . He batted .247 in his first 11 games with Greensboro , and struggled defensively , making nine errors in 48 chances . Weighing 156 pounds ( 71 kg ) , Jeter had a scrawny appearance that did not match his reputation as the Yankees ' future leader . Jorge Posada and Andy Pettitte , who played for the Hornets that season , at first questioned the hype surrounding Jeter , but recognized his talent and poise . 
 Jeter focused the next offseason on his fielding . Baseball America rated Jeter among the top 100 prospects in baseball before the 1993 season , ranking him 44th . Returning to the Hornets in 1993 , his first full season of professional baseball , Jeter hit .295 with five home runs , 71 RBI and 18 stolen bases ; SAL managers voted him the " Most Outstanding Major League Prospect " in the league . He finished second in the SAL in triples ( 11 ) , third in hits ( 152 ) , and eleventh in batting average , and was named to the postseason All @-@ Star team . Jeter committed 56 errors , a SAL record . Despite this , he was voted the SAL 's Best Defensive Shortstop , Most Exciting Player , and Best Infield Arm by Baseball America . 
 Coming off his strong 1993 season , Baseball America rated Jeter as the 16th @-@ best prospect in baseball . Jeter played for the Tampa Yankees of the Class A @-@ Advanced Florida State League ( FSL ) , the Albany @-@ Colonie Yankees of the Class AA Eastern League , and the Columbus Clippers of the Class AAA International League during the 1994 season , combining to hit .344 with five home runs , 68 RBI , and steal 50 bases across the three levels . He was honored with the Minor League Player of the Year Award by Baseball America , The Sporting News , USA Today , and Topps / <unk> . He was also named the most valuable player of the FSL . 
 Considered the fourth @-@ best prospect in baseball by Baseball America heading into the 1995 season , the Yankees projected Jeter as their starting shortstop . He suffered mild inflammation in his right shoulder in the Arizona Fall League after the conclusion of the 1994 regular season . As a precaution , the Yankees signed Tony Fernández to a two @-@ year contract . With Fernández the starting shortstop , the Yankees assigned Jeter to Class AAA . During the 1994 – 95 Major League Baseball strike , Gene Michael , the Yankees ' general manager , offered Jeter the opportunity to work out for the MLB team with replacement players in spring training before the 1995 season . Jeter denied receiving the offer , and did not cross the picket line . 
 = = = Major leagues ( 1995 – 2014 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1995 – 98 = = = = 
 Early in the 1995 season , Fernández and infielder Pat Kelly were injured . Consequently , Jeter made his MLB debut on May 29 , 1995 . Jeter was assigned uniform number 2 , which had been worn by Mike Gallego from 1992 to 1994 , one of only two single @-@ digit numbers available at the time . Batting ninth , he went hitless in five at bats , striking out once . The following day , he recorded his first two major league hits and scored his first two career runs . Jeter batted .250 and committed two errors in 13 games before being demoted to Class AAA Columbus ; Fernández replaced Jeter at shortstop . The Yankees advanced to the postseason in 1995 . Jeter traveled with the team during the 1995 American League Division Series ( ALDS ) , though he was not on the active roster . The Yankees lost to the Seattle Mariners . 
 After Fernández batted a disappointing .245 and appeared in only 108 games due to injuries in 1995 , newly hired Yankees manager Joe Torre asserted that Jeter would be the starting shortstop for the 1996 season , indicating that he hoped Jeter could bat .250 and be dependable defensively . Yankees owner George Steinbrenner , often skeptical of younger players , was not convinced . Clyde King , a close Steinbrenner advisor , observed Jeter for two days in spring training in 1996 , and came away with the impression that Jeter was not yet ready . To provide depth to the team at the shortstop position after an injury to Fernández , Steinbrenner approved a trade that would have sent pitcher Mariano Rivera to the Mariners for shortstop Félix Fermín , but Michael , by then the vice president of scouting , and assistant general manager Brian Cashman convinced Steinbrenner to give Jeter an opportunity . 
 Rated the sixth @-@ best prospect in baseball by Baseball America heading into the 1996 season , Jeter started on Opening Day , the first Yankee rookie to start as shortstop for the team since Tom Tresh in 1962 . He hit his first MLB home run that day . With his speed and ability to execute the hit and run , Jeter served as a complement to leadoff hitter Tim Raines while batting in the ninth spot in the batting order . Jeter had a successful rookie season , exceeding Torre 's expectations , as he hit for a .314 batting average , with 10 home runs , 104 runs scored , and 78 RBI . Receiving all 28 first @-@ place votes in the AL Rookie of the Year balloting , Jeter was the fifth unanimous choice for the award in its 50 @-@ year history . 
 The Yankees reached the 1996 postseason , and Torre batted Jeter in the leadoff spot in the lineup due to his strong performance . During Game 1 of the 1996 American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) , the Yankees trailed the Baltimore Orioles 4 – 3 in the 8th inning when Jeter hit a fly ball to right field that was ruled a home run by the umpires after twelve @-@ year @-@ old fan Jeffrey Maier reached over the wall to catch the ball . Though the ball would have remained in play if not for Maier , and could have been caught by Tony <unk> , the home run stood as called , tying the game . It marked the first home run of Jeter 's postseason career . The Yankees won the game and defeated the Orioles in five games . Overall , Jeter batted .361 in the 1996 postseason , helping to lead the Yankees offensively with Bernie Williams , as Wade Boggs , Paul O 'Neill , and Tino Martinez struggled . The Yankees defeated the Atlanta Braves in the 1996 World Series to win their first championship since the 1978 World Series . 
 Following his Rookie of the Year campaign , Jeter headlined a group considered the " new crop " of shortstops , along with Alex Rodriguez and Nomar Garciaparra , as the careers of older shortstops such as Cal Ripken , Jr . , Barry Larkin , Ozzie Smith and Alan Trammell were concluding . Rodriguez , the first overall selection in the 1993 MLB draft , first contacted Jeter about his experiences as a high @-@ first round pick . The two became friends to the extent that The New York Times journalist Jack Curry commented " [ r ] arely have two higher @-@ profile opponents been as close " . Rodriguez described Jeter as being " like my brother " , even though they were on @-@ field adversaries . 
 Before the 1997 season , Jeter and the Yankees agreed on a $ 540 @,@ 000 contract with performance bonuses . Becoming the Yankees ' leadoff batter , Jeter batted .291 , with 10 home runs , 70 RBI , 116 runs , and 190 hits . Though he hit two home runs during the 1997 American League Division Series , the Yankees lost to the Cleveland Indians , three games to two . 
 Jeter earned $ 750 @,@ 000 for the 1998 season . That year , Jeter was selected for his first All @-@ Star Game . In the regular season , he batted .324 with a league @-@ leading 127 runs , 19 home runs , and 84 RBI , for a team that won 114 games during the regular season and is widely considered to be one of the greatest of all time . In the playoffs , Jeter hit only .176 in the 1998 ALDS and ALCS , but batted .353 in the World Series , as the Yankees defeated the San Diego Padres in four games . At season 's end , Jeter finished third in voting for the AL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) Award . 
 = = = = 1999 – 2002 = = = = 
 Eligible for salary arbitration for the first time before the 1999 season , the arbitrator awarded Jeter a $ 5 million salary . Jeter led the AL in hits that season with 219 , while finishing second in the league in batting average ( .349 ) and runs scored ( 134 ) , appearing in his second All @-@ Star game that year . His season totals in batting average , runs , hits , runs batted in , doubles ( 37 ) , triples ( 9 ) , home runs ( 24 ) , SLG ( .552 ) , and OBP ( .438 ) are all personal bests . Jeter , who for part of the year hit third in the batting order , also drove in 102 runs , becoming only the second Yankee shortstop to do so , following Lyn Lary 's 107 RBI in 1931 . In the postseason , Jeter batted .455 in the ALDS , .350 in the ALCS , and .353 in the World Series , as the Yankees defeated the Braves to win another championship , Jeter 's third . 
 During the 1999 – 2000 offseason , the Yankees negotiated with Jeter , tentatively agreeing to a seven @-@ year , $ 118 @.@ 5 million contract . Steinbrenner did not want to set a record for the largest contract , and delayed a response while Juan González and the Detroit Tigers negotiated on a reported eight @-@ year , $ 143 million contract extension . When that agreement fell through , so did Jeter 's tentative deal . To avoid arbitration , Jeter and the Yankees agreed to a one @-@ year deal worth $ 10 million . 
 Jeter batted a team @-@ best .339 in the 2000 regular season and added 15 home runs , 73 RBI , 119 runs scored , and 22 stolen bases . In the 2000 MLB All @-@ Star Game , he recorded three hits , including a two @-@ run single that gave his team the lead and victory . The performance earned him the All @-@ Star Game MVP Award , the first time a Yankee won the award . During the postseason , he batted only .211 in the Division Series but rebounded to hit .318 in the Championship Series against the Seattle Mariners , and .409 in the World Series against the New York Mets . Jeter added two home runs , a triple , and two doubles in the World Series , including a leadoff home run on the first pitch of Game 4 and a triple later in the third inning . His home run in Game 5 tied the game and extended his World Series hitting streak to 14 games . The Yankees defeated the Mets in five games for their third consecutive title and fourth in Jeter 's first five full seasons . Jeter won the World Series MVP Award , becoming the only player to win the All @-@ Star Game MVP and World Series MVP Awards in the same season . 
 With one year remaining until he would become eligible for free agency , Jeter signed a ten @-@ year , $ 189 million contract before the 2001 season to remain with the Yankees . Alex Rodriguez had signed a ten @-@ year , $ 252 million contract with the Texas Rangers earlier in the offseason , setting the market for Jeter 's negotiations . Jeter became the second @-@ highest @-@ paid athlete across all team sports and auto racing , trailing only Rodriguez . The $ 18 @.@ 9 million average annual value of Jeter 's contract was the third @-@ highest in baseball , behind only Rodriguez ( $ 25 @.@ 2 million ) and Manny Ramirez ( $ 20 million ) . 
 In 2001 , Jeter posted another strong season , batting .311 with 21 home runs , 74 RBI , 110 runs scored , and 27 stolen bases , making his fourth All @-@ Star appearance . Jeter made a notable defensive assist in Game 3 of the 2001 American League Division Series against the Oakland Athletics . With Jeremy Giambi on first base , Oakland right fielder Terrence Long hit a double off Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina into the right @-@ field corner . As Giambi rounded third base and headed for home plate , Yankees right fielder Shane Spencer retrieved the ball and made a wild throw that missed cut @-@ off man Tino Martinez and dribbled down the first @-@ base line . Jeter ran from shortstop to grab the ball and flipped it backhanded to catcher Jorge Posada , rather than throwing it overhand . Posada tagged Giambi out on the leg just before he crossed home plate , preserving the Yankees ' one @-@ run lead . Facing elimination , the Yankees eventually won the game , as well as the series . The play , known as " The Flip " , was later voted seventh in Baseball Weekly 's 10 Most Amazing Plays of all time , and won the 2002 Best Play ESPY Award . 
 As a result of the September 11 attacks , the start of the playoffs was delayed and the season 's end was extended past the usual October timeframe . The Yankees advanced to the 2001 World Series to face the Arizona Diamondbacks . Game 4 marked the first time that any non @-@ exhibition MLB game had been played in the month of November . In extra innings , Jeter hit a game @-@ winning home run off of Byung @-@ Hyun Kim . The words " Mr. November " flashed on the scoreboard , alluding to former Yankee Reggie Jackson 's nickname , " Mr. October " . Despite the home run , Jeter slumped at the plate ; he denied injuries were a factor , though a fall into a photographer 's box trying to catch a foul ball may have aggravated an earlier hamstring injury . Jeter batted .148 in the World Series , as the Yankees lost in seven games . 
 Jeter batted .297 , with 18 home runs , 75 RBI , 124 runs scored , 191 hits , and a career @-@ best 32 stolen bases during the 2002 regular season . He led the majors in stolen base percentage ( 91 @.@ 4 % ) , getting caught only three times . He made his fifth All @-@ Star appearance . In the 2002 postseason , the Anaheim Angels defeated the Yankees in the ALDS on their way to winning the World Series . 
 = = = = 2003 – 08 = = = = 
 On Opening Day of the 2003 season , Jeter dislocated his left shoulder when he collided with Toronto Blue Jays catcher Ken Huckaby at third base . He was placed on the disabled list for six weeks and missed 36 games ; he had never played fewer than 148 games in the prior seven full seasons . Jeter returned to bat .324 , finishing third in batting average to Bill Mueller , who batted .326 . Ramirez finished second . 
 Steinbrenner named Jeter the captain of the Yankees on June 3 , 2003 , following eight seasons without a captain after Don Mattingly retired in 1995 . That postseason , Jeter batted .314 with two home runs , five RBI and 10 runs scored across 17 playoff games , including three hits in Game 3 of the 2003 World Series against the Florida Marlins – the only three hits Josh Beckett allowed during the game . Jeter committed a crucial error in a Game 6 loss , and the Marlins won the series in six games . 
 The Yankees acquired Rodriguez from the Texas Rangers during the 2003 – 04 offseason . Rodriguez had won two Gold Glove Awards at shortstop and was considered the best shortstop in baseball . Jeter — who had no Gold Gloves at the time — remained the team 's starting shortstop while Rodriguez moved to third base . Rodriguez 's fielding range allowed Jeter to cede ground to his right to Rodriguez and cheat to his left : fielding balls hit to his left is a weakness identified by scouts . The 2004 season began with Jeter mired in a slump , at one point getting only one hit in a span of 36 at @-@ bats ; through April , he batted <unk> . His batting average improved to .277 by the All @-@ Star break in July . 
 Jeter made the All @-@ Star team and finished the season with a .292 average ; 23 home runs , the second @-@ most of his career ; 78 RBI ; 111 runs scored ; and a career @-@ best 44 doubles , which broke the Yankee single @-@ season record for doubles by a shortstop , besting Tony Kubek 's 38 in 1961 . He batted .316 with a team @-@ leading four RBI as the Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins in the 2004 ALDS . Jeter struggled in the 2004 ALCS , batting .200 with one extra base hit , as the Yankees lost the series to the Red Sox in seven games , despite winning the first three games . 
 In the 12th inning of a tied game on July 1 , 2004 , against their rivals , the Boston Red Sox , Trot Nixon hit a pop fly down the left field line . Jeter ran from his position at shortstop and made an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder catch . He launched himself over the third @-@ base side railing and two rows of seats , receiving a lacerated chin and bruised face . The Yankees went on to win the game in the bottom of the 13th inning . This was voted the Play of the Year in the This Year in Baseball Awards competition , as voted on by fans at <unk> Following the 2004 season , Jeter was presented with his first Gold Glove Award ; his diving catch on July 1 was cited as a reason for the award . Though Jeter was fourth among shortstops in fielding percentage and errors , two traditional fielding statistics , critics pointed to his lower ratings in the more advanced sabermetric statistics , such as range factor and ultimate zone rating ( UZR ) . 
 Jeter was second in the AL in runs scored ( 122 ) in the 2005 season , and was third in the league in both at bats ( 654 ) and hits ( 202 ) . Though his critics continued to see Jeter as a liability defensively , he won his second consecutive Gold Glove in 2005 . Orlando Cabrera of the Angels had a higher fielding percentage and committed fewer errors , but voters noted that Jeter had more assists . Though Jeter batted .333 during the 2005 ALDS , the Yankees lost to the Angels . 
 For the 2006 season , the Yankees signed Johnny Damon to play center field and lead off , moving Jeter to the second position in the batting lineup . During the 2006 season , Jeter recorded his 2,000th career hit , becoming the eighth Yankee to reach the milestone . Jeter finished the season second in the AL in both batting average ( .343 ) and runs scored ( 118 ) , third in hits ( 214 ) , and fourth in OBP ( .417 ) , earning his seventh All @-@ Star selection . Jeter batted .500 with one home run in the 2006 ALDS , including a perfect 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 performance in Game 1 , making him the sixth player to record five hits in one postseason game . The Yankees lost to the Detroit Tigers , three games to one . 
 Many expected Jeter would win the AL MVP Award for 2006 . In a close vote , Jeter finished second in the voting to Justin Morneau of the Twins . It was his sixth top @-@ 10 finish in the MVP balloting in 11 full seasons through 2006 . Though he lost the MVP Award , he won the Hank Aaron Award , given for superior offensive performance . He also won his third consecutive Gold Glove Award . 
 Though the Yankees continued to struggle with postseason failures , Jeter remained a consistent contributor . During the 2007 season , Jeter was third in the AL with 203 hits , his third consecutive season and sixth overall , with at least 200 hits . He also finished ninth in batting average ( .322 ) . He was selected for his eighth All @-@ Star appearance . In the field , he was involved in turning a career @-@ high 104 double plays . He struggled during the 2007 ALDS , batting 3 @-@ for @-@ 17 ( .176 ) with one RBI , as the Indians defeated the Yankees . 
 Jeter hit his 400th career double on June 27 , 2008 , and his 200th home run on July 12 . Jeter 's slugging percentage ( SLG ) dropped to <unk> in the 2008 season , his lowest mark since 1997 . His offense took an upward turn after May as he hit .322 with a <unk> OPS after June 1 . Jeter was elected to his ninth All @-@ Star game as the starting shortstop . He finished the season with a .300 batting average . 
 Jeter tied Lou Gehrig 's record for hits at Yankee Stadium ( 1 @,@ 269 ) with a home run off Tampa Bay Rays pitcher David Price on September 14 , 2008 . On September 16 , he broke the record against Chicago White Sox pitcher Gavin Floyd . The Yankees were eliminated from postseason contention , the only full season in Jeter 's career where he did not compete in the playoffs . Following the final game in Yankee Stadium history , Jeter made a speech at the request of the Yankees , thanking the Yankees fans for their support — a moment later voted by fans as the Moment of the Year in MLB.com 's This Year in Baseball Awards : 
 From all of us up here , it 's a huge honor to put this uniform on every day and come out here and play . Every member of this organization , past and present , has been calling this place home for 85 years . There 's a lot of tradition , a lot of history and a lot of memories . The great thing about memories is you 're able to pass them along from generation to generation . Although things are going to change next year and we 're going to move across the street , there are a few things with the New York Yankees that never change . That 's pride , tradition and most of all , we have the greatest fans in the world . We 're relying on you to take the memories from this stadium and add them to the new memories we make at the new Yankee Stadium and continue to pass them on from generation to generation . We just want to take this moment to salute you , the greatest fans in the world . 
 = = = = 2009 – 13 = = = = 
 For the 2009 season , Yankees manager Joe Girardi switched Jeter and Damon in the batting order , with Damon moving to second and Jeter to the leadoff role . Jeter batted .334 , third @-@ best in the AL , with a .406 OBP , 18 home runs , 30 stolen bases in 35 attempts , 107 runs scored , and 212 hits ( second in MLB ) . Defensively , Jeter committed a career @-@ low eight errors , and his .986 fielding percentage was his career best . The addition of Gold Glove @-@ winning first baseman Mark Teixeira allowed second baseman Robinson Canó to shift his focus to his right , helping Jeter . During the season , the Sporting News named Jeter eighth on their list of the 50 greatest current players in baseball . 
 Jeter achieved two career hit milestones in the second half of the 2009 season . On August 16 , 2009 , against the Seattle Mariners , Jeter doubled down the right @-@ field line for his <unk> hit as a shortstop , breaking Luis Aparicio 's previous major league record . Then , Jeter became the all @-@ time hits leader as a member of the Yankees ( 2 @,@ 722 ) , passing Lou Gehrig on September 11 , 2009 . The hit was a single off Baltimore Orioles pitcher Chris Tillman in the third inning . 
 In the 2009 postseason , Jeter batted .355 , including <unk> in the 2009 World Series , as he won his fifth World Series championship . He was named Sportsman of the Year for 2009 by Sports Illustrated , and won the Roberto Clemente Award , Hank Aaron Award , and his fourth Gold Glove Award . Jeter also finished third in the AL MVP voting , behind Minnesota 's Joe Mauer and Yankee teammate Mark Teixeira . It was also the fifth championship for Pettitte , Posada , and Rivera , who along with Jeter were referred to as the " Core Four " . 
 In 2010 , Jeter , along with Posada and Rivera , became the first trio of teammates in any of the four major league sports in North America ( MLB , NFL , NBA , or NHL ) to play in at least 16 consecutive seasons on the same team as teammates . The 2010 season was statistically Jeter 's worst in many respects . The Yankee captain batted .270 with a .340 OBP and .370 SLG , all career lows , as he hit more ground balls than usual . Despite this , Jeter was elected to start at shortstop in the All @-@ Star Game . He rebounded to bat .342 in his last 79 at @-@ bats after making adjustments to his swing with the help of Kevin Long , the Yankees hitting coach , who had successfully helped Nick Swisher and Curtis Granderson make adjustments that improved their production . With Long , Jeter changed the way he strode with his left leg . Following the season , Jeter won his fifth Gold Glove award . Jeter committed six errors during the season , his lowest total in 15 full seasons . 
 After the 2010 season , Jeter became a free agent for the first time in his career . At age 36 , Jeter appeared to be in decline ; Joe Sheehan of Baseball Prospectus suggested that Jeter , once a " good , not great " shortstop , had declined to become " below average " defensively , to the extent that he would likely need to change positions ; Cashman later acknowledged that Jeter might need to shift to the outfield . Though Jeter stated that he wanted to remain with the Yankees , negotiations became tense . Jeter 's agent , Casey Close , stated that he was " baffled " by the Yankees ' approach to the negotiations , and Cashman , now the team 's general manager , responded publicly that Jeter should test the open market to ascertain his value , which angered Jeter . According to reports , Jeter initially sought a four @-@ year contract worth between $ 23 million and $ 25 million per season . He reached an agreement with the Yankees on a three @-@ year contract for $ 51 million with an option for a fourth year . He spent the offseason working with Long on adjustments to his swing . 
 The adjustments left Jeter frustrated , as he batted .242 in the first month of the 2011 season . As he struggled , it appeared that the 2011 season was the continuation of Jeter 's decline . Jeter broke Rickey Henderson 's franchise record for stolen bases when he stole his 327th base against the Mariners on May 28 , 2011 . He suffered a calf injury on June 13 that required his fifth stint on the 15 @-@ day disabled list , and his first since 2003 . At that point , he was batting .260 for the 2011 season with a .649 OPS . <unk> from his injury in Tampa , Jeter worked on his swing with Denbo , his former minor league manager . With Denbo , Jeter returned to the mechanics he used in his minor league days . Following his activation from the disabled list , he hit .326 with an <unk> OPS in his last 64 games of the season . Jeter finished the year with a .297 batting average , 6 home runs , 61 runs batted in , 84 runs , and 16 stolen bases . He credited the turnaround to his work with Denbo ; Long acknowledged that his attempt to adjust Jeter 's swing did not work . 
 On July 9 , 2011 , Jeter recorded his 3,000th career hit , a home run off of David Price of the Tampa Bay Rays . Jeter finished the day with five hits in five at @-@ bats , the second player to have five hits on the day he achieved his 3,000th hit ( the first was Craig Biggio ) . He also became the second player to hit a home run for his 3,000th hit , Wade Boggs having done so in 1999 . The last of Jeter 's five hits proved to be the game @-@ winning hit . He is the only member of the 3 @,@ 000 hit club to record all of his hits with the New York Yankees , and the only player to join the club as a Yankee . Jeter became the second player to reach 3 @,@ 000 career hits while still a regular shortstop ( the first was Honus Wagner ) . Only Ty Cobb , Hank Aaron , and Robin Yount were younger than Jeter on the day of their 3,000th hit . MLB and HBO produced <unk> Jeter <unk> , a documentary that profiled his path to 3 @,@ 000 hits and originally aired on July 28 , 2011 . 
 <unk> from the stress of chasing 3 @,@ 000 career hits and wanting to rest his calf , Jeter opted not to attend the 2011 MLB All @-@ Star Game . Jeter and Posada played their <unk> game together on July 14 , 2011 , breaking the previous franchise record of 1 @,@ 659 by Gehrig and Tony Lazzeri . Jeter played his <unk> game with the Yankees on August 29 , 2011 , breaking Mickey Mantle 's record for most games played as a Yankee . He finished the 2011 season with 162 hits , his 16th consecutive season with 150 hits , which tied him with Pete Rose for the second @-@ most consecutive 150 @-@ hit seasons , one behind Hank Aaron for the MLB record . Jeter was honored with the Lou Gehrig Memorial Award , given in recognition of charitable endeavors . 
 Despite continuing concerns about his age , the beginning of the 2012 season saw Jeter on a hot streak : he batted .411 through April 23 . Rodriguez commented that Jeter is playing as he did in 1999 , while Girardi said Jeter looks like he is 25 years old . In the 2012 MLB All @-@ Star Game , Jeter recorded his eleventh All @-@ Star hit , passing Mantle for the most All @-@ Star Game hits in Yankees history . Jeter went 1 @-@ for @-@ 2 in the game , moving into fourth all @-@ time with a .458 average among players with a minimum of 12 plate appearances in the All @-@ Star Game . 
 Jeter finished the 2012 season with the most hits in MLB ( 216 ) . Against the Tampa Bay Rays on September 14 of that year , he moved into the Top 10 on the all @-@ time hit list , surpassing Willie Mays by beating out an infield single for his <unk> career hit . After hitting .364 in the 2012 ALDS , Jeter fractured his left ankle during Game 1 of the 2012 ALCS against the Detroit Tigers reaching for a ground ball , an injury which ended his season . Jeter had received a cortisone shot to treat a bone bruise in his left foot in September , which could have contributed to the break . Jeter had surgery on his broken left ankle on October 20 , with an expected recovery time of four to five months . 
 While rehabilitating , Jeter suffered a small crack in the area of his previous ankle fracture . As a result , Jeter began the 2013 season on the disabled list . The Yankees activated Jeter on July 11 , but after playing in one game , Jeter returned to the disabled list with a quadriceps strain . He returned to the Yankees lineup on July 28 , hitting a home run on the first pitch off of Matt Moore of Tampa Bay . Jeter was again placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list on August 5 due to a Grade 1 calf strain , and after a brief return to the lineup , he was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list for a third time on September 11 due to problems with his ankle , ending his season . On September 14 , 2013 Jeter was transferred to the 60 @-@ day disabled list . Jeter batted .190 in only 17 games played during the 2013 season . 
 = = = = Final season ( 2014 ) = = = = 
 Jeter re @-@ signed with the Yankees on a one @-@ year , $ 12 million contract for the 2014 season . Jeter announced on his Facebook page on February 12 , 2014 , that the 2014 season would be his last . During his final season , each opposing team honored Jeter with a gift during his final visit to their city , which has included donations to Jeter 's charity , the Turn 2 Foundation . 
 On July 10 , Jeter recorded his 1,000th career multi @-@ hit game , becoming the fourth player to do so . He was elected to start at shortstop in the 2014 All @-@ Star Game , and batted leadoff for the AL . Jeter went 2 for 2 , scored one run and received two standing ovations in the four innings he played at the 2014 All @-@ Star Game . As a result , Jeter 's <unk> career All @-@ Star batting average ( 13 for 27 ) ranked him fifth all @-@ time ( among players with at least 10 at @-@ bats ) . At 40 , Jeter also became the oldest player to have two or more hits in an All @-@ Star Game . In July , Jeter broke Omar Vizquel 's MLB career record of 2 @,@ 609 games started at shortstop , and Gehrig 's franchise career record of 534 doubles . On July 17 , Derek scored the <unk> run of his career becoming the 10th player in MLB history to do so . Jeter passed Carl Yastrzemski for seventh place on MLB 's all @-@ time career hit list on July 28 and on August 11 he passed Honus Wagner climbing to sixth on the all @-@ time hits list . 
 The Yankees honored Jeter with a pregame tribute on September 7 . Beginning with that day 's game , the Yankees wore a patch on their hats and uniforms honoring Jeter for the remainder of the season . In the final week of Jeter 's career , MLB Commissioner Bud Selig honored him as the 15th recipient of the Commissioner 's Historic Achievement Award for being " one of the most accomplished shortstops of all @-@ time " . 
 During Jeter 's final series at Yankee Stadium , Louisville Slugger announced they would retire their " <unk> " model baseball bat , the bat Jeter uses , though it will be sold under the name " <unk> " , in Jeter 's honor . The average ticket price for Jeter 's final home game , on September 25 , reached $ 830 on the secondary market . In his final game at Yankee Stadium , Jeter hit a walk @-@ off single against Orioles pitcher Evan Meek to win the game , 6 – 5 . 
 Jeter decided to play exclusively as the designated hitter in the final series of his career , at Fenway Park in Boston , so that his final memories of playing shortstop would be at Yankee Stadium . The Red Sox honored Jeter with a pregame ceremony including Red Sox retired stars Carl Yastrzemski , Jim Rice , Fred Lynn , Luis Tiant and Rico <unk> , the Boston Bruins ' Bobby Orr , New England Patriots receiver Troy Brown and the Boston Celtics ' Paul Pierce , while many Boston fans at Fenway Park loudly cheered for Jeter and gave him a standing ovation . In his final at @-@ bat , he hit an RBI infield single against Clay Buchholz , before being substituted for pinch runner Brian McCann ; he received an ovation from the Red Sox fans as he exited the field . 
 = = = World Baseball Classic = = = 
 Jeter started at shortstop for the United States national baseball team in the 2006 World Baseball Classic . He hit 9 @-@ for @-@ 20 ( .450 ) and scored five runs in six games . Only teammate Ken Griffey , Jr . ( .524 ) and Cuba 's <unk> <unk> ( .480 ) had a higher batting average with a minimum of 20 at @-@ bats . Jeter 's play earned him recognition as the shortstop selection on the All @-@ Tournament Team . 
 In the 2009 World Baseball Classic , Jeter again started at shortstop . He was named captain of the United States team by manager Davey Johnson , and he batted 8 @-@ for @-@ 29 ( .276 ) in eight games . Jeter and the United States team faced the Yankees at Steinbrenner Field in an exhibition game , the only time Jeter played against the Yankees . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Jeter is considered to be one of the most consistent baseball players of all time . He played fewer than 145 games a season only three times in his career : when he dislocated his left shoulder on Opening Day 2003 ( 119 games ) , when he injured his calf in 2011 ( 131 games ) , and in 2013 when he struggled with a myriad of injuries ( 17 games ) . For his career , he averaged 204 hits , 113 runs scored and 21 stolen bases per 162 games . He is currently 6th on the all @-@ time hits list in Major League Baseball history . Highly competitive , Jeter once said , " If you 're going to play at all , you 're out to win . Baseball , board games , playing Jeopardy ! , I hate to lose . " Seen as one of the best players of his generation , sportswriters believe that Jeter will be inducted on the 1st ballot into the Baseball Hall of Fame following his retirement , and could be a unanimous selection . 
 An aggressive hitter , Jeter swings at most pitches in the strike zone , and many near it . Though right @-@ handed hitters often pull the ball into left field , Jeter 's signature inside @-@ out swing , dubbed the " <unk> Swing " , results in most of his hits going to center and right field . Similarly , most of his home runs have been hit to right field than to center or to left , as his swing takes advantage of Yankee Stadium 's close right @-@ field fences . 
 Jeter is also known for his professionalism . In an age where professional athletes often find themselves in personal scandals , Jeter has mostly avoided major controversy in a high profile career in New York City while maintaining a strong work ethic . Due to his style of play , opponents and teammates hold Jeter in high esteem . A clubhouse leader , Jeter defuses confrontations between teammates . 
 = = = Postseason performance = = = 
 Jeter is noted for his postseason performances , and has earned the titles of " Captain Clutch " , and " Mr. November " due to his outstanding postseason play . He has a career .309 postseason batting average , and a .321 batting average in the World Series . Except for 2008 , 2013 and 2014 , the Yankees have been to the postseason every year since Jeter joined the team . Jeter holds MLB postseason records for games played ( 158 ) , plate appearances ( 734 ) , at @-@ bats ( 650 ) , hits ( 200 ) , singles ( 143 ) , doubles ( 32 ) , triples ( 5 ) , runs scored ( 111 ) , total bases ( 302 ) and strikeouts ( 135 ) . Jeter is also third in home runs ( 20 ) , fourth in runs batted in ( 61 ) , fifth in base on balls ( 66 ) and sixth in stolen bases ( 18 ) . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Jeter has won five Gold Glove Awards , trailing only Vizquel , Ozzie Smith , Luis Aparicio , Dave Concepción , and Mark Belanger for most by a shortstop . He is credited with positioning himself well and for a quick release when he throws the ball . One of his signature defensive plays is the " jump @-@ throw " , by which he leaps and throws to first base while moving towards third base . 
 Despite this , Jeter 's defense has been the subject of criticism from a number of sabermetricians , including Rob Neyer and the publication Baseball Prospectus . The 2006 book The Fielding Bible by John Dewan contains an essay by Bill James in which he concludes that Jeter " was probably the most ineffective defensive player in the major leagues , at any position " over his entire career . A 2008 study by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania found that , from 2002 through 2005 , Jeter was the worst defensive shortstop in MLB . Two sites that rely on advanced defensive statistics , <unk> and <unk> , rated Jeter below middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ pack status in 2010 , despite his receiving his fifth Gold Glove Award that season . 
 Jeter committed 18 errors in 2007 , his highest total since finishing with 24 in 2000 . After the season , Cashman and his staff saw Jeter 's defense as an area that needed to be addressed . At the Yankees ' request , Jeter embarked on a rigorous training program to combat the effects of age , by focusing on lateral movement and first @-@ step quickness . Jeter 's ultimate zone rating ( UZR ) improved from worst in the AL for shortstops in 2007 to close to league average in 2008 . 
 When asked to respond to criticism of his defense , Jeter replied : " I play in New York , man . Criticism is part of the game , you take criticism as a challenge . " Jeter further asserted that many defensive factors cannot be quantified . The controversy over Jeter 's fielding has become a flash point for the debate over whether the analyses of statistics or subjective observation is the better method to assess a player 's defensive ability , and for criticism of the Gold Glove Award . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jeter maintains homes in Marlboro Township , New Jersey ; Greenwood Lake , New York ; and the Davis Islands neighborhood of Tampa , Florida . He previously owned a penthouse apartment in Manhattan 's Trump World Tower . Regarding his official residence , Jeter settled a tax dispute with the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance in 2008 . New York State alleged that Jeter should have paid state income tax from 2001 to 2003 , as Jeter resided in the Manhattan apartment he bought in 2001 ; Jeter claimed to have established his residence in Tampa , Florida , in 1994 and that he was still a resident of Florida at the time . Florida has no state income tax . 
 Jeter 's personal life has been a frequent topic in gossip columns and celebrity magazines since his rookie year in 1996 . He had a well @-@ publicized relationship with singer Mariah Carey from 1997 to 1998 . Jeter also had a relationship with model Vida Guerra . Jeter has also dated former Miss Universe Lara Dutta , singer Joy Enriquez , television personality Vanessa <unk> , and the actresses Jordana Brewster , Jessica Biel , Minka Kelly , and model Hannah Davis . 
 In December 2002 , Yankees owner George Steinbrenner criticized Jeter for staying out until 3 a.m. at a birthday party during the 2002 season , saying that his star shortstop " wasn 't totally focused " and that " it didn 't sit well " with him . The two mocked the incident in a May 2003 VISA commercial , similar to the manner in which Steinbrenner and former Yankees manager Billy Martin made light of their feud in a Miller Lite commercial during the 1970s . 
 Jeter and Davis became engaged in 2015 . She bought Jeter an Italian Mastiff named Kane for Christmas in 2014 . Jeter never had pets as a child , and attributed his fear of dogs to the movie Cujo . In July 2016 , Jeter and Davis were married . 
 = = Business interests = = 
 During his injury @-@ shortened 2013 season , Jeter arranged a partnership with Simon & Schuster to form an imprint called Jeter Publishing . He called it " the blueprint for <unk> " . It will begin publishing nonfiction books for adults , children 's picture books , elementary grade fiction , and books for children who are learning to read , and could lead to film and television productions . 
 On October 1 , 2014 , Jeter 's new website , <unk> , appeared online ; it was billed as " a new media platform that will present the unfiltered voice of professional athletes , bringing fans closer to the games they love than ever before " . It was reported by the Tampa Bay Business Journal in March 2015 that Jeter had partnered with Concessions Tampa to bid for a space within the Tampa International Airport , and plans to open a restaurant named after his website . 
 Jeter also serves as a brand development officer for <unk> Inc . , and has investment interests in multi @-@ channel video network company , Whistle Sports Network . He explored purchasing the Buffalo Bills football team in 2014 . 
 = = Appearances outside of baseball = = 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Jeter created the Turn 2 Foundation , a charitable organization , in 1996 . It was established to help children and teenagers avoid drug and alcohol addiction , and to reward those who show high academic achievement . In 2012 , Jeter received an honorary doctorate from Siena College honoring him for his foundation 's work . 
 Jeter also serves as an ambassador for <unk> , a website designed to encourage children to get involved in sports . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Jeter has appeared in national ad campaigns for Nike , Gatorade , Fleet Bank , Ford , VISA , Discover Card , Florsheim , Gillette , Skippy , and XM Satellite Radio . He endorses a cologne named Driven , designed in collaboration with and distributed by Avon . Jeter has his own Jumpman shoe . To commemorate Jeter 's final year , the Jordan brand made a tribute commercial titled " # <unk> " , which had many baseball players ( such as Jon Lester ) and celebrities , even rival Boston Red Sox fans tip their caps . 
 In 2006 , Jeter was the second @-@ highest paid endorser in baseball , behind Ichiro Suzuki , who received endorsement deals in Japan . He was ranked as the most marketable player in baseball according to the 2003 , 2005 , and 2010 Sports Business Surveys . A 2011 list by the marketing firm Nielsen ranked Jeter as the most marketable player in baseball , accounting for personal attributes such as sincerity , approachability , experience , and influence . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 Jeter has appeared on television as a guest actor in the sitcom Seinfeld in the episode titled , " The Abstinence " and Saturday Night Live , a late @-@ night live television sketch comedy and variety show , in episode 7 during season 27 . He had cameo appearances in the comedy films Anger Management and The Other Guys . Jeter was the subject of a 2005 segment on the TV news magazine 60 Minutes and a 2014 episode of Finding Your Roots , a Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) public television series . Jeter also appears as a character in the Broadway play Bronx Bombers . Jeter made an appearance alongside Peyton Manning to celebrate Saturday Night Live 's 40th Anniversary in February 2015 . 
 Video games have featured Jeter on their cover , including 2K Sports ' MLB <unk> , MLB <unk> , and MLB <unk> , Acclaim Entertainment 's All @-@ Star Baseball series of video games , and Gameloft 's wireless phone baseball game , Derek Jeter Pro Baseball 2008 . A wax figure <unk> Jeter at the Madame Tussauds Wax Museum in New York , and a sculpture at the Louisville Slugger Museum & Factory in Louisville , Kentucky . 
 = = Career highlights = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 In 2015 , Jeter was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Statistical highlights = = = 
 = Chroogomphus vinicolor = 
 Chroogomphus vinicolor , commonly known as the wine @-@ cap Chroogomphus or the pine spike , is a species of mushroom in the family <unk> . Found in North America and the Dominican Republic , mushrooms grow on the ground under pine trees . Fruit bodies have reddish @-@ brown , shiny caps up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) wide atop tapered stems up to 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) long . The gills are thick , initially pale orange before turning blackish , and extend a short way down the length of the stem . Although the mushroom is edible , and sold in local markets in Mexico , it is not highly rated . Distinguishing this species from some other similar Chroogomphus species is difficult , as their morphology is similar , and cap coloration is too variable to be a reliable characteristic . C. vinicolor is differentiated from the European C. rutilus and the North American C. ochraceus by the thickness of its <unk> walls . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described as Gomphidius vinicolor in 1898 by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck , based on specimens collected near Lake Mohonk in Ulster County , New York . Peck noted a resemblance to Gomphidius roseus , which he thought was closely related . It was transferred to the newly created genus Chroogomphus by Orson K. Miller , Jr. in 1964 . 
 Molecular analysis of internal transcribed spacer DNA sequences shows that C. vinicolor groups in a clade with the closely related C. jamaicensis and C. <unk> . All of these species feature darkly @-@ amyloid flesh and thick @-@ walled cystidia . Based on this analysis , Miller considered C. jamaicensis to be insufficiently distinct genetically from C. vinicolor to warrant designation as a separate species ; however , as of 2012 , both MycoBank and Index Fungorum list it as a valid species . 
 The specific epithet vinicolor means " wine @-@ colored " . It is commonly known as the " wine @-@ cap Chroogomphus " or the " pine spike " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body of C. vinicolor has caps that are initially conical to convex before later flattening out , sometimes developing a small umbo , or a central depression ; the caps measure 2 – 10 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide . Its color is highly variable , ranging from wine @-@ red to reddish @-@ brown to orange @-@ brown or yellow @-@ brown . Wine @-@ red stains develop where the surface has dried or become rotten . The smooth cap surface is shiny , somewhat sticky when wet , and often radially streaked . The flesh is thick and orangish to ochraceous in color ; its taste and odor have been variously described as " not distinctive " or " pleasant " . The thick gills are decurrent ( attached to and extending a short ways down the stem ) , well spaced , ochraceous buff to pale orange when young , but turning to blackish after the spores mature . In his original description , Peck noted that the gills , when viewed with a hand lens , " appear velvety due to the abundant spores " . The fruit bodies are initially covered with a thin , web @-@ like partial veil that soon disappears as the cap expands . The cylindrical stem measures 2 @.@ 5 – 15 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) long by 0 @.@ 2 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , and taper towards the base . It is ochraceous to wine red or reddish @-@ brown with a dry , smooth to fibrillose surface . The partial veil sometimes leaves an indistinct , thin fibrous ring on the upper stem . 
 The spore print is greyish @-@ black . Spores are narrowly elliptical to spindle @-@ shaped , smooth , and measure 17 – 23 by 4 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 μm . The cystidia are somewhat spindle @-@ shaped or narrowly club @-@ shaped , and measure 112 – 164 by 13 – 20 µm . They have characteristically thick walls , up to 7 @.@ 5 µm wide in the middle portion . 
 Although the mushroom is edible , and is often free of insect damage , it is not highly recommended , " except as " fillers " to include with the more flavorful species " . The flavor may improve with drying . C. vinicolor mushrooms are sold in local markets at <unk> del Volcan in the state of Morelos , Mexico . There is a report of this species causing a contact sensitivity , in which an individual who had handled the mushroom developed a burning sensation in the eyes and an itchy rash on the eyelid after rubbing the eyes . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Two other Chroogomphus species with a morphology and coloration similar to C. vinicolor include C. rutilus and C. ochraceous . C. vinicolor is most reliably distinguished from these on the basis of having thick @-@ walled cystidia ( up to 5 – 7 @.@ 5 μm at the widest part ) . The other two species have been separated on the basis of color , with C. ochraceous having brighter colors ( yellowish @-@ orange to ochraceous ) than C. rutilus . Molecular analyses of European and North American collections suggest that C. rutilus is restricted to Europe , C. ochraceous only occurs in North America , and that cap coloration cannot be reliably used for species determination . 
 Another nearly identical species is C. jamaicensis , found in the Dominican Republic , Jamaica , and the Greater Antilles . It is distinguished microscopically by its slightly smaller spores measuring 17 – 20 by 4 @.@ 5 – 6 μm , cystidia with more uniformly thickened walls up to 5 μm thick , and cuticular hyphae that measure 2 – 5 μm wide . The fruit bodies of C. <unk> are more robust , with wooly or scaly reddish stems up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Further , this species tends to produce spore prints that are greener than those of C. vinicolor . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The mycorrhizal fungus sometimes fruits singly , but more often in scattered or groups on the ground under pines and other conifers . Fruiting usually occurs in the cooler weather of later summer and autumn . In coastal California , however , fruiting occurs in winter . It is often found near Suillus luteus and Suillus brevipes , and is known to parasitize the mycelium of both those and the truffle @-@ like Rhizopogon species . Chroogomphus vinicolor has a widespread range in North America , extending south to Mexico . It has also been recorded from the Dominican Republic . 
 = Millepora alcicornis = 
 Millepora alcicornis , or sea ginger , is a species of colonial fire coral with a calcareous skeleton . It is found on shallow water coral reefs in the tropical west Atlantic Ocean . It shows a variety of different morphologies depending on its location . It feeds on plankton and derives part of its energy requirements from microalgae found within its tissues . It is an important member of the reef building community and subject to the same threats as other corals . It can cause painful stings to unwary divers . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Millepora alcicornis is not a true coral in class Anthozoa but is in class Hydrozoa , and is more closely related to jellyfish than stony corals . Because of the variability in growth habit that this coral exhibits , it has been the subject of much confusion as to its taxonomy , being described under a number of different names from different localities . In 1898 , Hickson decided that the variations in morphology were due to environmental factors and that Millepora alcicornis was the valid name for all these species . This conclusion has since been questioned . 
 The species was first described by Linnaeus in 1758 , but his type locality is unknown . The scientific name comes from the Latin with Millepora meaning " thousand @-@ pored " and alcicornis meaning " elk @-@ horned " . It seems likely that the type locality is in fact the West Indies . Explaining this in 1941 Crossland wrote " I cannot resist the remark that the one thing quite certain about the many forms of Millepora is that none of them have any resemblance to an elk 's horn , except perhaps that from the West Indies " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The morphology of Millepora alcicornis is very variable . Most colonies probably start as encrusting forms and adopt a branching structure as they grow . The encrustations can become established on a variety of structures , not only on coral reefs and rocks but also on dead corals and the hulls of wrecked ships . Later development is in the form of plates or blades in habitats with much water movement such as the surf @-@ pounded outer edges of reefs . In calmer waters , such as in deep lagoons or more sheltered parts of the reef , a more upright , leafy or branched structure develops which can grow to 50 centimetres ( 20 in ) tall . The habit of growth is also influenced by the inclination of the surface on which the fire coral grows . On vertical surfaces , the encrusting bases are larger with longer perimeters and the density of branching is lower than it is on horizontal surfaces . The cylindrical branches usually grow in a single plane and span a range of hues from brown to pale , cream @-@ like yellow , while branch tips are white . 
 Embedded in the calcareous skeleton are numerous microscopic polyps . They are connected internally by a system of canals and are concealed behind pores in the skeleton , the surface of which is smooth and lacks the corallites of true stony corals . The polyps have specialist functions , the gastrozooids processing and digesting the food caught by the dactylzooids which are grouped around them . The gastrozooids are small and plump and extend four to six tentacle stubs through their pores but are otherwise invisible . The dactylzooids have hairlike tentacles covered in <unk> . Stings from the <unk> immobilize an item of prey and the tentacles thrust it through the mouth of an adjacent <unk> , from where it passes into the stomach for digestion . The polyps also extrude the <unk> , the calcareous material of which the skeleton is composed . The <unk> contains certain symbiotic microalgae called zooxanthellae . These are photosynthetic organisms which provide their hosts with energy and in return benefit from a protective environment in a well lit position . About 75 % of the fire coral 's energy requirements are provided by the zooxanthellae . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Millepora alcicornis is found in the Caribbean Sea , the Gulf of Mexico , Florida , the Cape Verde Islands and along the coast of Central and South America as far south as Brazil . It has also been found in Bermuda , but the morphology at that location is so different from that in the rest of its range that it may be a distinct species . It grows at depths of up to 40 metres ( 130 ft ) and is the only fire coral that often grows at depths greater than 10 metres ( 33 ft ) . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Millepora alcicornis feeds on plankton . The tentacles of the dactylzooids are normally extended all the time . If an object is waved about above the coral , it will cause the tentacles to retract and then the coral can be handled without experiencing the painful stings caused by the cnidocytes . 
 Reproduction is by either asexual or sexual means . Parts of the coral may get detached from the colony by a storm or other means , and some of these fragments may end up in suitable locations to grow into new colonies which will be genetically identical to the parent colony . This fragmentation is probably the most frequent method of reproduction . Alternatively , certain pores called ampullae contain polyps that bud off short @-@ lived , jellyfish @-@ like medusae , which separate from the colony . They produce gametes which , after fertilisation , develop into planula larvae . These drift with the currents as part of the zooplankton before settling out and developing into new colonies . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 A number of species of shrimp and fish take refuge among the branches of Millepora alcicornis , seemingly immune to the venom . <unk> in particular often perch on top of the fire coral , perhaps protected by their skinless pectoral fins . Perhaps unsurprisingly , Millepora alcicornis has few predators . The <unk> ( <unk> carunculata ) sometimes grazes on it , but prefers other corals . Certain nudibranchs in the genus <unk> eat it as do filefish in the family <unk> . 
 It has been found that when Millepora alcicornis grows in close proximity to an <unk> <unk> sea fan , the fire coral becomes aggressive . It produces " attack " branches which grow out sideways towards the sea fan , develop into hand @-@ like structures and encircle and smother it . The fire coral then uses it as a substrate for new growth . Sometimes this new growth gets separated from the parent colony , and a new colony of fire coral is formed , genetically identical to the original one . This aggressive action is specific to gorgonians and does not happen in response to the close presence of other live or dead corals , other sessile invertebrates or open water . The fire coral seems to be able to detect the <unk> 's presence as a result of water flowing over the surfaces of both . 
 = = Threats = = 
 Although not a true coral , Millepora alcicornis is subject to the same general threats that corals and coral reefs are facing . The greatest of these is global warming and the consequent rise in sea temperatures . Millepora alcicornis is one of the first corals to show bleaching as the symbiont zooxanthellae are killed . However , it is also more resilient than most and becomes re @-@ established by recruitment earlier than the scleractinian corals . Other general threats to reefs include ocean acidification , pollution , sedimentation , invasive species and other changes in species dynamics , coral diseases , fisheries , leisure activities and tourism . Small quantities of Millepora alcicornis are gathered for sale to collectors . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The cnidocytes of Millepora alcicornis are powerful enough to sting human skin . They can inject a venom that causes a painful burning sensation , skin eruptions , blisters and scarring . The toxin has been investigated and is a water @-@ soluble protein , 40 μg of which provides a median lethal dose to mice weighing 20 grams ( 0 @.@ 71 oz ) . 
 Millepora alcicornis has no commercial uses but is sometimes kept in reef aquaria . It requires high water movement and bright light to flourish and its health can be judged by its colour , a yellow hue showing health whereas a darker brown colour can indicate too little light . It can be difficult to control because it grows fast and spreads over other objects in the tank . 
 = The Boat Race 1852 = 
 The 11th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 3 April 1852 . Typically held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge . Former Cambridge cox Thomas Selby Egan coached Oxford , the first time that either crew had been trained by a member of the opposing university . The race was won by Oxford , their first Boat Race victory at Easter , who triumphed over Cambridge by nine lengths . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge , who were disqualified , in the previous race held in December 1849 . Cambridge led overall with seven wins to Oxford 's three . 
 The universities were unable to agree on a date for race in both 1850 and 1851 . The challenge to race from Cambridge was received by Oxford in December 1851 and was finally accepted that a race be conducted around Easter the following year . Oxford were coached by the former Cambridge cox Thomas Selby Egan , who had represented the Light Blues in the 1836 , 1839 and 1840 races , in protest at the use of watermen as Boat Race coaches . Oxford had prevented their use since 1841 but Cambridge would not do so until 1873 and were coached by the Thames waterman and world champion sculler Bob Coombes . It was the first time a crew was coached by a member of the other university . 
 The umpire for the race was Charles Jasper Selwyn and the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Three members of the Oxford crew had participated in the previous meeting of the universities in December 1849 , Houghton , Joseph William Chitty and the cox , Cotton . None of the Cambridge crew had Boat Race experience . The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 8 @.@ 5 lb ( 73 @.@ 5 kg ) , 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start on the Surrey side of the river , handing the Middlesex station to Oxford . The race started under Searle 's command at <unk> with Oxford taking a slight lead . On the approach to Hammersmith Bridge the gap was closing and Oxford passed through the central arch . Cambridge , following Coombe 's advice , opted to shoot the bridge towards the Surrey side and in doing so " lost the stream " and allowed Oxford to extend their lead . By Barnes Bridge the lead was around four lengths , and Oxford kept increasing their margin , winning by nine lengths in a time of 21 minutes 36 seconds . It was their second consecutive victory and took the overall record to 7 – 4 in favour of Cambridge . 
 = Fizeau experiment = 
 The Fizeau experiment was carried out by Hippolyte Fizeau in 1851 to measure the relative speeds of light in moving water . Fizeau used a special interferometer arrangement to measure the effect of movement of a medium upon the speed of light . 
 According to the theories prevailing at the time , light traveling through a moving medium would be dragged along by the medium , so that the measured speed of the light would be a simple sum of its speed through the medium plus the speed of the medium . Fizeau indeed detected a dragging effect , but the magnitude of the effect that he observed was far lower than expected . His results seemingly supported the partial aether @-@ drag hypothesis of Fresnel , a situation that was disconcerting to most physicists . Over half a century passed before a satisfactory explanation of Fizeau 's unexpected measurement was developed with the advent of Albert Einstein 's theory of special relativity . Einstein later pointed out the importance of the experiment for special relativity . 
 Although it is referred to as the Fizeau experiment , Fizeau was an active experimenter who carried out a wide variety of different experiments involving measuring the speed of light in various situations . 
 = = Experimental setup = = 
 A light ray emanating from the source S ′ is reflected by a beam splitter G and is collimated into a parallel beam by lens L. After passing the slits O1 and O2 , two rays of light travel through the tubes A1 and A2 , through which water is streaming back and forth as shown by the arrows . The rays reflect off a mirror m at the focus of lens L ′ , so that one ray always propagates in the same direction as the water stream , and the other ray opposite to the direction of the water stream . After passing back and forth through the tubes , both rays unite at S , where they produce interference fringes that can be visualized through the illustrated eyepiece . The interference pattern can be analyzed to determine the speed of light traveling along each leg of the tube . 
 = = Fresnel drag coefficient = = 
 Assume that water flows in the pipes with speed v. According to the non @-@ relativistic theory of the luminiferous aether , the speed of light should be increased when " dragged " along by the water , and decreased when " overcoming " the resistance of the water . The overall speed of a beam of light should be a simple additive sum of its speed through the water plus the speed of the water . 
 That is , if n is the index of refraction of water , so that c / n is the velocity of light in stationary water , then the predicted speed of light w in one arm would be 
 <formula> 
 and the predicted speed in the other arm would be 
 <formula> 
 Hence light traveling against the flow of water should be slower than light traveling with the flow of water . 
 The interference pattern between the two beams when the light is recombined at the observer depends upon the transit times over the two paths , and can be used to calculate the speed of light as a function of the speed of the water . 
 Fizeau found that 
 <formula> 
 In other words , light appeared to be dragged by the water , but the magnitude of the dragging was much lower than expected . 
 The Fizeau experiment forced physicists to accept the empirical validity of an old , theoretically unsatisfactory theory of Augustin @-@ Jean Fresnel ( 1818 ) that had been invoked to explain an 1810 experiment by Arago , namely , that a medium moving through the stationary aether drags light propagating through it with only a fraction of the medium 's speed , with a dragging coefficient f given by 
 <formula> 
 In 1895 , Hendrik Lorentz predicted the existence of an extra term due to dispersion : 
 <formula> 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Albert A. Michelson and Edward W. Morley ( 1886 ) repeated Fizeau 's experiment with improved accuracy , addressing several concerns with Fizeau 's original experiment : ( 1 ) Deformation of the optical components in Fizeau 's apparatus could cause artifactual fringe displacement ; ( 2 ) observations were rushed , since the pressurized flow of water lasted only a short time ; ( 3 ) the laminar flow profile of water flowing through Fizeau 's small diameter tubes meant that only their central portions were available , resulting in faint fringes ; ( 4 ) there were uncertainties in Fizeau 's determination of flow rate across the diameter of the tubes . Michelson redesigned Fizeau 's apparatus with larger diameter tubes and a large reservoir providing three minutes of steady water flow . His common path interferometer design provided automatic compensation of path length , so that white light fringes were visible at once as soon as the optical elements were aligned . <unk> , the light path was that of a Sagnac interferometer with an even number of reflections in each light path . This offered extremely stable fringes superior to those from Fizeau 's design ( which used an odd number of reflections ) that were , to first order , completely insensitive to any movement of its optical components . The stability was such that it was possible for him to insert a glass plate at h or even to hold a lighted match in the light path without displacing the center of the fringe system . Using this apparatus , Michelson and Morley were able to completely confirm Fizeau 's results . 
 Other experiments were conducted by Pieter Zeeman in 1914 – 1915 . Using a scaled @-@ up version of Michelson 's apparatus connected directly to Amsterdam 's main water conduit , Zeeman was able to perform extended measurements using monochromatic light ranging from violet ( <unk> Å ) through red ( <unk> Å ) to confirm Lorentz 's modified coefficient . In 1910 , Franz <unk> used a rotating device and overall confirmed Fresnel 's dragging coefficient . However , he additionally found a " systematic bias " in the data , which later turned out to be the Sagnac effect . 
 Since then , many experiments have been conducted measuring such dragging coefficients , often in combination with the Sagnac effect . For instance , in experiments using ring lasers together with rotating disks , or in neutron interferometric experiments . Also a transverse dragging effect was observed , i.e. when the medium is moving at right angles to the direction of the incident light . 
 = = Hoek experiment = = 
 An indirect confirmation of Fresnel 's dragging coefficient was provided by Martin Hoek ( 1868 ) . His apparatus was similar to Fizeau 's , though in his version only one arm contained an area filled with resting water , while the other arm was in the air . As seen by an observer resting in the aether , Earth and hence the water is in motion . So the following travel times of two light rays traveling in opposite directions were calculated by Hoek ( neglecting the transverse direction , see image ) : 
 The travel times are not the same , which should be indicated by an interference shift . However , if Fresnel 's dragging coefficient is applied to the water in the aether frame , the travel time difference ( to first order in v / c ) vanishes . Using different setups Hoek actually obtained a null result , confirming Fresnel 's dragging coefficient . ( For a similar experiment refuting the possibility of shielding the aether wind , see <unk> experiment ) . 
 In the particular version of the experiment shown here , Hoek used a prism P to disperse light from a slit into a spectrum which passed through a collimator C before entering the apparatus . With the apparatus oriented parallel to the hypothetical aether wind , Hoek expected the light in one circuit to be retarded 7 / 600 mm with respect to the other . Where this retardation represented an integral number of wavelengths , he expected to see constructive interference ; where this retardation represented a half @-@ integral number of wavelengths , he expected to see destructive interference . In the absence of dragging , his expectation was for the observed spectrum to be continuous with the apparatus oriented transversely to the aether wind , and to be banded with the apparatus oriented parallel to the aether wind . His actual experimental results were completely negative . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Although Fresnel 's hypothesis was empirically successful in explaining Fizeau 's results , many leading experts in the field , including Fizeau himself ( 1851 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1872 ) , Ketteler ( 1873 ) , Veltmann ( 1873 ) , and Lorentz ( 1886 ) were united in considering Fresnel 's partial aether @-@ dragging hypothesis to be on shaky theoretical grounds . For example , Veltmann ( 1870 ) demonstrated that Fresnel 's formula implies that the aether would have to be dragged by different amounts for different colors of light , since the index of refraction depends on wavelength ; <unk> ( 1872 ) demonstrated a similar result for polarized light traveling through a birefringent medium . In other words , the aether must be capable of sustaining different motions at the same time . 
 Fizeau 's dissatisfaction with the result of his own experiment is easily discerned in the conclusion to his report : 
 The success of the experiment seems to me to render the adoption of Fresnel 's hypothesis necessary , or at least the law which he found for the expression of the alteration of the velocity of light by the effect of motion of a body ; for although that law being found true may be a very strong proof in favour of the hypothesis of which it is only a consequence , perhaps the conception of Fresnel may appear so extraordinary , and in some respects so difficult , to admit , that other proofs and a profound examination on the part of <unk> will still be necessary before adopting it as an expression of the real facts of the case . 
 Despite the dissatisfaction of most physicists with Fresnel 's partial aether @-@ dragging hypothesis , repetitions and improvements to his experiment ( see sections above ) by others confirmed his results to high accuracy . 
 Besides the problems of the partial aether @-@ dragging hypothesis , another major problem arose with the Michelson – Morley experiment ( 1887 ) . In Fresnel 's theory , the aether is almost stationary , so the experiment should have given a positive result . However , the result of this experiment was negative . Thus from the viewpoint of the aether models at that time , the experimental situation was contradictory : On one hand , the aberration of light , the Fizeau experiment and the repetition by Michelson and Morley in 1886 appeared to support partial aether @-@ dragging . On the other hand , the Michelson – Morley experiment of 1887 appeared to prove that the aether is at rest with respect to Earth , apparently supporting the idea of complete aether @-@ dragging ( see aether drag hypothesis ) . So the very success of Fresnel 's hypothesis in explaining Fizeau 's results helped lead to a theoretical crisis , which was not resolved until the development of the theory of special relativity . 
 = = Lorentz 's interpretation = = 
 In 1892 , Hendrik Lorentz proposed a modification of Fresnel 's model , in which the aether is completely stationary . He succeeded in deriving Fresnel 's dragging coefficient as the result of an interaction between the moving water with an <unk> aether . He also discovered that the transition from one to another reference frame could be simplified by using an auxiliary time variable which he called local time : 
 <formula> 
 In 1895 , Lorentz more generally explained Fresnel 's coefficient based on the concept of local time . However , Lorentz 's theory had the same fundamental problem as Fresnel 's : a stationary aether contradicted the Michelson – Morley experiment . So in 1892 Lorentz proposed that moving bodies contract in the direction of motion ( FitzGerald @-@ Lorentz contraction hypothesis , since George FitzGerald had already arrived in 1889 at this conclusion ) . The equations that he used to describe these effects were further developed by him until 1904 . These are now called the Lorentz transformations in his honor , and are identical in form to the equations that Einstein was later to derive from first principles . Unlike Einstein 's equations , however , Lorentz 's transformations were strictly ad hoc , their only justification being that they seemed to work . 
 = = Derivation in special relativity = = 
 Einstein showed how Lorentz 's equations could be derived as the logical outcome of a set of two simple starting postulates . In addition Einstein recognized that the stationary aether concept has no place in special relativity , and that the Lorentz transformation concerns the nature of space and time . Together with the moving magnet and conductor problem , the negative aether drift experiments , and the aberration of light , the Fizeau experiment was one of the key experimental results that shaped Einstein 's thinking about relativity . Robert S. Shankland reported some conversations with Einstein , in which Einstein emphasized the importance of the Fizeau experiment : 
 He continued to say the experimental results which had influenced him most were the observations of stellar aberration and Fizeau 's measurements on the speed of light in moving water . " They were enough , " he said . 
 Max von Laue ( 1907 ) demonstrated that the Fresnel drag coefficient can be easily explained as a natural consequence of the relativistic formula for addition of velocities , namely : 
 The speed of light in immobile water is c / n . 
 From the velocity composition law it follows that the speed of light observed in the laboratory , where water is flowing with speed v ( in the same direction as light ) is 
 <formula> 
 Thus the difference in speed is ( assuming v is small comparing to c , dropping higher order terms ) 
 <formula> <formula> 
 This is accurate when v / c ≪ 1 , and agrees with the formula based upon Fizeau 's measurements , which satisfied the condition v / c ≪ 1 . 
 Fizeau 's experiment is hence supporting evidence for the collinear case of Einstein 's velocity addition formula . 
 = R.V. College of Engineering = 
 <unk> Vidyalaya College of Engineering ( RVCE or R.V. College of Engineering , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a private technical co @-@ educational college located in Bangalore , Karnataka , India . Established in 1963 , RVCE has 11 departments in engineering , one school in architecture , and a Master of Computer Applications department . It is affiliated to the Visvesvaraya Technological University , Belgaum . The undergraduate courses are granted academic autonomy by the university . RVCE is accredited by the All India Council for Technical Education ( AICTE ) and all its departments are accredited by the National Board of Accreditation ( NBA ) . The college has twinning programs and tie ups with many institutions across the world , as well as collaborations with the industry . The annual festival of the college is called 8th Mile which is the most awaited event in the annual calendar .. The students of RVCE operate many student projects , most notable being the ones supported by the Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO ) , and the ones which participate in the competitions conducted by the Society of Automotive Engineers ( SAE ) . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 RVCE is spread over 53 acres ( 21 ha ) on the banks of the <unk> River in Bangalore , located on the Mysore Road , in between Bangalore University gate and <unk> . The nearest commuter railway station is <unk> Station , and the nearest major railway station is the Bangalore City Railway Station . The campus has a building for each undergraduate department , with the exception of the Biotechnology , Information Science , Instrumentation Technology and Master of Computer Applications departments , which are housed in a single building . 
 The college has a post office with postal identification as R.V. <unk> <unk> , and a bank operated by ING on its campus . The canteen serves North Indian , South Indian and Chinese vegetarian cuisine . RVCE offers internet connectivity at its browsing center , with Wi @-@ fi access all over campus , along with copier facilities . The college also operates a health center . 
 = = = Hostels = = = 
 RVCE has 4 hostels on campus , namely the Cauvery Hostel for first year students , the Sir . M. Visvesvaraya Block for the final year students , and the Diamond Jubilee Block hostel for the rest of the students . The hostels on campus are completely meant for boys . The college , along with the managing trust ( <unk> ) operates 4 other hostels in Bangalore located in locations like Jayanagar , J.P. Nagar , and <unk> Nagar meant exclusively for the girls . 
 = = = Environmental initiatives = = = 
 A rainwater harvesting system sponsored by KPMG has been installed near the Telecommunication Engineering block , and a similar system is in place near the administrative block , the construction of which was supervised by the department of Civil engineering . Both the harvesting systems make use of a sump , and the stored water is typically used for gardening purposes . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The college is managed by the <unk> <unk> Samiti Trust located in Jayanagar , Bangalore , chaired by Dr. Panduranga <unk> . 
 = = = Industry collaborations and <unk> = = = 
 The college has industry collaborations and <unk> of Understanding ( MoU ) s with companies and universities . The college has tied up with universities in India , the United States , Germany , South Korea and Singapore . The college has twinning programs with many institutions including <unk> University , South Korea University of Wisconsin , Milwaukee ; West Virginia University ; University of Missouri ; Lamar University , all in the United States , Aachen University and University of Muenster in Germany ; <unk> , France ; University of Sydney and University of Wollongong , both in Australia . The college also has ties with the Kuvempu University , Shimoga ; and Mangalore University . 
 In 2007 , RVCE signed a Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) with IT company Cognizant Technology Solutions to strengthen industry @-@ academia partnership . In October 2009 , Pace Embedded Systems opened a Embedded Systems lab at RVCE to train the students in Digital Television and Embedded Systems . The college also has industrial interactions with companies like ABB , Indian Space Research Organisation ( ISRO ) , <unk> Bengaluru <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , Gas Turbine Research Establishment ( <unk> ) and the Indian Railways . 
 = = = Campus placements = = = 
 The college offers placement on campus for its students . A few of the companies which have visited the college for campus placements are Microsoft , Oracle , Google , Dell , Delphi , Intel , Yahoo , IBM , Caterpillar , Accenture , ABB , Citrix , Wipro , Tata Consultancy Services ( TCS ) , Infosys , Quest Global and Sasken . 
 = = Academic profile = = 
 All the engineering departments and the school of architecture are accredited by the AICTE and the National Board of Accreditation . 
 = = = Admission = = = 
 Students are admitted to undergraduate courses on basis of their merit in the Karnataka CET test , or in the <unk> @-@ K undergraduate test . Students are also admitted through a management quota , which does not place merit requirements . There is a lateral entry scheme in place , by which students holding diploma degrees can enter directly to the second year of study in engineering . Students , upon graduating , receive a Bachelor of Engineering or a Bachelor of Architecture degree . 
 Students are admitted to postgraduate courses on basis of their GATE test scores , as well as on their Post Graduate Karnataka CET scores . 
 = = = Course content and Grading = = = 
 All the departments which have been conferred autonomous status set their own course content and grading system . RVCE follows the credit @-@ based system of performance evaluation , with proportional weighting of courses based on their importance . The total marks ( usually out of 100 ) form the basis of grades , with a grade value ( out of 10 ) assigned to a range of marks . For each semester , the students are graded by taking a weighted average from all the courses with their respective credit points . Each semester 's evaluation is done independently with a cumulative grade point average ( <unk> ) reflecting the average performance across semesters . The medium of instruction is English . 
 = = = Achievements = = = 
 RVCE has been recognised as a centre for excellence by the Union Government of India . In 2008 , the college had the highest number of gold medal @-@ winners among colleges affiliated to Visvesvaraya Technological University . The department of Mechanical engineering of RVCE is the state 's first degree programme in a private institution to be accredited by the National Board of Accreditation . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 R.V. College of Engineering has been ranked as the 35th best Engineering College of India in the Edu @-@ Rand Rankings of 2015 . The survey was done jointly by Edu , an Indian company and Rand Corporation , a non @-@ profit American <unk> . 
 = = = Departments and courses = = = 
 Undergraduate 
 These departments offer four year undergraduate courses in engineering . All of the undergraduate courses have been conferred autonomous status by the Visvesvaraya Technological University 
 Aerospace 
 Bio @-@ technology 
 Chemical Engineering 
 Civil Engineering 
 Computer Science And Engineering 
 Electronics and Communication Engineering 
 Electrical And Electronics Engineering 
 Industrial Engineering and Management 
 Information Science Engineering 
 Instrumentation Technology 
 Mechanical Engineering 
 Telecommunication Engineering 
 The School Of Architecture offers a 5 @-@ year course in architecture . 
 The allied departments of the college are the departments of Physics , Chemistry , Mathematics , Humanities , and that of placement and training . 
 Postgraduate 
 Master of Computer Applications 
 Master of Technology offered by departments of Computer Science , Information Science , Electronics and Communication and Mechanical Engineering 
 Master of Architecture 
 = = Student activities = = 
 = = = College festival = = = 
 8th Mile is the main annual techno @-@ cultural festival of the college and features inter @-@ college competitions and concerts each night , popularly known as " Pro @-@ shows " . Previous performers include KK , Indian Ocean , Usha Uthup , Raghu Dixit , Benny Dayal , <unk> , Thermal Projekt and Best Kept Secret . 
 = = = Department Events = = = 
 The Science Forum of the college , consisting of freshman students conducts Genesis , the intercollegiate festival . Apart from this , each department conducts its own festivals , some of them being Infinity ( Department of Information Science and Engineering ) , Impulse ( Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering ) , Vortex ( Department of Mechanical Engineering ) , Vantage ( Department of Instrumentation Technology ) , and Connect ( Department of Telecommunication Engineering ) . All of these are intercollegiate technical and cultural festivals . 
 = = = Cultural Activities = = = 
 The Cultural Activities Team overlooks the functioning of all cultural clubs in the college which are led by student and faculty heads . Footprints , the dance club of RVCE , conducts one of the largest college hip @-@ hop festivals called <unk> . RV <unk> , the quiz club of RVCE conducts the national level college and corporate quiz festival Under the <unk> Tree each year . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Cricket and Football are widely played across the college campus . The college has a cricket team , which has won major competitions like the <unk> Memorial inter @-@ collegiate tournament . The college 's football team has excelled in tournaments like the VTU South Zone football tournaments . Basketball is fast gaining popularity among the women , after the women 's team excelled in University tournaments , as well as other tournaments . The college Badminton team frequently excels in university @-@ level tournaments , having won many of them . 
 = = = Literary and language awareness = = = 
 R.V. College of Engineering has one of the best Debating Societies in India , . The R.V Debating Society ( RV DebSoc - as it is popularly known ) takes part in tournaments across the world , with success at tournaments such as the All Asians <unk> Tournament , <unk> , ABP . The society also participates in inter varsity competitions held by Oxford University and Cambridge University . The society also won the 2011 Asian British Parliamentary Debate held at Dhaka , Bangladesh . Since its inception , the DebSoc has won many tournaments in India . RV DebSoc also hosts the R.V Debating Tournament , which receives participation from all over India . The RV Debating Society is proud of being one of the oldest and most active , successful clubs in R.V. College of Engineering . 
 Kannada Sangha is the club dedicated to spreading Kannada language and cultural awareness . The club conducts Kannada classes and holds a cultural fest every year . 
 = = = Entrepreneurship = = = 
 <unk> , the entrepreneurship cell was started in 2006 by Pushkar <unk> , <unk> Johar and Piyush Gupta under the guidance of Prof <unk> <unk> , Director Placement and Training . The cell promotes the spirit of entrepreneurship and provides a platform for the students to showcase their business talents . The organization conducts an annual business plan / ideas contest where entries are invited throughout Karnataka . The cell won the Best <unk> Award from National Entrepreneurship Network in 2006 . 
 = = = Social service = = = 
 The <unk> Club of RVCE is affiliated to Rotary International District <unk> The club conducts blood donation camps , National pulse polio drives , tree plantation drives and eye check @-@ up camps . <unk> is the youth club of RVCE . The club provides the students a platform to showcase their leadership skills , talents in music , art and craft and also literary interests by organizing college level events like Opinions , an open discussion forum . The club , along with the National Service Scheme unit of college , organizes visit to <unk> and orphanages . It organizes an Eye Pledging Camp in association with the Lions Eye Bank , Bangalore . 
 = = Student projects = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A team of students of RVCE , along with students from some other colleges in the country and the Indian Space Research Organisation , teamed up to make the first pico satellite in India , called <unk> . The pico satellite was launched by the <unk> C @-@ 15 on 12 June 2010 from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre in <unk> . The camera on board has a low resolution of 90 metres . The panchromatic images are designed to provide terrain information during the satellite 's short lifespan of six months to one year . 
 = = = SAE Events = = = 
 <unk> , a Formula racing car . The car won the " Best Car from South Asia " award in the Formula Society of Automotive Engineers ( <unk> ) event in Germany . The team was also the first Indian team to compete in the <unk> event in 2005 in Australia , which won the " Best Value for Money " award . The project team has been awarded the " Young Achiever 2007 " award , an award instituted by the Rotary Midtown and the Brigade Group . Team <unk> , a student group designs and manufactures UAVs ( Unmanned Aerial Vehicles ) to participate in <unk> competitions conducted by the Society of Automotive Engineers in Marietta , GA ; and in Brazil . The team is the first Asian team to compete in the <unk> competitions . 
 Team Helios Racing .. An All Terrain Vehicle ( ATV ) that can travel on muddy swamps and climb up hills was designed by a group of students from the Mechanical engineering department . The vehicle entered the " Mini <unk> Challenge " — an international challenge in Pretoria in October 2006 . Became the NATIONAL CHAMPIONS in an event called <unk> <unk> <unk> in January 2015 . 
 = = = IEEE branch = = = 
 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) operates a student branch in RVCE . It organises many events , some of them being a workshop <unk> ( Laboratory Virtual Instrumentation Engineering <unk> ) , which is a platform and development environment for a visual programming language from National Instruments , various paper presentation competitions , and a seminar competition . 
 = = = Robotics = = = 
 The Robotics team from the Instrumentation Technology Department won the " All India Robotics Challenge " at <unk> 2007 The annual tech fest held at IIT Madras . 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 Garuda , a fuel @-@ efficient , aerodynamic car , was designed by the Mechanical engineering students . The car reportedly gives a mileage of 180 kilometers per litre of fuel . Project Garuda members were the only team from India to participate in the Shell Eco Marathon held at Rockingham Raceway , Corby , UK . Project Garuda was awarded the <unk> <unk> Team ' award , which is given to the best first @-@ time participant every year . 
 Eight students of the RV College of Engineering developed a vehicle consuming water as a fuel . Together , they have developed a water @-@ powered hybrid auto rickshaw . The team has developed an inexpensive and simple retrofit kit for auto rickshaws . 
 In June 2008 , the students developed a prototype of a hybrid @-@ electric vehicle that uses both electric energy and diesel mixed with bio @-@ diesel . According to The Hindu , this is the first indigenous hybrid @-@ electric prototype in the country and among very few prototypes to use bio @-@ diesel . The project , codenamed ‘ Chimera ' , was conceived and the prototype developed by the final year students of four engineering disciplines — Mechanical , Electrical and Computer science and Industrial engineering . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 Nikhil Prasad , winner of the Junior Orange Bowl tennis Championships held at Miami , USA . Anil Kumble , former captain of the Indian Test Cricket Team and winner of Arjuna Award in 1995 and Padma Shri Award in 2005 graduated from RVCE with a degree in Mechanical Engineering . 
 Another alumnus of the college is Table tennis player Chetan <unk> , who represented India in the 1992 Barcelona Olympics . <unk> Venkata Reddy and <unk> Scindia , politicians from Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka respectively , are alumni of the college . Ashok Nayak , chairman of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and noted Kannada singer <unk> also call the college their alma mater . 
 = Chef ( film ) = 
 Chef is a 2014 American comedy @-@ drama film written , produced , directed by and starring Jon Favreau , and co @-@ starring Sofía Vergara , John Leguizamo , Scarlett Johansson , Oliver Platt , Bobby Cannavale , Dustin Hoffman , and Robert Downey , Jr . Favreau plays a professional chef who , after a public altercation with a food critic , quits his job at a popular Los Angeles restaurant and returns to his home town of Miami to fix up a food truck . He reconnects with his ex @-@ wife and invites their young son to join him in driving the truck back to L.A. while selling <unk> in various cities along the way . 
 Favreau wrote the script after directing several big @-@ budget films , wanting to go " back to basics " and to create a film about cooking . Food truck owner and chef Roy Choi served as a co @-@ producer and oversaw all of the menus and food prepared for the film . Principal photography took place in July 2013 in Los Angeles , Miami , Austin and New Orleans . Chef premiered at South by Southwest on March 7 , 2014 and was released theatrically on May 9 , 2014 by Open Road Films . It grossed over US $ 45 million at the box office and was well received by critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Miami @-@ born Carl Casper is the head chef of Gauloise in Brentwood , California . While popular with his kitchen staff and hostess Molly , the restaurant owner Riva wants Carl to stick to tired " classics " rather than innovative dishes . Carl has a strained relationship with his tech @-@ savvy preteen son Percy and rich ex @-@ wife Inez . 
 When Carl has a chance to prove his creative talents during a visit from prestigious critic and blogger Ramsey Michel , Riva demands that he stick with old favorites at the last minute , causing Carl to concede , leading to a scathing review . On Twitter , Carl insults Ramsey for the review , not realizing that his reply is public , and gains a large Twitter following . Carl comes up with an inspirational new menu that his staff loves and invites Ramsey to a " rematch " . After a confrontation with Riva as the owner wants the same old menu again , Carl walks out , quitting . At home , he prepares the menu he wanted to serve to Ramsey . Carl 's assistant becomes the interim chef and even the regular dishes become a disaster . Ramsey again starts to tweet negatively about Carl , leading Carl to go to the restaurant , where he angrily and publicly berates Ramsey . 
 Videos featuring Carl 's meltdown go viral , and his professional credibility evaporates . Molly and Inez encourage him to run a food truck . He accepts Inez 's invitation to Miami , where he spends some quality time with Percy and rediscovers his love for Cuban cuisine . Inez 's ex @-@ husband Marvin offers him a dilapidated food truck , and Carl reluctantly accepts . He also finds out that Marvin and Inez spent some time together after his divorce from Inez , which made him a little angry . He and Percy bond while restoring the truck and buying groceries and Carl buys him a chef 's knife . Martin , his friend from Gauloise , turns down his restaurant promotion to work with Carl , who has become an exuberant and passionate chef again . 
 The three drive the food truck across the country back to Los Angeles , serving top @-@ quality Cuban sandwiches and yuca fries . Percy finds ways to promote the food truck on social media websites , and the truck becomes successful in New Orleans and Austin , Texas , where the daily specials include items made with local ingredients such as po ' boys and barbecued brisket . 
 Back in Los Angeles , Carl realizes the importance of his relationship with his son and accepts Percy 's enthusiastic offer to help out on weekends and holidays . Ramsey visits the truck to explain that he wrote the bad review as he knew Carl 's creativity did not suit a restaurant which had been serving the same menu for years . He leaves with an offer to bankroll a new restaurant . In a flash @-@ forward set six months later , the new restaurant is a hit and closed for a private event : Carl and Inez remarry . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jon Favreau as Carl Casper 
 Sofía Vergara as Inez 
 <unk> Anthony as Percy 
 John Leguizamo as Martin 
 Scarlett Johansson as Molly 
 Oliver Platt as Ramsey Michel 
 Bobby Cannavale as Tony 
 Amy Sedaris as Jen 
 Dustin Hoffman as Riva 
 Robert Downey , Jr. as Marvin 
 Russell Peters as Miami cop 
 Jose Caridad Hernandez , " <unk> " as <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Jon Favreau , the writer , director and star of Chef , wrote the film 's script in about two weeks . He had long wanted to make a film about food and chefs , and felt that the subject was suited to a small @-@ scale independent film rather than a big @-@ budget production . He cited Jiro Dreams of Sushi , Eat Drink Man Woman and Big Night as inspirations for creating a food @-@ centric film . 
 The script was semi @-@ autobiographical , incorporating parts of Favreau 's life into the main character , such as being a father while having a busy career and coming from a " broken home " . Favreau also drew a comparison between his career as a director and Carl 's career as a chef in the film , noting that he stepped down from directing major studio films to go " back to basics " and create Chef on a smaller budget , much like Carl 's resignation from a popular restaurant to work in a food truck . 
 Favreau contacted Roy Choi , a restaurateur who created the <unk> Korean BBQ food truck , to serve as a consultant on the film ; Choi was eventually promoted to co @-@ producer . While the film was in pre @-@ production , Favreau shadowed Choi in his restaurants and worked as part of Choi 's kitchen crew after training at a culinary school . Choi oversaw all of the menus prepared for the film and created the Cuban sandwiches that formed a central part of the storyline . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In addition to Favreau , the first actors cast in main roles were Sofía Vergara , John Leguizamo and Bobby Cannavale . It was announced that Robert Downey , Jr . ‍ — ‌ whom Favreau had previously directed in two Iron Man films ‍ — ‌ had joined the cast in May 2013 . Scarlett Johansson and Dustin Hoffman were cast later that month . Favreau felt that the film 's casting was one of its biggest successes , which provided him with " a tremendous amount of confidence " ; in particular , he was impressed by <unk> Anthony , who was ten years old at the time of filming . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography of the film began in July 2013 in Los Angeles . Subsequent filming took place in Miami , Austin and New Orleans — cities that Favreau chose to work into the story because they all " possess a rich food and music culture " . Specific filming locations in Miami included the Versailles restaurant , the Fontainebleau Hotel , and the Cuban restaurant Hoy Como Ayer in Little Havana . In New Orleans , some scenes were filmed at Café du Monde in the city 's French Quarter . In Austin , filming locations included Franklin Barbecue and Guero 's on South Congress . All food prepared for the shoot was eaten by members of the cast and crew after filming had finished . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Milan Records released a Chef soundtrack on May 6 , 2014 , three days before the film 's release . The soundtrack is a combination of Latin jazz , New Orleans jazz and blues , which serve as background to the storyline as it moves through Miami , New Orleans and Austin , respectively . The film 's music was chosen by music supervisor Mathieu Schreyer , while the incidental music was scored by Lyle Workman . 
 Charts 
 = = Release = = 
 Chef premiered on March 7 , 2014 at South by Southwest , where it was the opening film of the festival and was attended by Favreau , Leguizamo , Anthony , and Platt . It was subsequently screened at the Tribeca Film Festival in April . On August 19 , Open Road Films announced to re @-@ release the film nationally on August 29 for a Labor Day weekend , which would grow 100 screens to 600 @-@ 800 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was released theatrically on May 9 , 2014 , beginning in limited release in six theaters and expanding throughout May and June to a peak of 1 @,@ 298 theaters . Its total gross in the United States as of November 2 , 2014 is $ 31 @.@ 4 million . 
 Outside of the U.S. , Chef performed best in Australia ( earning $ 2 @.@ 8 million ) , the United Kingdom and Spain ( $ 2 @.@ 6 million in each country ) and Mexico ( earning a little over $ 1 million ) . In total , Chef has grossed almost $ 15 million outside America . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Reviews for Chef have been positive . On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a " certified fresh " rating of 86 % , based on 169 reviews , with the site 's consensus summarizing : " Chef 's charming cast and sharp , funny script add enough spice to make this feel @-@ good comedy a flavorful — if familiar — treat . " Metacritic gave the film a score of 68 out of 100 , based on 36 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , describing it as " an artful surprise and an exuberant gift " and " deliciously entertaining , comic , touching and often bitingly true " . Ty Burr of the Boston Globe also awarded the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars ; he thought it was " funny and heartfelt " and that , despite its weaknesses , the strengths " overpower the parts of the meal that are undercooked " . Chicago Sun @-@ Times critic Richard Roeper gave Chef 3 out of 4 stars , finding it " funny , quirky and insightful , with a bounty of interesting supporting characters " but also noting the lack of plot and character development in some parts . Gary Goldstein of the Los Angeles Times gave particular praise to the " terrific supporting cast " and the script 's lack of cliché , such as in its presentation of family dynamics . 
 Joe Leydon from Variety found the film 's plot predictable and slow @-@ paced , but noted " the trip itself is never less than pleasant , and often extremely funny " . The New York Times ' Stephen Holden described Chef as " aggressively feel @-@ good " and " shallow but enjoyable " . Michael O 'Sullivan of The Washington Post gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars and found it " deeply satisfying , down to the soul " , praising the " incredible " food photography , the " colorful supporting cast " and the " wryly observant " humor , raving , " There 's nothing terribly profound about " Chef " . But its message ‍ — ‌ that relationships , like cooking , take a hands @-@ on approach ‍ — ‌ is a sweet and sustaining one . " San Francisco Chronicle film critic Mick LaSalle opined that Chef was Favreau 's best film to date , highlighting the " natural and convincing " chemistry between Favreau and Anthony and the " vivid " scenes featuring big @-@ name actors in small roles . USA Today 's Scott Bowles gave Chef 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars and called it " a nuanced side dish , a slow @-@ cooked film that 's one of the most heartwarming of the young year " . Ken Choy of Wide Lantern noted the structural problems but admitted , " If you ever saw the Kristen Bell sloth video on Ellen , that was me during the entire 2nd half of the movie . Non @-@ stop tears . It was happy @-@ crying because Favreau 's character was doing what he wanted . " 
 Slant Magazine critic Chris Cabin , however , gave Chef 1 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars and described it as Favreau 's " most self @-@ satisfied , safe , and compromised film to date " , chiefly criticizing the film 's lack of realism and credibility . Writing for The Village Voice , Amy Nicholson agreed that the storyline was implausible and summarized the film as " so charmingly middlebrow that it 's exactly the cinematic comfort food it mocks " . Indiewire 's Eric Kohn opined that with Chef , " Favreau has no sweeping thematic aims " , and that the end product was a " self @-@ indulgent vanity project " . 
 = Banksia caleyi = 
 Banksia caleyi , commonly known as the red lantern banksia or Caley 's banksia , is a species of woody shrub of the family Proteaceae native to Western Australia . It generally grows as a dense shrub up to 2 m ( 7 ft ) tall , has serrated leaves and unusual red , pendent ( hanging ) inflorescences which are generally hidden in the foliage . First described by Scottish naturalist Robert Brown in 1830 , Banksia caleyi was named in honour of the English botanist George Caley . No subspecies are recognised . It is one of three or four related species with hanging inflorescences , which is an unusual feature within the genus . 
 Found south and east of the Stirling Ranges through to the vicinity of Jerramungup , Banksia caleyi grows in a habitat burnt by periodic bushfires . Plants are killed by fire and regenerate by seed afterwards . The species is classified as Not Threatened under the Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia . In contrast to other Western Australian banksias , it appears to have some resistance to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi , and is comparatively easy to grow in cultivation . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia caleyi grows as a many @-@ branched bushy shrub to 2 m ( 7 ft ) in height , with crumbly grey bark . Rarely , plants of up to 4 m ( 13 ft ) have been found . The new growth is hairy , and generally occurs in summer . The branchlets become smooth after around two years . The stiff leaves are narrowly wedge @-@ shaped ( cuneate ) and measure 5 – 14 cm ( 2 – 5 1 ⁄ 2 in ) in length by 1 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 4 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 1 in ) wide . The leaf margins are serrated , with many teeth measuring 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 4 in ) each . 
 Flowering takes place between September and January . The inflorescences hang down from the ends of three- to five @-@ year @-@ old branchlets deep within the shrub and measure 5 – 9 cm ( 2 – 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) in length and roughly 7 cm ( 2 3 ⁄ 4 in ) in diameter . The flowers are cream at the base and deep pink to red in the upper half , and are brightest before anthesis and then gradually fade with age . The inflorescences eventually turn grey , the old flowers remaining as up to 25 large woody follicles develop . Oval in shape and covered with fine hair , the follicles can reach 4 cm ( 1 5 ⁄ 8 in ) long , 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) high , and 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) wide . 
 The obovate seed is 4 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 3 ⁄ 4 – 1 7 ⁄ 8 in ) long and fairly flattened , and is composed of the wedge @-@ shaped seed body proper , measuring 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 – 5 ⁄ 8 in ) long and 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 ⁄ 8 in ) wide , and a papery wing . One side , termed the outer surface , is dark brown and wrinkled , while the other is black and smooth . Both surfaces sparkle slightly . The seeds are separated by a sturdy dark brown seed separator that is roughly the same shape as the seeds with a depression where the seed body sits adjacent to it in the follicle . Seedlings have cuneate cotyledons which measure 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 in ) wide . These are dull green with three veins , and the margin of the wedge may be red and crenulated ( lined with small teeth ) . The hypocotyl is red and measures 1 @.@ 5 – 2 cm ( 5 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 4 in ) high . Seedlings have hairy stems and leaves that are oppositely arranged ( arising from the stem in pairs ) that are obovate with triangular @-@ lobed serrate margins . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Robert Brown formally described Banksia caleyi in his 1830 work Supplementum primum Prodromi <unk> Novae Hollandiae , naming it in honour of the English botanist George Caley . The type specimen was collected by William Baxter , inland from King George Sound on Western Australia 's south coast , in 1829 . 
 Carl Meissner placed B. caleyi in series Quercinae in his 1856 arrangement of the genus on account of its strongly dentate , cuneate to obovate leaves . As they were defined on leaf characters alone , all of Meissner 's series were highly heterogeneous . Meissner also described B. caleyi variety <unk> from material collected by James Drummond , which was reviewed by Alex George and found to be no different from the other collections of B. caleyi . Drummond also collected material identified as B. caleyi that was named as a distinct species — Banksia aculeata — in 1981 . No subspecies of B. caleyi itself are recognised . 
 George Bentham published a thorough revision of Banksia in his landmark publication Flora Australiensis in 1870 . In Bentham 's arrangement , the number of recognised Banksia species was reduced from 60 to 46 . Bentham defined four sections based on leaf , style and pollen @-@ presenter characters . Banksia caleyi was placed in section Orthostylis . In his 1891 work Revisio Generum Plantarum , German botanist Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. caleyi as Sirmuellera caleyi . The challenge failed , and Banksia L.f. was formally conserved in 1940 . 
 In his 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) , Alex George placed B. caleyi in B. subg . Banksia because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike shape ; in B. sect . Banksia because of its straight styles ; and B. ser . Tetragonae because of its pendulous inflorescences . He considered its closest relative to be B. aculeata , which has narrower leaves with fewer , larger lobes ; longer perianths , which grade from red to cream rather than from cream to red ; shorter pistils ; and also differences in the follicles , seeds and flowering time . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published the results of a cladistic analysis of morphological characters of Banksia . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . George 's B. ser . Tetragonae was found to be monophyletic , and therefore retained ; and their analysis of the relationships within the series supported the placement of B. caleyi alongside B. aculeata . 
 B. caleyi 's placement in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 B. elegans ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. ser . Tetragonae 
 B. elderiana 
 B. lemanniana 
 B. caleyi 
 B. aculeata 
 The arrangement of Thiele and Ladiges was not accepted by George , and was discarded in his 1999 revision . Under George 's 1999 arrangement , B. caleyi 's placement was as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia 
 B. ser . Salicinae ( 11 species , 7 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Grandes ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Banksia ( 8 species ) 
 B. ser . Crocinae ( 4 species ) 
 B. ser . Prostratae ( 6 species , 3 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis ( 13 species ) 
 B. ser . Tetragonae 
 B. lemanniana 
 B. caleyi 
 B. aculeata 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is rather different from previous taxonomic arrangements , but support the placement of B. aculeata alongside B. caleyi in a clade corresponding closely with B. ser . Tetragonae . 
 Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They have refrained from publishing a full arrangement of Banksia until DNA sampling of Dryandra is complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. caleyi is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia caleyi is found near the southern coast of Western Australia , from South Stirling to the West River and northeast to <unk> . Some of its population lies within Fitzgerald River National Park . Often locally abundant , it is found in mallee woodland on white sand , gravel , and sandy clay , generally on flat or slightly undulating land . The annual rainfall is 550 – 600 mm ( 22 – 24 in ) . Banksia caleyi is classified as Not Threatened under the Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like many plants in south @-@ west Western Australia , Banksia caleyi is adapted to an environment in which bushfire events are relatively frequent . Most Banksia species can be placed in one of two broad groups according to their response to fire : reseeders are killed by fire , but fire also triggers the release of their canopy seed bank , thus promoting recruitment of the next generation ; resprouters survive fire , resprouting from a lignotuber or , more rarely , epicormic buds protected by thick bark . B. caleyi belongs to the reseeder group . In the wild , seedlings take at least three to four years to reach flowering after bushfire . Non @-@ patchy fires occurring at intervals of less than seven years may wipe out local populations of reseeders . 
 Banksia caleyi has been shown to have a low susceptibility to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi , unlike many Western Australian banksias . The fungal pathogen <unk> ribis has been recovered from B. caleyi . The caterpillar of the dryandra moth ( <unk> <unk> ) feeds on the leaves , though it prefers to eat those of dryandra species that grow alongside it . 
 The upside @-@ down flower spikes drip nectar onto the ground or lower leaves , suggesting pollination by <unk> mammals which are attracted to the scent . Supporting this hypothesis , the spiky leaves seem to also prevent access to foragers not at ground level . Furthermore , the individual flower structure is similar to Banksia attenuata , for which the honey possum ( Tarsipes rostratus ) is a major pollinator . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 23 to 50 days to germinate in cultivation . Banksia caleyi is a medium- to slow @-@ growing plant , taking four to five years to flower from seed . The flowers are attractive but are obscured by the foliage . This species can grow in a range of soil types so long as they provide good drainage . The nominal soil pH range is from 6 to 7 @.@ 5 . It grows in full sun and partly shaded situations , and tolerates light pruning . Unlike many other Western Australian banksias , Banksia caleyi has had some degree of success in growing in more humid areas , such as Australia 's east coast . It attracts pygmy and honey possums in the garden . 
 = Gerald Fischbach = 
 Gerald D. Fischbach ( born November 15 , 1938 ) is an American neuroscientist . He received his M.D. from the Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University in 1965 before beginning his research career at the National Institutes of Health in 1966 , where his research focused on the mechanisms of neuromuscular junctions . After his tenure at the National Institutes of Health , Fischbach was a professor at Harvard University Medical School from 1972 – 1981 and 1990 – 1998 and the Washington University School of Medicine from 1981 – 1990 . In 1998 , he was named the director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke before becoming the Vice President and Dean of the Health and Biomedical Sciences , the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine , and the Dean of the Faculty of Health Sciences at Columbia University from 2001 – 2006 . Gerald Fischbach currently serves as the scientific director overseeing the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative . Throughout Fischbach 's career , much of his research has focused on the formation and function of the neuromuscular junction , which stemmed from his innovative use of cell culture to study synaptic mechanisms . 
 = = Education and experience = = 
 Fischbach attended Colgate University in Hamilton , NY , where he was a four @-@ year recipient of the New York State Regents Scholarship . He graduated magna cum laude with high honors in mathematics receiving a Bachelor of Arts degree in Mathematics and Chemistry . Fischbach was also elected a member of Colgate University ’ s Phi Beta Kappa chapter in 1960 . After graduating from Colgate University , Fischbach attended Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University , where he was a recipient of the New York State Medical Scholarship from 1962 to 1965 and the Polk Award for Undergraduate Research in 1965 , before graduating with his M.D. that same year . Additionally , Fischbach received an honorary master 's degree from Harvard University in 1978 and an honorary Doctor of Science degree from Colgate University in 2003 . After graduating medical school , Fischbach interned at the University of Washington hospital in Seattle , Washington before beginning his research career at the National Institutes of Health in 1966 . Fischbach is married to Ruth L. Fischbach , who currently serves as a Professor of Bioethics in Psychiatry at Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center . They have four children . 
 = = Research career = = 
 = = = National Institutes of Health 1966 – 1973 = = = 
 Fischbach began his research career at the National Institutes of Health , where he served as a senior surgeon at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke ( NINDS ) before becoming a fellow at the National Institute of Child Health from 1966 to 1973 . Much of Fischbach ’ s research concentrated on the mechanisms controlling action potentials and synapses , from which he pioneered the use of neuron and muscle cell culture to study neuromuscular junctions . Fischbach used this technique to reconstruct neuromuscular junctions from dissociated spinal cord and muscle cells from chick embryos to show that functional synaptic connections reformed and were capable of sending spontaneous or induced action potentials . However , cultures containing isolated spinal cord cells were unable to send similar action potentials . This technique proved to be an important model for further studies to determine the essential mechanisms controlling neuromuscular junction development and maintenance . Towards the end of his tenure at the National Institutes of Health , Fischbach began to search for motor neuron molecules responsible for regulating the number of acetylcholine receptors on postsynaptic cells . This research project culminated in 1993 with the isolation of the ARIA ( acetylcholine receptor inducing activity ) protein , which is a member of the neuregulin family and is responsible for stimulating the production of acetylcholine receptors in postsynaptic muscle tissue . 
 = = = Harvard University 1973 – 1981 , 1990 – 1998 = = = 
 After his time at the National Institutes of Health , Fischbach obtained a position as an associate professor at Harvard Medical School 's Department of Pharmacology in 1973 . By 1978 he obtained tenure and became a full professor , and continued teaching at Harvard University for the next three years . After a nine @-@ year stint at Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis , Missouri , he returned to Harvard to serve as the Nathan Marsh Pusey Professor of Neurobiology and Chairman of the Neurobiology Departments of both Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts General Hospital from 1990 to 1998 . During his years as an associate professor , he researched the development of precursor muscle cells , specifically the development of acetylcholine receptors on embryonic chick pectoral muscles . Later on he continued his research on ARIA that he started at the National Institutes of Health , specifically focusing on the expression of the protein 's isoforms and their effects on tyrosine kinases . In 1993 , Fischbach was involved with the founding of the Mind , Brain , Behavior Institute . This inter @-@ disciplinary program aims to research the different structures , evolution , and development of the nervous system in order to better understand human behavior . 
 = = = Washington University School of Medicine 1981 – 1990 = = = 
 Gerald Fischbach spent nine years at the Washington University School of Medicine , where he served as the Edison Professor of Neurobiology and Head of the Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology . During his time here , Fischbach continued his work on the ARIA protein . When ARIA isolated from chick embryo brain was applied to chicken <unk> , which are developing chicken muscle fibers , it was shown to increase the rate of insertion of acetylcholine receptors into chicken myotube membranes . This indicated ARIA could play a role in acetylcholine receptor insertion in neuromuscular junctions . Additionally , it was demonstrated that ARIA stimulated the transcription of α acetylcholine receptor subunits leading to an increase in α subunit messenger RNA ( mRNA ) and precursors , but had no effect on the mRNA levels of the γ or δ acetylcholine receptor subunits . This indicated that the amount α acetylcholine receptor subunit limits the synthesis and subsequent insertion of acetylcholine receptors into chicken myotube membranes . 
 In addition to his ARIA work , Fischbach also researched rapid desensitization of glutamate receptors in chicken spinal cord and rat hippocampal neurons . Using focal <unk> and pressure injections to apply glutamate and other agonists including NMDA , AMPA , and <unk> to different regions of the neurons , he noticed that certain hot spots were desensitized more rapidly that other sites on the neuron . Fischbach and his collaborators hypothesized that these hot spots may be located at synapses between neurons , where clusters of glutamate receptors were present . 
 = = = National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 1998 – 2001 = = = 
 Fischbach returned to the NIH in 1998 when he was named director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke ( NINDS ) , a division of the NIH that supports research on the brain and nervous system . While he was director , Fischbach oversaw a staff of more than 700 and an annual budget of about $ 800 million . This money was used to support research by private and public organizations across the country as well as scientists working in labs at NINDS . Fischbach accomplished many things while director of NINDS , one of which being helping to shape national policy on important neurological research issues . He received great praise for his time as director from both Harold Varmus , former director of the NIH and current director of the National Cancer Institute ( NCI ) , and Richard Klausner , former director of the NCI . Fischbach left NINDS is 2001 when he was named Columbia University 's Vice President for Health and Biomedical Sciences . 
 While at the NINDS , Fischbach researched the effects of neuregulin , which is a family of proteins including <unk> , neu differentiation factor , ARIA , and glial growth factor that are critical for vertebrate embryogenesis and specifically for the formation of vertebrate spinal cord oligodendrocytes . Fischbach and his colleagues noticed that oligodendrocytes failed to form in mice that were homozygous for the mutant neuregulin gene . However , when wild @-@ type neuregulin was added to homozygous mutant neuregulin explants ( isolated tissue cell cultures ) nine days after conception of the embryos , normal oligodendrocyte development occurred . This indicated that neuregulin is not necessary for the proliferation of oligodendrocyte <unk> precursor cells . Additionally , when <unk> , a neuregulin inhibitor , is added to wild @-@ type explants , oligodendrocyte development failed to occur . 
 = = = Columbia University 2001 – 2006 = = = 
 After serving as the Director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke at the National Institute of Health , Gerald Fischbach was selected as the Vice President and Dean of the Health and Biomedical Sciences , the Dean of the Faculty of Medicine , and the Dean of the Faculty of Health Sciences at Columbia University in New York City . He served as the Dean for all three branches simultaneously . Fischbach was interviewed in 2001 by the newspaper for Columbia University Health Sciences , and there he stated that the mission of the University was " to use all its resources to reduce the burden of human disease . " He explained that this required interdisciplinary and collaborative work with the other departments and resources at Columbia University . The Health and Biomedical Sciences division at Columbia University includes the School of Nursing , the Joseph L. Mailman School of Public Health , the School of Dental Medicine , the College of Physicians and Surgeons , and the Audubon Business and Technology Center . The Audubon Center is the only research park that is affiliated with a university in New York City and holds the only incubator for business related to biotechnology . 
 The research Fischbach conducted at Columbia University stemmed from his previous work at Harvard University , Washington University and with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke , National Institute of Health . The specialized focus of his research was on the influence trophic factors could have on the survival of nerve cells and the efficiency of synapses . After his arrival to Columbia , Fischbach was focused on the expression of neuregulin in regards to neuromuscular synapses , signaling pathways in the brain , transcription factors , as well as work on autism . His research on Neuregulin @-@ 1 revealed a possible function in CNS neurogenesis since the <unk> were labeled throughout proliferation with an anti @-@ <unk> antibody and an anti @-@ <unk> antibody were suggested to have become neuron @-@ restricted progenitors . Some of his other research examined the relationship between neuregulin and expression of myosin heavy chain and transcription factors in human muscle . The research found that treatment including neuregulin increased the number of acetylcholine receptors on the surface of the myotube as well as an increase in the early growth response family for transcription factors . These findings impact the available knowledge regarding muscle spindle fiber formation , myosin heavy chains development , and the feasibility of mimicking muscle development processes in vitro . 
 = = Current research = = 
 = = = Simons Foundation 2006 – present = = = 
 In 2006 , Fischbach joined the Simons Foundation as the scientific director to oversee the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative . The Simons Foundation is an organization founded by Jim Simons and his wife Marilyn , and has awarded $ 130 million for autism research as of 2008 . As scientific director , Fischbach collaborates with mathematicians , engineers , chemists , and neuroscientists to try and understand autism more completely . Currently , Fischbach oversees research focusing on the neurobiology of autism and how it can relate to finding a possible cure . 
 Additionally , Fischbach and his colleagues are working on the Simons Simplex Collection ( SSC ) , which is designed to identify genetic factors that increase the risk of autism . Over 100 researchers and 13 universities have interviewed and collected blood samples from more than 2000 families to look for a genetic linkage to autism . The majority of tested individuals have moderate to severe autistic symptoms and do not display high levels of intellectual disability . Additionally , autistic individuals from enrolled SSC families exhibit genetic deletions , duplications , and copy number variants ( CNVs ) that are not present in unaffected family members . Siblings serve as ideal control groups to identify unique CNVs associated with autism . Although CNVs are rare and are found in only up to 1 % autistic individuals , the presence of multiple CNVs in autistic individuals may account for a larger fraction of autism cases . Ultimately , the goal of the SSC is to expand the number of individuals enrolled in the program in hope of identifying penetrant CNVs , small de novo mutations , and single nucleotide polymorphisms that are linked to a higher risk of autism . 
 Along with this research , Fischbach and his colleagues at the Simons Foundation are studying diseases that have autistic features , such as Rett syndrome and Fragile X syndrome . The hope is that a better understanding of the central role of the synapse in autistic symptoms can be discovered as well as which specific regions of the brain are responsible for these behaviors . Within the next decade , the ultimate goal of this research is to determine the precise neural circuitry involved in autism and how it translates to the autistic behaviors displayed . 
 = = Honors and publications = = 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 Fischbach has received the following awards : 
 1960 Phi Beta Kappa ( Colgate University ) 
 1965 Polk Award for Undergraduate Research ( Cornell University ) 
 1975 Mathilde <unk> Award in Neuroscience ( Foundation for Advanced Education in the Sciences : National Institute of Health ) 
 1981 W. Alden Spencer Award ( College of Physicians and Surgeons , Columbia University ) 
 1984 Elected to the National Academy of Sciences 
 1988 Elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 
 1988 – 1990 McKnight Endowment Fund for Neuroscience Senior Investigator Award 
 1990 Elected to the Institute of Medicine 
 1991 Elected to the European Academy of Sciences and Arts 
 1998 Foundation <unk> Neuronal Plasticity Prize 
 2000 Dr. Nathan Davis Award 
 2003 Parkinson ’ s Disease Foundation Honor for Contributions 
 2003 Appointed to the Council for Foreign Relations 
 2004 Maroon Citation ( Colgate University ) 
 = = = Selected publications = = = 
 Fischbach has authored or co @-@ authored over a hundred papers on his research work , which according to the Web of Science have been cited over 10 @,@ 000 times , giving him an h @-@ index of 57 . Some selected publications are : 
 Falls , <unk> ; Rosen , Kenneth ; <unk> , Gabriel ; Lane , William ; Fischbach , Gerald ( 1993 ) . " ARIA , a protein that stimulates acetylcholine receptor synthesis , is a member of the neu ligand family " . Cell 72 ( 5 ) : 801 – 813 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1016 / <unk> @-@ <unk> ( 93 ) <unk> @-@ H. PMID <unk> . 
 Loeb , Jeffery ; <unk> , <unk> ; Fischbach , Gerald ; Land , Susan ; Zakarian , <unk> ( 2002 ) . " Neuregulin Expression at Neuromuscular Synapses is <unk> by Synaptic Activity and <unk> Factors " . Journal of Neuroscience 22 ( 6 ) : <unk> – <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 Mann MA , Knipe DM , Fischbach GD , Fields BN ( 2002 ) . " Type 3 <unk> <unk> after intramuscular inoculation : direct invasion of nerve terminals and age @-@ dependent pathogenesis " . Virology . 303 ( 2 ) : 222 – 31 . 
 Jacobson C , Duggan D , and Fischbach G , ( 2004 ) . " Neuregulin induces the expression of transcription factors and myosin heavy chains typical of muscle spindles in cultured human muscle " . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 101 ( 33 ) : <unk> – <unk> . 
 Fischbach , Gerald ; Fischbach , Ruth ( 2004 ) . " Stem cells : science , policy , and ethics " . Journal of Clinical Investigation 114 ( 10 ) : 1364 – 1370 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1172 / <unk> . PMC <unk> . PMID <unk> . 
 Liu Y , Ford B , Mann M , Fischbach G , ( 2005 ) . " Neuregulin @-@ 1 increases the proliferation of neuronal progenitors from embryonic neural stem cells " . Developmental Biology . 283 ( 2 ) : 437 – 445 . 
 Fischbach G , and Lord , C , ( 2010 ) . " The Simons Simplex Collection : A Resource for Identification of Autism Genetic Risk Factors " . Neuron . 68 ( 2 ) : 192 – 195 . 
 = Battle of Nablus ( 1918 ) = 
 The Battle of Nablus took place , together with the Battle of Sharon during the set piece Battle of Megiddo between 19 and 25 September 1918 in the last months of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of the First World War . Fighting took place in the Judean Hills where the British Empire 's XX Corps attacked the Ottoman Empire 's Yildirim Army Group 's Seventh Army defending their line in front of Nablus . This battle was also fought on the right flank in the Jordan Valley , where Chaytor 's Force attacked and captured the Jordan River crossings , before attacking the Fourth Army at Es Salt and Amman capturing many thousands of prisoners and extensive territory . The Battle of Nablus began half a day after the main Battle of Sharon , which was fought on the Mediterranean section of the front line where the XXI Corps attacked the Eighth Army defending the line in front of Tulkarm and Tabsor and the Desert Mounted Corps which rode north to capture the Esdrealon Plain . Together these two battles , known as the Battle of Megiddo , began the Final Offensive of the war in the Sinai and Palestine campaign . 
 By the afternoon of 19 September , it was clear that the breakthrough attacks in the Battle of Sharon by the XXI Corps had been successful , and the XX Corps was ordered to begin the Battle of Nablus by attacking the well @-@ defended Ottoman front line , supported by an artillery barrage . These attacks continued late into the night and throughout the next day , until the early hours of 21 September when the continuing successful flanking attack by the XXI Corps , combined with the XX Corps assault and aerial bombing attacks , forced the Seventh and Eighth Armies to disengage . The Ottoman Seventh Army retreated from the Nablus area down the Wadi el Fara road towards the Jordan River , aiming to cross at the Jisr ed Damieh bridge , leaving a rearguard to defend Nablus . The town was captured by the XX Corps and the 5th Light Horse Brigade , while devastating aerial bombing of the Wadi el Fara road , blocked that line of retreat . As all objectives had now been won , no further attacks were required of the XX Corps , which captured thousands of prisoners in the area and at Nablus and Balata . 
 Defending the right flank and subsidiary to the Nablus battle , the Third Transjordan attack began on 22 September when Meldrum 's Force , a section of Chaytor 's Force captured the 53rd Ottoman Division on the Wadi el Fara road , running from Nablus to the bridge at Jisr ed Damieh over the Jordan River . Further sections of the retreating Seventh Army column were attacked and captured , during the subsequent battle for the bridge when several fords were also captured along with the bridge , cutting this main Ottoman line of retreat eastwards . As the Fourth Army began its retreat , Chaytor 's Force supported by reconnaissance and attacking aircraft , advanced from Jisr ed Damieh to the east to capture Es Salt on 23 September . This force continued its advance eastwards , to capture Amman on 25 September , after a strong Fourth Army rearguard was defeated there . The southern Hedjaz section of the Fourth Army was captured to the south of Amman , at Ziza on 29 September , ending military operations in the area . 
 Following the victory at Megiddo , the Final Offensive continued when Damascus was captured on 1 October , after several days of pursuit by the Desert Mounted Corps . A further pursuit resulted in the occupation of Homs . On 26 October , the attack at Haritan , north of Aleppo , was under @-@ way when the Armistice of Mudros was signed between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire , ending the Sinai and Palestine campaign . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the Ottoman Army 's defeat at the Battle of Beersheba , the loss to the Central Powers of southern Palestine , the retreat to the Judean Hills and the loss of Jerusalem at the end of 1917 , several Ottoman army commanders in Palestine were replaced . The Yildirim Army Group 's German commander , General Erich von Falkenhayn , was replaced by the German General Otto Liman von Sanders . The commander of the Eighth Army , Kress von Kressenstein , was replaced by Djevad Pasha and Cemal commander of the Ottoman Army , appointed Cemal Kucjuk Pasha to command the Fourth Army . Mustafa Kemal had resigned as commander of the Seventh Army in 1917 but was back by early September 1918 . 
 Following the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk in March 1918 , which ended the war on the Eastern Front between Imperial Russia and Imperial Germany , the main focus of the Ottoman Army turned to the Anatolian provinces and territories lost in 1877 – 1878 during the Russo @-@ Turkish War . The Ottoman Army embarked on a series of territorial conquests in the Caucasus beginning in northern Persia . Erzerum which had been captured by the Russians in 1916 , was retaken on 24 March 1918 , followed by Van on 5 April and later Batum , Kars and Tiflis . <unk> of these former possessions brought little strategic advantage to the Ottoman Empire , compared with the potential benefits of military success in Palestine . 
 Major offensive operations in Palestine also became a low priority for the British Army in March ; being postponed because of the Spring Offensive in France , but by July , it was clear that the German offensive had failed resulting in a return to the battle of attrition in the trenches . This coincided with the approach of the campaign season in Palestine . General Edmund Allenby , commander of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) was " very anxious to make a move in September " when he expected to capture Tulkarm and Nablus , the headquarters of the Seventh and Eighth Armies , along with the road to Jisr ed Damieh and Es Salt . " Another reason for moving to this line is that it will encourage both my own new Indian troops and my Arab Allies . " 
 = = = Reorganisation of EEF infantry = = = 
 To replace British losses suffered during the Spring Offensive the 52nd ( Lowland ) , the 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions and nine British infantry battalions from each of the 10th , 53rd , 60th and the 75th Divisions were sent to France between April and August 1918 . The resulting vacancies in the divisions were filled by British Indian Army battalions . The 75th Division had received the first Indian battalions in June 1917 . Infantry brigades were now reorganised with one British battalion and three Indian battalions . Except one brigade in the 53rd Division which had one South African and three Indian battalions . The British Indian Army 's 7th ( Meerut ) Division arrived from the campaign in Mesopotamia in January 1918 followed by the 3rd ( Lahore ) Division in April , 1918 . Only the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division remained , as previously , an all British division . 
