 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 In his memoirs Khrushchev described the Albanian leadership as " monsters , " saying that , " The rift which developed between the Soviet Union and Albania stemmed mainly from the Albanians ' fear of democratisation . " The downfall of Khrushchev in 1964 saw Hoxha write an article for Zëri i Popullit in which he stated that , " Despite the fact that Khrushchev was the head of modern revisionism , his political liquidation as a person does not mean the liquidation of his political , ideological , economic and organizational course ... <unk> revisionism is not dead , his ideology and policy expressed in the line of the 20th and 22nd Congresses of the CPSU are not liquidated . " In the view of William Ash , writing in support of the Albanian position , " The final proof of the correctness of Albania 's characterisation of Soviet revisionism came with the invasion and military occupation of Czechoslovakia in 1968 – ' <unk> without Khrushchev ' , since Brezhnev who succeeded the deposed revisionist leader followed the same line . " An Albanian account discussing the invasion notes that , " Albania resolutely denounced this act , calling it ' an aggression of the fascist type ' which ' represented the greatest debasement of the honour and authority of the Soviet Union and the Soviet people on the part of the <unk> revisionist Brezhnev @-@ Kosygin clique ' ... the Warsaw Treaty had completely been transformed from a means of defence into a means of aggression " and that , having been de facto excluded from the Pact since 1961 , " on September 13 , 1968 , at an extraordinary session the People 's Assembly of the People 's Republic of Albania decided to denounce this Treaty and exonerate Albania from any obligation deriving from it . " In the 1970s the alliance between Albania and China against perceived Soviet revisionism gradually began to break down , resulting in the Sino – Albanian split . 
 Writing in 1988 , Ramiz Alia reiterated the Albanian view that , " The revisionist current most dangerous to the world communist movement has been and still is Soviet revisionism " and that , " To oppose the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , which had great political and theoretical authority , meant to isolate oneself , at least for a time , from most of the communist parties of the world . Precisely here lies the heroism of the Party of Labour of Albania , the majesty of its decision , and its courage and determination for the cause of Marxism @-@ Leninism , for the cause of socialism and communism . " 
 In July 1990 , after the fall of the Eastern Bloc and political upheaval in Albania itself , Alia announced the restoration of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union . In an official communiqué the Soviets " attributed the normalisation [ of diplomatic relations ] to the better political climate in Europe , and the state radio reported that , as the Soviet Union was on course for reform , ' there has been a marked trend recently towards democratisation of Albanian society ' . " In June 1991 the ruling Party of Labour became the social @-@ democratic Socialist Party , dropping its prior commitment to Marxism – Leninism , and in December 1991 the Soviet Union was dissolved . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = Sunshine of Your Love = 
 " Sunshine of Your Love " is a 1967 song by the British rock band Cream . With elements of hard rock , psychedelia , and pop , it is one of Cream 's best @-@ known and most popular songs . Cream bassist and vocalist Jack Bruce based it on a distinctive bass riff or repeated musical phrase he developed after attending a Jimi Hendrix concert . Guitarist Eric Clapton and lyricist Pete Brown later contributed to the song . Recording engineer Tom Dowd suggested the rhythm arrangement in which drummer Ginger Baker plays a distinctive tom @-@ tom drum rhythm , although Baker has claimed it was his idea . 
 The song was included on Cream 's second album Disraeli Gears in November 1967 , which was a best seller . Atco Records , the group 's American label , was initially unsure of the song 's potential . After recommendations by other label @-@ affiliated artists , it released an edited single version in January 1968 . The song became Cream 's first and highest charting American single and one of the most popular singles of 1968 . In September 1968 , it became a modest chart hit after being released in the UK . 
 Cream performed " Sunshine of Your Love " regularly in concert and several live recordings have been issued , including on the Royal Albert Hall London May 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 5 @-@ 6 , 2005 reunion album and video . Hendrix performed faster instrumental versions of the song , which he often dedicated to Cream . Several rock journals have placed the song on their greatest song lists , such as Rolling Stone , Q magazine , and VH1 . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame included it on its list of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In early 1967 , Cream were writing and rehearsing songs for their second album . Their December 1966 debut album , Fresh Cream , was a mix of updated blues numbers and pop @-@ oriented rock songs . Inspired by recent developments in rock music , they began pursuing a more overtly psychedelic direction . " Sunshine of Your Love " began as a bass phrase or riff developed by Cream bassist Jack Bruce . Cream attended a concert on 29 January 1967 by the Jimi Hendrix Experience at the Saville Theatre in London . Cream guitarist Eric Clapton elaborated in a 1988 Rolling Stone magazine interview : 
 He [ Hendrix ] played this gig that was blinding . I don 't think Jack [ Bruce ] had really taken him in before ... and when he did see it that night , after the gig he went home and came up with the riff . It was strictly a dedication to Jimi . And then we wrote a song on top of it . 
 Music writers Covach and Boone describe the riff as blues @-@ derived , which uses a minor blues pentatonic scale with an added flattened fifth note ( or common blues scale ) . The song follows a blues chord progression ( I – IV – I ) during the first eight bars . Brown had a difficult time writing lyrics that fit the riff . After an all @-@ night session , Bruce played it on a standup bass while lyricist Pete Brown was staring out the window . Slowly , he started to write " It 's getting near dawn and lights close their tired eyes " , which is used in the first verse . Later , to break up the rhythm , Clapton wrote a refrain which also yielded the song 's title . It consists of eight @-@ bar sections using three chords , when the key shifts to the V chord ( I = V ) : 
 A bootleg recording from the Ricky @-@ Tick club in London before Cream recorded the song in the studio , shows " Sunshine of Your Love " with a beat common to rock for the period . Cream drummer Ginger Baker compared it to the uptempo " Hey Now , Princess " , another Bruce / Brown composition Cream recorded in March . He has claimed that he advised Bruce to slow it down and came up with the distinctive drum pattern which emphasises beats one and three ( typical rock drumming favours beats two and four and is known as the backbeat ) . However , Bruce and recording engineer Tom Dowd dispute Baker 's claim , which they say he only made much later . Dowd later explained 
 Where all the other songs that they [ Cream ] played were prepared , [ but ] this one song , they never found a pocket , they were never comfortable ... I said , ' You know , have you ever seen any American Westerns [ films that have ] the Indian beat , where the downbeat is the beat ? ' ... And when he [ Ginger ] started playing it that way , all of the parts came together and right away they were elated . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Cream performed their first American concerts in New York City in 1967 . Robert Stigwood , the group 's manager , booked them for a Murray the K package show at the RKO Manhattan Theatre from 25 March to 2 April 1967 . When it was finished , Stigwood arranged for a recording session with Ahmet Ertegun at Atlantic Studios . Bruce and Brown had a number of new songs in various stages of development and entered the studio on 3 April . Initially , Ertegun assigned Dowd to work with the trio . Dowd had worked with many of the biggest jazz and rhythm and blues musicians in the 1950s and 1960s . However , Cream was his first exposure to extreme volume levels . The group arrived at Atlantic with their concert setup of multiple Marshall amplifiers ( each 100 watts ) . Dowd was surprised by the amount of equipment accompanying the trio : " They recorded at ear @-@ shattering level ... Everyone I 'd worked with before was using Fender <unk> [ about 20 watts ] or Twins [ about 80 watts ] — six- and seven @-@ piece bands that didn 't play as loud as this three piece did . " 
 Ertegun brought in producer Felix Pappalardi , whom he believed could work as a go @-@ between with the group and Dowd . They began with " Strange Brew " , " Tales of Brave Ulysses " , and " Sunshine of Your Love " . Ertegun previewed the demos and was unhappy , expecting more blues @-@ based material that was found on Fresh Cream . Jerry Wexler , Ertegun 's Atlantic Records partner , reportedly went as far as to call it " psychedelic hogwash " . However , Booker T. Jones ( producer and keyboardist of Booker T. & the M.G. ' s ) and Otis Redding ( both whose Stax recordings at the time were distributed by Atco parent Atlantic ) gave " Sunshine of Your Love " their wholehearted approval . Differences were smoothed over by the time Cream returned in May 1967 to finish recording the songs for Disraeli Gears . 
 With Pappalardi and Dowd , work continued on " Sunshine of Your Love " . For his guitar solo , Clapton used a sound known as the " woman tone " on his 1964 Gibson SG Standard . Author Mitch Gallagher describes it as a " smooth , dark , singing , sustaining sound " . It is one of the best @-@ known examples of the woman tone and quotes the melody from the perennial pop standard " Blue Moon " . By using the song 's major pentatonic scale , Clapton provides a contrast with the riff 's blues scale . A writer for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame describes this as " creating a balance between the sun and the moon " . Baker plays much of the song on the tom @-@ toms , described as sounding African ( Schumacher ) and Native American ( Shapiro ) . Covach and Boone note he " concentrates on the lower tom sounds and uses an articulation and sound reminiscent of the jazz drumming in the Woody Herman or Benny Goodman bands " . 
 = = Releases and charts = = 
 " Sunshine of Your Love " was included as the second track on Disraeli Gears , which was released in November 1967 by Reaction Records in the UK and Atco Records in the US . At first , Atco did not see the song as a single ( " Strange Brew " , backed with " Tales of Brave Ulysses " had been released as a single in June 1967 ) . However , in January 1968 , the label issued an edited version of the song as the second single from the album , backed with " <unk> " ( the running time was trimmed from 4 : 08 to 3 : 03 ) . It entered Billboard magazine 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart on 6 January 1968 and eventually reached number five in the Hot 100 . In the UK , the single was not released until September 1968 , after Cream had announced their impending breakup . Polydor Records issued the UK single , which reached number 25 in the charts . 
 The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the single gold on 26 September 1968 , signifying sales in excess of 500 @,@ 000 copies . In the US , it became one one the biggest selling singles of 1968 and one of the best @-@ selling at the time for the Atlantic group of labels . 
 As one of Cream 's most popular songs , several of the group 's compilation albums include the full @-@ length studio recording , such as Best of Cream , Heavy Cream , The Very Best of Cream , and the boxed set Those Were the Days . 
 = = Recognition and influence = = 
 In 2004 , the song ranked number 65 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . In March 2005 , Q magazine placed " Sunshine of Your Love " at number 19 on its list of the " 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks Ever ! " In 2009 , VH1 included it at number 44 on its list of the " Top 100 Hard Rock Songs " . The song is on the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's list of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " . 
 Ertegun later admitted that , while his tastes ran more to Robert Johnson ( Clapton had recorded Johnson 's " Ramblin ' on My Mind " with John Mayall , " Crossroads " with the Powerhouse , and " Four Until Late " with Cream ) , Cream 's and Pappalardi 's vision resulted in songs which had a much larger impact on the rock audiences of the time . Covach and Boone have identified " Sunshine of Your Love " as foreshadowing future trends in rock : 
 <unk> of Your Love ' , Cream 's best @-@ known song , is a culmination of the British adaptation of blues into rock and also the direct precursor of Led Zeppelin and heavy metal , where this type of blues @-@ based motivic riff and harmonic motions like A – C – G or E – G – A ( as in " Whole Lotta Love " ) serve as the basis for a seemingly endless number of songs . 
 = = Other recordings = = 
 Several live recordings of " Sunshine of Your Love " have been issued on Cream albums . These include a 24 October 1967 recording by the BBC ( BBC Sessions ) , 9 March 1968 at the Winterland Ballroom ( Live Cream Volume II ) , and 26 November 1968 at the Royal Albert Hall ( Cream 's Farewell Concert ) . A recording from Cream 's reunion show on 3 May 2005 is included on Royal Albert Hall London May 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 5 @-@ 6 , 2005 . During their post @-@ Cream careers , Clapton and Bruce have recorded several live performances of the song . 
 A variety of musicians have recorded " Sunshine of Your Love " . After Cream announced their breakup , Hendrix often performed it in concert as a tribute to the group , apparently unaware that they had dedicated the song to him . He played it as an instrumental and sometimes as part of a medley . A performance by the Experience on 4 January 1969 is one of the best @-@ known . During the live broadcast of A Happening for Lulu , a music variety show hosted by pop singer Lulu on BBC Television , the Experience suddenly broke with the programme . Hendrix announced , " We 'd like to stop playing this rubbish [ " Hey Joe " ] and dedicate a song to the Cream , regardless of what kind of group they may be in – dedicate this to Eric Clapton , Ginger Baker , and Jack Bruce " . As their performance of " Sunshine of Your Love " ran into the time allotted for Lulu 's closing number , the show 's producer and staff were frantically signalling for the Experience to stop . However , they continued playing and the show ended on a fade . Hendrix later apologised to Lulu , who thought the performance made for a great television moment . 
 Other artists include Spanky Wilson in 1968 and Ella Fitzgerald in 1969 ( on her album of the same name ) . 
 = Atmosphere of Venus = 
 The atmosphere of Venus is the layer of gases surrounding Venus . It is composed primarily of carbon dioxide and is much denser and hotter than that of Earth . The temperature at the surface is 740 K ( 467 ° C , 872 ° F ) , and the pressure is 93 bar ( 9 @.@ 3 MPa ) . The Venusian atmosphere supports opaque clouds made of sulfuric acid , making optical Earth @-@ based and orbital observation of the surface impossible . Information about the topography has been obtained exclusively by radar imaging . Aside from carbon dioxide , the other main component is nitrogen . Other chemical compounds are present only in trace amounts . 
 Mikhail Lomonosov was the first person to hypothesize the existence of an atmosphere on Venus based on his observation of the transit of Venus of 1761 in a small observatory near his house in Saint Petersburg , Russia . 
 The atmosphere is in a state of vigorous circulation and super @-@ rotation . The whole atmosphere circles the planet in just four Earth days , much faster than the planet 's sidereal day of 243 days . The winds supporting super @-@ rotation blow as fast as 100 m / s ( ~ 360 km / h or 220 mph ) . Winds move at up to 60 times the speed of the planet 's rotation , while Earth 's fastest winds are only 10 % to 20 % rotation speed . On the other hand , the wind speed becomes increasingly slower as the elevation from the surface decreases , with the breeze barely reaching the speed of 10 km / h ( 2 @.@ 8 m / s ) on the surface . Near the poles are anticyclonic structures called polar vortices . Each vortex is double @-@ eyed and shows a characteristic S @-@ shaped pattern of clouds . 
 Unlike Earth , Venus lacks a magnetic field . Its ionosphere separates the atmosphere from outer space and the solar wind . This ionised layer excludes the solar magnetic field , giving Venus a distinct magnetic environment . This is considered Venus 's induced magnetosphere . Lighter gases , including water vapour , are continuously blown away by the solar wind through the induced magnetotail . It is speculated that the atmosphere of Venus up to around 4 billion years ago was more like that of the Earth with liquid water on the surface . A runaway greenhouse effect may have been caused by the evaporation of the surface water and subsequent rise of the levels of other greenhouse gases . 
 Despite the harsh conditions on the surface , the atmospheric pressure and temperature at about 50 km to 65 km above the surface of the planet is nearly the same as that of the Earth , making its upper atmosphere the most Earth @-@ like area in the Solar System , even more so than the surface of Mars . Due to the similarity in pressure and temperature and the fact that breathable air ( 21 % oxygen , 78 % nitrogen ) is a lifting gas on Venus in the same way that helium is a lifting gas on Earth , the upper atmosphere has been proposed as a location for both exploration and colonization . 
 On January 29 , 2013 , ESA scientists reported that the ionosphere of the planet Venus streams outwards in a manner similar to " the ion tail seen streaming from a comet under similar conditions . " 
 = = Structure and composition = = 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The atmosphere of Venus is composed of 96 @.@ 5 % carbon dioxide , 3 @.@ 5 % nitrogen , and traces of other gases , most notably sulfur dioxide . The amount of nitrogen in the atmosphere is relatively small compared to the amount of carbon dioxide , but because the atmosphere is so much thicker than that on Earth , its total nitrogen content is roughly four times higher than Earth 's , even though on Earth nitrogen makes up about 78 % of the atmosphere . 
 The atmosphere contains a range of interesting compounds in small quantities , including some based on hydrogen , such as hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) and hydrogen fluoride ( HF ) . There is carbon monoxide , water vapour and molecular oxygen as well . Hydrogen is in relatively short supply in the Venusian atmosphere . A large amount of the planet 's hydrogen is theorised to have been lost to space , with the remainder being mostly bound up in sulfuric acid ( H2SO4 ) and hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) . The loss of significant amounts of hydrogen is proved by a very high D – H ratio measured in the Venusian atmosphere . The ratio is about 0 @.@ 015 – 0 @.@ 025 , which is 100 – 150 times higher than the terrestrial value of 1 @.@ 6 × 10 − 4 . According to some measurements , in the upper atmosphere of Venus D / H ratio is 1 @.@ 5 higher than in the bulk atmosphere . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The atmosphere is divided into a number of sections depending on altitude . The densest part of the atmosphere , the troposphere , begins at the surface and extends upwards to 65 km . At the furnace @-@ like surface the winds are slow , but at the top of the troposphere the temperature and pressure reaches Earth @-@ like levels and clouds pick up speed to 100 m / s . 
 The atmospheric pressure at the surface of Venus is about 92 times that of the Earth , similar to the pressure found 910 metres below the surface of the ocean . The atmosphere has a mass of 4 @.@ 8 × 1020 kg , about 93 times the mass of the Earth 's total atmosphere . The density of the air at the surface is 67 kg / m3 , which is 6 @.@ 5 % that of liquid water on Earth . The pressure found on Venus 's surface is high enough that the carbon dioxide is technically no longer a gas , but a supercritical fluid . This supercritical carbon dioxide forms a kind of sea that covers the entire surface of Venus . This sea of supercritical carbon dioxide transfers heat very efficiently , buffering the temperature changes between night and day ( which last 56 terrestrial days ) . 
 The large amount of CO2 in the atmosphere together with water vapour and sulfur dioxide create a strong greenhouse effect , trapping solar energy and raising the surface temperature to around 740 K ( 467 ° C ) , hotter than any other planet in the Solar System , even that of Mercury despite being located farther out from the Sun and receiving only 25 % of the solar energy ( per unit area ) Mercury does . The average temperature on the surface is above the melting points of lead 600 K ( 327 ° C ) , tin 505 K ( 232 ° C ) , and zinc 693 K ( 420 ° C ) . The thick troposphere also makes the difference in temperature between the day and night side small , even though the slow retrograde rotation of the planet causes a single solar day to last 116 @.@ 5 Earth days . The surface of Venus spends 58 @.@ 3 days of darkness before the sun rises again behind the clouds . 
 The troposphere on Venus contains 99 % of the atmosphere by mass . Ninety percent of the atmosphere of Venus is within 28 km of the surface ; by comparison , 90 % of the atmosphere of Earth is within 10 km of the surface . At a height of 50 km the atmospheric pressure is approximately equal to that at the surface of Earth . On the night side of Venus clouds can still be found at 80 km above the surface . 
 The altitude of the troposphere most similar to Earth is near the tropopause — the boundary between troposphere and mesosphere . It is located slightly above 50 km . According to measurements by the Magellan and Venus Express probes , the altitude from 52 @.@ 5 to 54 km has a temperature between 293 K ( 20 ° C ) and 310 K ( 37 ° C ) , and the altitude at 49 @.@ 5 km above the surface is where the pressure becomes the same as Earth at sea level . As manned ships sent to Venus would be able to compensate for differences in temperature to a certain extent , anywhere from about 50 to 54 km or so above the surface would be the easiest altitude in which to base an exploration or colony , where the temperature would be in the crucial " liquid water " range of 273 K ( 0 ° C ) to 323 K ( 50 ° C ) and the air pressure the same as habitable regions of Earth . As CO2 is heavier than air , the colony 's air ( nitrogen and oxygen ) could keep the structure floating at that altitude like a dirigible . 
 = = = = Circulation = = = = 
 The circulation in Venus 's troposphere follows the so @-@ called <unk> approximation . Its windspeeds are roughly determined by the balance of the pressure gradient and centrifugal forces in almost purely zonal flow . In contrast , the circulation in the Earth 's atmosphere is governed by the geostrophic balance . Venus 's windspeeds can be directly measured only in the upper troposphere ( tropopause ) , between 60 – 70 km , altitude , which corresponds to the upper cloud deck . The cloud motion is usually observed in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum , where the contrast between clouds is the highest . The linear wind speeds at this level are about 100 ± 10 m / s at lower than 50 ° latitude . They are retrograde in the sense that they blow in the direction of the retrograde rotation of the planet . The winds quickly decrease towards the higher latitudes , eventually reaching zero at the poles . Such strong cloud @-@ top winds cause a phenomenon known as the super @-@ rotation of the atmosphere . In other words , these high @-@ speed winds circle the whole planet faster than the planet itself rotates . The super @-@ rotation on Venus is differential , which means that the equatorial troposphere super @-@ rotates more slowly than the troposphere at the midlatitudes . The winds also have a strong vertical gradient . They decline deep in the troposphere with the rate of 3 m / s per km . The winds near the surface of Venus are much slower than that on Earth . They actually move at only a few kilometres per hour ( generally less than 2 m / s and with an average of 0 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 0 m / s ) , but due to the high density of the atmosphere at the surface , this is still enough to transport dust and small stones across the surface , much like a slow @-@ moving current of water . 
 All winds on Venus are ultimately driven by convection . Hot air rises in the equatorial zone , where solar heating is concentrated , and flows to the poles . Such an almost @-@ <unk> overturning of the troposphere is called Hadley circulation . However , the meridional air motions are much slower than zonal winds . The poleward limit of the planet wide Hadley cell on Venus is near ± 60 ° latitudes . Here air starts to descend and returns to the equator below the clouds . This interpretation is supported by the distribution of the carbon monoxide , which is also concentrated in the vicinity of ± 60 ° latitudes . <unk> of the Hadley cell a different pattern of circulation is observed . In the latitude range 60 ° – 70 ° cold polar collars exist . They are characterised by temperatures about 30 – 40 K lower than in the upper troposphere at nearby latitudes . The lower temperature is probably caused by the upwelling of the air in them and by the resulting adiabatic cooling . Such an interpretation is supported by the denser and higher clouds in the collars . The clouds lie at 70 – 72 km altitude in the collars — about 5 km higher than at the poles and low latitudes . A connection may exist between the cold collars and high speed <unk> jets in which winds blow as fast as 140 m / s . Such jets are a natural consequence of the Hadley – type circulation and should exist on Venus between 55 – 60 ° latitude . 
 Odd structures known as polar vortices lie within the cold polar collars . They are giant hurricane @-@ like storms four times larger than their terrestrial analogs . Each vortex has two " eyes " — the centres of rotation , which are connected by distinct S @-@ shaped cloud structures . Such double eyed structures are also called polar dipoles . <unk> rotate with the period of about 3 days in the direction of general super @-@ rotation of the atmosphere . The linear wind speeds are 35 – 50 m / s near their outer edges and zero at the poles . The temperature at the cloud @-@ tops in the polar vortexes are much higher than in the nearby polar collars reaching 250 K ( − 23 ° C ) . The conventional interpretation of the polar vortexes is that they are anticyclones with downwelling in the centre and upwelling in the cold polar collars . This type of circulation resembles the winter polar anticyclonic vortexes on Earth , especially the one found over Antarctica . The observations in the various infrared atmospheric windows indicate that the anticyclonic circulation observed near the poles may penetrate as deep as to 50 km altitude , i.e. to the base of the clouds . The polar upper troposphere and mesosphere are extremely dynamic ; large bright clouds may appear and disappear over the space of a few hours . One such event was observed by Venus Express between 9 and 13 January 2007 , when the south polar region became brighter by 30 % . This event was probably caused by an injection of sulfur dioxide into the mesosphere , which then condensed forming a bright haze . The two eyes in the vortexes have yet to be explained . 
 The first vortex on Venus was discovered at the north pole by the Pioneer Venus mission in 1978 . A discovery of the second large ' double @-@ eyed ' vortex at the south pole of Venus was made in the summer of 2006 by Venus Express , which came with no surprise . 
 = = = Upper atmosphere and ionosphere = = = 
 The mesosphere of Venus extends from 65 km to 120 km in height , and the thermosphere begins at around 120 , eventually reaching the upper limit of the atmosphere ( exosphere ) at about 220 to 350 km . The exosphere is the altitude at which the atmosphere becomes collisionless . 
 The mesosphere of Venus can be divided into two layers : the lower one between 62 – 73 km and the upper one between 73 – 95 km . In the first layer the temperature is nearly constant at 230 K ( − 43 ° C ) . This layer coincides with the upper cloud deck . In the second layer temperature starts to decrease again reaching about 165 K ( − 108 ° C ) at the altitude of 95 km , where mesopause begins . It is the coldest part of the Venusian dayside atmosphere . In the dayside mesopause , which serves as a boundary between the <unk> and thermosphere and is located between 95 – 120 km , temperature grows up to a constant — about 300 – 400 K ( 27 – 127 ° C ) — value prevalent in the thermosphere . In contrast the nightside Venusian thermosphere is the coldest place on Venus with temperature as low as 100 K ( − 173 ° C ) . It is even called a cryosphere . 
 The circulation patterns in the upper mesosphere and thermosphere of Venus are completely different from those in the lower atmosphere . At altitudes 90 – 150 km the Venusian air moves from the dayside to nightside of the planet , with upwelling over sunlit hemisphere and downwelling over dark hemisphere . The downwelling over the nightside causes adiabatic heating of the air , which forms a warm layer in the nightside mesosphere at the altitudes 90 – 120 km . The temperature of this layer — 230 K ( − 43 ° C ) is far higher than the typical temperature found in the nightside thermosphere — 100 K ( − 173 ° C ) . The air circulated from the dayside also carries oxygen atoms , which after recombination form excited molecules of oxygen in the long @-@ lived singlet state ( <unk> ) , which then relax and emit infrared radiation at the wavelength 1 @.@ 27 μm . This radiation from the altitude range 90 – 100 km is often observed from the ground and spacecraft . The nightside upper mesosphere and thermosphere of Venus is also the source of non @-@ LTE ( non @-@ local thermodynamic equilibrium ) emissions of CO2 and NO molecules , which are responsible for the low temperature of the nightside thermosphere . 
 The Venus Express probe has shown through stellar occultation that the atmospheric haze extends much further up on the night side than the day side . On the day side the cloud deck has a thickness of 20 km and extends up to about 65 km , whereas on the night side the cloud deck in the form of a thick haze reaches up to 90 km in altitude — well into mesosphere , continuing even further to 105 km as a more transparent haze . In 2011 , the spacecraft discovered that Venus has a thin ozone layer at an altitude of 100 km . 
 Venus has an extended ionosphere located at altitudes 120 – 300 km . The ionosphere almost coincides with the thermosphere . The high levels of the ionization are maintained only over the dayside of the planet . Over the nightside the concentration of the electrons is almost zero . The ionosphere of Venus consists of three layers : v1 between 120 and 130 km , v2 between 140 and 160 km and v3 between 200 and 250 km . There may be an additional layer near 180 km . The maximum electron volume density ( number of electrons in a unit of volume ) 3 × 1011 m − 3 is reached in the v2 layer near the subsolar point . The upper boundary of the ionosphere — ionopause is located at altitudes 220 – 375 km and separates the plasma of the planetary origin from that of the induced magnetosphere . The main ionic species in the v1 and v2 layers is O2 + ion , whereas the v3 layer consists of O + ions . The ionospheric plasma is observed to be in motion ; solar photoionization on the dayside , and ion recombination on the nightside , are the processes mainly responsible for accelerating the plasma to the observed velocities . The plasma flow appears to be sufficient to maintain the nightside ionosphere at or near the observed median level of ion densities . 
 = = = Induced magnetosphere = = = 
 Venus is known not to have a magnetic field . The reason for its absence is not clear , but is probably related to the planet 's slow rotation or the lack of convection in the mantle . Venus only has an induced magnetosphere formed by the Sun 's magnetic field carried by the solar wind . This process can be understood as the field lines wrapping around an obstacle — Venus in this case . The induced magnetosphere of Venus has a bow shock , magnetosheath , magnetopause and magnetotail with the current sheet . 
 At the subsolar point the bow shock stands 1900 km ( 0 @.@ 3 Rv , where Rv is the radius of Venus ) above the surface of Venus . This distance was measured in 2007 near the solar activity minimum . Near the solar activity maximum it can be several times further from the planet . The magnetopause is located at the altitude of 300 km . The upper boundary of the ionosphere ( ionopause ) is near 250 km . Between the magnetopause and ionopause there exists a magnetic barrier — a local enhancement of the magnetic field , which prevents solar plasma from penetrating deeper into the Venusian atmosphere , at least near solar activity minimum . The magnetic field in the barrier reaches up to 40 nT . The magnetotail continues up to ten <unk> from the planet . It is the most active part of the Venusian magnetosphere . There are reconnection events and particle acceleration in the tail . The energies of electrons and ions in the magnetotail are around 100 eV and 1000 eV respectively . 
 Due to the lack of the intrinsic magnetic field on Venus , the solar wind penetrates relatively deep into the planetary exosphere and causes substantial atmosphere loss . The loss happens mainly via the magnetotail . Currently the main ion types being lost are O + , H + and He + . The ratio of hydrogen to oxygen losses is around 2 ( i.e. almost stoichiometric ) indicating the ongoing loss of water . 
 = = Clouds = = 
 Venusian clouds are thick and are composed of sulfur dioxide and droplets of sulfuric acid . These clouds reflect about 75 % of the sunlight that falls on them , which is what obscures the surface of Venus from optical imaging . The geometric albedo , a common measure of reflectivity , is the highest of any planet in the Solar System . This high reflectivity potentially enables any probe exploring the cloud tops sufficient solar energy such that solar cells can be fitted anywhere on the craft . 
 The cloud cover is such that typical surface light levels are similar to a partly cloudy day on Earth , around 5000 – 10000 lux . The equivalent visibility is about three kilometers . Note , that this will likely vary because of the prevailing wind conditions . At this level little to no solar energy could conceivably be collected by solar panels on a surface probe . In fact , due to the thick , highly reflective cloud cover the total solar energy received by the planet is less than that of the Earth . 
 Sulfuric acid is produced in the upper atmosphere by the sun 's photochemical action on carbon dioxide , sulfur dioxide , and water vapour . Ultraviolet photons of wavelengths less than 169 nm can <unk> carbon dioxide into carbon monoxide and atomic oxygen . Atomic oxygen is highly reactive ; when it reacts with sulfur dioxide , a trace component of the Venusian atmosphere , the result is sulfur trioxide , which can combine with water vapour , another trace component of Venus 's atmosphere , to yield sulfuric acid . 
 CO2 → CO + O 
 SO2 + O → SO3 
 SO3 + H2O → H2SO4 
 Surface level humidity is less than 0 @.@ 1 % . Venus 's sulfuric acid rain never reaches the ground , but is evaporated by the heat before reaching the surface in a phenomenon known as virga . It is theorized that early volcanic activity released sulfur into the atmosphere and the high temperatures prevented it from being trapped into solid compounds on the surface as it was on the Earth . 
 The clouds of Venus are capable of producing lightning much like the clouds on Earth . The existence of lightning had been controversial outside of the former Soviet Union since the first suspected bursts were detected by the Soviet Venera probes . However , in 2006 – 2007 Venus Express was reported to detect whistler mode waves , which were attributed to lightning . Their intermittent appearance indicates a pattern associated with weather activity . The lightning rate is at least half of that on Earth . 
 In 2009 a prominent bright spot in the atmosphere was noted by an amateur astronomer and photographed by Venus Express . Its cause is currently unknown , with surface volcanism advanced as a possible explanation . 
 = = Possibility of life = = 
 Due to the harsh conditions on the surface , little of the planet has been explored ; in addition to the fact that life as currently understood may not necessarily be the same in other parts of the universe , the extent of the tenacity of life on Earth itself has not yet been shown . Creatures known as extremophiles exist on Earth , preferring extreme habitats . Thermophiles and <unk> thrive at temperatures reaching above the boiling point of water , acidophiles thrive at a pH level of 3 or below , <unk> can survive a varied number of extreme conditions , and many other types of extremophiles exist on Earth . However , the surface temperature of Venus ( over 450 ° C ) is far beyond the extremophile range , which extends only tens of degrees beyond 100 ° C. 
 However , life could also exist in the cloud tops . It has been proposed that life on Venus could exist there , the same way that bacteria have been found living and reproducing in clouds on Earth . Microbes in the thick , cloudy atmosphere could be protected from solar radiation by the sulfur compounds in the air . The solar wind may provide a mechanism for the transfer of such microbiota from Venus to Earth . 
 The Venusian atmosphere has been found to be sufficiently out of equilibrium as to require further investigation . Analysis of data from the Venera , Pioneer , and Magellan missions has found the chemicals hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) and sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) together in the upper atmosphere , as well as carbonyl sulfide ( OCS ) . The first two gases react with each other , implying that something must produce them . Although carbonyl sulfide is difficult to produce <unk> , it is present in the Venusian atmosphere . It should be noted , however , that the presence of carbonyl sulfide can be accounted for by the planet 's volcanism . In addition , one of the early Venera probes detected large amounts of toxic chlorine just below the Venusian cloud deck . 
 It has been proposed that microbes at this level could be soaking up ultraviolet light from the Sun as a source of energy , which could be a possible explanation for dark patches seen on UV images of the planet . Large , non @-@ spherical cloud particles have also been detected in the cloud decks . Recently , abundance and vertical distribution of these unknown ultraviolet absorber in the Venusian atmosphere has been investigated from analysis of Venus Monitoring Camera images . But their composition is still unknown . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Through studies of the present cloud structure and geology of the surface combined with the fact that the luminosity of the Sun has increased by 25 % since around 3 @.@ 8 billion years ago , it is thought that the atmosphere of Venus up to around 4 billion years ago was more like that of Earth with liquid water on the surface . The runaway greenhouse effect may have been caused by the evaporation of the surface water and the rise of the levels of greenhouse gases that followed . Venus 's atmosphere has therefore received a great deal of attention from those studying climate change on Earth . 
 There are no geologic forms on the planet to suggest the presence of water over the past billion years . However , there is no reason to suppose that Venus was an exception to the processes that formed Earth and gave it its water during its early history , possibly from the original rocks that formed the planet or later on from comets . The common view among research scientists is that water would have existed for about 600 million years on the surface before evaporating , though some such as David Grinspoon believe that up to 2 billion years could also be plausible . 
 The early Earth during the Hadean eon is believed by most scientists to have had a Venus @-@ like atmosphere , with roughly 100 bar of CO2 and a surface temperature of 230 ° C , and possibly even sulfuric acid clouds , until about 4 @.@ 0 billion years ago , by which time plate tectonics were in full force and together with the early water oceans , removed the CO2 and sulfur from the atmosphere . Early Venus would thus most likely have had water oceans like the Earth , but any plate tectonics would have ended when Venus lost its oceans . Its surface is estimated to be about 500 million years old , so it would not be expected to show evidence of plate tectonics . 
 = = Observations and measurement from Earth = = 
 In 1761 , Russian polymath Mikhail Lomonosov observed an arc of light surrounding the part of Venus off the Sun 's disc at the beginning of the egress phase of the transit and concluded that Venus has an atmosphere . In 1940 , Rupert Wildt calculated that the amount of CO2 in the Venusian atmosphere would raise surface temperature above the boiling point for water . This was confirmed when Mariner 2 made radiometer measurements of the temperature in 1962 . In 1967 , Venera 4 confirmed that the atmosphere consisted primarily of carbon dioxide . 
 The upper atmosphere of Venus can be measured from Earth when the planet crosses the sun in a rare event known as a solar transit . The last solar transit of Venus occurred in 2012 . Using quantitative astronomical spectroscopy , scientists were able to analyse sunlight that passed through the planet 's atmosphere to reveal chemicals within it . As the technique to analyse light to discover information about a planet 's atmosphere only first showed results in 2001 , this was the first opportunity to gain conclusive results in this way on the atmosphere of Venus since observation of solar transits began . This solar transit was a rare opportunity considering the lack of information on the atmosphere between 65 and 85 km . The solar transit in 2004 enabled astronomers to gather a large amount of data useful not only in determining the composition of the upper atmosphere of Venus , but also in refining techniques used in searching for extrasolar planets . The atmosphere of mostly CO2 , absorbs near @-@ infrared radiation , making it easy to observe . During the 2004 transit , the absorption in the atmosphere as a function of wavelength revealed the properties of the gases at that altitude . The Doppler shift of the gases also enabled wind patterns to be measured . 
 A solar transit of Venus is an extremely rare event , and the last solar transit of the planet before 2004 was in 1882 . The most recent solar transit was in 2012 , however , the next one will not occur until 2117 . 
 = = Future exploration = = 
 The Venus Express spacecraft formerly in orbit around the planet probed deeper into the atmosphere using infrared imaging spectroscopy in the 1 – 5 µm spectral range . The JAXA probe Akatsuki , launched in May 2010 , was intended to study the planet for a period of two years , including the structure and activity of the atmosphere , but it failed to enter Venus orbit in December 2010 . A second attempt to achieve orbit succeeded 7 December 2015 . One of its five cameras known as the " <unk> " will be able to measure the atmosphere of the planet underneath its thick clouds , in addition to its movement and distribution of trace components . With a varied orbit from 300 to 60 @,@ 000 km , it will be able to take close @-@ up photographs of the planet , and should also confirm the presence of both active volcanoes as well as lightning . 
 The Venus In @-@ Situ Explorer , proposed by NASA 's New Frontiers program is a proposed probe which would aid in understanding the processes on the planet that led to climate change , as well as paving the way towards a later sample return mission . 
 Another craft called the Venus Mobile Explorer has been proposed by the Venus Exploration Analysis Group ( <unk> ) to study the composition and isotopic measurements of the surface and the atmosphere , for about 90 days . A launch date has not yet been set . 
 = = = Proposed missions = = = 
 After missions discovered the reality of the harsh nature of the planet 's surface , attention shifted towards other targets such as Mars . There have been a number of proposed missions recently however , and many of these involve the little @-@ known upper atmosphere . The Soviet Vega program in 1985 dropped two balloons into the atmosphere , but these were battery @-@ powered and lasted for only about two Earth days each before running out of power and since then there has been no exploration of the upper atmosphere . In 2002 the NASA contractor Global Aerospace proposed a balloon that would be capable of staying in the upper atmosphere for hundreds of Earth days as opposed to two . 
 A solar flyer has also been proposed by Geoffrey A. Landis in place of a balloon , and the idea has been featured from time to time since the early 2000s . Venus has a high albedo , and reflects most of the sunlight that shines on it making the surface quite dark , the upper atmosphere at 60 km has an upward solar intensity of 90 % , meaning that solar panels on both the top and the bottom of a craft could be used with nearly equal efficiency . In addition to this , the slightly lower gravity , high air pressure and slow rotation allowing for perpetual solar power make this part of the planet ideal for exploration . The proposed flyer would operate best at an altitude where sunlight , air pressure , and wind speed would enable it to remain in the air perpetually , with slight dips down to lower altitudes for a few hours at a time before returning to higher altitudes . As sulfuric acid in the clouds at this height is not a threat for a properly shielded craft , this so @-@ called " solar flyer " would be able to measure the area in between 45 km and 60 km indefinitely , for however long it takes for mechanical error or unforeseen problems to cause it to fail . Landis also proposed that rovers similar to Spirit and Opportunity could possibly explore the surface , with the difference being that Venus surface rovers would be " dumb " rovers controlled by radio signals from computers located in the flyer above , only requiring parts such as motors and transistors to withstand the surface conditions , but not weaker parts involved in microelectronics that could not be made resistant to the heat , pressure and acidic conditions . 
 Russian space plan for 2006 – 2015 involves a launch of Venera @-@ D ( Venus @-@ D ) probe around 2024 . The main scientific goals of the Venera @-@ D mission are investigation of the structure and chemical composition of the atmosphere and investigation of the upper atmosphere , ionosphere , electrical activity , magnetosphere and escape rate . 
 = Gyromancer = 
 Gyromancer is a puzzle and role @-@ playing video game developed by PopCap Games in collaboration with Square Enix . In the game , the player moves through a map of an enchanted forest , battling monsters using their own summoned monsters through a puzzle @-@ game battle based on PopCap 's Bejeweled Twist . In these battles , the player rotates groups of four in a grid of gems to line up three or more jewels of the same color ; when enough lines have been created damage is dealt to the enemy . Between battles , a story is told through a series of cutscenes , while the player and the summoned monsters gain experience and power using role @-@ playing game elements . 
 The initial idea for the game was inspired by Puzzle Quest : Challenge of the Warlords , a 2007 video game which members of both companies were playing at the time . The game was proposed to Square Enix half @-@ jokingly by PopCap 's chief creative officer Jason Kapalka during a meeting between the two companies in 2007 , and was released on the Xbox Live Arcade and on the Steam platform for Windows PCs by Square Enix on November 18 , 2009 . Gyromancer received a generally positive reception from reviewers . Critics took issue with perceived limited graphics , some aspects of the music , and a weak and confusing plot . Despite these flaws , in general they found the game to be fun and addictive , and to have a great deal of replay value . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players assume the role of <unk> , an immortal summoner who ventures through the enchanted <unk> Wood . He has been tasked to track down the rebel group Temperance , led by <unk> Kingsley , who have assassinated a member of the royal family . The forest at times magically seals itself , trapping visitors inside , and is rumored to hold a source of mystical power for which <unk> is searching . The game consists of twelve stages , which are large branching maps that allow the player to move from points represented by stars to adjacent points . Each stage contains its own objectives , from defeating beasts that block the player ’ s way , to solving puzzles before time runs out . Additional stages are available for purchase as downloadable content . There are multiple optional objectives per stage , in addition to a main goal . Many areas of each stage are initially blocked off , and can only be entered by replaying the stage later in the game . 
 While moving through the stages , the player encounters many monsters , and is forced to battle against them using one of their own monsters in a puzzle battle based on Bejeweled Twist . The creatures are " variations on fantasy archetypes " and include demons , giant spiders , giant frogs , and beasts inspired by Dungeons & Dragons . The player can only bring three creatures into a stage out of all of the ones that they have , and selects one of the three when a battle begins . A grid of different colored gems is displayed , and the player can select blocks of four jewels and rotate them clockwise . If a line of three or more identical gems is formed , the gems disappear , allowing all of the jewels above the now @-@ vacant spaces in the grid to fall down a row to replace them . New gems appear at the top of the screen to fill any holes in the grid . If new lines of gems are formed from this movement , the process repeats . Whenever lines are formed , a gauge is filled slightly for the player ; when it is full a special gem appears on the board . When that gem is formed into a line , damage is done to the enemy . The enemy also has a gauge , which is filled every time the player performs a rotation , and damage is dealt directly to the player when it is filled . 
 Later in the game , non @-@ rotatable gems can be found , and the player is punished for rotations that do not lead to a match by having the enemy 's gauge fill faster . The amount of damage that the player can take or deliver is dependent on the monster used in battle , and using a beast in battle earns experience points which can increase the power of that summon . Each monster has a corresponding color , and matching gems that are the same color as your chosen monster or the enemy makes your gauge fill faster or theirs slower . Enemy monsters can change gems on the board to skulls , which cause damage to the player if they are not lined up within a certain number of moves . After being defeated in a battle , enemy monsters are added to the list of creatures that the player chooses from when they start a stage . New monsters can also be found hidden in the stages , along with items that can be used during battles . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was first thought up in 2007 during a meeting between PopCap and Square Enix , which had published several of PopCap 's games in Japan . Jason Kapalka , the co @-@ founder and chief creative officer of PopCap , claims that he " half @-@ jokingly " proposed a game collaboration between the two companies that would combine a role @-@ playing game with Bejeweled @-@ style gameplay , calling it “ Final Fantasy Bejeweled ” . Kapalka was envisioning creating a similar game to Puzzle Quest : Challenge of the Warlords , a 2007 video game which members of the development staff of both companies were playing at the time . The idea attracted the attention of Yuichi Murasawa , designer of Final Fantasy Tactics Advance , and the game began formal development . To differentiate the game from Puzzle Quest , the gameplay was based around Bejeweled Twist rather than Bejeweled , which <unk> feels fit the art design of the game more . Other candidates considered were Zuma and Peggle , but they were dropped as the developers felt that they did not fit in with the combat theme . PopCap developed the early prototype for the game , then allowed Square Enix to complete the bulk of the work in designing and creating the game , especially in regards to the RPG aspects . Square Enix and PopCap announced the game on September 24 , 2009 . It was published by Square Enix on the Xbox Live Arcade and on the Steam platform for Windows PCs on November 18 , 2009 . A downloadable pack of maps and a pack of items were made available for sale a week after launch on November 23 , 2009 for both versions of the game . 
 The game was directed by Murasawa and produced by Yoshinori Kamei . The story was written by Kyoko Kitahara , who had previously worked on Final Fantasy Tactics Advance with Murasawa , and the art direction was led by Yuki Matsuzawa . The soundtrack was created by Tsuyoshi Sekito . Matsuzawa was asked to make the art style that of a " dark fantasy " and to focus more on making the visuals realistic rather than fantasy @-@ oriented , so that it would appeal more to players outside Japan . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gyromancer received a generally positive reception from reviewers . While many critics noted its similarity to Puzzle Quest , the gameplay was still described as being " fun and addictive " by Brett Todd of GameSpot , and similar praises were made by Daemon Hattfield of IGN and Eurogamer 's Oli Welsh . Welsh claimed that it had a great deal of replay value , and praised the " surprisingly varied story missions " . Game Informer 's Matt Miller disagreed slightly , stating that while the game had some replay value , it was limited by the lack of depth to the RPG elements of the game . Although the paintings of the monsters and game world were rated highly by critics , the art direction itself was criticized . Todd called the graphics " murky and grainy " and noted the lack of animation in the battles or cutscenes , in which two @-@ dimensional pictures of the characters speaking " slide back and forth like cardboard cutouts " rather than perform realistic movements . Welsh added that the stage maps were " crudely portrayed " . Hattfield did not share those concerns , but did note say that they felt that the portraits of monsters were reused for different monsters too often . Miller disagreed completely with the other critics , saying that the game " looks great " and that " even the map screen between battles has a polished appearance " . A reviewer from GameTrailers also enjoyed the aesthetic of the game , saying that despite the " still images " and " simple effects " , the game made an " effort to look and sound the part " of a deeper game , which they felt would increase the player 's enjoyment . 
 The plot was similarly criticized , with Welsh calling it " endearing , largely unpronounceable rubbish " , while Hattfield termed it " not Gyromancer 's strong point " and " a bit hard to follow " . Miller dismissed it as " generic " and " lackluster " , while the GameTrailers reviewer said that it was " somewhat thrown together " . All the reviews , however , noted that the plot was largely irrelevant to the game next to the gameplay elements . Todd criticized the tutorial system as very inadequate , as well as the " beyond cheesy " music , a criticism that Hattfield left only to the " Japanese videogame metal during boss battles " , rather than the rest of Sekito 's " rousing orchestral tunes " . Overall , however , the reviewers felt that Gyromancer was a fun , casual game . 
 = Secret Truths = 
 " Secret Truths " is the two @-@ part pilot episode of the American teen drama series South of Nowhere which premiered on November 4 , 2005 on The N in the United States . It was written by series creator Thomas W. Lynch and directed by Donna Deitch . The episode introduces three siblings — Spencer , Glen and Clay Carlin — who start at a new school after their family moves from a small town in Ohio to Los Angeles . 
 Lynch conceived South of Nowhere from the idea of a teenager 's coming out after hearing that his friend 's son had come out to his parents . Lynch pitched the premise to The N and was commissioned to write the pilot . After the casting process was complete , the episode was filmed in October 2004 , but when the show was picked up for a full season , Lynch decided to recast many of the characters and the pilot was shot again in July 2005 with the new cast . The premiere of the episode was promoted with branded MetroCards that were handed out to teenagers in Manhattan . Generally , critics reviewed the pilot positively , particularly commending its treatment of current social issues ; however , some critics found the show 's introduction of these issues to be forced and inauthentic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After their mother Paula ( Maeve Quinlan ) takes on a new job , the Carlin family moves from a small town in Ohio to Los Angeles , California . The three Carlin siblings start at King High School , where they each try to fit in . Glen ( Chris Hunter ) , a talented basketball player , tries out for the school basketball team , upsetting the star player Aiden Dennison ( Matt Cohen ) and his cheerleader girlfriend Madison Duarte ( Valery Ortiz ) . Tensions between Glen and Aiden escalate into a locker room fight over Aiden 's ex @-@ girlfriend Ashley Davies ( Mandy Musgrave ) , and Glen takes the spotlight in his first game , leaving Aiden on the bench . Glen 's sister Spencer ( Gabrielle Christian ) joins the cheerleading squad but ends up doing little more than take orders from Madison . She befriends the rebellious Ashley , but when Ashley indicates her interest in girls , Spencer starts to avoid her , only to admit later that she enjoyed their time spent together . That night , though , she dreams of being taunted by the cheerleaders and called gay , although she denies it . Glen and Spencer 's adopted African American brother Clay ( <unk> Gordon ) is smart but naïve , and he finds himself facing the racial tensions of LA that he never experienced in Ohio . After Clay strikes up a conversation with a girl named Chelsea Lewis ( <unk> Davis ) , he is beaten up by her ex @-@ boyfriend Dallas ( Marcus Brown ) when Clay tries to defend her . He then earns the respect of Sean Miller ( Austen <unk> ) , who is cynical about the way African Americans are treated in society , and when they go driving they are pulled over by the police for " driving while black " . 
 At a school dance , Sean persuades Dallas to make peace with Clay while Clay dances with Chelsea . Spencer convinces Ashley to come despite her disdain for school dances , but when Madison sees them together , she alleges that Spencer is gay and kicks Spencer off the cheerleading squad . It is revealed that Ashley was once pregnant by Aiden and lost the baby in a miscarriage , and when Glen tries to force Spencer to leave , another fight breaks out between him and Aiden . Spencer and Ashley flee the dance with Aiden and end up at a lookout over LA . 
 = = Production = = 
 Thomas W. Lynch first had the idea for South of Nowhere when one of his close conservative friends told Lynch that his son had just come out to him . The man asked his son , " How do you know you 're gay ? " and the son responded , " How do you know you 're straight ? " When Lynch heard this , he says , he " knew there was a series in there about identity . " He wondered why such a noteworthy event — an adolescent 's coming out to their parents — had never before been explored as an ongoing subject on a television series . He " sat with the idea for a few days " and then wrote an outline of the show 's pilot over a few weeks . In an effort to maintain authenticity in depicting teenage experiences , Lynch spoke to high school counselors and asked drama students at a Los Angeles high school for feedback . He pitched the series — which he was then calling " Out " — to The N executives Amy Friedman and Essie Chambers , who then commissioned him to write the pilot script . 
 Gabrielle Christian first auditioned for the role of Spencer ( then called " Zooey " ) in July 2004 , though Lynch also had her read for Ashley 's part . Mandy Musgrave also auditioned for the role of Spencer , but Lynch liked her chemistry with Christian , so he paired the two up with Musgrave as Ashley . The pilot was first shot in October 2004 and directed by Rose <unk> , but after the series was picked up by The N in January 2005 , Lynch decided to recast many of the characters . He said that " I didn 't pick [ Christian ] up right away , I had her keep re @-@ auditioning . ... I [ had ] to make sure that this combination [ was ] perfect . " Her contract was finally picked up in May 2005 and the pilot was re @-@ filmed with the new cast in July . Filming took place in Los Angeles , with a correctional facility used largely as the high school set . Donna Deitch , who directed the second version of the pilot but no subsequent South of Nowhere episodes said that the pilot is " something I 'm really , really proud of , because I think that show has a look , a style to it that really helps " . She felt that the style she set suited the material and was " fairly inventive " for a low @-@ budget series . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Before the airing of the pilot , The N joined with marketing agency Mr. Youth LLC to promote the show amongst teenagers in Manhattan . On Thursday November 3 and Friday November 4 , 2005 , street teams with chest @-@ mounted televisions as well as branded <unk> were dispersed around lower Manhattan . They visited various high schools and offered South of Nowhere @-@ branded MetroCards to teenagers who were traveling south on the N subway line . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Most reviews of " Secret Truths " were positive , particularly praising its treatment of social issues . Maureen Ryan wrote for the Chicago Tribune that " The lack of either <unk> or condescension shown by this program is promising . " She also commended that the pilot " doesn 't shy away " from issues pertaining to race , religion and sexuality . Kate <unk> of The New York Times compared the pilot positively to other series , writing , " If you took the plot of Beverly Hills , 90210 ( a good @-@ looking Midwestern family moves to Los Angeles ) , combined it with the identity issues of Degrassi ( race , sexuality and class clash in a high school setting ) and added a splash of One Tree Hill 's basketball backdrop , you would get South of Nowhere ... That 's meant to be a compliment . " Alessandra Stanley , another critic for The New York Times , mentioned " Secret Truths " in a feature about racial issues on television . She felt that the pilot distinguished itself from other teen shows by including a subplot about race ; however , she still found it to be " constrained and politically correct " . Variety 's Brian Lowry gave the episode a lukewarm review , comparing it to other teen dramas . He wrote that " the web of relationships doesn 't feel particularly fresh , mirroring the recent spate of nighttime teen serials " , but he felt the pilot was an " edgier treatment " , noting that it " isn 't screwing around " by addressing topics including abortion , drugs , homosexuality and racism . Karman Kregloe of AfterEllen.com , a website focused on the portrayal of lesbians in the media , thought that the episode was " well @-@ written , and the storyline for each of the lead characters is compelling " . She praised the show greatly for its authentic portrayal of teenagers ' questioning of their sexuality and the " big step " taken towards promoting tolerance . 
 Other critics responded to the episode less positively . Joanna Weiss of The Boston Globe was more critical , feeling that the show " takes pains to introduce as many hot @-@ button issues as possible " to give the illusion of authenticity . She found the characters to be predictable and to only serve as " plot vehicles " . The Seattle Times ' Kay McFadden also found a main problem of the show in the characters , believing that the pilot was more focused on plot development than it was on character development . She felt that the show was slightly hypocritical in trying to educate viewers on moral values but at the same time emphasising its own sexual aspects , setting " a weird standard for young viewers " . 
 = Kenilworth Castle = 
 Kenilworth Castle is located in the town of the same name in Warwickshire , England . Constructed from Norman through to Tudor times , the castle has been described by architectural historian Anthony Emery as " the finest surviving example of a semi @-@ royal palace of the later middle ages , significant for its scale , form and quality of workmanship " . Kenilworth has also played an important historical role . The castle was the subject of the six @-@ month @-@ long Siege of Kenilworth in 1266 , believed to be the longest siege in English history , and formed a base for Lancastrian operations in the Wars of the Roses . Kenilworth was also the scene of the removal of Edward II from the English throne , the French insult to Henry V in 1414 ( said by John Strecche to have encouraged the Agincourt campaign ) , and the Earl of Leicester 's lavish reception of Elizabeth I in 1575 . 
 The castle was built over several centuries . Founded in the 1120s around a powerful Norman great tower , the castle was significantly enlarged by King John at the beginning of the 13th century . Huge water defences were created by damming the local streams , and the resulting fortifications proved able to withstand assaults by land and water in 1266 . John of Gaunt spent lavishly in the late 14th century , turning the medieval castle into a palace fortress designed in the latest perpendicular style . The Earl of Leicester then expanded the castle once again , constructing new Tudor buildings and exploiting the medieval heritage of Kenilworth to produce a fashionable Renaissance palace . 
 Kenilworth was partly destroyed by Parliamentary forces in 1649 to prevent it being used as a military stronghold . Ruined , only two of its buildings remain habitable today . The castle became a tourist destination from the 18th century onwards , becoming famous in the Victorian period following the publishing of Sir Walter Scott 's novel Kenilworth in 1826 . English Heritage has managed the castle since 1984 . The castle is classed as a Grade I listed building and as a Scheduled Monument , and is open to the public . 
 = = Architecture and landscape = = 
 Although now ruined as a result of the slighting , or deliberate partial destruction , of the castle after the English Civil War , Kenilworth illustrates five centuries of English military and civil architecture . The castle is built almost entirely from local new red sandstone . 
 = = = Entrance and outer bailey wall = = = 
 To the south @-@ east of the main castle lie the Brays , a corruption of the French word <unk> , meaning an external fortification with palisades . Only earthworks and fragments of masonry remain of what was an extensive 13th @-@ century barbican structure including a stone wall and an external gatehouse guarding the main approach to the castle . The area now forms part of the car park for the castle . Beyond the Brays are the ruins of the Gallery Tower , a second gatehouse remodelled in the 15th century . The Gallery Tower originally guarded the 152 @-@ metre ( 500 @-@ ft ) long , narrow walled @-@ causeway that still runs from the Brays to the main castle . This causeway was called the Tiltyard , as it was used for tilting , or jousting , in medieval times . The Tiltyard causeway acted both as a dam and as part of the barbican defences . To the east of the Tiltyard is a lower area of marshy ground , originally flooded and called the Lower Pool , and to the west an area once called the Great Mere . The Great Mere is now drained and forms a meadow , but would originally have been a large lake covering around 100 acres ( 40 ha ) , dammed by the Tiltyard causeway . 
 The outer bailey of Kenilworth Castle is usually entered through Mortimer 's Tower , today a modest ruin but originally a Norman stone gatehouse , extended in the late 13th and 16th centuries . The outer bailey wall , long and relatively low , was mainly built by King John ; it has numerous buttresses but only a few towers , being designed to be primarily defended by the water system of the Great Mere and Lower Pool . The north side of the outer bailey wall was almost entirely destroyed during the slighting . Moving clockwise around the outer bailey from Mortimer 's Tower , the defences include a west @-@ facing watergate , which would originally have led onto the Great Mere ; the King 's gate , a late 17th @-@ century agricultural addition ; the Swan Tower , a late 13th @-@ century tower with 16th century additions named after the swans that lived on the Great Mere ; the early 13th @-@ century Lunn 's Tower ; and the 14th @-@ century Water Tower , so named because it overlooked the Lower Pool . 
 = = = Inner court = = = 
 Kenilworth 's inner court consists of a number of buildings set against a bailey wall , originally of Norman origin , exploiting the defensive value of a natural knoll that rises up steeply from the surrounding area . The 12th @-@ century great tower occupies the knoll itself and forms the north @-@ east corner of the bailey . Ruined during the slighting , the great tower is notable for its huge corner turrets , essentially hugely exaggerated Norman pilaster buttresses . Its walls are 5 metres ( 17 ft ) thick , and the towers 30 metres ( 100 ft ) high . Although Kenilworth 's great tower is larger , it is similar to that of Brandon Castle near Coventry ; both were built by the local Clinton family in the 1120s . The tower can be termed a hall keep , as it is longer than it is wide . The lowest floor is filled with earth , possibly taken from the earlier motte that may have been present on the site , and is further protected by a sloping stone plinth around the base . The tall Tudor windows at the top of the tower date from the 1570s . 
 Much of the northern part of the inner bailey was built by the 14th @-@ century noble John of Gaunt between 1372 and 1380 . This part of the castle is considered by historian Anthony Emery to be " the finest surviving example of a semi @-@ royal palace of the later middle ages , significant for its scale , form and quality of workmanship " . Gaunt 's architectural style emphasised rectangular design , the separation of ground floor service areas from the upper stories and a contrast of austere exteriors with lavish interiors , especially on the 1st floor of the inner bailey buildings . The result is considered " an early example of the perpendicular style " . 
 The most significant of Gaunt 's buildings is his great hall . The great hall replaced an earlier sequence of great halls on the same site , and was heavily influenced by Edward III 's design at Windsor Castle . The hall consists of a " ceremonial sequence of rooms " , approached by a particularly grand staircase , now lost . From the great hall , visitors could look out to admire the Great Mere or the inner court through huge windows . The undercroft to the hall , used by the service staff , was lit with slits , similar to design at the contemporary Wingfield Manor . The roof was built in 1376 by William <unk> , producing the widest hall , unsupported by pillars , existing in England at the time . There is some debate amongst historians as to whether this roof was a hammerbeam design , a collar and truss @-@ brace design , or a combination of the two . 
 There was an early attempt at symmetry in the external appearance of the great hall – the Strong and <unk> Towers architecturally act as near symmetrical " wings " to the hall itself , while the plinth of the hall is designed to mirror that of the great tower opposite it . An unusual multi @-@ sided tower , the Oriel , provides a counterpoint to the main doorway of the hall and was intended for private entertainment by Gaunt away from the main festivities on major occasions . The Oriel tower is based on Edward III 's " La Rose " Tower at Windsor , which had a similar function . Gaunt 's Strong Tower is so named for being entirely vaulted in stone across all its floors , an unusual and robust design . The great hall influenced the design of Bolton and Raby castles , while the hall 's roof design became famous and was copied at Arundel Castle and Westminster Hall . 
 Other parts of the castle built by Gaunt include the southern range of state apartments , Gaunt 's Tower and the main kitchen . Although now extensively damaged , these share the same style as the great hall ; this would have unified the appearance of Gaunt 's palace in a distinct break from the more eclectic medieval tradition of design . Gaunt 's kitchen replaced the original 12th @-@ century kitchens , built alongside the great tower in a similar fashion to the arrangement at Conisbrough . Gaunt 's new kitchen was twice the size of that in equivalent castles , measuring 19 metres ( 66 ft ) by eight metres ( 28 ft ) . 
 The remainder of the inner court was built by Robert Dudley , the Earl of Leicester , in the 1570s . He built a tower now known as Leicester 's building on the south edge of the court as a guest wing , extending out beyond the inner bailey wall for extra space . Leicester 's building was four floors high and built in a fashionable contemporary Tudor style with " brittle , thin walls and grids of windows " . The building was intended to appear well @-@ proportioned alongside the ancient great tower , one of the reasons for its considerable height . Leicester 's building set the style for later Elizabethan country house design , especially in the Midlands , with Hardwick Hall being a classic example . Modern viewing platforms , installed in 2014 , provide views from Elizabeth I 's's former bedroom . 
 Leicester also built a loggia , or open gallery , beside the great keep to lead to the new formal gardens . The loggia was designed to elegantly frame the view as the observer slowly admired the gardens , and was a new design in the 16th century , only recently imported from Italy . 
 = = = Base , left @-@ hand and right @-@ hand courts = = = 
 The rest of Kenilworth Castle 's interior is divided into three areas : the base court , stretching between Mortimer 's Tower and Leicester 's gatehouse ; the left @-@ hand court , stretching south @-@ west around the outside of the inner court ; and the right @-@ hand court , to the north @-@ west of the inner court . The line of trees that cuts across the base court today is a relatively modern mid @-@ 19th century addition , and originally this court would have been more open , save for the collegiate chapel that once stood in front of the stables . Destroyed in 1524 , only the chapel 's foundations remain . Each of the courts was designed to be used for different purposes : the base court was considered a relatively public area , with the left and right courts used for more private occasions . 
 Leicester 's gatehouse was built on the north side of the base court , replacing an older gatehouse to provide a fashionable entrance from the direction of Coventry . The external design , with its symbolic towers and , originally , battlements , echoes a style popular a century or more before , closely resembling Kirby <unk> and the Beauchamp gatehouse at Warwick Castle . By contrast the interior , with its contemporary wood panelling , is in the same , highly contemporary Elizabethan fashion of Leicester 's building in the inner court . Leicester 's gatehouse is one of the few parts of the castle to remain intact . The stables built by John Dudley in the 1550s also survive and lie along the east side of the base court . The stable block is a large building built mostly in stone , but with a timber @-@ framed , decoratively panelled first storey designed in an anachronistic , vernacular style . Both buildings could have easily been seen from Leicester 's building and were therefore on permanent display to visitors . <unk> 's intent may have been to create a deliberately anachronistic view across the base court , echoing the older ideals of chivalry and romance alongside the more modern aspects of the redesign of the castle . 
 = = = Garden and landscape = = = 
 Much of the right @-@ hand court of Kenilworth Castle is occupied by the castle garden . For most of Kenilworth 's history the role of the castle garden , used for entertainment , would have been very distinct from that of the surrounding chase , used primarily for hunting . From the 16th century onwards there were elaborate knot gardens in the base court . The gardens today are designed to reproduce as closely as possible the primarily historical record of their original appearance in 1575 , with a steep terrace along the south side of the gardens and steps leading down to eight square knot gardens . In Elizabethan gardens " the plants were almost incidental " , and instead the design focus was on sculptures , including four wooden obelisks painted to resemble porphyry and a marble fountain with a statue of two Greek mythological figures . A timber aviary contains a range of birds . The original garden was heavily influenced by the Italian Renaissance garden at Villa d 'Este . 
 To the north @-@ west of the castle are earthworks marking the spot of the " Pleasance " , created in 1414 by Henry V. The Pleasance was a banqueting house built in the style of a miniature castle . Surrounded by two diamond @-@ shaped moats with its own dock , the Pleasance was positioned on the far side of the Great Mere and had to be reached by boat . It resembled Richard II 's retreat at Sheen from the 1380s , and was later copied by his younger brother , Duke Humphrey of Gloucester , at Greenwich in the 1430s , as well by his son , John of Lancaster at <unk> . The Pleasance was eventually dismantled by Henry VIII and partially moved into the left @-@ hand court inside the castle itself , possibly to add to the anachronistic appearance . These elements were finally destroyed in the 1650s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 12th century = = = 
 Kenilworth Castle was founded in the early 1120s by Geoffrey de Clinton , Lord Chamberlain to Henry I. The castle 's original form is uncertain . It has been suggested that it consisted of a motte , an earthen mound surmounted by wooden buildings ; however , the stone great tower may have been part of the original design . Clinton was a local rival to Roger de Beaumont , the Earl of Warwick and owner of the neighbouring Warwick Castle , and the king made Clinton the sheriff in Warwickshire to act as a counterbalance to Beaumont 's power . Clinton had begun to lose the king 's favour after 1130 , and when he died in 1133 his son , also called Geoffrey , was only a minor . Geoffrey and his uncle William de Clinton were forced to come to terms with Beaumont ; this set @-@ back , and the difficult years of the Anarchy ( 1135 – 54 ) , delayed any further development of the castle . 
 Henry II succeeded to the throne at the end of the Anarchy but during the revolt of 1173 – 74 he faced a significant uprising led by his son , Henry , backed by the French crown . The conflict spread across England and Kenilworth was garrisoned by Henry II 's forces ; Geoffrey II de Clinton died in this period and the castle was taken fully into royal possession , a sign of its military importance . The Clintons themselves moved on to Buckinghamshire . By this point Kenilworth Castle consisted of the great keep , the inner bailey wall , a basic causeway across the smaller lake that preceded the creation of the Great Mere , and the local chase for hunting . 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 Henry 's successor , Richard I , paid relatively little attention to Kenilworth , but under King John significant building resumed at the castle . When John was excommunicated in 1208 , he embarked on a programme of rebuilding and enhancing several major royal castles . These included Corfe , Odiham , Dover , Scarborough as well as Kenilworth . John spent £ 1 @,@ 115 on Kenilworth Castle between 1210 and 1216 , building the outer bailey wall in stone and improving the other defences , including creating Mortimer 's and Lunn 's Towers . He also significantly improved the castle 's water defences by damming the <unk> and <unk> Brooks , creating the Great Mere . The result was to turn Kenilworth into one of the largest English castles of the time , with one of the largest artificial lake defences in England . John was forced to cede the castle to the baronial opposition as part of the guarantee of the Magna Carta , before it reverted to royal control early in the reign of his son , Henry III . 
 Henry III granted Kenilworth in 1244 to Simon de Montfort , Earl of Leicester , who later became a leader in the Second Barons ' War ( 1263 – 67 ) against the king , using Kenilworth as the centre of his operations . Initially the conflict went badly for King Henry , and after the Battle of Lewes in 1264 he was forced to sign the Mise of Lewes , under which his son , Prince Edward , was given over to the rebels as a hostage . Edward was taken back to Kenilworth , where chroniclers considered he was held in unduly harsh conditions . Released in early 1265 , Edward then defeated Montfort at the Battle of Evesham ; the surviving rebels under the leadership of Henry de Hastings , Montfort 's constable at Kenilworth , regrouped at the castle the following spring . Edward 's forces proceeded to lay siege to the rebels . 
 The Siege of Kenilworth Castle in 1266 was " probably the longest in English history " according to historian Norman Pounds , and at the time was also the largest siege to have occurred in England in terms of the number of soldiers involved . Simon de Monfort 's son , Simon VI de Montfort , promised in January 1266 to hand over the castle to the king . Five months later this had not happened , and Henry III laid siege to Kenilworth Castle on 21 June . Protected by the extensive water defences , the castle withstood the attack , despite Edward targeting the weaker north wall , employing huge siege towers and even attempting a night attack using barges brought from Chester . The distance between the royal trebuchets and the walls severely reduced their effectiveness , and heavier trebuchets had to be sent for from London . Papal intervention through the legate Ottobuono finally resulted in the compromise of the Dictum of Kenilworth , under which the rebels were allowed to re @-@ purchase their confiscated lands provided they surrendered the castle ; the siege ended on 14 December 1266 . The water defences at Kenilworth influenced the construction of later castles in Wales , most notably Caerphilly . 
 Henry granted Kenilworth to his son , Edmund Crouchback , in 1267 . Edmund held many tournaments at Kenilworth in the late 13th century , including a huge event in 1279 , presided over by the royal favourite Roger de Mortimer , in which a hundred knights competed for three days in the tiltyard in an event called " the Round Table " , in imitation of the popular Arthurian legends . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Edmund Crouchback passed on the castle to his eldest son , Thomas , Earl of Lancaster , in 1298 . Lancaster married Alice de Lacy , which made him the richest nobleman in England . Kenilworth became the primary castle of the Lancaster estates , replacing Bolingbroke , and acted as both a social and a financial centre for Thomas . Thomas built the first great hall at the castle from 1314 to 1317 and constructed the Water Tower along the outer bailey , as well as increasing the size of the chase . Lancaster , with support from many of the other English barons , found himself in increasing opposition to Edward II . War broke out in 1322 , and Lancaster was captured at the Battle of Boroughbridge and executed . His estates , including Kenilworth , were confiscated by the crown . Edward and his wife , Isabella of France , spent Christmas 1323 at Kenilworth , amidst major celebrations . 
 In 1326 , however , Edward was deposed by an alliance of Isabella and her lover , Roger Mortimer . Edward was eventually captured by Isabella 's forces and the custody of the king was assigned to Henry , Earl of Lancaster , who had backed Isabella 's invasion . Henry , reoccupying most of the Lancaster lands , was made constable of Kenilworth and Edward was transported there in late 1326 ; Henry 's legal title to the castle was finally confirmed the following year . Kenilworth was chosen for this purpose by Isabella probably both because it was a major fortification , and also because of the symbolism of its former owners ' links to popular ideals of freedom and good government . Royal writs were issued in Edward 's name by Isabella from Kenilworth until the next year . A deputation of leading barons led by Bishop Orleton was then sent to Kenilworth to first persuade Edward to resign and , when that failed , to inform him that he had been deposed as king . Edward formally resigned as king in the great hall of the castle on 21 January 1326 . As the months went by , however , it became clear that Kenilworth was proving a less than ideal location to imprison Edward . The castle was in a prominent part of the Midlands , in an area that held several nobles who still supported Edward and were believed to be trying to rescue him . Henry 's loyalty was also coming under question . In due course , Isabella and Mortimer had Edward moved by night to Berkeley Castle , where he died shortly afterwards . Isabella continued to use Kenilworth as a royal castle until her fall from power in 1330 . 
 Henry of Grosmont , the Duke of Lancaster , inherited the castle from his father in 1345 and remodelled the great hall with a grander interior and roof . On his death Blanche of Lancaster inherited the castle . Blanche married John of Gaunt , the third son of Edward III ; their union , and combined resources , made John the second richest man in England next to the king himself . After Blanche 's death , John married Constance , who had a claim to the kingdom of Castile , and John styled himself the king of Castile and León . Kenilworth was one of the most important of his thirty or more castles in England . John began building at Kenilworth between 1373 and 1380 in a style designed to reinforce his royal claims in Iberia . John constructed a grander great hall , the Strong Tower , <unk> Tower , the state apartments and the new kitchen complex . When not campaigning abroad , John spent much of his time at Kenilworth and Leicester , and used Kenilworth even more after 1395 when his health began to decline . In his final years , John made extensive repairs to the whole of the castle complex . 
 = = = 15th century = = = 
 Many castles , especially royal castles were left to decay in the 15th century ; Kenilworth , however , continued to be used as a centre of choice , forming a late medieval " palace fortress " . Henry IV , John of Gaunt 's son , returned Kenilworth to royal ownership when he took the throne in 1399 and made extensive use of the castle . Henry V also used Kenilworth extensively , but preferred to stay in the Pleasance , the mock castle he had built on the other side of the Great Mere . According to the contemporary chronicler John Strecche , who lived at the neighbouring Kenilworth Priory , the French openly mocked Henry in 1414 by sending him a gift of tennis balls at Kenilworth . The French aim was to imply a lack of martial prowess ; according to Strecche , the gift spurred Henry 's decision to fight the Agincourt campaign . The account was used by Shakespeare as the basis for a scene in his play Henry V. 
 English castles , including Kenilworth , did not play a decisive role during the Wars of the Roses ( 1455 – 85 ) , which were fought primarily in the form of pitched battles between the rival factions of the Lancastrians and the Yorkists . With the mental collapse of King Henry VI , Queen Margaret used the Duchy of Lancaster lands in the Midlands , including Kenilworth , as one of her key bases of military support . Margaret removed Henry from London in 1456 for his own safety and until 1461 , Henry 's court divided almost all its time among Kenilworth , Leicester and Tutbury Castle for the purposes of protection . Kenilworth remained an important Lancastrian stronghold for the rest of the war , often acting as a military balance to the nearby castle of Warwick . With the victory of Henry VII at Bosworth , Kenilworth again received royal attention ; Henry visited frequently and had a tennis court constructed at the castle for his use . His son , Henry VIII , decided that Kenilworth should be maintained as a royal castle . He abandoned the Pleasance and had part of the timber construction moved into the base court of the castle . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 The castle remained in royal hands until it was given to John Dudley in 1553 . Dudley came to prominence under Henry VIII and became the leading political figure under Edward VI . Dudley was a patron of John Shute , an early exponent of classical architecture in England , and began the process of modernising Kenilworth . Before his execution in 1553 by Queen Mary for attempting to place Lady Jane Grey on the throne , Dudley had built the new stable block and widened the tiltyard to its current form . 
 Kenilworth was restored to Dudley 's son , Robert , Earl of Leicester , in 1563 , four years after the succession of Elizabeth I to the throne . Leicester 's lands in Warwickshire were worth between £ 500 – £ 700 but Leicester 's power and wealth , including monopolies and grants of new lands , depended ultimately on his remaining a favourite of the queen . 
 Leicester continued his father 's modernisation of Kenilworth , attempting to ensure that Kenilworth would attract the interest of Elizabeth during her regular tours around the country . Elizabeth visited in 1566 and 1568 , by which time Leicester had commissioned the royal architect Henry Hawthorne to produce plans for a dramatic , classical extension of the south side of the inner court . In the event this proved unachievable and instead Leicester employed William Spicer to rebuild and extend the castle so as to provide modern accommodation for the royal court and symbolically boost his own claims to noble heritage . After negotiation with his tenants , Leicester also increased the size of the chase once again . The result has been termed an English " Renaissance palace " . 
 Elizabeth viewed the partially finished results at Kenilworth in 1572 , but the complete effect of Leicester 's work was only apparent during the queen 's last visit in 1575 . Leicester was keen to impress Elizabeth in a final attempt to convince her to marry him , and no expense was spared . Elizabeth brought an entourage of thirty @-@ one barons and four hundred staff for the royal visit that lasted an exceptional nineteen days ; twenty horsemen a day arrived at the castle to communicate royal messages . Leicester entertained the Queen and much of the neighbouring region with pageants , fireworks , bear baiting , mystery plays , hunting and lavish banquets . The cost was reputed to have amounted to many thousand pounds , almost bankrupting Leicester , though it probably did not exceed £ 1 @,@ 700 in reality . The event was considered a huge success and formed the longest stay at such a property during any of Elizabeth 's tours , yet the queen did not decide to marry Leicester . 
 Kenilworth Castle was valued at £ 10 @,@ 401 in 1588 , when Leicester died without legitimate issue and heavily in debt . In accordance with his will , the castle passed first to his brother Ambrose , Earl of Warwick , and after the latter 's death in 1590 , to his illegitimate son , Sir Robert Dudley . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 Sir Robert Dudley , having tried and failed to establish his legitimacy in front of the Court of the Star Chamber , went to Italy in 1605 . In the same year Sir Thomas Chaloner , governor ( and from 1610 chamberlain ) to James I 's eldest son Prince Henry , was commissioned to oversee repairs to the castle and its grounds , including the planting of gardens , the restoration of fish @-@ ponds and improvement to the game park . During 1611 – 12 Dudley arranged to sell Kenilworth Castle to Henry , by then Prince of Wales . Henry died before completing the full purchase , which was finalised by his brother , Charles , who bought out the interest of Dudley 's abandoned wife , Alice Dudley . When Charles became king , he gave the castle to his wife , Henrietta Maria ; he bestowed the stewardship on Robert Carey , Earl of Monmouth , and after his death gave it to Carey 's sons Henry and Thomas . Kenilworth remained a popular location for both King James I and his son Charles , and accordingly was well maintained . The most famous royal visit occurred in 1624 , when Ben Jonson 's The Masque of Owls at Kenilworth was performed for Charles . 
 The First English Civil War broke out in 1642 . During its early campaigns , Kenilworth formed a useful counterbalance to the Parliamentary stronghold of Warwick . Kenilworth was used by Charles on his advance to Edgehill in October 1642 as a base for raids on Parliamentary strongholds in the Midlands . After the battle , however , the royalist garrison was withdrawn on the approach of Lord Brooke , and the castle was then garrisoned by parliamentary forces . In April 1643 the new governor of the castle , Hastings Ingram , was arrested as a suspected Royalist double agent . By January 1645 the Parliamentary forces in Coventry had strengthened their hold on the castle , and attempts by Royalist forces to dislodge them from Warwickshire failed . Security concerns continued after the end of the First Civil War in 1646 , and in 1649 Parliament ordered the slighting of Kenilworth . One wall of the great tower , various parts of the outer bailey and the battlements were destroyed , but not before the building was surveyed by the antiquarian William Dugdale , who published his results in 1656 . 
 Colonel Joseph Hawkesworth , responsible for the implementation of the slighting , acquired the estate for himself and converted Leicester 's gatehouse into a house ; part of the base court was turned into a farm , and many of the remaining buildings were stripped for their materials . In 1660 Charles II was restored to the throne , and Hawkesworth was promptly evicted from Kenilworth . The Queen Mother , Henrietta Maria , briefly regained the castle , with the Earls of Monmouth acting as stewards once again , but after her death King Charles II granted the castle to Sir Edward Hyde , whom he later created Baron Hyde of Hindon and Earl of Clarendon . The ruined castle continued to be used as a farm , with the gatehouse as the principal dwelling ; the King 's Gate was added to the outer bailey wall during this period for the use of farm workers . 
 = = = 18th and 19th centuries = = = 
 Kenilworth remained a ruin during the 18th and 19th centuries , still used as a farm but increasingly also popular as a tourist attraction . The first guidebook to the castle , A Concise history and description of Kenilworth Castle , was printed in 1777 with many later editions following in the coming decades . The castle 's cultural prominence increased after Sir Walter Scott wrote Kenilworth in 1821 describing the royal visit of Queen Elizabeth . Very loosely based on the events of 1575 , Scott 's story reinvented aspects of the castle and its history to tell the story of " the pathetic , beautiful , undisciplined heroine Amy Robsart and the steely Elizabeth I " . Although considered today as a less successful literary novel than some of his other historical works , it popularised Kenilworth Castle in the Victorian imagination as a romantic Elizabethan location . Kenilworth spawned " numerous stage adaptations and burlesques , at least eleven operas , popular redactions , and even a scene in a set of dioramas for home display " , including Sir Arthur Sullivan 's 1865 cantata The Masque at Kenilworth . J. M. W. Turner painted several watercolours of the castle . 
 The number of visitors increased , including Queen Victoria and Charles Dickens . Work was undertaken during the 19th century to protect the stonework from further decline , with particular efforts to remove ivy from the castle in the 1860s . 
 = = Today = = 
 The castle remained the property of the <unk> until 1937 , when Lord Clarendon found the maintenance of the castle too expensive and sold Kenilworth to the industrialist Sir John Siddeley . Siddeley , whose tax accounting in the 1930s had been at least questionable , was keen to improve his public image and gave over the running of the castle , complete with a charitable donation , to the Commissioner of Works . In 1958 his son gave the castle itself to the town of Kenilworth and English Heritage has managed the property since 1984 . The castle is classed as a Grade I listed building and as a Scheduled Monument , and is open to the public . 
 Between 2005 – 09 English Heritage attempted to restore Kenilworth 's garden more closely to its Elizabethan form , using as a basis the description in the Langham letter and details from recent archaeological investigations . The reconstruction cost more than £ 2 million and was criticised by some archaeologists as being a " matter of simulation as much as reconstruction " , due to the limited amount of factual information on the nature of the original gardens . In 2008 plans were put forward to re @-@ create and flood the original Great Mere around the castle . As well as re @-@ creating the look of the castle it was hoped that a new mere would be part of the ongoing flood alleviation plan for the area and that the lake could be used for boating and other waterside recreations . 
 = Environmental threats to the Great Barrier Reef = 
 The Great Barrier Reef is the world 's largest reef system , composed of roughly 2 @,@ 900 individual reefs and 940 islands and cays that stretch for 2 @,@ 300 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 616 mi ) and cover an area of approximately 344 @,@ 400 square kilometres ( 133 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . The reef is located in the Coral Sea , off the coast of Queensland in northeast Australia . A large part of the reef is protected by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park . 
 According to the 2014 report of the Australian Government 's Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority ( GBRMPA ) , climate change is the most significant environmental threat to the Great Barrier Reef , while the other major environmental pressures are listed as decreased water quality from land @-@ based runoff , impacts from coastal development and some persistent impacts from fishing activities . The reef is also threatened by storms , coral bleaching and ocean acidification . The 2014 report also shows that , while numerous marine life species have recovered after previous declines , the strength of the dugong population is continuing to decline . Terry Hughes , Federation Fellow , ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies at James Cook University , wrote in a 14 August 2014 Conversation piece that harmful government policies and ongoing conflicts of interest over mining royalties are risks of an equivalent magnitude . 
 The GBRMPA consider climate change , poor water quality , coastal development , and some impacts from fishing to be the area 's major threats , but reef scientists Jon Day , Bob Pressey , Jon Brodie and Hughes stated that the " cumulative effects of many combined impacts " is the real issue . 
 In a Conversation Article , Mathieu <unk> , a biogeochemical modeller at CSIRO and colleagues mapped parts of the Great Barrier Reef that are most exposed to ocean acidification . This map of pH on the Great Barrier Reef presents the exposure to ocean acidification on each of the 3 @,@ 581 reefs , providing managers with the information they need to tailor management to individual reefs . The Great Barrier Reef is not a singular reef nor a physical barrier that prevents exchange between reefs ; it is a mixture of thousands of productive reefs and shallow areas lying on a continental shelf with complex oceanic circulation . 
 = = History = = 
 The Australian and Queensland Governments committed to act in partnership in 2007 to protect the reef , and water quality monitoring programmes were implemented . However , the World Wildlife Fund criticised the slow progress of the governments , raising a concern that as many as 700 reefs continued to be at risk from sediment runoff . 
 The Australian government then outlined further action after the WHC called for the completion of a strategic assessment of the Reef area in 2011 . The Committee also urged the government to use the assessment data to develop a long @-@ term plan for protecting the " Outstanding Universal Value " of the reef , which is the basis for its World Heritage listing . Again , criticisms emerged from the expert community — due to vague quantitative targets , the absence of clear , specific strategies , and no mention of the implications of climate change — but the significant efforts of both state and federal governments addressed key recommendations from the World Heritage Committee . 
 A 2012 UNESCO report , published by the World Heritage Committee ( WHC ) , then criticised the government 's management of the Great Barrier Reef , warning that the area could be downgraded to a world heritage site " in danger " unless major changes were implemented . The report expressed " extreme concern " at the rapid rate of coastal development , highlighting the construction of liquefied natural gas plants at Gladstone and Curtis Island , and recommended that thorough assessments are made before any new developments that could affect the reef are approved . UNESCO specifically recommended no new port development in Abbot Point , Gladstone , Hay Point , Mackay , and Townsville . 
 Australian Foreign Minister Julie Bishop informed the Australian media that she would use climate change talks , held in Lima , Peru , in December 2014 , to avoid the WHC — consisting of experts from 20 nations — applying the " in danger " listing in 2015 . Bishop believed that " no justification " existed for the downgrading : 
 It would send a message around the world that even if you meet all of the criteria set out by the world heritage committee , there is still a risk that they will place an area on the in @-@ danger list ... It [ downgrading ] would have significant implications for Australia but it would also set a very dangerous precedent for countries who don ’ t have the opportunity to take the action that Australia has . 
 To avoid the Great Barrier Reef being listed as " in danger " , the Queensland Government introduced the Ports Bill 2014 on 25 November 2014 . The Bill seeks to restrict further port development along the coast to Brisbane and four " Priority Port Development Areas " , with the latter including four ports identified by the WHC in its 2012 report . The Bill also restricts dredging over a decade @-@ long period , with the exception of priority ports . Additionally , the a long @-@ term sustainability plan and the expansion of water @-@ quality activities were introduced by state and federal governments , and their partner agencies . 
 However , in response to the Ports Bill , University of Queensland ( <unk> ) academics said on 19 December 2014 that , although the issues are " not insurmountable " , " the health of the reef is still declining and consequently more needs to be done . " Australian Marine Conservation Society ( AMCS ) Great Barrier Reef campaign director Felicity Wishart was more damning and stated in a press release : 
 The new Ports Bill fails to rule out any currently proposed new dredging , the dumping of dredge spoil in the Reef ’ s waters and is silent on maintenance dredging across the region . The millions of tonnes of dredging and dumping for mega port developments that are in the pipeline will be able to go ahead under the Bill . Despite the establishment of four Priority Port Development Areas along the Reef ( Townsville , Abbot Point , Mackay / Hay Point and Gladstone ) , the Bill will still allow port expansion in Cairns . This fails to meet the recommendation by the World Heritage Committee that no new port developments be permitted outside of the existing port areas . The Bill contains no protections for the most northern section of the Reef or the Fitzroy Delta , and it does nothing to improve water quality in Reef waters , all matters which the World Heritage Committee wants action on . 
 = = Water quality = = 
 Water quality was first identified as a threat to the Great Barrier Reef in 1989 . Thirty " major rivers " and hundreds of small streams comprise the Great Barrier Reef catchment area , which covers 423 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 163 @,@ 000 sq mi ) of land . Queensland has several major urban centers on the coast including Cairns , Townsville , Mackay , Rockhampton and the industrial city of Gladstone . Dredging in the Port of Gladstone is raising concern after dead and diseased fish where found in the harbor . Cairns and Townsville are the largest of the coastal cities , with populations of approximately 150 @,@ 000 each . 
 There are many major water quality variables affecting coral reef health including water temperature , salinity , nutrients , suspended sediment concentrations , and pesticides . The species in the Great Barrier Reef area are adapted to tolerable variations in water quality however when critical thresholds are exceeded they may be adversely impacted . River discharges are the single biggest source of nutrients , providing significant pollution of the Reef during tropical flood events with over 90 % of this pollution being sourced from farms . 
 As of 1995 , water visibility had decreased to 10 metres . 
 Due to the range of human uses made of the water catchment area adjacent to the Great Barrier Reef , some 700 of the 3000 reefs are within a risk zone where water quality has declined due to the naturally acidic sediment and chemical runoff from farming . Coastal development and the loss of coastal wetlands — the latter acts as natural filter — are also major factors 
 Industries in the water catchment area are cotton growing , comprising approximately 262 km ² ; 340 dairy farms with an average area of 2 km ² each , 158 km ² cattle grazing , 288 km ² horticulture including banana growing , sugarcane farming , and cropping of approximately 8 @,@ 000 km ² wheat , 1 @,@ 200 km ² barley , and 6 @,@ 000 to 7000 km ² sorghum and maize . Fertiliser use in the cotton , dairy , beef , horticulture and sugar industries is essential to ensure productivity and profitability . However , fertiliser and byproducts from sugar cane harvesting methods form a component of surface runoff into the Great Barrier Reef lagoon . 
 The principal agricultural activity in the wet tropics is sugar cane farming , while cattle grazing is the primary industry in the dry tropics regions . Both are considered significant threats to high water quality . Copper , a common industrial pollutant in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef , has been shown to interfere with the development of coral polyps . 
 Flood plumes are flooding events associated with higher levels of nitrogen and phosphorus . In February 2007 , due to a monsoonal climate system , plumes of sediment runoff have been observed reaching to the out most regions of the reef . 
 Runoff is especially concerning in the region south of Cairns , as it receives over 3000 mm of rain per year and the reefs are less than 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) away from the coastline . Farm run off is polluted as a result of overgrazing and excessive fertilizer and pesticide use . Mud pollution has increased by 800 % and inorganic nitrogen pollution by 3 @,@ 000 % since the introduction of European farming practices on the Australian landscape . This pollution has been linked to a range of very significant risks to the reef system , including intensified outbreaks of the coral @-@ eating Crown of Thorns Starfish which contributed to a loss of 66 % of live coral cover on sampled reefs in 2000 . 
 It is thought that the mechanism behind excess nutrients affecting the reefs is due to increased light and oxygen competition from algae , but unless herbivory is unusually low , this will not create a phase shift from the Great Barrier Reef being primarily made up of coral to being primarily made up of algae . 
 It has been suggested that poor water quality due to excess nutrients encourages the spread of infectious diseases among corals . In general , the Great Barrier Reef is considered to have low incidences of coral diseases . Skeletal <unk> Band , a disease of bony corals caused by the protozoan <unk> <unk> , affects 31 species of corals from six families on the reef . The long @-@ term monitoring program has found an increase in incidences of coral disease in the period 1999 @-@ 2002 , although they dispute the claim that on the Great Barrier Reef , coral diseases are caused by anthropogenic pollution . 
 Elevated nutrient concentrations result in a range of impacts on coral communities and under extreme conditions can result in a collapse . It also affects coral by promoting phytoplankton growth which increases the number of filter feeding organisms that compete for space . Excessive inputs of sediment from land to coral can lead to reef destruction through burial , disruption of recruitment success , or deleterious community shifts . Sediments affect coral by smothering them when particles settle out , reducing light availability and potentially reducing photosynthesis and growth . Coral reefs exist in seawater salinities from 25 to 42 % . Salinity impacts to corals are increased by other flood @-@ related stresses . 
 = = = Pollution from mining = = = 
 A freedom of information request by the Northern Queensland Conservation Council in 2014 showed that Queensland Nickel , owned by Australian politician Clive Palmer , discharged nitrate @-@ laden water into the Great Barrier Reef in 2009 and 2011 — releasing 516 tonnes ( 508 long tons ; 569 short tons ) of toxic waste water on the latter occasion . In June 2012 , Queensland Nickel stated it intended to release waste water , continuously for three months , " at least 100 times the allowed maximum level as well as heavy metals and other contaminants " . A GBRMPA briefing stated the company had " threatened a compensation claim of $ <unk> should the GBRMPA intend to exert authority over the company 's operations " . In response to the <unk> of the dumping incidents , the GBRMPA stated : 
 We have strongly encouraged the company to investigate options that do not entail releasing the material to the environment and to develop a management plan to eliminate this potential hazard ; however , GBRMPA does not have legislative control over how the <unk> tailings dam is managed . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Following a tour of the Great Barrier Reef area by WHC members , a 2012 UNESCO report , which criticised management of the Great Barrier Reef , specifically recommended no new port development outside the established areas of Abbot Point , Gladstone , Hay Point / Mackay , and Townsville . However , in December 2013 , Greg Hunt , the Australian environment minister , approved a plan for dredging to create three shipping terminals as part of the construction of a <unk> . According to corresponding approval documents , the process will create around 3 million cubic metres of dredged seabed that will be dumped within the Great Barrier Reef marine park area . 
 On 31 January 2014 , the GBRMPA issued a dumping permit that will allow three million cubic metres of sea bed from Abbot Point , north of Bowen , to be transported and unloaded in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park . Potential significant harms have been identified in relation to dredge spoil and the process of churning up the sea floor in the area and exposing it to air : firstly , new research shows the finer particles of dredge spoil can cloud the water and block sunlight , thereby starving sea grass and coral up to distances of 80 km away from the point of origin due to the actions of wind and currents . Furthermore , dredge spoil can literally smother reef or sea grass to death , while storms can repeatedly <unk> these particles so that the harm caused is ongoing ; secondly , disturbed sea floor can release toxic substances into the surrounding environment . 
 The dredge spoil from the Abbot Point port project is to be dumped 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) away , near Bowen in north Queensland , and the approval from the Authority will result in the production of an extra 70 million tonnes of coal annually , worth between A $ 1 @.@ 4 billion and $ 2 @.@ 8 billion . Authority chairman , Dr Russell <unk> , stated after the confirmation of the approval : 
 This approval is in line with the agency 's view that port development along the Great Barrier Reef coastline should be limited to existing ports . As a deepwater port that has been in operation for nearly 30 years , Abbot Point is better placed than other ports along the Great Barrier Reef coastline to undertake expansion as the capital and maintenance dredging required will be significantly less than what would be required in other areas . It 's important to note the seafloor of the approved disposal area consists of sand , silt and clay and does not contain coral reefs or seagrass beds . 
 The approval was provided with a corresponding set of 47 new environmental conditions that include the following : 
 A long @-@ term water quality monitoring plan extending five years after the disposal activity is completed . 
 A heritage management plan to protect the Catalina second world war aircraft wreck in Abbot Bay . 
 The establishment of an independent dredging and disposal technical advice panel and a management response group , to include community representatives . 
 Numerous responses , including online petitions , were published in opposition to the proposal : Greenpeace launched the " Save the Reef " campaign in opposition to the dumping , which remained active with over 170 @,@ 000 signatures on 3 March 2014 ; in addition to an online petition that registered more than 250 @,@ 000 signatures on 3 March 2014 , political activist group GetUp ! are also funding a legal case in conjunction with non @-@ profit Environmental Defenders Office of Queensland ( <unk> ) , which represents the North Queensland Conservation Council ; and " Fight for the Reef " , a partnership between World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) <unk> and the Australian Marine Conservation Society ( AMCS ) , maintains a campaign that collects online donations to fund a " legal fighting team " , and displayed nearly 60 @,@ 000 supporters on its website on 11 May 2014 . 
 The legal fighting team of the WWF @-@ Australia and the AMCS received further support in April 2014 following the release of the " Sounds For The Reef " musical fundraising project . Produced by <unk> , the digital album features artists such as John Butler , The Herd , <unk> , Missy Higgins , The Cat Empire , Fat Freddys Drop , The Bamboos ( featuring Kylie <unk> ) and Resin Dogs . Released on 7 April , the album 's 21 songs were sold on the Bandcamp website . 
 Further support for the WWF @-@ Australia and AMCS partnership occurred in late April 2014 , when the Ben & Jerry 's ice cream company signed onto the " Fight for the Reef " campaign . In early April 2014 , the company withdrew the popular " Phish Food " flavour in Australia due to the aquatic association and the potential for awareness @-@ raising . The product withdrawal decision followed tours around select parts of the nation that involved Ben & Jerry 's representatives distributing free ice cream to highlight the reef damage issue . 
 In response , Minister for the Environment and Heritage Protection of Queensland Andrew Powell said that he would be contacting parent corporation Unilever , explaining , " The only people taking a scoop out of the reef is Ben and Jerry 's and Unilever . If you understand the facts , you 'd want to be boycotting Ben and Jerry 's " . The Australian public was also informed by Australian Ben & Jerry 's brand manager <unk> <unk> , who stated to the Brisbane Times newspaper : " Ben & Jerry 's believes that dredging and dumping in world heritage waters surrounding the marine park area will be detrimental to the reef ecology . It threatens the health of one of Australia 's most iconic treasures . " 
 A Queensland state senator , Matthew Canavan , confirmed that he raised the issue in writing with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission ( ACCC ) and said to The Courier @-@ Mail : 
 Ben & Jerry 's can campaign on whatever issue they like but as a company they have an obligation to tell Australians the whole truth and nothing but the truth . Australia has strict laws to protect consumers against misleading and deceptive behavior . These <unk> could cost jobs and development in regional Queensland . It 's irresponsible behavior from a company that should know better . 
 = = Climate change = = 
 According to the GBRMPA in 2014 , the most significant threat to the status of the Great Barrier Reef is climate change , due to the consequential rise of sea temperatures , gradual ocean acidification and an increase in the number of " intense weather events " . Hughes writes of " the demonstrable failure of the state and Commonwealth " to address the issue of climate change in his August 2014 article . Furthermore , a temperature rise of between two and three degrees Celsius would result in 97 % of the Great Barrier Reef being bleached every year . 
 Reef scientist Terry Done has predicted that a one @-@ degree rise in global temperature would result in 82 % of the reef bleached — two degrees would result in 97 % , while three degrees would result in " total devastation " . A predictive model based on the 1998 and 2002 bleaching events has concurred that a temperature rise of three degrees would result in total coral mortality . 
 However , a few scientists hold that coral bleaching may in some cases be less of a problem than the mainstream believes . Professor Ridd , from James Cook University in Townsville was quoted in The Australian ( a conservative newspaper ) as saying ; " They are saying bleaching is the end of the world , but when you look into it , that is a highly dubious proposition " . Research by scientist Ray <unk> " ... has documented astonishing levels of recovery on the Keppel outcrops devastated by bleaching in 2006 . " A related article in The Australian newspaper goes on to explain that ; " Those that expel their zooxanthellae have a narrow opening to recolonise with new , temperature @-@ resistant algae before succumbing . In the <unk> in 2006 , <unk> and his team noticed that the dominant strain of zooxanthellae changed from light and heat @-@ sensitive type C2 , to more robust types D and C1 . " 
 Nevertheless , most coral reef researchers anticipate severely negative effects from climate change already occurring , and potentially disastrous effects as climate change worsens . The future of the Reef may well depend on how much the planet 's climate changes , and thus , on how high atmospheric greenhouse gas concentration levels are allowed to rise . On 2 September 2009 , a report by the Australian Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority revealed that if carbon dioxide levels reached 450 parts per million corals and reef habitats will be highly vulnerable . If carbon dioxide levels are managed at or below 380 parts per million they will be only moderately vulnerable and the reefs will remain coral @-@ dominated . 
 Global warming may have triggered the collapse of reef ecosystems throughout the tropics . Increased global temperatures are thought by some to bring more violent tropical storms , but reef systems are naturally resilient and recover from storm battering . Most people agree that an upward trend in temperature will cause much more coral bleaching ; others suggest that while reefs may die in certain areas , other areas will become habitable for corals , and new reefs will form . However , the rate at which the mass bleaching events occur is estimated to be much faster than reefs can recover from , or adjust to . 
 However , <unk> et al. in their 2006 report suggest that the trend towards ocean acidification indicates that as the sea 's pH decreases , corals will become less able to secrete calcium carbonate . In 2009 , a study showed that Porites corals , the most robust on the Great Barrier Reef , have slowed down their growth by 14 @.@ 2 % since 1990 . It suggested that the cause was heat stress and a lower availability of dissolved calcium to the corals . 
 Climate change has implications for other forms of life on the Great Barrier Reef as well - some fish 's preferred temperature range lead them to seek new areas to live , thus causing chick mortality in seabirds that prey on the fish . Also , in sea turtles , higher temperatures mean that the sex ratio of their populations will change , as the sex of sea turtles is determined by temperature . The habitat of sea turtles will also shrink . 
 = = Crown of Thorns Starfish = = 
 The Crown @-@ of @-@ Thorns Starfish is a coral reef predator which preys on coral polyps by climbing onto them , extruding its stomach over them , and releasing digestive enzymes to absorb the liquified tissue . An individual adult of this species can eat up to six square meters of living reef in a single year . Geological evidence suggests that the Crown @-@ of @-@ Thorns Starfish has been part of the Great Barrier Reef 's ecology for " at least several thousand years " , but there is no geological evidence for Crown of Thorns outbreaks . Large outbreaks of these starfish can devastate reefs . In 2000 , an outbreak contributed to a loss of 66 % of live coral cover on sampled reefs in a study by the CRC Reefs Research Centre . Although large outbreaks of these starfish are believed to occur in natural cycles , human activity in and around the Great Barrier Reef can worsen the effects . Reduction of water quality associated with agriculture can cause the crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish larvae to thrive . Fertilizer runoff from farming increases the amount of phytoplankton available for the Crown of Thorns Starfish larvae to consume . A study by the Australian Institute of Marine Science showed that a doubling of the chlorophyll in the water leads to a tenfold increase in the crown @-@ of @-@ thorns starfish larvae 's survival rate . Overfishing of its natural predators , such as the Giant Triton , is also considered to contribute to an increase in the number of Crown of Thorns Starfish . The CRC Reef Research Centre defines an outbreak as when there are more than 30 adult starfish in an area of one hectare . There have been three large outbreaks of COTS on the reef since observation began , between 1962 and 1976 ; 1978 and 1991 ; 1993 and 2005 , and a fourth began in 2009 . Investigation is being undertaken into mimicking a chemical scent released by the COTS ' natural predator , the giant triton snail . 
 = = Overfishing = = 
 The unsustainable overfishing of keystone species , such as the Giant Triton and sharks , can cause disruption to food chains vital to life on the reef . Fishing also impacts the reef through increased pollution from boats , by @-@ catch of unwanted species ( such as dolphins and turtles ) and reef habitat destruction from trawling , anchors and nets . Overfishing of herbivore populations can cause algal growths on reefs . The <unk> <unk> pinnatus has been observed to significantly reduce algal growths in studies simulating overfishing . Sharks are fished for their meat , and when they are part of bycatch , it is common to kill the shark and throw it overboard , as there is a belief that they interfere with fishing . As of 1 July 2004 , approximately one @-@ third of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park is protected from species removal of any kind , including fishing , without written permission . However , illegal poaching is not unknown in these no @-@ take zones . A 2015 study into coral trout on the Great Barrier Reef found that the no @-@ take zones had more coral trout and more coral trout larvae after tropical cyclone events , which helped replenish those areas sooner . 
 = = Shipping = = 
 Shipping accidents continue to be perceived as a threat , as several commercial shipping routes pass through the Great Barrier Reef . The GBRMPA estimates that about 6000 vessels greater than 50 metres ( 164 ft ) in length use the Great Barrier Reef as a route . From 1985 to 2001 , 11 collisions and 20 groundings occurred along the Great Barrier Reef shipping route , with human error identified as the leading cause of shipping accidents . 
 Reef pilots have stated that they consider the reef route safer than outside the reef in the event of mechanical failure , since a ship can sit safely while being repaired . The inner route is used by 75 % of all ships that travel over the Great Barrier Reef . As of 2007 , over 1 @,@ 600 known shipwrecks have occurred in the Great Barrier Reef region . 
 Waste and foreign species discharged from ships in ballast water ( when purging procedures are not followed ) are a biological hazard to the Great Barrier Reef . <unk> ( TBT ) compounds found in some <unk> paint on ship hulls leaches into seawater and is toxic to marine organisms and humans ; as of 2002 , efforts are underway to restrict its use . 
 In April 2010 , the bulk coal carrier Shen Neng 1 ran aground on the Great Barrier Reef , causing the largest grounding scar to date . The spill caused damage to a <unk> section of the Great Barrier Reef and the use of oil dispersant resulted in oil spreading to reef islands 25 km away . In 2012 and 2013 , there were <unk> ship voyages through the Great Barrier Reef region , and this is forecast to increase 250 % over the next 20 years . 
 Over 9 @,@ 600 ship voyages occurred in the GBRMPA between 2012 and 2013 . 
 = = Oil = = 
 It was suspected that the Great Barrier Reef is the cap to an oil trap , after a 1923 paper suggested that it had the right rock formation to support " oilfields of great magnitude " . After the Commonwealth Petroleum Search Subsidies Act of 1957 , exploration activities increased in Queensland , including a well drilled at Wreck Island in the southern Great Barrier Reef in 1959 . In the 1960s , drilling for oil and gas was investigated throughout the Great Barrier Reef , by seismic and magnetic methods in the Torres Strait , along " the eastern seaboard of Cape York to Princess Charlotte Bay " and along the coast from Cooktown to Fraser Island . In the late 1960s , more exploratory wells were drilled near Wreck Island in the Capricorn Channel , and near Darnley Island in the Torres Strait , but " all results were dry " . 
 In 1970 , responding to concern about oil spills such as the Torrey Canyon , two Royal Commissions were ordered " into exploratory and production drilling for petroleum in the area of the Great Barrier Reef " . After the Royal Commissions , the federal and state governments ceased allowing petroleum drilling on the Great Barrier Reef . A study in 1990 concluded that the reef is too young to contain oil reserves . Oil drilling remains prohibited on the Great Barrier Reef , yet oil spills due to shipping routes are still a threat to the reef system , with a total of 282 oil spills between 1987 @-@ 2002 . 
 = = Tropical cyclones = = 
 Tropical cyclones are a cause of ecological disturbance to the Great Barrier Reef . The types of damage caused by tropical cyclones to the Great Barrier Reef is varied , including fragmentation , sediment plumes , and decreasing salinity following heavy rains ( Cyclone Joy ) . The patterns of reef damage are similarly ' patchy ' . From 1910 – 1999 , 170 cyclones ' paths came near or through the Great Barrier Reef . Most cyclones pass through the Great Barrier Reef within a day . In general , compact corals such as Porites fare better than branching corals under cyclone conditions . The major damage caused by Tropical Cyclone Larry was to underlying reef structures , and breakage and displacement of corals , which is overall consistent with previous tropical cyclone events . Severe tropical cyclones hit the Queensland coast every 200 to 300 years ; however , during the period 1969 – 1999 most cyclones in the region were very weak – category one or two on the Australian Bureau of Meteorology scale . 
 On 2 February 2011 , Severe Tropical Cyclone Yasi struck northern Queensland and caused severe damage to a stretch of hundreds of kilometres within the Great Barrier Reef . The corals could take a decade to recover fully . Cyclone Yasi had wind speeds of 290 kilometers per hour . 
 = = Other threats = = 
 On the second day of the 2013 round of the biennial training exercise ' Talisman Saber ' , in which 28 @,@ 000 US and Australian military personnel conduct joint activities over a three @-@ week period , four unarmed bombs were dropped into the Great Barrier Reef by two US AV @-@ 8B Harrier jets that were unable to land with the weight of the weapons . To minimize potential harm to the reef , the four bombs , weighing a total 1 @.@ 8 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 000 pounds ) , were dropped into more than 50 meters ( 164 ft ) of water away from the reef 's coral structures . The bomb drop was originally planned to occur at the Townshend Island bombing range , but after controllers reported that the area was not clear of hazards , the emergency jettison occurred . Australian senator Larissa Waters responded to the news by asking , " Have we gone completely mad ? Is this how we look after our World Heritage area now ? Letting a foreign power drop bombs on it ? " 
 = Winslow Ames House = 
 The Winslow Ames House is a prefabricated modular International Style house in New London , Connecticut , United States . It was designed by Robert W. McLaughlin , Jr. and was built in 1933 . Winslow Ames , a professor of art history at Connecticut College and the art director of the Lyman Allyn Museum , had the home built after attending the Century of Progress Exposition in Chicago . Constructed for $ 7 @,@ 500 , the prefabricated house is one of two surviving <unk> produced by McLaughlin 's company American Houses Inc . The modular house , comprising three rectangles and a flat roof , was constructed on a concrete slab with a welded steel framework . It was made with asbestos panels and features a core component that provides the heating and plumbing functions for the house . The other two modules feature two bedrooms and a one @-@ car garage . 
 Ames and his family resided in the house briefly , the Connecticut College acquired the house in 1949 and used it for faculty housing until 1986 . The house was in a state of disrepair by 1989 and was a hazard due to its construction with asbestos panels . It was slated to be demolished , but Ms. Hendrickson rallied supporter to the save the house after uncovering its history . A restoration and rehabilitation project was completed in 1994 and it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1995 . The other prefabricated house built by Ames , House at 130 Mohegan Avenue , was also added the National Register of Historic Places in 2009 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Winslow Ames House was unlike other homes of the 1930s , it is a modular home that was constructed on a concrete slab and constructed with a welded steel framework . The designer of the house was John B. McLaughlin Jr . , who co @-@ founded American Houses Inc. in 1932 . McLaughlin 's designs focused on inexpensive housing through mass production and new materials and technology . The International Style house was modular and intended to allow easy enlargement , dismantling and relocation of the structure if needed . The houses , termed " <unk> " , featured modular " <unk> " that contained heating and plumbing equipment . The use of steel in the prefabricated homes would later be limited by World War II , which made steel unavailable for civilian use . After the war , prefabricated homes were typically made of wood and offices were normally constructed of steel and concrete . 
 The house bears the name of Winslow Ames , a professor of art history at Connecticut College and the art director of the Lyman Allyn Museum . In 1933 , Ames decided to construct two houses on the museum @-@ owned property after seeing prefabricated homes at the Century of Progress Exposition in Chicago . Ames had a strong interest in the Modernism movement and believed such houses would become predominant . The Ames house cost $ 7 @,@ 500 , similar to other McLaughlin houses from 1933 and 1934 , which ranged from $ 3 @,@ 500 to $ 7 @,@ 500 each . Later , Ames and his family would briefly take up residence in the house . The other house , known as the " House at 130 Mohegan Avenue " would be added the National Register of Historic Places in 2009 . 
 The Winslow Ames house rests on a concrete foundation and has a welded steel skeleton . The walls were made of 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) white @-@ painted panels that were constructed of asbestos board over an insulating core . The two @-@ story house is composed of three rectangular modules , offset to create an irregular plan , with a flat roof structure . The largest block in the middle contains the service core with the kitchen and bathroom . The left block contains the main entry , stair hall and two bedrooms . The right block consists of the one @-@ car garage and its second story only covers its overlap with the middle block . 
 = = Use = = 
 The house was ready for occupancy in 1934 and was used by many tenants , but the Ames sold the house to the Connecticut College in 1949 . Sometime after its completion , Winslow Ames and his family lived in the house for a brief period . From 1949 to 1987 , the college used it for faculty housing . One of the tenets , Mary Kent , lived in the house with her husband and three children from 1958 through 1961 . Throughout its life the original furnace , kitchen cabinets , plumbing fixtures were replaced , but the core module has retained its purpose . The house fell into a state of disrepair , becoming an " eyesore " . By 1989 , the college was concerned with the asbestos in the building and obtained a permit to demolish the house ; the college intended to use the land for a boathouse . After its restoration was completed , the Connecticut College uses the house as an office and for meeting rooms . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 The house was saved through the efforts of Ms. Hendrickson , who uncovered the history surrounding the house and its designer . The house was a deemed a " rare survivor " because only one other <unk> remained in White Plains , New York . Hendrickson gathered supporters , including from the students and faculty of the college and New London Landmarks to save the house . The demolition was delayed and in May 1990 , the Connecticut Historical Commission gave the college $ 24 @,@ 000 . The college matched the funds , which were originally planned for its demolition . During the restoration , the asbestos board panels were covered over non @-@ asbestos panels that mimic the appearance of the original . A new roof was installed and the windows were replaced with vertical casement windows which were originally used . The interior and exterior of the house was coated with white paint , but the restoration did not revert the flooring to the original <unk> rectangles . The restoration project was completed in 1994 and it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1995 . 
 = Seth Kinman = 
 Seth Kinman ( September 29 , 1815 – February 24 , 1888 ) was an early settler of Humboldt County , California , a hunter based in Fort Humboldt , a famous chair maker , and a nationally recognized entertainer . He stood over 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) tall and was known for his hunting prowess and his brutality toward bears and Indians . Kinman claimed to have shot a total of over 800 grizzly bears , and , in a single month , over 50 elk . He was also a hotel keeper , barkeeper , and a musician who performed for President Lincoln on a fiddle made from the skull of a mule . 
 Known for his publicity seeking , Kinman appeared as a stereotypical mountain man dressed in buckskins on the U.S. east coast and selling cartes de <unk> of himself and his famous chairs . The chairs were made from <unk> and grizzly bear skins and given to U.S. Presidents . Presidents so honored include James Buchanan , Abraham Lincoln , Andrew Johnson , and Rutherford Hayes . He may have had a special relationship with President Lincoln , appearing in at least two of Lincoln 's funeral <unk> , and claiming to have witnessed Lincoln 's assassination . 
 His autobiography , dictated to a scribe in 1876 , was first published in 2010 and is noted for putting " the entertainment value of a story ahead of the strict facts . " His descriptions of events change with his retelling of them . Contemporary journalists and modern writers were clearly aware of the stories contained in the autobiography , " but each chooses which version to accept . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Seth Kinman 's father , James Kinman , ran a ferry across the West Branch Susquehanna River in central Pennsylvania , in an area then called Uniontown , now called Allenwood in Gregg Township , Union County . James also was a millwright and an inn @-@ keeper , whose forebears were Quakers from Bucks County , Pennsylvania . Seth 's mother , Eleanor Bower Kinman , was of German descent whose family lived in Reading , Pennsylvania . Seth was born in Uniontown in 1815 . While in Pennsylvania , he learned to read and write , " I could form good letters with a pen but I never learned to spell well . " In 1830 his father took the family and migrated to Tazewell County , Illinois . 
 In his autobiography , Seth stated that his father fought in the Blackhawk War in Illinois in 1832 . He also claimed that his father and Abraham Lincoln fought together in the war , became friends afterward , and that Seth met the future president during Lincoln 's circuit @-@ riding days in Illinois . At about the same time the <unk> acquired a rifle , known as " Old Cotton Bale , " that Seth kept throughout his life . The rifle had a 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) long barrel and " is supposed to have killed Gen 'l <unk> " at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815 . With some skepticism , Anspach relates a long history of the rifle , gleaned from an 1864 local newspaper story on Kinman , of a renegade Kentucky sniper shooting the British general while carrying on a conversation with American General Andrew Jackson . 
 Seth spent ten years working in his father 's mill in Illinois , sawing lumber and grinding grain . After his father 's death in 1839 he sold the mill and tried farming . He married Anna Maria Sharpless , of Catawissa , Pennsylvania , in 1840 and they had five children together : James ( 1842 ) , Carlin , who is sometimes called Calvin ( 1846 ) , Austin ( 1847 ) , Ellen ( 1849 ) , and Roderick ( 1851 ) . Anna Maria and two of their sons , James and Austin , died during the winter of 1852 @-@ 53 , while Seth was in California . 
 By 1848 Kinman was operating the Eagle Hotel in Pekin , Illinois , on the Illinois River . The hotel was known less for its comforts than for Kinman 's rendition of the fiddle tune Arkansas Traveler . 
 A traveler came off a steamboat one day and went to the Eagle Hotel . There had been a little western " scrimmage " at the " Eagle " the night before , and though things had not been put in order , the proprietor , Seth Kinman , was sitting in front of the door , playing his favorite tune , the " <unk> Traveler " , with the greatest self @-@ satisfaction . 
 The stranger , stopping , said to Seth : " Are you the proprietor here ? " Seth , without resting his bow , <unk> " Wall , I reckon I be , stranger " . " Do you keep tavern ? " " Of course I do : I keep tavern like h — l , " said Seth , fiddling away with all his might , " Just pile in : hang your freight on the floor , and make yourself at home . " " The boys , " continued Seth , " have been having a little fun , but if there is a whole table or plate in the house , I 'll get you some cold hash toward night . " The stranger didn 't like this peculiarly western reception , so took his departure , leaving Kinman still enjoying his violin . 
 = = Life in California = = 
 Kinman claimed to have migrated to California in 1849 during the great Gold Rush and worked as a gold miner in Pierson B. Reading 's party on the Trinity River near present day Douglas City . He then returned to Illinois for two years . In 1852 he travelled to California and explored the Humboldt Bay area , near present day Eureka , California . Humboldt Bay had been recently rediscovered by gold miners seeking a faster and cheaper route to transport supplies . An early settlement in the area was also named Uniontown , but is now known as Arcata . During this period , miners and their suppliers were often flush with gold , but had little to spend it on . 
 On Christmas , 1852 Kinman was hired to perform on fiddle at the then exorbitant amount of $ 50 , despite his lack of musical training . As described by a fellow ' 49er : 
 Seth Kinman , the noted hunter and antler chair @-@ maker , and myself were tendered fifty dollars each to preside as the orchestra for a Christmas ball at Uniontown in 1852 . Kinman 's repertoire consisted mainly of an alternation of the " <unk> Traveler " and " Hell on the Wabash " and mine was little more varied or pretentious . He responded . My conscience has not yet reached that level of elasticity . 
 Over the winter of 1852 @-@ 53 he lived in what is now Ferndale in the cabin of Stephen Shaw . His wife and two of their children died that winter , and he may have gone back to Illinois to bring back his mother and three remaining children by 1854 . In 1853 he started working as a hunter , feeding U.S. troops in Fort Humboldt . While at Fort Humboldt he met future president Ulysses S. Grant , and future General George Crook . According to tradition , about this time , he brought the first herd of cattle to Humboldt County . 
 Some events and their timing are unclear during this early period . Sources disagree on whether he brought his family to California from Illinois in 1852 or 1854 . <unk> dates Seth 's first return to Illinois starting in 1850 , with his return to California in August 1852 , his arrival in Humboldt County in February 1853 , another return to Illinois in September 1853 , and a trip back to California starting in May 1854 with his mother , two children , and a herd of cattle . Thus , in the course of the six years 1849 @-@ 1854 , he is believed to have crossed the Great Plains , Rocky Mountains , and the Sierra Nevada Mountains five times , travelling mostly on foot . 
 Kinman lived in several places in the county , including houses near Fern Cottage and a dairy farm on Bear River Ridge . He bought 80 acres ( 320 @,@ 000 m2 ) of farm or ranch land 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of the future Table Bluff Lighthouse in October 1858 , and about 10 mi ( 16 km ) south of Fort Humboldt . This was the first purchase of land in the Humboldt Land District , which was established by an Act of Congress in March 1858 . He later built a hotel and bar on the site . 
 Kinman made his name first as a hunter , especially as a hunter of grizzly bears . California was noted for its large population of grizzlies . Seth 's son Carlin claimed that they once saw 40 grizzlies at one time . But by 1868 , the last grizzly in Humboldt County had been killed . While Kinman was on his way to deliver one of the presidential chairs , he met Methodist bishop and writer Oscar Penn Fitzgerald on a California steamboat . Fitzgerald recorded his impressions in the sketch The Ethics of Grizzly Hunting . He presented Kinman as a drunkard who cruelly abused Indians and grizzly bears . 
 His countenance was expressive of a mixture of brutality , cunning , and good humor . He was a thorough animal . Wild frontier life had not sublimated this old sinner in the way pictured by writers who romance about such things at a distance . 
 Kinman 's eyes made a special impression on Fitzgerald . Decades later he compared Kinman 's eyes to those of the California bandit Tiburcio Vásquez , " His eyes were nature 's special label of one of her <unk> creations . Only in two other human beings have I ever seen such eyes as those .... It was the eye of a wild beast , the baleful glitter you have seen in the eyes of snakes , panthers , <unk> , or other creatures of the reptile or feline kind . " 
 During a gale on the night of January 5 – 6 , 1860 , Kinman was alerted by distress signals from the Northerner which had been breached by a submerged rock . Kinman tethered himself to the shore and waded into the surf to rescue passengers . In all , 70 people were saved by various means and 38 people perished . He was hailed as a hero and awarded a Bible and free life @-@ time passage on the Pacific Mail Steamship Company 's ships . 
 = = = Relations with Native Americans = = = 
 Native Americans in northern California suffered greatly at the hands of European @-@ Americans in the last half of the 19th century , and their population decline is often characterized as genocide . The Wiyot people , who lived around Humboldt Bay , were particularly hard hit . Their population declined from about 1 @,@ 500 @-@ 2 @,@ 000 in 1850 to about 200 in 1860 . 
 Kinman 's brutality was noted by James R. Duff , a fellow ' 49er , who described him as " an avowed enemy of the red man , ... ( who ) shot an Indian on sight . " <unk> states that " Seth always took an Indian along on a hunt - partly to carry the game , but primarily to serve as bear bait , " and concludes " sometimes he regarded them ( Indians ) as human beings ... other times , only as predatory animals to shoot at . " Kinman himself claimed to be an official Indian agent , though there is little evidence that he actually served in the position . He collected " Indian artifacts " including scalps , which he claimed to have taken himself . 
 Kinman was involved with the Wiyot people who lived on Table Bluff , near his farm . The Wiyot continue to live on Table Bluff on a small <unk> or reservation . The key event in Wiyot history was the February 25 – 26 , 1860 Wiyot Massacre on Indian Island , when over one hundred Wiyot were murdered in their sleep . At the same time there were massacres of the Wiyot at other sites , possibly including Table Bluff . Kinman has not been specifically identified as one of the murderers . Nevertheless , in May 1860 he was elected to represent Bear River at a county @-@ wide meeting ostensibly called to discuss ways to protect white settlers from the Indians . In 1864 he scouted for Captain William Hull 's California Volunteers , which according to Kinman , " slaughtered and captured Indians , and at one time they took as many as 160 captives to Fort Humboldt . " 
 = = = Life as an entertainer = = = 
 While delivering an elkhorn chair to President Buchanan in 1857 , Kinman said , " l awoke one fine morning and found myself famous . " He made use of this fame starting in the summer of 1861 , together with ventriloquist and magician J. G. Kenyon , by opening an exhibit , first in Eureka and then in San Francisco in August of that same year . Kinman displayed his " curiosities " including an elkhorn chair , mounted grizzly bears , several fiddles , and scalps , and gave a lecture . 
 How they shouted and yelled when I related some of my old ' bar ' stories and hair @-@ breadth escapes , and played on that fiddle made out of the skull bones . That got them ! I would wind up on the " Arkansas Traveler " and their enthusiasm wound up to the highest pitch . Before I fetched my ' bar ' , I would horrify them by telling them how the ' bar ' tore Indian children to pieces , and how I finally trapped the ' bar ' with a young dead Indian . Then the ' bar ' was led out by a chain , and he would dance before he unbuttoned himself and out stepped a man . Then I had to explain about the ' bar ' skin . Then I told the audience how I sawed off those Indian scalps the ladies looked horrified and aghast . Then I would tell about the Indian way of life . I would finish up by describing my elkhorn chair and how I had constructed it . 
 They then toured gold mining camps and the San Francisco Bay area as entertainers . Later he opened a traveling “ museums of curiosities ” in Eureka , San Francisco , Sacramento and Los Angeles . 
 During his trip to the East Coast in 1864 @-@ 1866 , Kinman exhibited his curiosities including his chairs , primarily in Pennsylvania and Illinois . He took a ten @-@ year @-@ old Native American boy , named Burtch or <unk> , with him on this trip , but Burtch died in December , 1864 . Kinman said that he took the boy on the trip because he had killed both of Burtch 's parents . 
 Kinman may have also displayed his chairs at the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition in 1876 . As late as 1885 , Kinman opened a museum in Los Angeles with his sons Carlin and Roderick . 
 = = Presidential chairs = = 
 Kinman first used the large number of <unk> shed near his farm every year to create a fence . With the help of George Hill , about 1856 he created his first elkhorn chair , which he traded to Dr. Josiah Simpson of Fort Humboldt for a telescope . The construction of an elkhorn chair included using matching horns to make the front legs and arms of the chair . These horns interlocked with another matching pair , which formed the rear legs and the back of the chair . An elk @-@ hide seat was added , along with actual elk feet as the feet of the chair , and the horns were connected beneath the seat . 
 Inspired by the 1856 election of James Buchanan , a fellow Pennsylvanian , to the presidency , Kinman built his first presidential elkhorn chair and brought it to Washington . 
 I kill deer and elk meat up in Humboldt County . My range is from Bear Valley into Oregon . This winter I killed considerable meat so I thought I would take it easy and set about to make this cheer with a view of sending it on to Washington for Old Buck . After I got it finished , though , the boys up in our parts thought it enough to travel on ; so I thought I would try and go on with it to Washington myself , leaving my mother and four children behind , and started with nothing but my rifle and powder horn . Nobody has yet <unk> in this cheer , and never shall till after the President . 
 He arranged free passage on the ship Golden Age to Panama , then to New York , and finally to Washington . With some help from Peter Donahue and <unk> <unk> , on May 26 , 1857 , after an introduction from the Commissioner of Indian Affairs James W. Denver , Kinman presented the chair to Buchanan . The President was so pleased by the present that he bought Kinman a rifle and two pistols in return . 
 In 1861 he advertised that he had made a chair that he would present to Napoleon III . Later , because of French involvement in Mexico , he abandoned the idea . Kinman took two chairs on his 1864 trip to the East Coast for use in exhibitions . 
 Kinman 's presentation of an elkhorn chair to President Abraham Lincoln at 10 a.m. on Saturday , November 26 , 1864 was recorded by artist Alfred Waud , the only known picture of Lincoln accepting a gift . The drawing shows Lincoln examining Kinman 's rifle , which he called " Ol ' <unk> . " Kinman also presented a fiddle made from the skull and a rib of his favorite mule and played the instrument . 
 Much to the amusement of Lincoln and other spectators , he played ' Essence of Old Virginia ' and ' John Brown ' on the bones of the mule . Lincoln said that if he could play the fiddle he would ask him for it , but since he could not , the fiddle would be better off in Mr. Kinman 's hands . 
 Within three weeks , Lincoln stated that he would prefer to eat Kinman 's chair , antlers and all , than to appoint a certain office @-@ seeker . 
 The following April , Kinman marched in President Lincoln 's funeral cortege in Washington . 
 Kinman was allegedly in Ford 's Theater the night of the assassination and witnessed the murder . He escorted Lincoln 's body on its way to burial as far as Columbus , Ohio . On April 26 , 1865 , the New York Times described Kinman in the funeral cortege in New York City : " Much attention was attracted to Mr. Kinman , who walked in a full hunting suit of buckskin and fur , rifle on shoulder . Mr. Kinman , it will be remembered , presented to Mr. Lincoln some time ago a chair made of California elk @-@ horn , and continuing his acquaintance with him , it is said , enjoyed quite a long conversation with him the very day before the murder . " 
 During his stays on the East Coast , many cartes de <unk> photographs of Kinman and his chairs were taken by Mathew Brady . Kinman claimed to have paid Brady $ 2 @,@ 100 in one three @-@ month period for photos at 8 cents apiece , which calculates to an unlikely amount of over 26 @,@ 000 photographs . Kinman sold these photographs , among other places , in the U.S. Capitol . He also toured the country , performing in his buckskins as a frontier story teller and fiddle player . 
 Kinman 's tour de force in presidential chairs was presented to President Andrew Johnson on September 8 , 1865 . 
 This was intended to surpass all his previous efforts , and was made from two grizzly bears captured by Seth . The four legs and claws were those of a huge grizzly and the back and sides ornamented with immense claws . The seat was soft and exceedingly comfortable , but the great feature of the chair was that , by touching a cord , the head of the monster grizzly bear with jaws extended , would dart out in front from under the seat , snapping and gnashing its teeth as natural as life . 
 Johnson kept the chair in his White House library , the Yellow Oval Room . 
 On September 18 , 1876 , Kinman presented an elkhorn chair to Governor Rutherford Hayes of Ohio , who was soon to become the President of the United States . The chair is now displayed in the Rutherford B. Hayes Presidential Center in Fremont , Ohio . He later gave a chair constructed of <unk> and other bear body parts to Hayes 's vice @-@ president William A. Wheeler . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1876 , Kinman dictated his memoirs , but they were not published until 2010 . He also kept an extensive scrapbook of newspaper articles . About 1930 , a one @-@ time neighbor of Kinman , George Richmond , copied the memoirs and the scrapbook by hand . The original manuscript and scrapbook were then sent to a potential publisher or agent , and lost after his death . The published version is from Richmond 's copy . Richmond also recalled many of Kinman 's stories and collected others from Kinman 's family and friends , then retold these stories in a book now published as I 'm a Gonna Tell Ya a Yarn . 
 In his later years , Kinman lived in Table Bluff , California with his family , where he owned a hotel and bar . In 1886 , Kinman was preparing to send chairs to President Grover Cleveland and former presidential candidate General Winfield Scott Hancock . He died in 1888 after accidentally shooting himself in the leg . He was interred at Table Bluff Cemetery in Loleta , California , in his buckskin clothing . 
 Mrs. R.F. Herrick bought Kinman 's traveling museum collection of 186 items , including at least two of his famous chairs , and displayed them in San Francisco in 1893 . She then took the collection to Chicago to display them at the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition , where she reportedly sold the individual items . The Clarke Historical Museum in Eureka displays a suit of his buckskins , complete with beaded moccasins , as well as a wooden chest he owned . The Ferndale Museum displays several Kinman items , including another of his buckskin suits . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Veerapandiya Kattabomman ( film ) = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman ( English : Kattabomman , the Brave Warrior ) is a 1959 Indian Tamil @-@ language biographical film directed by B. R. Panthulu . The film 's screenplay was written by Ma . Po . Sivagnanam while its story and dialogue were written by Sakthi T. K. Krishnasamy . The film features Sivaji Ganesan , Gemini Ganesan , Padmini , S. Varalakshmi , and Ragini in the lead roles , with V. K. Ramasamy and Javar Seetharaman in pivotal supporting parts . 
 Produced and distributed by Panthulu under his banner , Padmini Pictures , Veerapandiya Kattabomman is loosely based on the story of the 18th century South Indian chieftain of the same name , who rose in rebellion against the East India Company . The film was an adaptation of the play Kattabomman , performed by Sivaji Ganesan 's troupe . Most of the film was shot in Jaipur . Veerapandiya Kattabomman is notable for being the first Tamil film to be shot in Technicolor . 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman 's premiere was held in London on 10 May 1959 , and it was released in Tamil Nadu six days later . It became a critical and commercial success and had a theatrical run of 175 days . It was dubbed and released in Telugu as Veerapandiya <unk> in 1959 and in Hindi as Amar Shaheed in 1960 . In addition to winning the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil under the " Certificate of Merit " section , it was also the first Tamil film to receive international awards for Best Film , Best Actor , and Best Music Director at the 1960 Afro @-@ Asian Film Festival in Cairo . A digitally restored version of the film was released on 21 August 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman ( Sivaji Ganesan ) , the king of Panchalankurichi , is a brave fighter and a devotee of his family deity , Lord Murugan of Tiruchendur . On receiving the news of a robbery in his territory , Kattabomman and his retinue set out incognito to capture the robbers . When the robbers are captured , they confess that they had been hired by the British to create unrest in Kattabomman 's domain . They also tell him that the British had enticed the neighbouring chieftain , Ettappan ( V. K. Ramasamy ) , to help them in their endeavour to annexe Panchalankurichi . Ettappan was promised that an additional two villages would be added to his land by the British , as a price for his betrayal . Ettappan , in disguise , goes to Kattabomman 's court and tries to frighten him by extolling the omnipotence of the British . Kattabomman is indignant and tears off Ettappan 's fake beard , but spares him because he had come to his court as an ambassador . 
 At <unk> , a village near Panchalankurichi , lives Vellaiyammal ( Padmini ) , who vows to marry the man who tames her pet bull . She takes her bull to participate in a Jallikattu game held at Panchalankurichi under Kattabomman 's patronage . All those who attempt to tame the bull fail . At Kattabomman 's call , his Commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Vellaiyathevan ( Gemini Ganesan ) , subdues the bull and wins Vellaiyammal 's love . Later , Kattabomman comes to know of their love and gets them married . 
 Kattabomman receives a message from Lord W. C. Jackson ( C. R. Parthiban ) , collector of Tirunelveli , who demands a meeting with Kattabomman at Ramanathapuram to discuss the payment of Kattabomman 's tribute . Captain Davison ( S. A. Kannan ) , Kattabomman 's British friend , advises him to go and see Jackson . Jackson , finding that Kattabomman has come to see him with his troops , demands to meet him alone . At the meeting , Jackson insults him and orders his arrest . Though surrounded by the British troops , Kattabomman fights his way out , but during his escape his Minister , Thanapathi Sivasubramaniam Pillai ( M. R. Santhanam ) , is captured by the British . 
 Some time later , Pillai is released . He brings news that Jackson has been transferred back to England on Davison 's recommendation . At Kattabomman 's court , a British messenger sent by Colonel <unk> , Tirunelveli 's new collector , reports that Pillai and his men have looted their granaries and killed their men at <unk> . Pillai justifies his act , saying that he instructed his men to do it due to the famine conditions prevalent in their kingdom . Ashamed of Pillai 's act , Kattabomman accuses him of injustice . Pillai apologises and offers himself as a prisoner to the British , but Kattabomman refuses to hand Pillai over ; instead he offers money to the British as compensation for the looted rice . <unk> does not agree and , with Major Bannerman 's ( Javar Seetharaman ) and Ettappan 's help , instigates the neighbouring rulers to attack Kattabomman . Bannerman is placed in charge of the British troops . He and Ettappan plan to attack Panchalankurichi when the people are away attending a festival in Tiruchendur . Kattabomman 's spy <unk> ( A. Karunanidhi ) , overhears this and informs Kattabomman , who prepares for battle . 
 On the day of the battle , Vellaiyammal pleads Vellaiyathevan not to go because the previous night she had a nightmare , which was full of evil omens . Ignoring her entreaties , Vellaiyathevan sets out , and is killed in the ensuing battle . Vellaiyammal , on learning of his death , kills the man who killed him , avenging her husband 's death . She finds Vellaiyathevan 's corpse and , out of grief , falls dead on it . Bannerman 's troops attack Panchalankurichi with heavy artillery and Kattabomman 's army suffers badly . Kattabomman is wounded in the neck , but is saved by his brother , Oomaithurai ( O. A. K. Thevar ) . Sensing that the fort cannot survive another cannon barrage , Kattabomman and Oomaithurai flee to the adjoining kingdom of Kovilpatti . Pillai , disguising himself as Kattabomman , misleads the British soldiers who are on the trail of Kattabomman . From Kovilpatti , Kattabomman and Oomaithurai then flee to Pudukkottai . <unk> , the king of Pudukkottai , is ordered by the British to capture Kattabomman and Oomaithurai . In fear of the British , <unk> captures the two and hands them over . While Oomaithurai is jailed , Kattabomman faces a summary trial by the British and is hanged from a Tamarind tree at Kayatharu . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Lead actors 
 Sivaji Ganesan as Veerapandiya Kattabomman 
 Gemini Ganesan as Vellaiyathevan 
 Padmini as Vellaiyammal 
 S. Varalakshmi as <unk> 
 Ragini as <unk> 
 Supporting actors 
 V. K. Ramasamy as Ettappan 
 Javar Seetharaman as Major Bannerman 
 O. A. K. Thevar as Oomaithurai 
 M. R. Santhanam as Thanapathi Sivasubramaniam Pillai 
 A. Karunanidhi as <unk> 
 S. A. Kannan as Captain Davison 
 C. R. Parthiban as Jackson Durai ( Lord W. C. Jackson ) 
 Baby Kanchana as Meena 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The idea to make a film adaptation on the life of Veerapandiya Kattabomman occurred to many producers in the late 1940s , just after India 's freedom from the British Raj . In 1947 , soon after the British left India , a production company announced its intention to produce <unk> ( named after the rebel 's real name ) , a " mammoth production " which was to star P. U. <unk> ; this production did not materialise . Another attempt was initiated in 1953 by producer S. S. Vasan . A promotional poster announcing the project was released in Ananda Vikatan on 5 November 1953 . On 8 November 1953 , a notice was issued at Vasan 's production company , Gemini Studios , through Ananda Vikatan stating that anyone who had any useful information regarding Kattabomman and his exploits can send them to the studios ' storyboard department . 
 The concept of Veerapandiya Kattabomman began when Sivaji Ganesan and Sakthi T. K. Krishnasamy were travelling through Kayatharu , where Kattabomman was hanged . While there , Ganesan expressed a desire of doing a play based on Kattabomman 's life , to which Krishnasamy immediately agreed , and started to write the play . Coincidentally , Ganesan 's first exposure to the field of acting was when he saw a street play on Kattabomman ’ s life titled <unk> <unk> . Krishnasamy completed writing the script for the play in a month 's time . The play was launched in Salem on 29 August 1957 . Ganesan had invested close to ₹ 50 @,@ 000 for the play 's sets and costumes . 
 On seeing the play , B. R. Panthulu decided to adapt it into a feature film and hired Krishnasamy to write the screenplay . G. <unk> , who was the play 's set designer , was selected to do the same for the film . For the purpose of making the popular play into a film , a " History @-@ Film Format Research Group " was formed under the leadership of Ma . Po . Sivagnanam , with Krishnasamy , Panthulu , Ganesan , P. A. Kumar , K. <unk> , and S. Krishnaswamy as members . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The Singapore @-@ based Indian Movie News stated in 1957 that when Ganesan heard of Vasan 's attempt to make a film adaptation on Kattabomman , he personally requested Vasan to abandon the project , adding that Vasan even lent Ganesan important research materials on Kattabomman . Film historian Randor Guy contradicted this in his 1997 book Starlight , Starbright : The Early Tamil Cinema by stating that writers like Kothamangalam Subbu and Veppathur Kittoo were employed by Vasan to conduct an extensive research on Kattabomman 's life , but the only eligible choice to play Kattabomman was Ganesan , who by then had become popular after Parasakthi ( 1952 ) . Guy noted that Ganesan was hesitant to play the role under Vasan 's direction as he was earlier rejected by Vasan for the role of a bodyguard in Chandralekha ( 1948 ) , which led to Vasan dropping the project . But later on , Ganesan acted in <unk> Thirai ( 1960 ) , which was produced and directed by Vasan , and Motor Sundaram Pillai ( 1966 ) , which was produced by Vasan . 
 Ganesan originally offered the role of Vellaiyathevan to S. S. Rajendran , who declined it due to his commitment to the film Sivagangai Seemai ( 1959 ) . He later requested actress Savitri to ask her husband Gemini Ganesan to play the role , which she agreed to do despite being pregnant at that time . Gemini Ganesan was initially reluctant to accept the role , but eventually agreed . Padmini , O. A. K. Thevar , and V. K. Ramasamy were chosen to play Vellaiyammal , Oomaithurai and Ettappan respectively . S. Varalakshmi played Kattabomman 's wife , <unk> , and also worked as a playback singer . C. R. Parthiban played the role of Lord W. C. Jackson , and M. R. Santhanam played the minister , Thanapathi Sivasubramaniam Pillai . Kattabomman 's daughter in the film , Meena , was a fictional character created by Krishnasamy . The character was based on Krishnasamy 's own daughter , <unk> , who died when she was five years old . Krishnasamy initially refused to include the scene involving Meena 's death as it reminded him of his daughter , but finally did so reluctantly . The character was played by Baby Kanchana . 
 Principal photography began in October 1957 with a puja . Most of the film 's shooting took place at Jaipur . With help from <unk> , the man in charge of the cavalry division , the production unit of Veerapandiya Kattabomman managed to hire junior artistes to portray the cavalry soldiers for shooting the war scenes . When the film was being shot at Bharani Studios in 1958 , Adoor Gopalakrishnan , who witnessed the shooting that afternoon , recalled that after every take , the actors would rush out due to the intense heat on the set . He also stated , " The speed of the film was so low those days that one needed many , many lights for correct exposure . " Veerapandiya Kattabomman is notable for being the first Tamil film to be shot in Technicolor . Panthulu adopted American director Cecil B. DeMille 's tactic of personally introducing the film on camera . The final length of the film was 5 @,@ 512 metres ( 18 @,@ 084 ft ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman 's original soundtrack album was composed by G. Ramanathan , with lyrics by Ku . Ma . Balasubramaniam . The soundtrack album was released on 1 December 1959 under the label of Saregama . The album became a major breakthrough for P. B. Srinivas , then a struggling playback singer . He was recruited by Ramanathan to sing the track " <unk> <unk> <unk> " , which was picturised on Gemini Ganesan and Padmini , with P. Susheela . The song " Pogaathe Pogaathe " is based on the <unk> raga , " Manam <unk> " is based on the <unk> raga , and " Singara Kanne " is based on the <unk> raga . Theatre actor K. B. <unk> was the violinist for the songs . A remix version of " <unk> <unk> <unk> " was done by Hiphop <unk> for the film , <unk> ( 2015 ) . 
 According to S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu , " Manam <unk> " and " Singara Kanne " , both of which were sung by Varalakshmi , " remained all time favourites . " On the song , " Pogaathe Pogaathe " , singer Charulatha Mani said that it was " a meandering , melancholic <unk> . " She also labelled <unk> 's rendition of the song as " expressive " . Film critic Baradwaj Rangan of The Hindu , in his review of the film 's digital re @-@ release , said that Ramanathan 's music " is still superb , spanning the range from folksy to light to classical " . 
 Tracklist 
 All lyrics written by Ku . Ma . Balasubramaniam . 
 = = Release = = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman 's premiere was held in London on 10 May 1959 , and it was released in Tamil Nadu on 16 May 1959 . The film was a commercial success and achieved cult status in Tamil cinema , becoming a silver jubilee film . The film was dubbed and released in Telugu and Hindi as Veerapandiya <unk> in 1959 , and Amar Shaheed in 1960 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman received positive reviews upon release . Ananda Vikatan , in its original review dated 24 May 1959 , wrote , " [ Veerapandiya ] Kattabomman will not leave the hearts of the people who have seen it ... Sivaji Ganesan has acted so well . This film adds pride to every person born as a Tamilian " . Baradwaj Rangan praised Ganesan 's performance , stating that " To watch Veerapandiya Kattabomman is to marvel at the shades and nuances an actor can infuse into oratory . " India Today stated in 2001 , " One doesn 't have to be well @-@ versed in Tamil to feel the fire in Veerapandiya Kattabomman . " Sri Lankan Canadian journalist D. B. S. Jeyaraj stated , " The first Tamil film which impacted on me greatly during childhood was [ Veerapandiya Kattabomman ] ... The magic of the movie to me at that time was the portrayal of Kattabomman by the doyen of Tamil actors , Sivaji Ganesan . The highlight of that performance was the powerful delivery of fiery dialogue by the film hero Kattabomman played by Sivaji . " N <unk> Moorthy wrote for Rediff.com in 2001 , " [ Ganesan 's ] portrayal of Lord Shiva in [ Thiruvilaiyadal ] and of freedom @-@ fighters <unk> Kattabomman and <unk> Thamizhan V O Chidambaram have become symbolic of the very characters in the average Tamil mind across the world . " 
 Guy labelled Ganesan 's performance as " breathtaking " . Janani Karthik of The Times of India wrote , " Watch this [ film ] for the legendary actor 's performance , something that old @-@ timers remember even today " . Another review from the same newspaper stated , " This digitally restored version is far from perfect — there are instances when in the same scene , the colours seem to have been leached of the frames . The sound , too , feels a bit contemporary . And the casting of Indian actors to play the British characters feels dated and even amusing . But set these niggles aside and the film still retains its dramatic force . " L. K. Advani , currently one of the senior leaders of the Bharatiya Janata Party , said , " I have seen the Tamil movie of <unk> Kattabomman [ sic ] , acted by [ Sivaji ] Ganesan , many times . It is fresh in my memory . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Sivaji Ganesan 's performance as Kattabomman earned him an international award as the Best Actor at the 1960 Afro @-@ Asian Film Festival , held from 29 February to 11 March . The award was presented to him by Gamal Abdel Nasser , then the President of Egypt . It was Ganesan 's first award in his film career . It also made him the first Indian actor to receive an international award . On hearing of Ganesan 's return from Cairo after winning the Afro @-@ Asian Film Festival award for the Best Actor category in 1960 , fellow actor M. G. Ramachandran , who also served as the president of the South Indian Actors Guild organised a huge reception in Chennai to welcome him . 
 In his autobiography , Ganesan recalled that during the Afro @-@ Asian film festival , " I was called on stage and I went up a diminutive , five foot nothing , looking boyish with my build , whereas they had expected me to be a colossus , on seeing [ Veerapandiya ] Kattabomman , at least seven or eight feet tall ! Irrespective of this they gave me a standing ovation for five minutes . " 
 = = Historical inaccuracies = = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman has often been criticised because of its historical inaccuracies . Randor Guy stated in 2015 that a Tamil weekly even went to the extent of saying , " [ ... ] a new face called Kattabomman acted brilliantly as Sivaji Ganesan ! ” Poet Kannadasan said , " Kattabomman was not a real freedom fighter ; he was a Telugu and a robber . " He also stated that the <unk> <unk> were the real freedom fighters and wrote a script about them , which was adapted into the film , Sivagangai Seemai . The film was released in the same month as Veerapandiya Kattabomman , but failed at the box office . Kannadasan 's statement was supported by writer Lena <unk> , who denounced Kattabomman 's glorification . 
 In Starlight , Starbright : The Early Tamil Cinema , Guy noted that according to East India Company records , Kattabomman was of Telugu ancestry , and that he was a strong and silent man , not of dash and daring as depicted in the film . Guy also noted that Ganesan portrayed Kattabomman as a " larger @-@ than @-@ life @-@ character , haranguing audiences in a high @-@ flown Tamil replete with literary flourishes " , as opposed to the real Kattabomman , who was not fluent in Tamil . Encyclopedia of Indian Cinema by Ashish Rajadhyaksha and Paul Willemen states , " A love interest has been added as well " , implying that the character of Vellaiyammal was fictional . Film historian S. Krishnaswamy , writing for The Hindu in 2001 , noted that the film was " historically far from accurate " and that it was " more like a costume drama or a mythological . " 
 In their 2010 book , Cinemas of South India : Culture , Resistance , Ideology , Sowmya Dechamma C. C. and <unk> Sathya Prakash state that Kattabomman 's Telugu identity is used in such a way that " while National historiography tries to elevate him , some versions of Tamil history seem to downgrade him . " In 2011 , S. Theodore Baskaran said , " Tamil films have scant regard for history . Almost always , they confuse between history and folklore , " and added , " Kattabomman was not even a king . His arsenal had just about three to four guns . " In 2014 , Ramu Manivannan , the <unk> of politics and public administration at University of Madras , told The Times of India , " The popular images of [ historical ] characters have been constructed from oral descriptions and accounts . In some cases , the popular image overtakes the historical one as in the case of Sivaji Ganesan 's portrayal of Kattabomman on the screen " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Veerapandiya Kattabomman took Ganesan 's career to a higher level , so much so that Tamil people identified Kattabomman with him . The film also became a trendsetter for presenting freedom fighters in a heroic manner , thus creating a new perception of the value of independence . The film 's success encouraged many in Tamil cinema to make films based on freedom fighters and historical figures , notable of which include <unk> Thamizhan ( 1961 ) and Bharathi ( 2000 ) . Veerapandiya Kattabomman was re @-@ released in 1984 during Ramachandran 's tenure as Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu . The film was granted tax exemption by the state government and was commercially successful at that time as well . 
 In 1970 , eleven years after the film 's release , Ganesan established a statue of Kattabomman at Kayatharu , where the rebel was hanged . A special postal cover designed by film historian and actor Mohan V. Raman was released on 16 May 2009 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the film 's release . The cover was jointly released by the Sivaji – Prabhu Charities trust and the Indo @-@ Russian Cultural and Friendship Society . 
 A. V. Ashok wrote for The Hindu , " It is no exaggeration to say that Sivaji 's heroic outpouring as Veerapandiya Kattabomman is an integral part of the Tamil cultural psyche . " Actor Sivakumar stated , " You can ’ t reproduce movies like Parasakthi , Pasamalar , Devadas , Veerapandiya Kattabomman or Ratha Kanneer [ ... ] By remaking such films , you are lowering yourself , while it enhances the original artists ’ image . " Suhasini Maniratnam listed Veerapandiya Kattabomman alongside <unk> Thamizhan , Aayirathil Oruvan ( 1965 ) and Iruvar ( 1997 ) , as her favourite period films in Tamil . The Times of India included Veerapandiya Kattabomman in its list of " Top 5 Sivaji Ganesan films on his birthday " . An elephant that Ganesan presented to the <unk> Mariamman temple in 1960 was named " Vellaiyammal " , after the character from the film . It was later donated to the Brihadeeswarar Temple in 1980 . 
 In Outlook 's issue dated 20 October 2008 , Ganesan 's line , " Vari , <unk> , <unk> ... <unk> <unk> vari ... <unk> <unk> vari . Vaanam <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> vari .... " , ( Roughly translated in English as " Tributes , Tax , Loan , Interest . The rains pour from the sky , the land blossoms , why should I offer you money ? " ) which he speaks in the scene featuring him and C. R. Parthiban , was ranked at number 8 in the magazine 's list of the " 13 cheesiest , <unk> lines in Indian cinema " . Dhananjayan noted the line also became a text book example of dialogue delivery for aspiring actors . 
 In April 2012 , Rediff included the film in its list " The A to Z of Tamil Cinema " . In a January 2015 interview with The Times of India , playwright Y. G. Mahendra said , " most character artists today lack variety [ ... ] Show me one actor in India currently who can do a Kattabomman , a VOC , a Vietnam Veedu , a Galatta Kalyanam and a Thiruvilayadal . " Actor Rana Daggubati , in an interview with Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu , said that Ganesan 's performances as Kattabomman and Karna ( in the 1964 film Karnan ) served as inspirations for his role in Baahubali ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Re @-@ release = = 
 In 2012 , Raj Television Network announced that they would re @-@ release Veerapandiya Kattabomman in 3D in early 2013 , but that did not materialise . However , in March 2015 , Raj Television Network announced that they would release a digital 5 @.@ 1 surround sound version of the film in collaboration with Sai Ganesh Films , on an unspecified date in April , though it was eventually released on 21 August 2015 . The trailer of the digitised version was released on 20 March 2015 . Murali B. V. , coordinator of the production company , Sai Ganesh Films , which helped in the restoration and digitisation of the film 's original prints , told The New Indian Express that nine months were taken to clean the film prints and completely restore them for digitisation from the original 35 mm film prints with mono sound . The film collected ₹ 553 @,@ 000 in its opening weekend from 39 shows in Chennai . 
 = German submarine U @-@ 41 ( 1939 ) = 
 The German submarine U @-@ 41 was a Type IXA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine that operated during World War II . She conducted three war patrols during her short career , two as part of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla and one as part of the 2nd flotilla . U @-@ 41 also sank five enemy vessels for a total of 22 @,@ 815 gross register tons ( GRT ) ; captured two more for a total of 2 @,@ 073 GRT and damaged one other of 8 @,@ 096 GRT . 
 On 5 February 1940 , U @-@ 41 was hit by depth charges from the British A class destroyer HMS Antelope after sinking two enemy merchant vessels and was sunk off the south coast of Ireland . All 49 of her crew members were lost with the boat . 
 = = Construction = = 
 U @-@ 41 was ordered by the Kriegsmarine on 21 November 1936 ( as part of Plan Z and in violation of the Treaty of Versailles ) . She was laid down on 27 November 1937 by AG Weser , Bremen as yard number 946 . She was launched on 28 January 1939 and commissioned on 22 April of that same year under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Gustav @-@ Adolf Mugler . 
 = = Design = = 
 As one of the eight original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA , U @-@ 41 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 032 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 016 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 153 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 135 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 51 m ( 21 ft 4 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 40 m ( 30 ft 10 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 7 knots ( 14 @.@ 3 km / h ; 8 @.@ 9 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 65 – 78 nautical miles ( 120 – 144 km ; 75 – 90 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 10 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 400 km ; 12 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 41 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 During her service in the Kriegsmarine , U @-@ 41 sank five commercial ships for 22 @,@ 815 gross register tons ( GRT ) ; damaged one commercial vessel of 8 @,@ 096 GRT and captured two ships totalling 2 @,@ 073 GRT . 
 = = = 1st Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 41 left Wilhelmshaven on 19 August 1939 , before World War II began . Her first patrol involved traveling as far south as Portugal after entering the North Sea and circumnavigating the British Isles . During this patrol , two ships were captured : the Finnish Vega , of 974 tons , and the 1 @,@ 099 @-@ ton Suomen <unk> . U @-@ 41 then returned to Wilhelmshaven , arriving on 17 September 1939 . 
 = = = 2nd Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 41 left Wilhelmshaven with Mugler in command once again on 7 November 1939 . On 12 November , both the 275 ton British vessel Cresswell and the 11 @,@ 019 ton Norwegian ship Arne <unk> were sunk by torpedoes . The 1 @,@ 351 @-@ ton British merchant vessel <unk> went to the bottom on the 19th . The last enemy vessel to be sunk by U @-@ 41 was the French vessel Les Barges II . She displaced a total of 296 tons and was sunk by a single torpedo on 21 November . The U @-@ boat then returned to port on 7 December 1939 . 
 = = = 3rd Patrol = = = 
 U @-@ 41 left the port of Helgoland on 27 January 1940 with Mugler still in command . During her final patrol , one enemy ship was sunk and one was damaged ; both of these attacks took place on 5 February . The first ship that was hit was the 8 @,@ 096 @-@ ton Dutch vessel Ceronia . The Ceronia was damaged and the 9 @,@ 874 @-@ ton British ship <unk> was sunk . Nevertheless U @-@ 41 did not return to her home port , she was sunk on the same day . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the attacks on the Dutch Ceronia and the British <unk> on 5 February 1940 , U @-@ 41 was attacked by the British A class destroyer HMS Antelope with depth charges . She was hit and sunk off the south coast of Ireland . All 49 of her crew members were lost with the boat during the attack . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = Andreas Tegström = 
 Andreas Tegström ( born 18 January 1979 ) is a former Swedish footballer who played as a striker . He is most noted for playing with Norwegian Tippeligaen clubs Sandefjord and Fredrikstad . 
 Tegström wanted to become a professional ice hockey player while growing up , but he quit playing ice hockey and played football as an amateur for <unk> IF and Husqvarna FF . He was brought to Sandefjord in 2005 and scored 14 goals in his first season ; the club won promotion to Tippeligaen . In Sandefjord 's first season in the top @-@ flight , Tegström scored ten goals in the league and played in the 2006 Norwegian Football Cup Final . The next season he moved to Fredrikstad , where he was not a regular player on the first team . He spent time on loan with Hønefoss in 2009 , and he returned to Sweden after the 2010 season when his contract with Fredrikstad expired . After two seasons with the Superettan side Jönköpings Södra , he rejoined Husqvarna FF before the 2013 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 As a child , Tegström dreamed of becoming a professional ice hockey player in the NHL and for the Swedish national ice hockey team , Tre kronor . He played for HV71 , attended the hockey school in Jönköping , and played football as a hobby . After he quit playing hockey , he worked at the local Intersport store while playing football for <unk> IF . He later joined Swedish football Division 2 side Husqvarna FF . 
 = = Club career = = 
 Tegström scored 22 goals in as many matches in 2004 , and was named Player of the Year in the 2004 Swedish football Division 2 . The same season , Husqvarna qualified for the promotion play @-@ off where they met Superettan side Mjällby . This match was attended by scouts from the Norwegian First Division side Sandefjord Fotball . Even though the Sandefjord envoys came to watch Mjällby 's Marcus <unk> , they were more impressed by Tegström — who was playing as a striker . Tegström was also wanted by Superettan sides Trelleborgs FF and <unk> IF , but joined Sandefjord ahead of the 2005 season and signed a three @-@ year contract with the club . 
 = = = Sandefjord = = = 
 Tegström became an instant success at Sandefjord and contributed greatly to the club 's first @-@ ever promotion to the Tippeligaen , with a total of 14 goals when the club finished second in the 2005 Norwegian First Division . Tegström scored a hat @-@ trick in the decisive match , beating promotion @-@ challengers Moss 4 – 2 ; Tegström 's teammate Andreas <unk> scored one goal . Tegström also impressed at the top @-@ flight in Norway , and after scoring five goals in the five first matches of the season he was the leading goalscorer in Tippeligaen , while his team was in fourth place despite being predicted to be in last place by every media outlet in Norway . When Sandefjord played Viking on 24 September 2006 , both teams were fighting against relegation and Tegström scored the match @-@ winning goal on a counter @-@ attack after dribbling past half the Viking defence — comparable to Maradona 's goal in the 1986 World Cup . Tegström scored ten goals and made five assists in the Tippeligaen , helping Sandefjord avoid relegation in their first year in the top @-@ flight . He also scored the first goal in the semi @-@ final of the 2006 Norwegian Football Cup , which Sandefjord won 5 – 2 against Rosenborg at Lerkendal Stadion and played in the 2006 Norwegian Football Cup Final , in which the team lost 3 – 0 to Fredrikstad . 
 After his performance for Sandefjord in 2006 , Expressen said that Tegström was wanted by several Norwegian , Danish and Dutch clubs , but signed a new contract with Sandefjord in December 2006 to the end of the 2009 season . Verdens Gang predicted that the Sandefjord team would finish 11th in the 2007 Tippeligaen , but stated that Tegström had to perform at the same level as in the previous season for Sandefjord to avoid relegation . Tegström scored one goal for Sandefjord in the 2007 season ; the team struggled throughout the season until it was relegated to the second tier . Tegström left Sandefjord half @-@ way through the season , when he was sold to Fredrikstad in August 2007 for 4 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) , according to <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Fredrikstad = = = 
 The same day his second child was born , Tegström scored a goal in his debut for Fredrikstad , a 2 – 0 victory against Stabæk on 3 September 2007 . He scored against Strømsgodset in October 2007 . The following season , Tegström played as a substitute and scored one goal in the 2 – 0 victory against Bodø / Glimt , with Fredrikstad leading the 2008 Tippeligaen after four matches . Tegström did not play much for Fredrikstad in the 2008 season because Tarik <unk> and Garðar <unk> were the preferred strikers in the starting lineup . Tegström secured the club 's first silver medals since 1972 when he scored two goals against Molde on 26 October 2008 ; he came on as a substitute in the 63rd minute of the match , which Fredrikstad won 2 – 1 . 
 Before the 2009 season , Fredrikstad told Tegström that he was not part of the club 's long @-@ term plans and that he was welcome to find another club . Fredrikstad turned down an offer from Stabæk to buy the striker . He did not start a single match in the pre @-@ season , but he came on as a substitute and scored a goal against Strømsgodset in the second match of the 2009 season . Tegström spent most of the 2009 season on the bench , but in the 2009 Norwegian Football Cup tie against Ranheim , he came on as a substitute and scored two goals in the extra time . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In August 2009 , he was loaned out to the First Division side Hønefoss until the end of the season , with an option to buy . In his first match for Hønefoss , Tegström scored a goal against Alta ; the game ended with a 2 – 0 victory . He scored a four goals in 12 matches for Hønefoss . After the season , he returned to Fredrikstad , which had been relegated to the First Division . He was troubled by injuries in his last season with Fredrikstad , and he started only nine matches . Jönköpings Södra wanted to buy Tegström during the summer , but he did not join the club until his contract with Fredrikstad expired after the 2010 season . After playing two seasons for the Superettan side , Tegström returned to Husqvarna ahead of the 2013 season , where in addition to playing for the team , he was hired as chief of marketing . 
 = Mercedes McQueen = 
 Mercedes Maria Theresa Immaculata McQueen ( previously Owen , Fisher and Browning ) is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , played by Jennifer Metcalfe . She debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 19 June 2006 as the first character to be introduced to the series by series producer , Bryan Kirkwood . In 2008 Metcalfe feared that the character was to be axed but was later reassured by the series producer that she would not be . Metcalfe later stated her intention to stay with the series . Mercedes is part of the McQueen family and is the longest serving McQueen on the series . On 26 August 2014 , it was revealed that Metcalfe had decided to quit the soap . In November 2014 , Mercedes was presumably stabbed to death , with her body discarded . However , Metcalfe returned to screens on 17 February 2015 in a surprise , unannounced twist which saw Mercedes revealed as alive and well , living in Nice , France . It was announced that Mercedes would make a full @-@ time return to the show in May 2015 . Following the various temporary breaks of Nicole Barber @-@ Lane ( who plays Mercedes ' mother , Myra McQueen ) , Metcalfe became the longest @-@ serving member of the McQueen family . On 21 January 2016 , the character went on another hiatus , as she once again departed the village for a considerable lengthy period of time , but she returned to Hollyoaks on 1 April 2016 . 
 " Mercedes is described as a " savvy , ballsy girl that can 't say no and is unapologetic about it " . She is played as having moments of happiness which she ruins for herself and as managing to justify " whatever she does that 's bad " . Throughout her time on the series , Mercedes ' storylines have centred on her relationships . These include her marriages to Russ Owen ( Stuart Manning ) , Malachy Fisher ( Glen Wallace ) and Paul Browning ( Joseph Thompson ) , with her second marriage involving her in an HIV storyline , an engagement to Riley Costello ( Rob Norbury ) and a committed relationship with Joe Roscoe ( Ayden Callaghan ) . She has also been central to several affairs which included Calvin Valentine ( Ricky Whittle ) , her sister 's husband , and Riley 's father Carl ( Paul Opacic ) . Following the revelation of her affair with Carl on her wedding day to Riley , Mercedes was at the centre of a kidnapping storyline when she was held against her will by Riley 's grandfather serial killer Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) before going into labour , giving birth to a boy as a result of the stress . Following her ordeal Mercedes briefly turned to prostitution . When Mitzeee ( Rachel Shenton ) grows close to Riley , Mercedes begins to stalk her . During the culmination of the plot , in " pure desperation " Mercedes stabs herself and Mitzeee is blamed . Mercedes friend , Lynsey Nolan ( Karen Hassan ) , discovers Mercedes ' stalking of Mitzeee and stabbing of herself . Lynsey is later murdered in a whodunit storyline with Mercedes becoming a suspect in her murder . It is later revealed Mercedes ' partner Doctor Browning killed Lynsey to protect Mercedes and in October 2013 , Mercedes , Cindy Cunningham ( Stephanie Waring ) and Lindsey Butterfield ( Sophie Austin ) attacked , murdered and covered up the murder of Browning . In the run @-@ up to her 2014 departure , Mercedes was involved in feuds with Freddie Roscoe ( Charlie Clapham ) and Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) and mourning for her sister Carmel ( Gemma Merna ) . Since her return in February 2015 , her storylines included reuniting with her family , her relationship with Joe and delivering a stillborn son named Gabriel , exposing Lindsey Butterfield as the Gloved Hand Killer and Silas returning and targeting Mercedes again . 
 Metcalfe has received numerous awards and nominations for her portrayal of Mercedes . Metcalfe has been praised by the British press for her performance in the role . The character has also been praised and criticised by the British press , for her numerous relationships and affairs , her appearance , her status as a " slapper " and her penchant for finding herself in " terrifying situations . " 
 = = Character creation and casting = = 
 Mercedes was created by producer Bryan Kirkwood , as part of his rejuvenation of Hollyoaks in 2006 , which included the creation of his " brainchild " the McQueen family . She was the first character created by Kirkwood during his tenure as executive producer . Jennifer Metcalfe , who had previously been considered for the role of Clare Devine ( Gemma Bissix ) before Mercedes was created , successfully auditioned for the role . Kirkwood credited Metcalfe with making the character her own and with bringing Mercedes to life . 
 Metcalfe reported that she was " put forward for Hollyoaks " but had to audition eight times before she was offered the role . She later revealed that when creating the part she took " inspiration " from several places , most prominently from Eva Longoria 's role in Desperate Housewives as Gabrielle Solis . In 2008 , due to her character 's HIV scare , Metcalfe feared she was to going to be fired from the serial and had to seek reassurance from the producer that her fears were unfounded . In 2011 Metcalfe stated her plans to stay with the serial indefinitely , saying , " I never get bored or lose interest " with her storylines and scripts . In 2012 , Kirkwood said that due to Metcalfe being the first actress he cast in Hollyoaks he was " so chuffed that she 's becoming a real star " . He added that " telling stories for Mercedes is as exciting now as it was on day one " . In 2013 , Metcalfe revealed to The Mirror that she was proud of portraying the character " everyone loves to hate " . In May 2013 , Metcalfe signed a new contract keeping her on the soap for at least another year . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Kirkwood branded Mercedes " a savvy , ballsy girl that can 't say no and is unapologetic about it " . Metcalfe has described Mercedes as someone who " hates every woman in Hollyoaks " except her own sisters , and as someone who talks too much and has a " mouth like a foghorn " . She went on to say that Mercedes " always looks after her family and would never do anything to deliberately hurt them . Mercedes ' heart is definitely in the right place " . Metcalfe observed that Mercedes is " completely mad " and she " just does whatever she feels like doing at the time . She doesn 't exactly think things through " . Metcalfe further explained that Mercedes did not " consider consequences " , which led her to unintentionally " destroy everything " . She elaborated on this , saying that Mercedes never has a happy ending " because she can 't . I don 't think with Mercedes there is ever a happy ending . Just when something might go her way or something 's going to go right for her , she destroys it " . She said that her character is " used to getting her own way " so she thought that despite her actions , " everything will turn out right in the end " . She opined that Mercedes was at her best in this state , being " <unk> and destructive " . Metcalfe described Mercedes in this way : " Whatever she does that 's bad , she manages to justify in her head . She doesn 't have much self @-@ worth and she knows what she 's like " . Metcalfe also expressed the hope that Mercedes could be happy " free and single " . She explained that Mercedes was unable to remain happy , saying : " she has moments of happiness but ruins them herself " . She went on to explain that due to Mercedes ' first love having " messed her up " , Mercedes behaved " the way she is where men are concerned " . She further explained that Mercedes believed she could change but was disappointed when she could not . Metcalfe said , " When she says that she 's going to change , she actually means it ; she just can 't sustain it . " 
 A reporter for E4 's official website described Mercedes saying " She 's no angel but the Village would be far less entertaining without our Mercedes . This glamorous McQueen can 't seem to keep herself out of trouble – more often than not due to her tendency to hop into bed with those she shouldn 't ! " They later said Mercedes is invincible , as " no matter evils she <unk> , somehow she still manages to come out smelling of roses " . Hollyoaks international broadcaster BBC America has described Mercedes stating : " Cocky , confident , and mean with a right hook , Mercedes McQueen isn 't afraid of anyone , especially not a man . She knows what effects her assets have on the opposite sex , and she always gets what she wants " . What 's on TV described her as the " man @-@ eater of the McQueen clan " who will not " take any nonsense " and is not " shy when it comes to a scrap ! " Digital Spy described Mercedes as " known for her fiery temper and sharp tongue " . Mercedes has also been described as " mouthy " , a " minx " , a " bitchy maneater " , " feisty " , " troubled " , " gorgeous " , a " sultry siren " and " spirited " by various media sources . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 = = = = Russ Owen = = = = 
 Despite Mercedes ' relationship with Russ Owen ( Stuart Manning ) , she had sex with Warren Fox ( Jamie Lomas ) and feeling guilty , proposed to Russ which he accepted . Metcalfe felt Mercedes might again stray with " Warren hanging around on the sidelines " although she hoped Mercedes would remain faithful to Russ . Mercedes and Russ marry despite the ceremony being interrupted by Louise Summers ( Roxanne McKee ) . Looking back at the wedding , Metcalfe commented that the wedding " didn 't go smoothly " . Warren was accused of attempting to murder Clare Devine ( Gemma Bissix ) , but his innocence and her infidelity was established when it was revealed that they were together the night Clare was attacked . Metcalfe said that " although Mercedes knew she was taking a risk by sleeping with Warren , she genuinely thought she 'd get away with it " . She opined that after her and Russ ' " honeymoon period " ended , Mercedes felt guilty and considered " spilling the beans " , although Metcalfe was not sure she would tell the truth about her affair with Russ . 
 During Russ ' trial , Mercedes decided to go to the court to testify for him due to Nancy Hayton ( Jessica Fox ) , who explained to Mercedes that her sister died because Justin Burton ( Chris Fountain ) was " too gutless to come forward and tell the truth " . This encouraged Mercedes to " take a long , hard look at herself " , and she realised that she was doing the same thing in the situation with Warren . On her way to the court however , Mercedes was " all over the place " . According to Metcalfe , everyone was shocked when Mercedes walked into the courtroom . She said that Mercedes was unsure of what she was going to tell the court , " but her alibi is vital to Warren 's case - his fate lies in her hands " . Metcalfe said that even if Mercedes and Russ ended their relationship , which they did shortly after she confessed the truth , would not matter because she believed that it would not take Mercedes " long before she goes back to her old ways " because " that 's just the type of person she is - Mercedes likes playing the field and having fun , and no man 's going to change her " 
 = = = = Tony Hutchinson = = = = 
 Although Tony Hutchinson ( Nick Pickard ) was in a relationship with Mercedes ' sister , Jacqui ( Claire Cooper ) , he and Mercedes had sex . Metcalfe explained this was because Mercedes was intoxicated and unaware of her actions , " but she was also furious at Jacqui for giving her a slap " . Metcalfe explained that when Mercedes woke up , she was in disbelief about the events of the previous night and felt " appalled " . She added that Mercedes did not fancy Tony and that they did not even like each other , which was why " neither of them can understand what happened between them " . Regarding Mercedes ' feelings about hurting Jacqui , Metcalfe stated : " Mercedes hates herself for it . She feels incredibly guilty and ashamed of what she 's done . It 's surprising Jacqui doesn 't guess something is wrong because Mercedes can 't look her in the eye " . 
 Mercedes discovered she has fallen pregnant , which left her " totally devastated " . Metcalfe expressed that Mercedes " felt bad enough about sleeping with Tony . Finding out she 's pregnant is a nightmare " . Mercedes informed Tony about the pregnancy , despite their dislike for each other , because she felt he had the right to know . According to Metcalfe , Mercedes considered giving her baby to her sister , since Jacqui was unable to have children but wanted to become a mother , but did not tell Jacqui the baby 's paternity . Metcalfe also felt that Mercedes decided against giving Jacqui the baby because Mercedes was unable to " cope " with the baby 's paternity , and would be more willing to give Jacqui the baby if Tony was not the father . When asked if Mercedes would keep the baby herself , Metcalfe said , " She would if it was Russ ' or maybe even the product of a one @-@ night stand . But Tony 's baby and all the baggage that comes with that ? No thanks ! " Mercedes decided to terminate the pregnancy . When asked how she thought Jacqui would react if she found out that Tony was the father , Metcalfe said Jacqui would " go a bit psycho " . She also said that it would take a long time for Jacqui to forgive Mercedes if she discovered the truth . 
 = = = = Malachy Fisher = = = = 
 Mercedes began a relationship with Malachy Fisher ( Glen Wallace ) . He proposed marriage to her , but she refused . Mercedes has sex with a stranger ; Metcalfe remarked , " Sex usually makes her forget about everything else that 's going on . But afterwards she still can 't stop thinking about Malachy , so she decides to go and see him to work out how she feels " . Mercedes subsequently accepted Malachy 's proposal and they marry . Mercedes found that she did not contract HIV from Malachy , but a Hollyoaks source described the news as " bitter sweet " because it was possible that her husband could die and leave her on her own . The source expanded on this , saying that if Mercedes had contracted HIV then the pair " would be going through everything together " . 
 Complications in Mercedes ' relationship with Malachy occurred when she begins an affair with Calvin Valentine ( Ricky Whittle ) while working with him at The Loft . Metcalfe expressed that she had initial " reservations " about the storyline which she felt was " far @-@ fetched " , adding that once she had begun filming the scenes she thought the plot was " brilliant " even though she felt Mercedes would be perceived as a " bitch " . Whittle expressed similar doubts , saying he felt it was " a bit out of character " for Calvin , although he felt the plot was " exciting " . At first the pair did not like each other , but after spending time together , they realised that there was more to their personalities than they initially thought . Whittle explained that the attraction between Mercedes and Calvin began " building " , to the point that she and Malachy have " a massive row " and Calvin comforts her ; Whittle stated that " the next thing you know they ’ re tearing each other ’ s clothes off " . 
 According to Metcalfe , Mercedes did not want to have an affair and was not " looking for someone else " , stating , " Malachy 's been working hard to provide for them and he hasn ’ t had a lot of time for her " . Turning to Calvin , she confided in him and they kiss . Whittle added that the affair had become more serious and their chemistry was " more than just physical " . Also according to Metcalfe , " Every three months Mercedes has to have an HIV test and , yes , it is making her resent Malachy a bit . She can ’ t help wondering what it would be like to be with someone like Calvin who isn 't HIV positive " , even though she felt " guilty " . When Mercedes learned that she has to be retested for HIV , she feared that the test would be positive . Initially , she did not tell Malachy about it , but eventually " snaps " at him , telling him she " won 't forgive him " if she has contracted HIV . The test was negative which was a " huge relief " for them . 
 Malachy later witnessed Mercedes and Calvin kissing but did not interrupt them . Wallace felt this was because he truly loved Mercedes and had accepted that " his life is much better with Mercedes in it " . Whittle explained that Malachy tested Mercedes and Calvin because he wanted to discover if " what he saw was a one @-@ off or more serious " . The pair failed the test and Mercedes , fearing that Malachy knew the truth , told Calvin that they had to end their affair , " but they simply can 't stay away from each other " . He added that the relationship could become more serious for Calvin as " he 's in danger of really falling for her " . Mercedes began to develop feelings for Calvin who did not expect Mercedes to develop " such deep feelings " for him . When Calvin rejected Mercedes she informed Calvin 's sister Sasha Valentine ( Nathalie Emmanuel ) that Calvin left Sasha 's then boyfriend Warren to die in a fire ; Sasha responded to the revelation by throwing Calvin out of their home . Not being able to " get past what happened with Warren " , Calvin and Carmel decide to end their relationship . Calvin confronted Mercedes , who " tells him that he 's ruined her life and warns that she 's going to do the same to him " . 
 Calvin and Carmel become reunited and plan to remarry . Metcalfe told a What 's on TV reporter that Mercedes was unable to accept Calvin loved Carmel more than her because " in her head he doesn 't . She can 't think rationally about this . Her thing for Calvin is an obsession now " . Mercedes tried to prevent the wedding going forward , including by anonymously threatening Calvin and by cancelling the wedding plans . Calvin discovered that Mercedes was behind the threats , and the pair go on to have a " day of passion " ; Metcalfe explained that their relationship is " all about the sex " . Mercedes tried everything to convince Calvin not to go through with the wedding . As Metcalfe stated , " They talk , shout and cry and she tells him she loves him " . Mercedes told Calvin , who " just sat there like a puppy , being manipulated by her " , that he should marry her instead , and he agreed and promised to tell Carmel . Mercedes later discovered that he has not told Carmel and she can not " believe he 's chosen Carmel over her " . Calvin was killed on his wedding day ; Metcalfe revealed to What 's on TV that Mercedes has " got it in her " to kill Calvin . She added that her character still loves Malachy , but Malachy and Mercedes end their relationship . Mercedes ' cousin Theresa ( Jorgie Porter ) was later found to have shot Calvin . 
 Mercedes lied that she has contracted HIV from Malachy who ends his relationship with Lynsey Nolan ( Karen Hassan ) to reunite with Mercedes . When Malachy discovered her lies , he hit Mercedes , who felt , according to Metcalfe , that she " deserved it " because she was " awful " and " the lies she told were just disgusting . She doesn 't resent Malachy for hitting her at all " . Mercedes reconciled with Malachy ; Metcalfe explained that Mercedes still loved Malachy but was unable to stay away from other men . She added that seeing Malachy with Lynsey helped Mercedes " realise " how much she loved him . After Malachy is injured in an explosion , Metcalfe explained that Mercedes regretted her affair with Calvin and she " desperately " wanted the chance to " make things work " with Malachy . She added that if he died , Mercedes would find it difficult to live with her guilt . If Malachy were to die Mercedes would be " devastated " as he was " the only positive thing in her life . [ ... ] She thinks that she 's nothing without him " . Malachy died . Metcalfe felt that when Malachy shielded Mercedes from the explosion by throwing himself over her it " proves to her how much he loves her . She knows that 's special and regrets she ever took him and his love granted " . Metcalfe felt that she and Wallace " had amazing storylines " , opining that Malachy 's death was the most emotional scene she had filmed while with the serial . 
 = = = = Riley and Carl Costello = = = = 
 Mercedes ' next relationship was with Riley Costello ( Rob Norbury ) ; their first romantic encounter occurred in the episodes following Malachy 's death . Metcalfe believed that this behaviour was typical of Mercedes . Malachy had died and rather than " moping " about she chooses to get on with her life . Riley filled the role of giving Mercedes some attention " when she needs it most " . The serial introduced complications with Riley and Mercedes ' relationship with the introduction of Riley 's father Carl ( Paul Opacic ) . Carl 's disapproval of Mercedes created tension between them and she " hits a nerve " by <unk> Carl . Metcalfe explained that Mercedes asked Carl what he would do if she stayed with Riley . In an effort to " wind him up " , Mercedes suggested that she and Carl sleep together ; Metcalfe stated that it was " obvious he 's tempted " , and Mercedes and Carl start an affair . Opacic told a reporter from Inside Soap that Mercedes and Carl felt guilty about their tryst , but suggested that viewers keep watching to see if the two could " stay away from each other " . He added that while Riley believed Mercedes was " the girl of his dreams " , Carl believed that Mercedes was not " good enough " for his son . 
 Mercedes and Riley become engaged . Riley 's brother Seth ( Miles Higson ) discovered that she and his father had an affair , so she lied about falling pregnant to prevent the truth from coming out . On the advice from her mother Myra ( Nicole Barber @-@ Lane ) , Mercedes planned to fake a miscarriage , but Mercedes ' sister Jacqui discovered the affair and Mercedes ' intention to fake a miscarriage . Jacqui was " disgusted " and threatened to expose the affair ; Metcalfe commented that this left Mercedes feeling like her " world could collapse around her at any moment " . " On eggshells " after Jacqui 's discovery , Mercedes believed Jacqui would expose the affair . Metcalfe described Jacqui 's attitude towards Mercedes , stating , " Jacqui knows what Mercedes is , she knows what she 's like - but she resorts to judging her because she 's just trying to support her " . Metcalfe explained that if Jacqui kept the affair secret Mercedes would be " relieved " that she still has Riley , and although she would not immediately think of Carl , Mercedes was worried that " they could end up in bed together again " . Metcalfe went on to say that Mercedes " loves Riley " but " can 't help fancying Carl " , adding that for Mercedes " there 's a difference between love and lust " . 
 The Daily Star announced that after lying about being pregnant for several weeks , Mercedes was to launch a " vicious " attack on Mitzeee ( Rachel Shenton ) , saying she tried to make up for her " mistake " by " turning on the tears and apologising " . Metcalfe felt that Riley and Mercedes would " fall out big time " because of Mercedes ' attack on Mitzeee . Mercedes discovered she had actually become pregnant , but was unsure of the child 's paternity . Metcalfe commented that the storyline had " got interesting " due to Mercedes ' pregnancy . During the storyline Metcalfe wore a prosthetic baby bump which she found " uncomfortable " . 
 During the fourth series of the late night spinoff show Hollyoaks Later , Mercedes ' past was explored when she goes to Ibiza to celebrate her hen night . While there she was reunited with Johnny ( Chris Coghill ) , her first love . Metcalfe said this caused a " real mix of emotions for Mercedes " . She went on to elaborate that there was a lot her character wanted to say to Johnny but " at the same time she doesn 't see the point . There 's a lot of anger there . But there 's also a lot of excitement for Mercedes as she sees him again , because he was the guy who won her heart for the first time . The storyline also explains why Mercedes is the way she is now " . Mercedes and Johnny kissed , which Metcalfe said was them just " getting lost in the moment " and was partly due to Mercedes having doubts about Riley 's fidelity . She added that Mercedes and Johnny spend time " just talking and reliving the old times , especially how he won her over in the past " . 
 The storyline was concluded with a week 's worth of episodes focusing on the pair 's wedding and fallout . A trailer , which took over 15 hours to film , was produced to promote the episodes and featured several characters dressed in black and who could expose her affair with Carl , watching Mercedes go down the aisle . During the trailer Mercedes cried a black tear , done by the show 's make @-@ up artists putting black paint in Metcalfe 's eye . Norbury opined that Riley was caught up in planning the wedding , and that his feelings for Mercedes were " very strong " , adding that Riley " loves her to bits and he thinks that she 's everything " . In the lead up to the wedding it was shown that potential guests who could reveal the affair included Jacqui , Seth , Carl , Mercedes , Warren , Mitzeee and Doug Carter ( PJ Brennan ) . 
 On her wedding day to Riley Mercedes was the one who exposes the affair . Metcalfe said this was because when Mercedes looked into Riley 's eyes she " couldn 't help it " because of her love for him , and because Jacqui 's entrance " just tipped her over the edge " . Metcalfe went on to say that she did not think Mercedes " thought about it " when revealing the affair , but if she had thought it through she would not have revealed the secret . Metcalfe postulated that there would be " huge repercussions " from the events , explaining that her following storylines " all stem from the wedding " . Metcalfe added that she did not " fancy " the chances of a reunion for Mercedes and Riley although the actress would have liked one . Metcalfe commented that she " loved " the storyline and with working with Norbury . 
 = = = = Doctor Browning = = = = 
 Lynsey was found dead by Brendan Brady ( Emmett J. Scanlan ) . The death sparked a " whodunit storyline " with Mercedes in the frame for her murder . Digital Spy explained her motives stating , " Mercedes has also become increasingly deranged in recent weeks and wanted to keep Lynsey quiet after she discovered the truth about her stalking of Mitzeee " . A promotional image featuring Mercedes was later released by Hollyoaks which confirmed Mercedes as an official suspect in the mystery . Mercedes entered a relationship with Doctor Browning , who had previously paid her for sex , in an attempt to make Riley jealous . Smithwick told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy that she " was nervous about the union of the dark soul mates , Mercy and Browning , but their chemistry is so watchable - that story is pretty dark " . Mercedes began to " fall for the charms " of Doctor Browning , believing she had " landed on her feet " when he invited her to a charity ball . Metcalfe commented that Mercedes began to think he could provide her with the WAG life style that she had always wanted . She added that Mercedes still had feelings for Riley and was " being very sneaky " in her attempts to win him back . She explained that Mercedes " still wants Riley back but , as we know , when she has everything she desires , she still craves a bit of danger " . Thompson elaborated on this , saying Mercedes " thinks she wants the quiet life with Riley , but Dr Browning offers an exciting alternative for her , he knows what makes her tick , and the two of them are excited by how dangerous the other is " . On Doctor Browning 's feelings for Mercedes , Thompson said : " he 's fallen for her and will do whatever it takes to be with her . He thinks if he spends enough time with Mercy , he 'll win her around " . When Doctor Browning witnessed Riley kiss Mercedes " it becomes a question of how much he can take " and he decided he must " make a quick move " to prevent them reuniting . To do this he takes Mercedes to a shooting range , Thompson explained that there she " realises there 's an undeniable connection between them " . He added that the couple are " kindred spirits " and Mercedes spending time with him made her rethink their relationship . Thompson said " it seemed to be written in the stars that Mercedes and Riley will get back together - but Dr Browning won 't let that happen " and to do this he threatened Riley . Thompson claimed that due to Doctor Browning having incriminating evidence showing that Mercedes discharged herself at the time Lynsey was murdered it gives him " real power , she thinks she 's in control , but she might just be underestimating Dr Browning ... " Metcalfe said that she feels Doctor Browning is Mercedes soul mate , explaining that " he gives as good as he gets and I think that 's really good for my character " . On who Mercedes loves more out of Doctor Browning and Riley , Metcalfe said " it 's Doctor Browning all the way for her , i think he really took her by storm and she absolutely adores him " . On 17 August 2012 during E4 's first look episode it was revealed Doctor Browning had killed Lynsey . Hollyoaks ' official website said Doctor Browning 's motives in killing Lynsey were " presumably to protect Mercedes " . 
 Mercedes and Riley reunite but when she discovers Riley does not love her she kidnaps Bobby in revenge and blames it on a Mitzeee , who has recently escaped from prison . Metcalfe said Mercedes does not have " any regrets whatsoever . I think she does what she does at the time for a reason and she 'll deal with the consequences later " . Mercedes is arrested when Myra reports her to the police . Riley is shortly after shot dead . Mercedes is put on trial for two counts of perverting the course of justice , one for the kidnap and one for stabbing herself . Digital Spy 's Kilkelly reported that Mercedes lawyer Jim McGinn ( Dan Tetsell ) would advise Mercedes to blame Riley for the crimes as he can not defend himself . Mercedes reluctantly agrees and tells the courtroom that Riley stabbed her and was abusive towards her . Metcalfe felt the scenes were " great to film " , adding that " the writers came up with some brilliant material " . However , she felt the scenes were " challenging " to film as Mercedes " completely breaks down and says how bad Riley was . From the audience 's point of view , it 's really going to be quite shocking " . The actress added that Mercedes " does feel guilty about it , but only as guilty as Mercedes can ever feel . So she gets over it very quickly ! " During the trial Jim suggests that Riley killed Lynsey and that Doctor Browning is innocent . Doctor Browning appears at the trial to give evidence , which Metcalfe revealed is " a total surprise . I don 't think she knows how she 'll react until she actually sees him , and when she does they 're back in that moment when he was dragged away from her . She really did fall for him hook , line and sinker " . 
 = = = Kidnap by Silas Blissett and prostitution = = = 
 On 16 October 2011 it was revealed that Mercedes ' next storyline , following straight on from her wedding to Riley , would focus on her kidnapping by serial killer Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) . On Mercedes ' wedding day Riley 's grandfather Silas kidnapped her in a " shock storyline twist " after Mercedes revealed her affair with Carl . Metcalfe had previously teased that Mercedes might have to watch her back around Silas in the future . Silas planned to hold Mercedes until after she gave birth . According to Metcalfe in a Digital Spy interview , Mercedes felt " pure fear " throughout her ordeal and that she " thinks that she 's going to die and she fears that her baby will die too " . Metcalfe opined that viewers would see Mercedes " go through different emotions " during her ordeal , explaining that she went from " begging " , to " breaking down crying " , to exhaustion . She added that the storyline was " a little bit " dark , but did not reveal whether or not Mercedes would survive her kidnapping . Metcalfe also stated that a special set was built in which the kidnapping scenes were filmed over five days . 
 On 19 December 2011 it was announced by Digital Spy that Mercedes would put her difficult year behind her and Lynsey would become a source of support for Mercedes . It was revealed that Mercedes would be tempted when a " charming doctor arrives on the scene and shows her the benefits of ' selling her services ' " . Mercedes began working as an escort ; Metcalfe explaining , " Mercedes signs up with an escort agency to try to earn some quick cash . She reckons it 's the only thing she 'll ever be good at , but it 's clear that she hasn 't stopped to think it all through " . 
 While Mercedes is on an escorting job , Lynsey confronted her and tried to convince Mercedes not to go through with it . Metcalfe told an Inside Soap reporter that this left Mercedes " devastated " as she has " built up the courage to go through with it " . Metcalfe went onto tease that things will get " darker " for her character . Mercedes became depressed and her sister Jacqui decided to help her . Mercedes attempted to seduce Jacqui 's husband Rhys Ashworth ( Andrew Moss ) , who told Jacqui . Cooper said Jacqui " knows what state of mind " Mercedes was in and " lays into " Mercedes , who revealed she has been working as a prostitute . Cooper explained Jacqui 's reaction is " pretty harsh " and that she thought Mercedes was a " promiscuous tart and a pathetic excuse for a woman " with " no morals " . Cooper said Jacqui had " given Mercedes chance after chance , and feels that she doesn 't deserve anything more " . 
 In another twist Mercedes discovered that Silas would not be put on trial and would instead be put in an institute for the insane . Metcalfe said this left her alter ego feeling " very let down " as a trial would be the opportunity for Mercedes to " tell the world about the terrible things Silas did and make sure that he got punished " . She went on to say that Mercedes felt like Silas was " getting away with it " . Metcalfe explained that Mercedes feared that Silas would escape and explained that Mercedes never recovered from her ordeal but did what she usually did : " put it in a box and tried to forget about it . If Mercedes dwelt on all the bad things she 's been through , she 'd go crazy . That box must be full now " . 
 Metcalfe told Katy Moon from Inside Soap that to forget about the situation Mercedes " wants to feel numb " and as a means of " escape " she called Doctor Browning ( Joe Thompson ) , which left her feeling " awful " . Metcalfe explained that Mercedes was in " self destruct mode " and she " hates herself " for having sex with Doctor Browning , although she does not take money this time . Metcalfe justified Mercedes ' actions by saying Mercedes was " looking for any distraction , any way to escape her demons " . Metcalfe told a journalist from The Sun 's magazine TV Buzz that Mercedes believes Doctor Browning " will help her move on " with her ordeal . Mercedes took a business man back to her hotel room where " things end badly " ; she locked herself in the bathroom and refused to come out . As Metcalfe explained , Lynsey soon arrived to comfort her , and came to her " rescue when she 's at her lowest point . Lynsey can see how broken Mercedes is " . On the friendship , Metcalfe said that the " characters are like chalk and cheese , which I think works well " , while Hassan said the characters " have this kind of prickly friendship " . She added that they have " a lot of things in common , but they ’ re very different people . It ’ s almost like they shouldn ’ t be friends , but opposites attract . Lynsey sees qualities in Mercy that she kind of wishes she had herself . Mercy ’ s very straight @-@ talking , she ’ s quite ballsy and calls a spade a spade , and sometimes Lynsey wishes she had a bit of that gusto . So I think that ’ s what attracts her to Mercy " . Both Metcalfe and Hassan praised the friendship between Mercedes and Lynsey , with Metcalfe saying she " loved " the friendship and enjoyed seeing her persona " form a good bond with Lynsey " while Hassan praised the chemistry between herself and Metcalfe . 
 Riley was " furious " when he discovered Mercedes ' escorting , and told her he did not want her around their son Bobby . Regarding Mercedes ' maternal feelings for Bobby , she stated , " Mercedes feels that when she 's getting closer to Riley , she can bond a bit more with Bobby as well . But when Riley forgets her , she finds it a lot more difficult to cope with Bobby " . Mercedes explained that she did not sleep with Doctor Browning for money this time , which calmed Riley down . Metcalfe said that Mercedes was " very honest and open " with Riley and that they were " very natural together " . The actress said Riley had begun to " see that she 's really damaged and has been affected by what 's happened a lot more than she 's letting on " . Metcalfe added that Riley felt sorry for Mercedes after seeing the " vulnerable Mercedes , the one who doesn 't hurt people " . Metcalfe said that Mercedes wanted Riley back , but if she could not , she wanted to prevent anyone else from getting the life Mercedes would have had if she had married Riley . She added that although Mercedes wanted Riley back she loved Malachy more , and believed that Malachy was the love of Mercedes ' life . 
 The actress said that if Mercedes discovered Riley 's relationship with Lynsey she would " feel utterly betrayed " . To cause tension between the friends Mercedes discovered Riley 's relationship with Lynsey . Metcalfe said that her character gets " such a shock " but because of Mercedes ' close friendship with Lynsey she " might not react the way people expect " . Metcalfe went on to say that she felt her character 's feelings for Riley have " gone beyond love ... it 's an obsession now " . She explained that Mercedes ' plan was " more destructive than winning him back " , and that she was " playing a game . The old Mercedes will be back shortly " . 
 = = = Stalking Mitzeee = = = 
 Mitzeee begins being stalked . Her portrayer Shenton said Mitzeee was unaware of who the stalker was and that " Mercedes hasn 't even crossed her mind . She thinks it 's a crazed fan " . The viewers learn that it was Mercedes . The stalking stopped but later was resumed when Mitzeee and Riley begin a relationship . Shenton explained that the stalker had a key to Mitzeee 's flat and had been watching her every move , and said that " not only has the stalker come back , but they 've come back on a whole new level " . Shenton added that at this point " Mitzeee definitely has no idea that it 's Mercedes - in fact , Mercedes is probably the last person that she 'd suspect . She actually thinks that it 's Lynsey and accuses her , because it seems to make sense " . 
 When Mitzeee realised Mercedes was her stalker , Mercedes knocked Mitzeee out after Mitzeee tries to stab her . Mercedes realised that she will be blamed for stalking Mitzeee so she stabbed herself to convince people Mitzeee was mad . Metcalfe said the situation was born through " pure desperation " . She said that " the thought of Mitzeee , Riley and Bobby as a family together was too much for her to take , and she just saw red . I don 't think it 's something that Mercedes thought about or planned - she wouldn 't have even dreamed of doing it to herself . But at the time , she saw it as the only way out of the situation " . Shenton explained that Mitzeee was worried due to the stalker so she decided to take some antidepressants and drink wine , which as she states " isn 't a great combination . " Shenton revealed that Mercedes arrived to see <unk> who " still has no idea who the stalker really is , but as they 're talking , Mercedes says something that makes Mitzeee discover the truth - and she 's totally shocked . Mitzeee is petrified and picks up a knife in the kitchen . The next thing you know , Mitzeee wakes up after being unconscious [ ... ] The first thing she sees is Mercedes with a stab wound and there is blood everywhere . Mitzeee doesn 't have a clue whether she could have stabbed Mercedes , or if someone else came into the flat and did it " . 
 According to Metcalfe , during Mercedes ' hospitalisation and recuperation she " starts putting it on to get sympathy . She 's determined to get what she wants " . Metcalfe explained that Mercedes did not " feel guilt at all - she just wants Riley back and she 'll do whatever it takes to get him " . Metcalfe believed that it was easy for Mercedes to lie ; " hence why she does it so much and so well ! " Mercedes felt that she had to lie , and found it easy to cry if she needed to , " especially if it will benefit her " . Metcalfe was unsure whether the audience would start to hate her character because she believed that Mercedes was not hateful . She stated , " I hope I 've done a good job and people still feel sorry for her " . She said that " the viewers have still been feeling some sympathy for Mercedes . I was getting lots of tweets saying , ' I feel so sorry for Mercedes , she needs to get back with Riley ' and ' Mitzeee is being a bitch ' " . Metcalfe said that she was surprised by the fans ' strong reaction . Hollyoaks executive producer Emma Smithwick also said that Mercedes " gets away with blue murder [ ... ] and yet there 's so much love for that character " . Smithwick told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy that Mercedes would get her comeuppance for framing Mitzeee , saying : " there most definitely will be a comeuppance . With the stabbing , she did it so coolly and lied about it so easily - that can 't last forever " . Smithwick explained that Mercedes is " driven by her insecurities . She thinks she loves Riley and will do what it takes to win him . That 's what it 's about ... winning . Mitzeee crossed her - she is dispensable but Riley ... well , Riley is the prize . Mercedes Fisher usually gets what she wants and men usually fall in line with her . I want to see what happens when they don 't ... " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy exclusively reported a new storyline for Hollyoaks as Mercedes and Joe Roscoe 's ( Ayden Callaghan ) unborn baby would die before birth in scenes to air in early November 2015 . It was revealed the show had been working with stillbirth charities , Count the Kicks and Sands to produce various ways mothers can monitor their unborn baby 's progress . Rival soap opera , EastEnders , had produced a similar storyline when Shabnam Masood and Kush <unk> ( Rakhee Thakrar and <unk> <unk> ) lost their son <unk> before he was born , but fans were reassured the storyline had been planned months prior to the announcement of EastEnders 's storyline . It was revealed Mercedes would first admit her fears to John Paul and they visited the hospital where a doctor would inform them that their son had died . Kilkelly teased that the storyline would see how Mercedes coped with the situation , how it affects Mercedes and Joe 's relationship , as well as seeing the permanent return of Myra . 
 Metcalfe spoke of the new storyline , saying how " honoured " she was to take part in the storyline as well as praising the writer , Anna Clements : " I 'm honoured to have been given this storyline to raise awareness of such an important cause . Count the Kicks is a fantastic charity , which aims to teach expectant mothers about noticing changes in their pregnancy to reduce the risk of stillbirth . And working with Sands has helped me understand how Mercedes would cope with life after her baby has died . Mercedes has already been through so much tragedy in her life , but the death of her son will show a much more fragile side to her character . The scripts are brilliantly written by Anna Clements and with the help of the two charities , I was able to really understand what Mercedes is going through . " Erica Stewart , the bereavement support services manager at Sands , said : " We 're pleased to have been approached by the researchers and writers at Hollyoaks for advice and help to ensure that this heartbreaking storyline is portrayed truthfully and sensitively . <unk> is not rare and it 's a tragedy that can happen to anyone . Sadly thousands of babies die each year in the UK . In 2013 , over 100 babies every week were stillborn or died soon after birth . For a show like Hollyoaks with a youth focus to be covering this devastating experience is a brilliant way of raising awareness of the issues surrounding baby death among a younger audience who may have not otherwise come across them . " Metcalfe later further discussed the storyline , revealing that when she read the scripts she had " a lump in my throat " , which made cry and when she had finished reading the scripts , she was " sat their sobbing " . She continued to say : " When it came to playing it on set I did minimal rehearsals because I didn 't want to wear out the true meaning of the words . " before praising the script writing , calling them " brilliant " and stating she did not have to work hard to find the " level of emotion " , " The words were all there on the page . I broke down every time . " 
 The week prior to the scenes airing , it was revealed that Mercedes ' relationship to Joe would run into trouble when her former fling Lockie Campbell ( Nick Rhys ) tells Joe that they had kissed the previous day . Mercedes then tells Joe he is not the baby 's father during an argument and unbeknown to Mercedes , he leaves for Canada . When Mercedes discovers their son has died , she realises she needs Joe more than anything and regrets her actions . It was revealed that Mercedes would rely on John Paul , Nana and Theresa to comfort her through the birth of her son , whom she names Gabriel . Mercedes would later be left delighted when her mother , Myra returned to support her through Gabriel 's funeral before choosing to stay in Hollyoaks . 
 Following the E4 airing of the episodes , Metcalfe received positive feedback from various fans on social network , Twitter . Fans commented such comments such as , " heartbreaking " , " well written and acted " , " amazing performance " and " it 's good to see soaps raising awareness on such a taboo subject " . Metcalfe responded to the comments , by tweeting she was " overwhelmed reading all the comments about tonight 's @ Hollyoaks and the stillbirth storyline . <unk> <unk> " The charity that worked with Hollyoaks , Count the Kicks also praised the show and Metcalfe , tweeting : " Brilliant portrayal from the doctor and Mercedes on @ Hollyoaks , genuine and accurate . @ <unk> . " The charity also reminded parents to report any non @-@ movements in a bid to save lives . The show received <unk> viewers on Channel 4 on 3 November , with <unk> viewing the E4 airing following afterwards . The following day , on 4 November , the Channel 4 airing received <unk> viewers and the E4 airing received <unk> viewers . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Mercedes meets Russ Owen ( Stuart Manning ) and flirts with him , angering his girlfriend , Sophie Burton ( Connie <unk> ) . Mercedes develops feelings for Russ and they have sex . They begin a relationship after Sophie dies . Russ is diagnosed with a sexually transmitted infection and wrongly accuses Mercedes of having an affair . She is angry with Russ and sleeps with Warren Fox ( Jamie Lomas ) . Mercedes discovers that her mother , Myra ( Nicole Barber @-@ Lane ) , is the cause of infection and Russ <unk> to Mercedes . Mercedes sleeps with Warren once again and feeling guilty , proposes marriage to Russ . He agrees , revealing that he was also going to propose . On the night before their wedding , Mercedes becomes intoxicated and has sex with Warren for a third time . On the same night , someone attempts to murder Clare Cunningham ( Gemma Bissix ) and Warren is arrested . Warren tries to prove his innocence as he was with Mercedes , but she denies it . At the wedding , Louise Summers ( Roxanne McKee ) interrupts the proceedings and confronts Mercedes . Mercedes half sister , Tina ( Leah Hackett ) , lies and gives her an alibi . Mercedes and Russ then marry and Warren is charged with Clare 's attempted murder . Mercedes agrees to be a witness at Warren 's trial and explains their affair , with Russ listening on . Russ then ends their relationship . 
 Mercedes has sex with Tony Hutchinson ( Nick Pickard ) , the boyfriend of her sister , Jacqui ( Claire Cooper ) . Mercedes discovers she is pregnant with Tony 's child and plans to have an abortion . Jacqui discovers the affair and asks Mercedes if she can raise the child herself , as she is unable to have children . However , Mercedes has an abortion . Mercedes has a brief relationship with Rhys Ashworth ( Andrew Moss ) and is upset to learn that he is having an incestuous affair with his half sister , Beth Clement ( Sinéad Moynihan ) . Mercedes and Darren Osborne ( Ashley Taylor Dawson ) make a bet : Darren has to have sex with Hannah Ashworth ( Emma Rigby ) , and if he does Mercedes promises to have sex with him . Darren accompanies an intoxicated Hannah home and takes a photo of her with no top on . Mercedes refuses to believe Darren , but sends the photo of Hannah to Hannah 's boyfriend , Danny Valentine ( David Judge ) . Danny ends his relationship with Hannah and sleeps with Mercedes . 
 Mercedes begins a casual relationship with Malachy Fisher ( Glen Wallace ) and develops feelings for him . When Malachy is diagnosed HIV @-@ positive , he avoids Mercedes and she has sex with his brother , Kris Fisher ( Gerard McCarthy ) . Mercedes discovers that Malachy is HIV @-@ positive and slaps him . She walks home alone and is kidnapped by her half @-@ brother Niall Rafferty ( Barry Sloane ) , along with the rest of her family , and takes them to an abandoned church . Niall causes an explosion , but Mercedes escapes . Malachy later comforts Mercedes and he proposes to her , but she refuses . Malachy then leaves for Belfast . After having sex with a stranger , Mercedes realises that she loves Malachy and travels to Belfast , where she accepts his proposal . Mercedes and Malachy marry . Mercedes learns that she has not contracted HIV from Malachy . Calvin Valentine ( Ricky Whittle ) , the ex @-@ husband of Mercedes half sister , Carmel ( Gemma Merna ) , hires Mercedes as a barmaid at The Loft nightclub and they later kiss . Mercedes and Calvin have sex , unaware that Malachy has seen them . They begin an affair and Mercedes is jealous then Calvin reconciles with Carmel . Calvin and Carmel then plan to remarry . On the day of their wedding , Mercedes attempts to seduce Calvin , but he rejects her . Malachy 's former girlfriend , Cheryl Brady ( Bronagh Waugh ) , later reveals Calvin and Mercedes affair to Carmel . Malachy then ends his marriage to Mercedes . 
 Mercedes becomes jealous of Malachy and his new girlfriend , Lynsey Nolan ( Karen Hassan ) . Mercedes lies to Lynsey and tells her that she is HIV @-@ positive . Mercedes tells Malachy and they secretly plan to reconcile . Lynsey learns of this and discovers Mercedes lied . Lynsey tells Malachy , who punches Mercedes . Mercedes and Malachy reconcile . However , Malachy is badly injured in an explosion and Mercedes is forced to turn off his life support and he dies . Malachy 's family are forced by Myra to invite Mercedes to his funeral despite discovering her infidelity . Mercedes gets into an argument with Billy Alexander ( Richard Graham ) at her aunt Kathleen McQueen ( Alison Burrows ) ' s fundraising event , after she accuses him of touching her . Carmel apologizes for Mercedes 's behaviour and agrees to have lunch with Billy . When Billy visits Carmel , Myra slaps him and reveals that he is the father of Mercedes and Jacqui . He tells Mercedes and Jacqui that he needs a kidney transplant and that they are the only likely donors . When Mercedes and Jacqui refuse to be donors , Kathleen tells Billy that he is the father of her daughter Theresa McQueen ( Jorgie Porter ) , confirming that Theresa is actually Mercedes and Jacqui 's half sister . Billy is later revealed to not be needing a kidney , and that it is actually Mercedes ' half sister Emily Alexander ( Elizabeth Henstridge ) . However , Mercedes isn 't interested and declines to be a donor , although Jacqui later agrees to be a donor but is revealed not to be a match , and Billy and Emily leave . 
 Mercedes begins a relationship with Riley Costello ( Rob Norbury ) . Riley 's father , Carl ( Paul Opacic ) , takes an instant dislike to Mercedes . This causes tension between Mercedes and Carl and they have sex . Carl and Mercedes begin an affair and Riley later proposes to Mercedes , which she accepts . Carl 's son and Riley 's brother , Seth ( Miles Higson ) , discovers the affair and threatens to tell Riley . Mercedes tells Seth that he cannot reveal the affair because she is pregnant with Riley 's child . She later tells Myra that she lied and is not pregnant . Myra tells Mercedes to fake a miscarriage , which Mercedes refuses . Mercedes attends an awards evening with Riley , where he becomes intoxicated . He accepts an award and attempts to get Mercedes onto the podium , but her high heel shoes becomes trapped in the step . As Riley pulls her , she loses her balance and falls to the ground . Myra then declares that Mercedes is having a miscarriage . Mercedes is taken to hospital , where she is told that she is in fact twelve weeks pregnant . She explains to Myra that she is unsure of the child 's paternity . On her wedding day she reveals her affair to Riley . Riley 's grandfather , Silas Blissett ( Jeff Rawle ) , who is a serial killer , kidnaps Mercedes and holds her captive in a basement , planning to kill her when the baby , his great @-@ grandchild , is born . Silas is then arrested for four murders , leaving Mercedes chained up , alone where she goes into labour . Lynsey asks Silas to tell them where Mercedes is and he refuses to tell her . She taunts him and he reveals where Mercedes is . Riley finds Mercedes , who is about to give birth . Mercedes gives birth to a boy , who is put in an incubator because of breathing difficulties . Mercedes is hurt when , after the birth , Riley declares he wants nothing more to do with Mercedes or the baby . However he later continues to visit Mercedes and the baby who Mercedes names Bobby . Mercedes returns to live with the McQueens and after Riley refuses to see Bobby , Mercedes agrees to do a paternity test . The results confirm that Riley is Bobby 's biological father . Mercedes and Riley argue over Bobby until Riley is transferred to a football club in Leeds and Mercedes asks him to take Bobby with him . 
 Mercedes has sex with Doctor Paul Browning ( Joe Thompson ) who assumes she is a prostitute and pays her afterwards . Mercedes becomes a cleaner in a hospital along with Lynsey . Mercedes meets Doctor Browning at the hospital and he asks to keep seeing and paying Mercedes which she agrees to . Mercedes convinces Lynsey to help a patient who is DNR . Lynsey is blamed for the incident and Mercedes discovers Doctor Browning had not put the patient 's DNR request into their file . Mercedes discovers Doctor Browning is married and threatens him , telling him she will tell his wife of their relationship should he report Lynsey . Mercedes joins an escorting website . She is contacted by a client and arranges to meet him at a hotel . Lynsey finds Mercedes and stops her going ahead with it . Mercedes becomes depressed and Jacqui meets Riley , telling him if Mercedes were to see Bobby then she would feel better . Riley later arrives back in Hollyoaks village asking Mercedes to sign legal documents so he will have full custody of Bobby . 
 Mercedes and Riley agree to attend mediation , but Mercedes does not turn up as she gets drunk . Mercedes sees an online news article showing a picture of Riley and Mitzeee together and considers running away with Bobby , but instead attends Bobby 's christening service . She witnesses Riley and Mitzeee kissing in the car park and later confronts them . Riley tells her that it was only a kiss . Mercedes begins stalking Mitzeee who leaves the village temporarily . Mercedes learns Silas will not be put to trial and will be put in an institute for the insane . Mercedes tells people she is fine but begins having nightmares of her time imprisoned by Silas . Mercedes meets up with Doctor Browning and has sex with him . Mercedes begins escorting again and while meeting a client , locks herself in the bathroom . Lynsey arrives and comforts Mercedes . 
 Mitzeee and Riley begin a relationship . Mercedes continues to stalk Mitzeee . Mitzeee accuses Lynsey of being her stalker . Mitzeee becomes <unk> after noticing her stalker has been in the flat . Mercedes and Lynsey go to visit Mitzeee and after Mitzeee threatens them with a knife Lynsey leaves to find Riley . Mitzeee realises Mercedes is her stalker and they fight . Mitzeee drops the knife and Mercedes hits her over the head with a bottle , rendering her unconscious . Mercedes sees Lynsey and Riley returning to the flat and feeling desperate , stabs herself in the stomach in an attempt to turn Riley against Mitzeee . In hospital Mercedes tells Riley and her family that Mitzeee stabbed her . Lynsey discovers that Mercedes is Mitzeee 's stalker . Mercedes discharges herself from hospital to speak to Lynsey . However , Lynsey is found dead in her flat , having been murdered . Mercedes enters into a relationship with Doctor Browning to make <unk> jealous . Jacqui calls Mercedes and tells her she has found Lynsey 's scarf in Doctor Browning 's drawer . He then confesses to killing Lynsey to protect Mercedes . She tries to run , but he kidnaps her and drives out of the village . Mercedes agrees to run away with him , but the police find them and arrest Doctor Browning . 
 Mercedes reunites with Riley and they agree to marry . Mitzeee escapes from a psychiatric hospital , she confronts Mercedes and threatens her with a knife . Carl returns and attempts to persuade Riley not to marry Mercedes . Mercedes hears a conversation between Riley and Carl in which Riley admits that he does not love Mercedes and that he recently had sex with Mitzeee . Angered , Mercedes kidnaps Bobby in an attempt to punish Riley . Mercedes accuses Mitzeee of kidnapping Bobby . Mercedes convinces Phoebe Jackson ( Mandip Gill ) to look after Bobby . Mercedes sends a letter to Riley asking for half a million pounds ransom money . When dropping off the ransom money , Riley sees Mercedes and accuses her of kidnapping Bobby . Realising Mercedes has kidnapped Bobby , Phoebe tells Riley . Mercedes takes Bobby to the rooftop of a building , threatening to throw herself and Bobby off . Mercedes gives Riley Bobby and she agrees to leave with the ransom money . They return to the McQueen household where Mercedes ' involvement in the kidnap is revealed by Phoebe . Myra reveals Mercedes ' stabbing of herself and calls the police who arrest Mercedes . Riley is shot and killed by Simon Walker ( Neil <unk> ) . In prison Mercedes shows further signs of mental illness , denying to herself that Riley has died . Mercedes is later taken to a psychiatric hospital . Doctor Browning pleads innocent in his trial . When Myra visits Mercedes , Mercedes appears distressed and asks Myra to help her . Myra contacts lawyer Jim . At the trial , Jim suggests Riley was abusive towards Mercedes and stabbed her . He also suggests that Lynsey knew of this so Riley killed her . Mercedes backs up the claims and tells the courtroom that Riley had threatened to kill her so she kidnapped Bobby to protect him from Riley . The jury give a not guilty verdict for both charges of perverting the course of justice and Mercedes is released . Myra tells Mercedes she can not come home and instead tells her to move in to Jacqui 's old flat that has recently been flooded . 
 After discharging Mercedes from hospital , Lynsey is found dead and Browning confirms her time of death . He forges Mercedes ' discharge papers so it appears as though she left hospital after Lynsey 's murder . He moves into the flat next door to Riley to be closer to Mercedes . He blackmails Mercedes with the papers and tells her that she can make Riley jealous if they pretend to be in a relationship . His wife , Helen Browning visits Mercedes and warns her that Browning will ruin her life . She has a black eye and Mercedes uses this to give Riley the impression that Browning has been hitting her . Doctor Browning says Mercedes is lying and she leaves him . Browning finds Mercedes and they share their secrets about bad deeds . He tells her that he loves her no matter what she has done and they become closer . When Mercedes finds out the truth about Browning killing Lynsey , Browning kidnaps her and drives off . He suggests that they go abroad and Mercedes agrees , but the police arrive and arrest him . Mercedes is shocked when Browning is released , blaming Lynsey 's murder on Riley . Browning surprises Mercedes on Christmas Eve and spends Christmas with Mercedes ' family . Mercedes is thrown out by her family and Browning proposes marriage to her which she accepts . Myra makes up with Mercedes after Browning leads her to believe she has cancer . Mercedes is nearly raped by Browning 's boss Davies after Browning offers Mercedes up to him for sex in exchange for his job being saved following the situation with Myra , but she is saved by Browning and he proposes to her . 
 Mercedes and Browning travel to Las Vegas . There she meets up with Clare Devine ( Gemma Bissix ) , who tells her that Browning tried to seduce her . They concoct a plan to extort money from Browning . Mercedes is helped by Clare to fake her disappearance and blackmail him for ransom money . When Mercedes realizes that Clare has been lying she decides to stop the scheme . However Clare knocks Mercedes unconscious and takes her hostage . Clare manages to take Doctor Browning prisoner and locks both Mercedes and him in a cage . She threatens them with two vicious dogs and Jacqui finds the ransom money . Clare is then sent to prison . Mercedes helps Jacqui fake her death , after she steals from criminal Trevor Royle ( Greg Wood ) and uncovers Trudy Ryan ( Danniella Westbrook ) ' s human trafficking circle . Mercedes stays with Jacqui , who has fled to Alicante , for a few days , before returning to the village . Myra discovers Browning is a murderer and attempts to end his relationship with Mercedes , starting up a hate campaign between the pair . Mercedes and her siblings are horrified when they learn Myra was killed by Browning , and Mercedes fights with him in The Loft over this and him attempting to kill Cindy Cunningham ( Stephanie Waring ) . Mercedes is nearly killed by Browning , but she is saved by the police and shouts verbal abuse as Browning is arrested . John Paul later reveals to the family that Myra faked her death to escape Browning and Trevor Royle 's clutches . Determined to get over the tragedy that has befallen her , Mercedes takes up Clare 's offer , after she is released from prison and makes amends with her , of a 30th birthday party at The Loft , unaware that Clare is secretly planning to blow the club up with Mercedes inside to get her revenge . However , Sinead O 'Connor ( Stephanie Davis ) believes the bag containing the bomb has money and takes it to Ste Hay ( Kieron Richardson ) ' s leaving party , causing a huge explosion at the block of flats when Clare detonates the bomb . Mercedes is furious and confronts Clare in the street , and a fight breaks out between the two women . Mercedes pushes Clare into the road and she is run over by a car and killed instantly . 
 Mercedes is shocked when the driver of the car gets out and is revealed as Browning , who has escaped from prison . He holds Mercedes prisoner and forces her into the car , driving off and leaving Clare 's body in the road . He takes her to the empty McQueen house and attempts to kill her , but Cindy and Lindsey Butterfield ( Sophie Austin ) arrive and Mercedes batters Browning with a shovel , killing him . The three women panic and put Browning 's body into bin liners , stashing it in the attic of the McQueen home . When they discover that the attic is going to have new insulation a few weeks later , the three women scramble to dispose of the body and enlist the help of Freddie Roscoe ( Charlie Clapham ) to hide the body . Mercedes and the others place Browning 's body in his car and push it off a cliff , making it appear that Browning had committed suicide after escaping prison . Cindy however panics and alerts the police to the car crash scene . Police officer Sam Lomax ( Lizzie Roper ) discovers that Mercedes , Cindy and Lindsey were involved in Browning 's murder and brings them in for questioning . When they all confess , she lets them go , explaining that she has had to make some decisions to get rid of bad people , and the three women are set free , and Sam disposes of the evidence . 
 Mercedes enjoys a fling with Freddie and then soon begin a relationship . The pair get into a feud with Grace Black ( Tamara Wall ) and Trevor over The Loft , which they work in and run . Mercedes is left angry and disappointed when she walks in on Lindsey and Freddie kissing . So when Mercedes discovers that Freddie killed Grace 's father Fraser Black ( Jesse Birdsall ) for his mistreatment of his mother , Sandy Roscoe ( Gillian Taylforth ) , she uses this information to blackmail him . She forms strong friendships with Cindy and Lindsey , whom she bonded with over Browning 's death , and helps Cindy 's daughter Holly Cunningham ( Amanda Clapham ) when she suspects Cindy has had a mental breakdown . Mercedes also helps Theresa , who is serving a prison sentence for Calvin 's murder after his brother Sonny Valentine ( Aaron Fontaine ) had tricked Carmel into reporting Theresa to the police , to escape by forcing a pregnant Theresa to fake labour . Mercedes enters the hospital dressed as a doctor and helps Theresa escape , but Sonny tracks them down . Myra , who has returned from Spain , knocks Sonny unconscious and the trio try to escape , but the police catch them and Theresa is returned to prison . Mercedes supports John Paul when he reveals that he was raped by one of his students , Finn O 'Connor ( Keith Rice ) and Mercedes starts a feud with Finn 's stepmother Diane O 'Connor ( Alex Fletcher ) , who protests Finn 's innocence . Mercedes , Myra , Nana and Carmel publicly embarrass Diane and support John Paul in court at Finn 's trial , when Finn protests his innocence and lies , claiming that John Paul molested him , but Finn is found guilty for the rape and sent to prison . 
 Carmel is killed in a train crash and a ring disappears from Carmel 's body . The McQueen family accuse Mercedes of stealing it . Porsche McQueen ( <unk> Lee Moore ) eventually owns up to stealing it . Mercedes prepares to leave the village but she is stopped and stabbed by an unknown assailant in her home . Police find blood in the kitchen an launch a murder investigation . Freddie is arrested but later goes on the run with Lindsey . Grace is revealed to be Mercedes ' killer and carries on with a scheme to frame Freddie . Joe discovers the truth but Grace asks him to board a flight to France . He agrees and when he arrives at a villa Mercedes meets him and explains that she and Grace are framing Freddie for murder . She reveals that Grace stabbed her to make it look authentic and received money in exchange . Lindsey sees Grace talking to Mercedes via a webcam but the police accuse her of lying . When Phoebe is arrested for Mercedes ' murder after being framed by Lindsey , Mercedes threatens to come home if Grace does not secure Phoebe 's release . 
 Mercedes is smuggled back into Chester by Trevor after Grace is arrested and charged with her murder . Mercedes is later kidnapped by Freddie and he forces her to leave the village again , or he will kill her for real . Mercedes is caught in the garage by Phoebe , however , and she urges her to visit Nana in hospital after being trapped in a fire . When she visits Nana , Porsche slaps Mercedes and questions her on why she did what she did . Nana then tells Mercedes to leave the village and never return after everything she has put the family through . While Mercedes is leaving the hospital , she is caught by Trevor and he tells her that if she doesn 't stay in the village , then he will kill Phoebe . Mercedes apologize to her half @-@ brother John Paul for not attend his wedding with Ste , only discover that he already divorce with him . 
 Unknown to him Mercedes later becomes pregnant with Joe Roscoe 's ( Ayden Callaghan ) child , he is later admitted to hospital and loses the use of his legs after an attack from Robbie Roscoe ( Charlie Wernham ) his brother . Along with John Paul , Mercedes began to affair with their cousin Porsche 's husband Lockie Campbell . At the same time Mercedes slowly Starts to develop feelings for Joe , but is scared if she can stay faithful to him so she decides to go to Valencia with Freddie . She later decided not to go through with it and gets with Joe . Soon after , Mercedes and Joe broke up after a heated argument , ending with her declaring that the paternity of her baby wasn 't Joe . The same day Mercedes confided in John Paul about her fears for her unborn baby . Which leads them to go to the hospital to gain answers , but it is revealed that Mercedes baby had died and they asked her to prepare for induced labour . Mercedes is devastated and later goes to find Joe for support but is left even more heartbroken when Jason Roscoe tells her that he had left the village prior to their argument . She is left to face giving birth alone , but is relieved when her family arrive to support her , as she collapsed into their arms . After giving birth to her son who she decided to call Gabriel , Mercedes is left overwhelmed with grief and the funeral costs . So her half sister Theresa decided to help raise the cash by doing a naked photo shoot . However even after the money for the funeral had been gathered , Mercedes is still left heartbroken and distraught . Seeing her half sister in so much pain , Theresa decided to make a phone call to Mercedes mum , Myra , telling her that she should come home to support Mercedes when she needs her most . At Gabriel 's funeral , Mercedes is overwhelmed and disliked the flowers and music , so she kissed Gabriel 's coffin and walked out , leaving her family concerned . Myra finds Mercedes sitting on the outside bench , and <unk> her . Mercedes is delighted to see her and as they head home , she explains why she stormed out . When they enter the McQueen house , she is delighted to see that her family has arranged a mini memorial service for Gabriel . As she gets ready to say goodbye to Gabriel , she lets off a balloon into the sky and holds onto the teddy bear Theresa got her . After finding out from his brother , Robbie that Gabriel had died , Joe headed to the McQueen house and demanded to see Mercedes , but she refused to go and talk to him . After explaining to Myra why she didn 't want to see Joe , Myra urges her to tell Joe the truth . Mercedes later goes to find Joe at Gabriel 's grave , she almost tells him the truth , but can 't go thought with it , after he confessed he still loves her . She then realises that Joe has been hurt to much , and that she loves him so she doesn 't want to lose him . She then tells Myra that she will never tell Joe the truth . Mercedes and Joe then decide to go on holiday for a while to clear their heads . 
 On New Year 's Eve , Mercedes finally decides to tell Joe about Gabriel 's paternity . Joe breaks up with her , and sleeps with Lindsay . Lindsay believes that she and Joe are back together , but Joe has secretly met up with Mercedes at Gabriel 's grave and decided that Mercedes needs him more than ever , and they reconcile . 
 Cindy moves into the Roscoe house when it is revealed that she is a bigamist , and is married to Mac Nightingale ( David Easter ) as well as Dirk Savage ( David Kennedy ) . Lindsey develops a stomach bug , and Cindy jokes that she may be pregnant . Lindsey sees this as an opportunity to get Joe back , and steals a pregnancy test from Dee Valley Hospital . Lindsey then plants the test in the bathroom for Joe to find . Joe mistakenly believes Mercedes is the one who is pregnant . Mercedes states that she is not pregnant , and Lindsey reveals that it is her , but says a doctor from the hospital is the father . She secretly tells Joe he is the father , but Mercedes finds out that the doctor at the hospital hasn 't been anywhere near Lindsey , and he has had a vasectomy . Lindsey then tells Mercedes that Joe is the father when Mercedes confronts her . Joe tells Mercedes that it is true , but he still wants to be with her . Mercedes believes him , until Lindsey says that she belongs with Joe and they will finally have a brother or sister for JJ . Mercedes then breaks up with Joe , saying he has his perfect family with Lindsey and that she cannot ruin it as Lindsey can give him the baby that she couldn 't . She then sends a message to her brother , John Paul , explaining what had happened , she hugs him and leaves in a taxi . 
 Mercedes returns two months later , and is shocked to learn that Lindsey 's younger sister , Kim Butterfield ( Daisy Wood @-@ Davis ) , has been imprisoned for killing seven patients at the local hospital . However , after discussing the matter with Kim 's ex @-@ girlfriend Esther Bloom ( Jazmine Franks ) , herself a victim of the killer when they tried to murder her , they realise that Lindsey is the serial killer after an earring matching Lindsey 's was dropped when Esther was attacked . Mercedes confronts Lindsey with Cindy , and she confesses to the murders and attempted murders . Lindsey then strikes both Mercedes and Cindy with a large book , being escaping and adopting a disguise so that she is unrecognisable . Mercedes is desperate for Lindsey to be caught and so Joe 's baby son , JJ , not be abducted , and moves back in with Joe and Freddie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Mercedes was selected as one of the " top 100 British soap characters " by industry experts for a poll run by What 's on TV entitled " Who is Soap 's Greatest Legend ? " , in which readers regularly vote for their favourite character . In her book Soap Stars , Debbie Foy featured Metcalfe and described Mercedes as " having a dangerous streak and is always causing trouble or has a scam on the go , she enjoys taking risks and usually seems to get what she wants " . Virgin Media listed Mercedes ' wedding to Russ amongst their list of " Soap 's biggest wedding day disasters " before adding that " McQueen weddings are full of drama , and Russ and Mercedes ' big day was no exception " . Virgin Media later profiled some of Hollyoaks ' " hottest females " in their opinion , and stated about Mercedes , " As one of the hottest ladies in Hollyoaks , with curves to die for , Mercedes has had more men than hot dinners . And now Malachy 's met his maker , we 're sure it won 't be long till Mercedes earns yet another notch on her bedpost " . The Liverpool Echo described Mercedes ' desire to marry saying , " Mercedes has finally got what she 's wanted for so long - a great big gleaming rock on her finger . Not that it matters who gave it to her , of course " . Anthony D. Langford from AfterElton praised Mercedes , saying he loved the character and had these affections " Because frankly , she scares the <unk> out of me . This is one tough chick [ ... ] As hard edged as she is , it 's obvious she loves her brother dearly , and heaven help anyone who hurts a member of her family " . 
 Inside Soap 's Sarah praised Metcalfe 's performances as " love cheat Mercedes " , calling them " stellar " . On the character , a journalist from the Liverpool Echo said that " she 's got herself in to some ridiculous situations in the past , but mark Mercedes ' words , she will not be pushed around " . A writer for the Liverpool Daily Post commented that " say what you like about Mercedes , but she 's good at getting what she wants " . The Wirral News 's Laura Cox called Mercedes ' pairing with Riley " Hollyoaks ' favourite on @-@ off couple " before dubbing the storyline " dramatic " . She added that the storyline " kept viewers on tenterhooks " . 
 Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail felt that Mercedes was one of " the two sexiest people in Hollyoaks " , that infidelity is part of her " family 's standards " , that " Mercedes all but has the word ' slapper ' tattooed on her forehead and looks as guilty as the Pope in a brothel " and that it was unfortunate that Mercedes would not " disappear into the sunset at <unk> " . Stephen commented that there were not " many occasions when Mercedes fails to get her kit off for at least one of the lads [ ... ] This time , Carl 's the victim / lucky recipient ( depending on your viewpoint ) when he sets out to prove that Mercedes is a slut . <unk> . With her track record , how much proof does anyone need ? " Stephen commented on Mercedes and Jacqui saying that if they " started charging for sex - they 'd never worry about money again . It would be a <unk> 's holiday for them . They could even make it a family business - <unk> " . Stephen questioned whether Mercedes would " get her perfect wedding " and then answered , " Expect gunmen / bombs / fights / murders . Get her to the church on time , but make sure there ’ s a getaway car waiting , too " . When Mercedes was kidnapped , Stephen said that Mercedes was " very unlucky with being centre @-@ siege " . Stephen added that " Still , she 's been in more terrifying situations – actually , she 's only been in terrifying situations . Any chance of her just enjoying a double espresso once in a while ? " Stephen 's colleague Caroline Fitton commented on Mercedes ' doubts about whether she could bring Bobby up alone saying it was " entirely understandable " due to Mercedes being unable to restrain from regularly " changing clothes , cosmetics , jobs or men – let alone children " . Stephen felt that due to Mercedes ' recent behaviour she would have to chloroform her new boyfriend , adding that to Mercedes a " bloke 's a bloke , conscious or unconscious " . 
 Regarding the feud between Mercedes and Mitzeee , All About Soap columnist Laura Morgan commented that it was shocking that she felt sorry for Mercedes . She explained that even though Mercedes was " a nasty cow " because of the feud she was a " woman teetering on the verge of a massive meltdown " . Upon Mercedes telling Riley she has no need to be angry with Silas not sitting trial Morgan said she could tell Mercedes had been " knocked her for six " , adding that Mercedes could not " hide anything from us " . The journalist added that " Mercedes did what Mercedes does best and decided a randy hook @-@ up [ ... ] was just what she needed to get her mind off Silas . After slapping on the war paint and selecting her sluttiest outfit , <unk> Merc headed to a grotty hotel " . She went on to explain that " Mercedes knows she ’ s sinking . She pretty much admitted it when the doc asked her if she hated him and she replied , “ I guess I hate myself a little more ... ” So why doesn ’ t she get some help before she totally and utterly loses the plot ? [ ... ] we ’ re missing our tart @-@ with @-@ a @-@ heart Mercedes . We want to see her flirting her way around the village again , but without her finger firmly on the self @-@ destruct button ... " 
 Stephen also commented on the feud , opining that while " Mercedes and Mitzeee are hardly Dynasty 's Alexis and <unk> , they are enjoying quite a good spat " . After Mercedes ' stalking of Mitzeee , Stephen went on to say : " No one could deny that Mercedes has had one heck of an exciting life . Siege victim , kidnap victim , depressive , stalker ... " Stephen urged Mercedes to realise that " there are other guys in the world apart from Riley . True , you 've had them all , but you could simply start going round the circuit again " . She added that Mercedes does not have much to lose in her life . After her stalking of Mitzeee , Mercedes went on to stab herself , on this Carena Crawford of All About Soap said the episode itself was a " huge shocker " due to Mercedes ' actions . Crawford added that when Mercedes realises she will be blamed for knocking Mitzeee unconscious she sees the knife and " mad Mercedes came up with the perfect plan and we <unk> as she plunged the blade into her own stomach , knowing everyone would think Mitzeee did it ! So now manipulative Mercedes has the upper hand over her rival [ ... ] After all , who ’ d suspect anyone of stabbing themselves – very few people are warped enough to do that " . 
 Stephen of the Daily Mail pondered whether Mercedes sleeps , saying " I can ’ t imagine her taking a rest from thinking about blokes long enough to enjoy a trip to the Land of Nod " . She added that Mercedes confiding secrets in Doctor Browning " served only to bring them closer . Usually , half a lager is all it takes to induce such a closeness , so I suppose we can call it progress " . 
 Langford from AfterElton praised Mercedes ' part in Lynsey 's murder storyline , saying he was " loving " Metcalfe as " scheming Mercedes " . He commented that he did not believe Mercedes killed Lynsey because " as crazy as Mercedes is , I don ’ t think she ’ s a killer , but watching her benefit from Lynsey ’ s murder by <unk> her way back into Riley ’ s life has been delicious to watch " . Langford said that he was " loving the dysfunctional affair between Mercedes and the bad Dr. Browning . Their scenes are hot and they are so suited for each other . The games they play with each other are a hoot " . He later added that Mercedes and Doctor Browning have " blistering " chemistry , saying that he is perfect for a " twisted girl like Mercedes . I loved their scenes — they were hot , hot , hot . I really thought they made a delicious and fun couple . But now it ’ s all ruined with Browning being a killer " . Morgan of All About Soap felt that Doctor Browning 's act of killing of Lynsey " was a crime of passion , but there ’ s no way Mercy is worth killing for " . Morgan later questioned why Mitzeee did not " just finish the job ? ! " when she threatened Mercedes with a knife . 
 After Riley proposed to Mercedes , Crawford commented that she does not " believe she really loves him . We still think this was all about winning for her " . Crawford added that she is " really hoping Mercedes is found out soon before Riley says his vows . Little Bobby needs a stable mother , not mental Mercy " . Stephen of the Daily Mail later questioned whether Mercedes will " bag Riley before she gets her bus pass at 60 ? " She added that Mercedes accusation that Mitzeee has kidnapped Bobby " is relative small fry " in comparison to her other recent misdemeanours . Morgan of All About Soap said that " the end of tonight ’ s episode was the moment fans had been patiently waited for – evil Mercedes was being carted off down the cop shop " . She added that Riley " come perilously close to pushing Mercedes over that rooftop , but that wouldn ’ t have been a bad thing , right ? " Following Mercedes ' trial , Crawford opined that she could not " quite believe she managed it , but she was cleared of all charges – will the mixed @-@ up McQueen ever get her comeuppance ? We ’ ll give Mercy her dues : she gave an outstanding performance in court – even we were left wondering if Riley had actually abused her – so a non @-@ the @-@ wiser jury had no chance against the wily woman " . She added that " someone needs to stand up to merciless Mercy " . Stephen felt that Myra deciding whether to give Mercedes another chance would be difficult as she would have to " manage to keep up with the many personalities the show has given the girl ? Short of turning her into a gay dwarf , there can ’ t be many transformations left " . 
 Many fans of the show were outraged when Mercedes was supposedly murdered by Freddie Roscoe in November 2014 , just a week after her sister Carmel died in a train crash . However , Jennifer Metcalfe stated that : ' Mercedes 's departure is totally shrouded in mystery . Running up to the week where she exits , she has really annoyed pretty much everyone in the village , so it 's ' who 's done it ? ' . The story line was billed as a complete mystery , as the viewers don 't completely know what happened between Mercedes and her killer on the night at the McQueen house , or whether or not she was actually dead . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 During her time on the serial Metcalfe has been nominated for a variety of awards for her portrayal of Mercedes . Metcalfe was nominated for " Sexiest Female " at the 2007 British Soap Awards . She was soon after nominated for " Best Bitch " and " Sexiest Female " at the 2007 Inside Soap Awards . In 2008 , at the British Soap Awards and the Digital Spy Soap Awards Metcalfe was nominated in the " Sexiest Female " category . Later that year , at the Inside Soap Awards , she was nominated for " Best Bitch " and " Sexiest Female " , the same year Niall terrorising the McQueen family was nominated for " Best Storyline " . At the 2009 British Soap Awards Metcalfe was nominated for " Best Actress " and " Sexiest Female " at the same time that Niall 's revenge on the McQueens was nominated for " Best Storyline " and the church explosion in which Mercedes was involved was nominated for " Spectacular Scene " . At the 2009 Inside Soap Awards Metcalfe was nominated for " Sexiest Female " and the conclusion to Niall 's revenge was nominated for " Best Storyline " ; the McQueen family also won the award for " Best Family " that year . At the 2010 All About Soap Bubble Awards Mercedes and Calvin were nominated for the " Fatal Attraction " award in the category of " Most sizzling couple " . [ 117 ] At the 2010 Inside Soap Awards Metcalfe was again nominated for the " Sexiest Female " award ; she was also nominated for " Sexiest Female " and " Best Actress " at the British Soap Awards ceremony . [ 118 ] [ 119 ] In 2011 Metcalfe was nominated in the category of " Sexiest Female " at the British Soap Awards and for " Best Actress " and " Sexiest Female " at the Inside Soap Awards . [ 120 ] [ 121 ] At the 2011 <unk> Awards Metcalfe was nominated for " TV Soap Personality " for her portrayal of Mercedes . [ 122 ] In 2012 Metcalfe was nominated for " Best Actress " at the TV Choice Awards , [ 123 ] " Sexiest Female " and " Best Actress " at the British Soap Awards , [ 124 ] and " Best Actress " , " Best Bitch " and " Sexiest Female " at the Inside Soap Awards . [ 125 ] 
 = Georgi Kinkladze = 
 Georgi Kinkladze ( Georgian : <unk> <unk> ; born 6 July 1973 ) , also spelled <unk> , or Giorgi , or shortened to Gio , is a Georgian former footballer , who played as a playmaking midfielder . Born in the Georgian capital Tbilisi , his first professional club was Mretebi Tbilisi . In Georgia he won three league titles and two cups with Dinamo Tbilisi , and was named national player of the year twice . He first came to international prominence with his performances for the Georgian national team against Wales in 1994 and 1995 . 
 <unk> transferred from Dinamo Tbilisi to English Premier League club Manchester City in 1995 , where his dribbling ability and spectacular goals made him a cult hero , winning the club 's Player of the Year award in two consecutive seasons . Kinkladze stayed with Manchester City despite relegation to the Football League First Division in 1996 , but the club continued to decline , and after a second relegation in 1998 he joined Dutch champions Ajax . Kinkladze was unable to settle in the Netherlands , and returned to England with Derby County a little over a year later . He spent four years at Derby , making nearly 100 appearances . After leaving Derby in 2003 , he became a journeyman footballer , having unsuccessful trials at several clubs before joining Cypriot club Anorthosis in 2004 , where he won a league championship medal . He finished his playing career with Russian club Rubin Kazan in 2006 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Georgi Kinkladze was born on 6 July 1973 in Tbilisi , Georgia , which was then part of the Soviet Union . As a child , he lived in the <unk> district of the city with his father , <unk> ( an engineer ) , his mother <unk> ( a teacher ) and his elder sister . <unk> was keen to see his son succeed as a footballer , sometimes making him walk around the family home on his knees to strengthen his legs , and enrolled him for Dinamo Tbilisi 's junior side when he was six years old . <unk> disapproved of some of her husband 's methods , instead taking Georgi to lessons in <unk> , a traditional Georgian ballet . Over the next few years , Kinkladze played in Dinamo Tbilisi 's youth teams , progressing as far as the reserve team , where he played alongside Shota Arveladze , who would later become his team @-@ mate at both senior and international level . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 When Georgian football formed leagues independent of Soviet competition in 1989 , a family friend arranged for Kinkladze to move to Mretebi Tbilisi , the first openly professional club in the Soviet Union . Mretebi Tbilisi were a smaller club playing at a lower level , but the move gave Kinkladze the opportunity to play first team football instead of playing for Dinamo 's second team . Kinkladze made his professional debut aged 16 , and immediately became a first team regular . In 1991 Kinkladze 's Mretebi won the <unk> Liga , and won promotion to the highest division following a play @-@ off . 
 After a season in the top flight with Mretebi , Kinkladze was signed by Dinamo Tbilisi , the team he represented as a youth , for one million roubles . In September 1992 , shortly after signing for Dinamo , Kinkladze made his senior international debut , aged 19 . The match , against Azerbaijan , was the Georgian national side 's fourth since breaking from the Soviet Union in 1991 . Kinkladze 's youth @-@ level team @-@ mate Shota Arveladze also played in the match , and Kinkladze provided an assist for a goal by Arveladze . 
 In Kinkladze 's first season at the club , Dinamo won a league and cup double . However , due to the ongoing Georgian Civil War , during 1993 the Dinamo Tbilisi management sought to put their players in a more stable environment . As part of this , Kinkladze was sent on loan to 1 . FC Saarbrücken in Germany . Kinkladze made his Saarbrücken debut in a 2 . Bundesliga match against Tennis Borussia Berlin , a 2 – 2 draw on 4 March 1994 . He was unable to settle into the side at Saarbrücken , rarely playing a full 90 minutes , and was sent off in a 1 – 3 defeat to Hertha Berlin . At the end of the season , Kinkladze returned to Tbilisi to resume his career in Georgia , where he was named the national Player of the Year for 1993 . Dinamo president <unk> Jordania was still uncomfortable with Kinkladze playing in Georgia amid political instability , and offered the player to Atlético Madrid for approximately £ 200 @,@ 000 ; they gave him a trial , but no contract . He then trained with Real Madrid 's reserves , where he caught the eye of Boca Juniors scouts , who took him to Argentina for a month 's loan . Kinkladze met his childhood hero Diego Maradona , but did not gain a permanent contract , as manager Silvio <unk> regarded him as too similar to Boca 's Argentine international playmaker Alberto <unk> . 
 In September 1994 , Kinkladze was part of the Georgian team that played Moldova in Tbilisi . Italian clubs became interested in Kinkladze after seeing footage of his performance , and the Italian press nicknamed Kinkladze the " Rivera of the Black Sea " , but no concrete attempts to sign him took place . It was not until Manchester City chairman Francis Lee saw the recording that negotiations for a permanent move abroad occurred . <unk> by Kinkladze 's display , Lee contacted Jordania , securing an agreement that Manchester City would have first refusal should Dinamo wish to sell the player . 
 Two months later , Kinkladze scored his first international goal as Georgia defeated Wales 5 – 0 . Wales goalkeeper Neville Southall later said of the game " They murdered us ... [ Kinkladze ] was different class and the best player on the pitch by a mile . " When the teams met again at Cardiff Arms Park , scouts from several clubs saw Kinkladze score the only goal of the game with a 20 @-@ yard ( 18 m ) chip over Southall . In his last season with Dinamo , the team once again won the double . Kinkladze had scored 14 goals in 21 appearances , and clubs from several countries expressed interest in signing him . Jordania kept true to his agreement with Lee , and on 15 July 1995 , Kinkladze signed for Manchester City . The fee was generally reported as £ 2 million . After initial difficulties obtaining a work permit , Kinkladze made his debut for Manchester City against Tottenham Hotspur in a 1 – 1 draw on 19 August 1995 . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Manchester City 's form was poor during the 1995 – 96 season . The team failed to win a single league game in the first three months of the season , but Kinkladze quickly became a popular figure . Kinkladze 's first goal for the club occurred in a 1 – 0 win against Aston Villa , following a one @-@ two with Niall Quinn . Kinkladze was initially homesick , as he was living in a hotel and spoke little English . In an effort to resolve his homesickness , his mother moved to Manchester to provide him with familiar food . By the time Manchester City travelled to Middlesbrough on 9 December 1995 , press and supporters regarded Kinkladze as the star player of the Manchester City side . The match against Middlesbrough was billed as a contest between Kinkladze and the Brazilian playmaker Juninho . Kinkladze scored the opening goal with a solo effort , but the match ended 4 – 1 to Middlesbrough . However , the Middlesbrough fans subsequently voted Kinkladze the " Best Opposing Player of the Season " . On 16 March 1996 , Kinkladze scored a particularly spectacular goal in a 2 – 1 win against Southampton . Kinkladze beat five players before chipping the ball over Southampton goalkeeper Dave <unk> . The goal won BBC programme Match of the Day 's " Goal of the Month " , and placed second in the programme 's " Goal of the Season " competition . 
 On the final day of the season , Manchester City were relegated to the First Division , prompting transfer speculation linking Kinkladze to a number of clubs including Barcelona , Internazionale , Liverpool , and Celtic . However , he opted to stay at Manchester City , where he had been named Player of the Year for 1995 – 96 . The 1996 – 97 season proved a turbulent one for Manchester City , and over the course of the season , Kinkladze played for five different managers . With Keith Curle no longer at the club , Kinkladze became the main penalty taker , and also scored a number of goals from free @-@ kicks , including a 35 @-@ yard ( 32 m ) effort against Swindon Town described by English newspaper Manchester Evening News as " like a missile " . In the First Division , Kinkladze frequently had two or even three opposing players assigned to man mark him . Several teams chose to combat Kinkladze 's playmaking skill with robust tackles ; in one such match on 11 January 1997 , against Crystal Palace , Kinkladze had to be stretchered off following a challenge by David Hopkin . Manchester City finished the season well below the promotion places , and again , there was speculation that Kinkladze would leave the club . At the final match of the season on 3 May 1997 , a 3 – 2 win against Reading , Manchester City supporters campaigned to keep Kinkladze at the club , even though he was not playing in the match , due to injury . The campaign even extended to the half @-@ time advertisements on the scoreboard , the " adverts " being messages from supporter groups who had paid to display them . Kinkladze was named Player of the Year for the second consecutive season , and one month after the season ended , he announced his intention to stay at the club by signing a new three @-@ year contract . Kinkladze used the proceeds from his new contract to buy a Ferrari , though the car caused consternation among club officials . Their fears were realised on 29 October 1997 , when Kinkladze lost control of his vehicle and crashed into a motorway bridge in Hale . Kinkladze received back injuries requiring 30 stitches , and missed two matches as a result . 
 Manchester City 's downward trajectory toward the Second Division continued in the 1997 – 98 season , and on 17 February 1998 , manager Frank Clark was sacked . His replacement , Joe Royle , was appointed City manager on 18 February 1998 . He had a reputation for playing defensive midfielders , which led to his Everton team being nicknamed the " Dogs of War " . Royle viewed Kinkladze as an unaffordable luxury in a relegation battle , and in his first board meeting as Manchester City manager , he opened proceedings with the words " We have to sell Kinkladze " . After playing the first two games under Royle , a 1 – 2 loss on 18 February against Ipswich Town , and a 3 – 1 win against Swindon Town on 23 February , Kinkladze sustained an ankle injury , which sidelined him for a month . He made his return at Port Vale on 14 March , despite having taken little part in training in the preceding week . Port Vale were a team with a physically robust approach , and used the muddy conditions to their advantage . Kinkladze was played out of position on the right wing , much to his displeasure , and gave a performance that the Manchester Evening News summarised as " barely noticeable " . Vale defeated City 2 – 1 , and Royle severely criticised Kinkladze for a lack of effort , dropping him for the next six games . In 2005 , Royle explained his view of Kinkladze in his autobiography : " To the supporters he was the only positive in all that time . To me , he was a big negative . I am not saying that City 's ills were all down to Kinkladze , but there was too much about the whole Kinkladze cult phenomenon that wasn 't right ... too often since his arrival , the team had under @-@ performed . I couldn 't help deducing that contrary to popular opinion , he would be my weak link not my strong one . " With two games remaining , Manchester City were in the relegation places , and Kinkladze was restored to the starting lineup for the home match against Queens Park Rangers ( QPR ) . The QPR team contained Vinnie Jones , who had a violent reputation and played using the axiom " if their top geezer gets sorted out early doors , you win " . Jones tried to apply his philosophy to Kinkladze , even targeting him in the tunnel before the start of the match . Kinkladze opened the scoring with a free kick , but City could not maintain their lead . Defending described by The Observer 's reporter as a " calamity " culminated in an unusual own goal from Jamie Pollock , and meant the match ended in a 2 – 2 draw . City were relegated for the second time in three seasons despite a final day 5 – 2 win against Stoke City . In total , Kinkladze made 119 appearances for Manchester City , scoring 22 goals . He played regular international football during this period of his career , including in a 0 – 0 draw with three @-@ time World Cup winners Italy . 
 = = = Ajax = = = 
 Following transfer negotiations which had been ongoing in the final months of the season , Kinkladze left Manchester City for Dutch club Ajax for £ 5 million . The move brought a reunion with Shota Arveladze , with whom he shared a house in Amsterdam . However , Kinkladze 's spell at Ajax proved unsuccessful . He was originally signed as a replacement for Jari Litmanen , but Litmanen stayed at Ajax as his proposed move to Barcelona fell through . As a result , Kinkladze played in an unfamiliar left @-@ wing position . His league debut for Ajax came in a 2 – 0 win against Willem II on 23 August 1998 , but he made few starts . To compound matters , manager Morten Olsen was sacked early in the season , and a disagreement with replacement Jan Wouters resulted in Kinkladze losing his place in the team . " I could have been Maradona and he wouldn 't have changed the system to accommodate me " , Kinkladze recalled later . " I wasn 't playing football and that made my life hell . " He immediately started to look elsewhere . Several English top @-@ flight clubs showed interest in signing him , but were discouraged by work permit issues . His lack of regular playing time also resulted in him losing his place in the Georgian national team . Having failed to established himself in the first team and struggling with a succession of injuries , he made just 12 appearances for Ajax in his first season . 
 Kinkladze was not issued a squad number for his second season , and was made to train with the reserve team . In September 1999 , Kinkladze held transfer talks with Sheffield United , but no move materialised . Two months later , a return to England was secured in the form of a loan move to Derby County . 
 = = = Derby County = = = 
 As Kinkladze was not playing regular international football when he signed for Derby , he was not automatically entitled to a work permit , but a review panel gave him special dispensation , due to his previous contribution to English football . He made his debut on 28 November 1999 , coming on as a substitute for Avi <unk> in a 1 – 2 loss against Arsenal , the first of 14 loan appearances . He scored his first Derby goal on 4 March 2000 in a 4 – 0 win against Wimbledon . At the end of the season , the loan move was made permanent . The transfer fee of £ 3 million set a club record that stood until 2007 . 
 Kinkladze missed the start of the 2000 – 01 season due to a hernia operation , to the disappointment of Smith , who expected him to become a leading figure at the club . He returned to the side as a substitute against Middlesbrough on 6 September 2000 . With Derby 3 – 0 down , Kinkladze and Malcolm Christie were introduced in a double substitution . The pair then proved influential as Derby came back to draw the match 3 – 3 . During the next four months , Kinkladze was sometimes a starter and sometimes a substitute , rotating with Stefano <unk> , until a groin injury sustained in the return match with Middlesbrough kept Kinkladze out for two months . Over the season , Kinkladze " showed little of the brilliance he was bought in to deliver " and was named Derby 's biggest disappointment of the season by The Guardian . The match against Leeds United on 23 September 2000 was a rare success for him . He came on as a substitute with 17 minutes remaining and levelled the game 1 – 1 with a solo goal two minutes later , jinking between two defenders before curling a left @-@ foot shot beyond the goalkeeper . Derby struggled for most of the season , but avoided relegation . Kinkladze stayed at the club , since his injuries and inability to prove himself led to a lack of serious offers . Around this time , he married Louise Tai , a Mancunian . Louise then became a member of the Orthodox Church and was christened in Tbilisi , receiving a new name – Mariam . Their first child , Saba , was born in October 2001 . 
 For Kinkladze , the start of the 2001 – 02 season followed a similar pattern to the previous season , comprising a mixture of starts and substitute appearances . Jim Smith resigned from his managerial position at Derby on 7 October 2001 , leaving Kinkladze , a Smith favourite , bitterly disappointed . The appointment of new manager Colin Todd signalled a change in the club 's playing style . Todd did not favour flair players , and Kinkladze made only a single substitute appearance in Todd 's first two months in charge . Frustrated by a lack of opportunities , Kinkladze took the unusual step of using his lawyer to arrange a meeting with Todd to discuss his exclusion from the first team . Todd reacted by telling Kinkladze he could leave the club if he was unhappy . According to Kinkladze 's agent , Manchester City , as well as Spanish clubs Valencia , Mallorca and Málaga , were all interested in signing Kinkladze . However , Todd was sacked on 14 January 2002 with Derby second from bottom of the Premier League , and John Gregory was appointed as manager on 30 January 2002 . Kinkladze stayed at the club , playing regular first team football in the remainder of the season , but Derby continued to struggle , and Kinkladze endured relegation for the third time in his career . The club , who were £ 35 million in debt , started an end @-@ of @-@ season clear @-@ out to reduce their annual £ 17 million wage bill . Derby 's actions included off @-@ loading of some of the highest earners , and the manager informed Kinkladze that he had no future at the club . However , Kinkladze , whose contract ended in summer 2003 , was reluctant to leave the club and turned down a move to Turkish champions Galatasaray . 
 As the club continued its attempts to terminate Kinkladze 's contract , he trained with the reserve team up to 29 September 2002 , missing Derby 's first five matches of the 2002 – 03 season . He was brought back to the first team following two defeats , introduced as a substitute after an hour 's stalemate against Stoke City on 31 August . His introduction proved crucial in turning the game into a 2 – 0 win for Derby , as he took part in the build @-@ up of both goals . He then missed a number of matches through injuries , featuring in around half of Derby 's games in the remainder of 2002 . In October 2002 , Georgian national team manager Aleksandr <unk> unexpectedly omitted Kinkladze and captain Georgi Nemsadze from the team for their match against Russia , causing a stir in Georgia . Kinkladze , surprised and disappointed , said : " When I was out of form , he constantly phoned me , asked me about my play and called me to the team . Now I 'm fit , scoring goals , but he didn 't call me and even didn 't phone . " Both Kinkladze and Nemsadze returned to the starting line @-@ up for the next European Championship qualifying match on against Ireland . By January , because of the financial crisis at Derby , Kinkladze had not been paid for more than three months . He intended to quit , but although his agent admitted interest from German side Hamburg and a second enquiry from Galatasaray , no move transpired and he remained at the club . He played for Derby more often in the second half of the season , and his form resulted in him being named the supporters Player of the Year . Derby finished the season in the bottom half of the table , and needed to reduce costs for the next season as their Premier League parachute payments had ended . As a result , Derby offered Kinkladze a one @-@ year contract , but on a wage one third of that of his previous contract . Kinkladze decided to turn down this contract extension proposal , desiring a move to a more successful club with a chance of winning trophies . To this end , he held talks with Liverpool in May 2003 . As contract negotiations with Derby did not reach a positive conclusion , Kinkladze left the club . 
 Without a club during pre @-@ season , Kinkladze trained with Portsmouth , where his former manager Jim Smith was on the managing staff . He played for Portsmouth in one pre @-@ season friendly , but Portsmouth decided instead to sign another former Manchester City playmaker , Eyal <unk> . Over the next few months , he was linked with moves to Scottish clubs Dundee and Celtic , and later Leeds United , but none resulted in a contract offer . As a consequence , he had to train individually and lost his place in the national team again , this time before the return match against Russia . In December 2003 , Kinkladze went for a one @-@ week trial at Panathinaikos , following an invitation from Giannis <unk> , the owner of the Greek club . However , at the end of the trial , the club decided not to sign him . Six months later , he was linked with a move to Russian club <unk> Yaroslavl , but again , he was not offered a contract . 
 = = = Anorthosis = = = 
 Kinkladze 's year and a half spell without a club came to an end in October 2004 . Kinkladze 's former international team @-@ mate <unk> Ketsbaia was player @-@ manager at financially troubled Cypriot team Anorthosis . Ketsbaia gave his old friend a chance to rebuild his career , offering him a contract to play for Anorthosis . He made his debut against title contenders APOEL on 21 November and marked it with a fine goal . He scored once more in a 5 – 0 home victory against Olympiakos Nicosia , and in February he was recalled to Georgia 's squad for the friendly against Lithuania . His contract was initially only for one season , but the club extended it for another year . Anorthosis ended the season successfully by winning the Cypriot championship and earned a place in the qualifying rounds of 2005 – 06 UEFA Champions League , where , thanks to the club 's good run , Kinkladze played five times . He started both legs of a 2 – 1 first round aggregate win against Dinamo Minsk , was twice a substitute in a 3 – 2 second round aggregate win against Süper Lig runners @-@ up Trabzonspor , and played the full 90 minutes in a 1 – 2 third round home defeat against Rangers . His display against Rangers caught the attention of Rubin Kazan ’ s manager <unk> <unk> , who invited him to join the Russian club . On 22 August 2005 , Kinkladze played his last game for Anorthosis against Omonia in the Cypriot Super Cup and two days later , on the day of the second leg of the tie against Rangers , he left to close a deal with Rubin . Ketsbaia said regarding the departure : " I don 't want players who have no wish to play for Anorthosis . As far as I 'm concerned the Kinkladze chapter is now closed . " 
 = = = Rubin Kazan = = = 
 Anorthosis and Rubin reached an agreement on 26 August . Kinkladze signed a contract until the end of the season , becoming the most decorated Georgian footballer to play in the Russian Premier League . He made his debut for Rubin the next day , playing the full 90 minutes in a 1 – 2 defeat against FC Rostov . On a personal level the debut was a successful one ; his corner kick was headed into the net by <unk> <unk> for Rubin 's goal . He had less remarkable performances in the next two games and was substituted both times . This did not affect Berdyev 's faith in him , and at a post @-@ match press conference he defended Kinkladze : " He needs time . He is an experienced player who , I think , will help the team . " The next game for Rubin was a 5 – 1 away win against low @-@ ranked Terek Grozny , and Kinkladze made a considerable contribution to it , scoring two goals and making two assists . Against Tom Tomsk , he was less successful . Kinkladze missed a late penalty , denying Rubin a vital victory . After the match Berdyev claimed he made a mistake in his choice of penalty taker . 
 Despite his misgivings Berdyev kept Kinkladze in the team , where he was used as one of three offensive midfielders in a 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 formation . Kinkladze , with his technical style and inclination for improvisation , brought more variety to the attacking play of the team , in contrast to the restrained style of play that Berdyev favoured . He provided an assist in four consecutive matches . The most important of these was against Zenit St. Petersburg , in a match that decided a place in the following year 's UEFA Cup . Subsequently , he received a recall to the Georgian national squad for friendlies against Bulgaria and Jordan . However , a muscle strain meant he missed both national team games and Rubin 's final league match . He ended the 2005 season with seven assists and two goals in nine appearances for Rubin . 
 Rubin delayed in offering Kinkladze a contract extension , leading Anorthosis to make an attempt to re @-@ sign him early in the pre @-@ season , but Kinkladze rejected the offer as he wished to stay at Rubin . By late December , Rubin expressed a desire to retain him but contract talks were delayed due to family reasons , and it took until mid @-@ January for a new one @-@ year contract to be agreed . 
 During his successful 2005 season , 32 @-@ year @-@ old Kinkladze said he hoped to play on well into his thirties . The 2006 season , however , was his last . He sustained an injury in Rubin 's first competitive match , a 1 – 0 cup match defeat against <unk> which proved to be the last time he played a full match . A recurrence of an old injury meant he was sidelined for longer than expected , only making his return to full training in late May . Kinkladze continued to struggle to maintain fitness , making five further appearances for Rubin , two of which were starts . A match against Rostov on 20 August 2006 was the last of Kinkladze 's playing career . In September , he was called to the Georgia national team but did not play or appear on the substitutes ' bench . A short time later he had to undergo another course of medical treatment . He also passed a thorough medical examination , the results of which were reported as the deciding factor for his future at the club . In October , he was an unused substitute just once ; he and his compatriots were the subject of criticism from Rubin 's general director who announced to the press " there are questions about the Georgians in the team regarding their training and attitude to football " . In November , Kinkladze again suffered an injury and missed the remainder of the season . 
 After a disappointing year for Kinkladze , Rubin decided not to renew his contract . In January 2007 , he held talks with his previous club , Anorthosis , but the transfer never materialised . In an interview in August 2007 Kinkladze 's former international team @-@ mate <unk> <unk> confirmed that Kinkladze had finished his career and settled in Moscow . Kinkladze later worked as a sports agent , and in August 2011 returned to his former club Anorthosis , where he was employed as Sports Director until an amicable departure in June 2012 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Kinkladze 's position was as a playmaking midfielder , typically playing further forward than the rest of the midfield . The main aim of the role is to create goalscoring chances , suiting a creative player like Kinkladze . <unk> ability was generally viewed as one of Kinkladze 's strongest attributes , and his jinking runs with the ball resulted in some spectacular goals , most notably his " Goal of the Month " against Southampton . Set piece ability was another of Kinkladze 's strengths ; he regularly took corners and free kicks . He also took penalties ; seven of his Manchester City goals were scored from the spot , though he stopped taking penalties for the club following two consecutive misses in the 1997 – 98 season . Two of his nine goals for Georgia were also penalties . 
 Weaker points of Kinkladze 's game were those related to defending . He was not noted for tackling , which sometimes caused frustration for his managers ; Colin Todd remarked wistfully in 2001 that " Georgi has to understand that there is an art to tackling " . <unk> to tackle and accusations of a lack of effort were also the source of Joe Royle 's omission of Kinkladze from his Manchester City side . 
 On occasions , Kinkladze played as a second striker , a role with less positional responsibility . Periods when Kinkladze was used in this way included Frank Clark 's first months as Manchester City manager , and alongside Fabrizio Ravanelli at Derby County . Though a left @-@ footed player , he did not perform well when played as a left winger , and publicly expressed his distaste for playing in the position . 
 Over the course of his career he was Georgian Player of the Year twice , won the Club Player of the Year three times at English clubs , and has been described by a Russian football history as the brightest Georgian talent of the 1990s . In 2005 , he placed third in a BBC poll to find Manchester City 's all @-@ time " cult hero " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 A Includes FA Cup , League Cup , UEFA Champions League , UEFA Cup , Johan Cruijff Shield , CIS Cup and Cyprus Super Cup . 
 B Complete figures for the Georgian Cup are unavailable and thus excluded . 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Georgia 's goal tally first . 
 = 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines = 
 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines , abbreviated as ( 3 / 3 ) , is an infantry battalion of the United States Marine Corps , based out of Kāne <unk> , Hawai 'i . Known as either " Trinity " or " America 's Battalion " , the unit falls under the command of the 3rd Marine Regiment of the 3rd Marine Division . The unit consists of approximately 800 U.S. Marines and United States Navy sailors . Like most battalions of the U.S. Marine Corps , 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines is made up of three rifle companies ( India , Kilo , and Lima ) , a Headquarters and Services ( H & S ) company , and a weapons company . The battalion was originally formed at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune , North Carolina in 1942 and saw action on both Bougainville and Guam during World War II , where it was awarded the first of its Presidential Unit Citations for " gallantry , determination , and esprit de corps in accomplishing its mission under extremely difficult and hazardous conditions " ; and the first of its Navy Unit Commendations for " outstanding service " . Marines in the battalion were also awarded one Medal of Honor and seven Navy Crosses during the war . Following World War II , 3rd Battalion was disbanded until 1951 , when it was reformed in California . The battalion was alerted for possible deployment during the 1956 Suez War and the 1958 intervention in Lebanon . In 1965 , the Marines of 3rd Battalion were deployed to the Vietnam War and participated in Operation Starlite , the first major Marine engagement of that conflict . The battalion continued to see major action through Vietnam and was rotated back to the United States in 1969 . Famous alumni from its time in Vietnam include Corporal Robert Emmett O 'Malley , the first Marine in Vietnam to be awarded the Medal of Honor , Oliver North , and John Ripley . Around the end of the Vietnam War , the Battalion was deactivated for a second time in 1974 . 
 In 1975 , 3rd Battalion was reformed for the third ( and last ) time at Marine Corps Base Hawaii . During this period , the battalion conducted numerous deployments in the Pacific and Indian Oceans . In 1983 , 3rd Battalion deployed off the coast of Lebanon for several weeks during a particularly tense period in the civil war . During the 1980s , the battalion was briefly commanded by Charles Krulak , later the 31st Commandant of the Marine Corps , who nicknamed 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines " America 's Battalion " because it was similar to the nickname used by the Dallas Cowboys . 3rd Battalion deployed again in 1990 as part of Operation Desert Shield and saw action at the Battle of Khafji and again during the liberation of Kuwait . In the early 21st century the battalion deployed overseas six times as part of the Global War on Terror : three times for Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and three times for Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq . One Marine from the battalion , Dakota Meyer , was awarded the Medal of Honor during the Global War on Terror . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Like many infantry battalions in the Marine Corps , 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines consists of five companies : three Rifle Companies , a Headquarters and Service Company ( H & S ) , and a Weapons Company . The rifle companies are designed to act as maneuver elements for the battalion . With attachments they can also be employed independently for short periods of time . Each rifle company ideally consists of six officers and 176 enlisted personnel and is typically commanded by a Captain who is assisted by a First Sergeant . The three rifle companies in 3rd Battalion have traditionally been I Company , K Company , and L Company . Because the Marine Corps uses the NATO phonetic alphabet , these companies are commonly known as India , Kilo , and Lima . Prior to 1956 , under the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet , they were known as Item , King , and Love . H & S Company provides combat service support and consists of the battalion staff , including the headquarters element , communications , medical , and service platoons . While not a combat unit itself , H & S provides the battalion with command and control , surveillance , target acquisition , and service support , making the battalion able to function independently without the direct involvement of a higher headquarters . Weapons Company provides fire support coordination , medium mortars , anti @-@ armor weapons , and heavy machine gun support for the rifle companies . Generally , these elements of Weapons Company are directly employed by the battalion , but may also be attached to the rifle companies . 
 = = World War II ( 1942 – 1945 ) = = 
 = = = Formation and Deployment ( 1942 – 1943 ) = = = 
 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines was activated on 1 June 1942 at New River , North Carolina as the 5th Training Battalion , Division Special Troops , 1st Marine Division , Fleet Marine Force . On 16 June , they were redesignated as the 3rd Battalion , 3rd Marines , Fleet Marine Force . From August to September 1942 , 3rd Battalion deployed with the rest of the 3rd Marine Regiment to Tutuila , American Samoa and was reassigned to the 2nd Marine Brigade . In 1943 , they were reassigned to the Fleet Marine Force . In May 1943 , they redeployed to Auckland , New Zealand and in June , were reassigned to the 3rd Marine Division . From July to August 1943 , they redeployed to the island of Guadalcanal to begin training in preparation for the invasion of Bougainville in November . 
 = = = Bougainville ( 1943 ) = = = 
 On 1 November 1943 , the 3rd Battalion landed at Cape Torokina with the rest of 3rd Marines , just east of the <unk> River . While resistance was extremely light , the rough surf and dense jungle ( which in many places extended all the way to the water ) resulted in numerous landing craft being lost or damaged beyond repair . For the next two weeks , the battalion helped construct a series of trails that linked the beachhead with the advancing units , and made supply much easier . On 16 November the battalion reached the Numa Numa Trail and began probing for Japanese units On 18 November after a sharp firefight near a Japanese roadblock the battalion recovered a Japanese map with valuable intelligence on Japanese defenses . From 19 – 21 November 3rd Battalion continued probing for Japanese units , which had been identified as elements of the 23rd Infantry Regiment , and engaging in sporadic firefights . In the lead @-@ up to the Battle of Piva Forks , 3rd Battalion was able to seize critical high terrain that would give the Marines the advantage in the upcoming fight . The actual battle , from 22 – 26 November , saw some of the most vicious close combat experienced in the Pacific War as of that date . 3rd Battalion additionally suffered many casualties from unusually accurate Japanese mortar and artillery fire . Two days later , after 27 days of continuous action , 3rd Battalion was moved to a relatively quiet sector on the 3rd Division 's flank where it remained for the remainder of the operation . 
 In December , the 3rd Marine Division was relieved by the Army 's Americal Division and 3rd Battalion left Bougainville for Guadalcanal on Christmas Day , 1943 with the rest of the division . They left behind 36 of their comrades , including Corporal John Logan Jr. and Captain Robert Turnbull ( Lima Company ) , who were both awarded Navy Crosses during the Battle of Piva Forks . 165 other Marines from 3rd Battalion became casualties during the campaign . After Bougainville , 3rd Battalion conducted numerous training exercises on Guadalcanal from January to May 1944 in preparation for the invasion of Kavieng in April ( which was cancelled ) and the Marianas in June . While 3rd Marines was designated as the floating reserve for the initial invasion of Saipan , they were ultimately not landed and returned to Eniwetok for a three @-@ week stay prior to the invasion of Guam . During the interlude , the Marines of 3rd Battalion were primarily confined to their transport ship , the USS Warren . 
 = = = Guam ( 1944 ) = = = 
 On 21 July 1944 , around 0830 , 3rd Battalion hit the Asan beaches on Guam . Landing on the extreme left of the entire 3rd Marine Division , their mission was to take Chonito Cliff and Adelup Point , which marked the left flank of the division . Within minutes the Japanese defenders opened up with mortars and machine guns , hitting many 3rd Battalion Marines coming ashore . By <unk> battalion commander Lieutenant Colonel ( LtCol ) Ralph Houser reported many casualties caused by both mortars and sniper fire . Both Kilo and India Companies rushed the Chonito Cliffs but the Japanese defenders ( Elements of the 2d Battalion , 18th Regiment and 320th Independent Infantry Battalion ) resisted strongly , in some cases rolling grenades down the hillside . Supported by flamethrowers , half @-@ tracks , and armor from the 3rd Tank Battalion , 3rd Battalion fought a bloody , three @-@ hour battle up the side of Chonito Cliff . Houser then ordered Lima Company to flank the cliffs to the north by dashing down an exposed beach road . Having secured Chonito Cliff , the battalion then moved on to Adelup Point . The US Navy sent a destroyer to blast the Japanese caves at point @-@ blank range and 3rd Battalion flamethrowers burned out Japanese soldiers who still remained . After securing Adelup Point , 3rd Battalion finished the day providing flank security for the rest of the 3rd Marines during the Battle for <unk> Ridge and became the only unit in the regiment to accomplish its objectives by the end of W @-@ Day . 
 The first night of 21 – 22 July , the Marines of 3rd Battalion came under a concerted counterattack by the survivors of the Japanese 320th Independent Infantry Battalion , as well as the 319th , committed by Japanese commander General Kiyoshi <unk> to retake the Chonito Cliffs . The Japanese managed to infiltrate past many 3rd Battalion units through ravines and dry river beds and briefly threatened to overrun the battalion command post . The fighting was so heavy that parts of the Division Reserve were committed and the destroyer USS McKee was unable to provide close fire support , as the Japanese and Marines were so closely intermingled . However the Marines held firm and managed to repulse the attack by 0830 . During the counterattack , a <unk> with Kilo Company , Private First Class ( PFC ) Luther Skaggs , Jr . , was critically wounded in the leg by a Japanese grenade . After applying a tourniquet , Skaggs continued to fight for another eight hours before moving unassisted to the rear where most of his leg was amputated . For this he became the first Marine from 3rd Battalion to be awarded the Medal of Honor . Over the next two days the 3rd Battalion fought a savage battle with the Japanese defenders for the Chonito Cliffs and Fonte Plateau area , as the battalion struggled to capture the Mt . Tenjo Road . On 23 July , 3rd Battalion seized the last ridge leading to the Fonte Plateau , provoking a heavy Japanese counterattack . LtCol Houser himself was seriously wounded in this engagement and the Executive Officer , Major Royal Bastian , took command . Then 3rd Battalion , now reinforced with tanks , took part in the assault on the Fonte Plateau on 25 July , seizing the key position after just an hour of fighting . The night of 25 – 26 July saw the climax of the fighting on Guam when the Japanese launched an all @-@ out counterattack against the Americans . In the 3rd Battalion 's sector , Japanese sailors of the 54th <unk> launched a series of failed attacks against the now @-@ well defended Marine positions . Backed up with artillery , the Marines easily repulsed the Japanese . 
 On the morning of 31 July , 3rd Battalion proceeded east on the Mt . Tenjo road towards the island capital of Agana , which it liberated the same day after token resistance . By 1045 , 15 minutes after its platoons entered the city , 3rd Battalion had reached the central plaza and stopped at the northern outskirts by noon . Resuming the offensive at 1545 , 3rd Battalion pushed forward 1 @,@ 500 yards to seize key road junctions that led to the towns of <unk> and <unk> . For the remaining ten days of the campaign , the battalion marched northeast up the coast , encountering occasional Japanese resistance , until the island was declared secure on 10 August . However , the Japanese were not totally defeated . On 7 August , as 3rd Battalion led the regimental advance towards Road Junction 460 , Japanese artillery shells began landing among the advancing Marines . After Marines discovered the source of fire , a 75mm artillery piece , the Japanese fled . The final action by 3rd Battalion during the campaign was on 9 August when a nearby battalion came under heavy Japanese tank and infantry attack . Blazing a trail through the jungle , 3rd Battalion rushed towards the action but the Japanese tanks vanished before the battalion could arrive . Casualties for the 3rd Battalion were twice that of Bougainville , with 300 wounded and 97 killed . 
 = = = Iwo Jima and Japan ( 1945 ) = = = 
 Following the invasion of Guam , 3rd Battalion spent two months conducting ' mopping up ' operations on the island until November , when it received orders to prepare for operations against Iwo Jima . From November until February 1945 , they took part in a training regimen so serious that a fellow battalion later reported at least 20 % of its members were incapacitated due to foot and heat injuries . During the Battle of Iwo Jima , 3rd Battalion , as part of 3rd Marines , was kept offshore as the Expeditionary Troops reserve . However , despite numerous requests from other Marine officers , the 3rd Marines were never landed . After sitting off Iwo Jima in their transport ships for a month , the 3rd Marines were ordered to return to Guam on 5 March 1945 . 
 Back on Guam , 3rd Battalion began training for a landing on Miyako Jima , an island just south of Okinawa . Those orders were eventually cancelled , but the battalion still saw minor combat in 1945 , participating in two operations on Guam designed to capture Japanese soldiers still holding out in the hills . These sweeps took place in April and December 1945 . 3rd Battalion also began preparing for Operation Olympic , where as part of V Amphibious Corps , it would have landed at <unk> , Kagoshima on Kyūshū . After the dropping of the atomic bombs in August 1945 , and Japan 's surrender , 3rd Battalion was detached from the 3rd Marine Division in November 1945 and deactivated the following month on 12 December 1945 . Shortly before it was deactivated , however , 3rd Battalion suffered the dubious honor of having the last American killed in World War II , when PFC W.C. Patrick Bates of Kilo Company was shot by a Japanese sniper on 14 December during a mopping up operation on Guam ( three months after the formal end of hostilities ) . 
 = = Early Cold War ( 1951 – 1965 ) = = 
 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines was reactivated at Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton in August 1951 as part of the 3rd Marine Brigade . In February 1952 , it took part in Lex @-@ Baker @-@ 1 , which was the first full @-@ scale Marine @-@ Navy exercise held on the West Coast since 1949 . In May , India Company participated in the ground portion of the Operation Buster @-@ Jangle atomic bomb tests in Nevada . In August , part of the battalion took part in an amphibious landing on Lake Washington as part of Seattle 's " Seafair . " Then in December , 3rd Battalion took part in one of the first exercises at Twentynine Palms , California . The entire 3rd Marine Division , including 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines , was transported more than 280 miles ( 451 km ) by truck between MCB Camp Pendleton and Twenty @-@ nine Palms . During the exercise , Third Battalion made a night airlift using over 60 helicopters . 
 In January 1953 , the unit deployed to the Marine Corps Air Station Kaneohe Bay on Oahu for six months of training , after which 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines returned to Pendleton . In August 1953 , 3rd Battalion deployed to Japan for training operations at Kin Beach , Okinawa and Iwo Jima . In October 1956 , 3rd Battalion was stationed in Japan when the Suez Crisis broke out . Though initially deployed to the Indian Ocean for possible action in Egypt and the surrounding region , the crisis was ultimately resolved . During this cruise , 3rd Battalion — designated Battalion Landing Team ( BLT ) 3 / 3 – visited Brunei Bay , Bombay , Karachi , and Singapore , before returning to Japan . In December 1956 , the entire 3rd Marine Regiment was deployed off of Indonesia because of civil strife in that country . In 1958 , 3rd Battalion was alerted for possible deployment to Lebanon , but its transports were turned back in the Indian Ocean to Okinawa . Four years later , in 1962 , the battalion deployed on the USS Bayfield to the Chinese coast to guard the Taiwanese islands of Quemoy Matsu . 
 = = Vietnam War ( 1965 – 1969 ) = = 
 = = = Deployment and Operation Starlite ( 1965 ) = = = 
 In January 1965 , the 2nd Battalion , 1st Marines at Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton , California deployed for a tour on Okinawa , Japan , where they were redesignated the 3rd Battalion , 3rd Marines . At the time the Marines of 3rd Battalion expected a typical 13 @-@ month deployment followed by a quick return to the States . However the battalion found itself caught up in the initial deployment of Marine units to Vietnam , and landed on 12 May along the coast south of Danang at Chu Lai . The battalion 's first major operation in the Vietnam War was Operation Starlite where they teamed up with units of the 7th Marines . Operation Starlite was aimed at destroying the 1st Viet Cong ( VC ) Regiment , which was preparing to attack Chu Lai from the Van Tuong peninsula . The fighting began on 18 August when the battalion conducted an amphibious landing just east of the VC positions . At first the attack was slowed by effective VC delaying tactics . However , 3rd Battalion eventually advanced to the outskirts of the village of An <unk> 2 . While attempting to clear the village , India Company came under intense fire from VC defending the village . When one squad under Corporal Robert Emmett O 'Malley was ambushed , O 'Malley jumped into a VC trench and personally killed eight Viet Cong . Wounded three times , O 'Malley refused to be evacuated until all his men were safe and was later awarded the Medal of Honor . India Company then had to fight its way back to the rest of the battalion through other Viet Cong units still operating in the area . Around 1200 , an H & S Company supply convoy bound for India Company was ambushed and a force sent to relieve them was also pinned down . The ordeal was covered by journalist Peter Arnett in his article " The Death of Supply Column 21 " . During the afternoon the situation was stabilized and the Viet Cong retreated that night , resulting in a tactical American victory . The United States had 52 Marines killed in Starlite . India Company lost 14 dead , including the company commander , and 53 wounded out of a force of 177 Marines . Three Navy Crosses were awarded to Marines from the battalion for actions during Starlite , including the battalion commander LtCol Joseph Muir . 
 = = = Search and Destroy Near Da Nang ( 1965 – 1966 ) = = = 
 Following Starlite 3rd Battalion continued to conduct regular sweeps and low @-@ level ( i.e. small unit ) combat operations against the Viet Cong ( usually the 1st VC Regiment ) in the greater Da Nang area . Among the casualties suffered during this period was LtCol Muir , who was killed when he stepped on an IED . In November they participated in an amphibious operation similar to Starlite called Blue Marlin ( II ) , which was carried out near Hoi An . Contact was irregular as the VC attempted to avoid a drawn @-@ out engagement and the battalion only had three Marines wounded . Then in December the battalion moved to the Que Son Valley for Operation Harvest Moon , preventing the VC from capturing the town . In March 1966 , 3rd Battalion participated in Operation Kings , officially a search and destroy mission in the An Hoa region , but really an attempt to create a long @-@ term occupation in a historic Viet Cong stronghold . However , any progress gained in Kings was immediately negated by the Buddhist Uprising just one week later in Da Nang . In July , the battalion acted as a blocking force during Operation Macon but did not see significant action . In August , 3rd Battalion left Vietnam for Okinawa . The battalion would not be gone long though , and in early October was stationed offshore as BLT 3 / 3 near the northern portion of I Corps to combat a possible North Vietnamese invasion across the Demilitarized Zone ( DMZ ) . The threat never materialized and BLT 3 / 3 returned to Vietnam later that month . 
 = = = The DMZ and Khe Sanh ( 1966 – 1967 ) = = = 
 In October 1966 , 3rd Battalion was deployed to combat the threat from the People 's Army of Vietnam ( PAVN ) in Quảng Trị Province . This would be a largely conventional fight , known as the " war against professionals " , that would continue until late 1968 . Supplies would be in constant short supply and Marines were constantly scavenging helmets , clothes , armor , and ammunition from their dead . In December , the battalion suffered a tragic case of friendly fire when a pair of F @-@ 4 Phantoms dropped several bombs in the middle of Mike Company , killing seventeen Marines and wounding a dozen others . Navy Corpsman Donald <unk> was awarded a posthumous Silver Star for his efforts to treat the wounded , despite suffering a mortal wound himself . From February – April , the battalion took part in Operations Prairie II @-@ IV , which were a series of sweeps throughout Quảng Trị Province . On 2 March 1967 , Lima Company , then under the command of Captain John Ripley , stumbled into a PAVN regiment trying to cross the DMZ . 12 Marines were killed , 28 severely wounded , and nearly every other man in the fight , including Ripley , was hit . The PAVN suffered heavy casualties and retreated across the border . 
 In April , 3rd Battalion participated in a series of bloody engagements near Khe Sanh known as The Hill Fights . Activity near Khe Sanh had increased dramatically that spring and on 24 April , Bravo Company 1st Battalion 9th Marines was engaged by elements of the PAVN 18th Regiment dug in on Hills 881 North , 881 South , and 861 . 3rd Battalion , then a hybrid unit with companies from multiple battalions , was sent to assist . 3rd Battalion 's commander , LtCol Gary Wilder , believed he was only facing a small PAVN unit and counterattacked . Throughout the 25th , 3rd Battalion launched a series of piecemeal attacks on the hills , only to be repulsed with heavy losses . The 3rd Marine Division committed its reserve to the fighting and took Hill 861 on 26 April . On the night of 29 April , the PAVN replaced the battered 18th Regiment with the fresh 95th Regiment . The following day the Marines dropped 250 bombs and more than 1300 artillery rounds on Hill 881 . Mike Company was allowed by the PAVN to advance partially up the hill before opening fire . By the end of the battle , 46 Marines from the battalion were killed , half of them from Mike Company . 
 Throughout the late spring and early summer of 1967 the battalion helped keep open Route 9 , the supply route between Ca Lu Combat Base and Khe Sanh . After a firefight between a PAVN battalion and Mike Company in late July , the road was closed until 1968 . The battalion was also stricken by malaria during this time ; 206 3rd Battalion Marines contracted it . In the fall the battalion was put to work building and defending the McNamara Line , a series of fixed fortifications along the DMZ in an area known as Leatherneck Square ( The four corners were Cam <unk> , Con Thien , Gio Linh and Đông Hà ) . The PAVN repeatedly attacked the positions and twice 3rd Battalion had to come rescue elements of 2nd Battalion 4th Marines that were in danger of being overrun . 3rd Battalion would occupy several of those positions through May 1968 . From 29 December to 12 January elements of the battalion participated in the construction and defense of strongpoint Alpha 3 . 
 = = = Tet and Its Aftermath ( 1968 ) = = = 
 The first major combat for 3rd Battalion in 1968 came on 7 February , about a week after the Tet Offensive began , when Kilo Company engaged a PAVN battalion near Gio Linh . 29 Kilo Marines were killed , including PFC Robert Quick who was awarded a posthumous Navy Cross for deflecting a PAVN hand grenade . Another 31 were wounded , including PFC Craig Swartz who was wounded three times and received three purple hearts for his service . PAVN losses numbered at least 139 , with another 60 graves discovered by 3rd Battalion Marines three days later . That same month a platoon from Mike Company observed and damaged two PAVN PT @-@ 76 tanks near Alpha 3 , one of only three times they were encountered during the Vietnam War before 1972 . On 6 March , Mike Company blundered into the 27th Regiment of the PAVN 325th Division and had one @-@ third of the company put out of action in an all @-@ night engagement , including 14 Marines killed . 
 In early May the PAVN launched a new offensive known as the May Offensive or ‘ mini @-@ Tet ’ . During that time , on 8 May , 3rd Battalion overran a PAVN regimental command post in Leatherneck Square , suffering 102 casualties including 8 killed . On 22 May , Lima Company uncovered a North Vietnamese staging area near Alpha 3 and destroyed it in an action that involved elements of three other Marine battalions . Then on 26 May the battalion was moved east to Dai Do as part of Operation Napoleon @-@ Saline , in response to PAVN pressure on the supply lines to the 3rd Marine Division headquarters at Dong Ha . By the end of the month , 3rd Battalion had lost 53 Marines and had another 319 severely wounded , a casualty ratio of about one out of every two infantrymen in the field . 
 In June the battalion was placed in reserve as a ready @-@ reinforcement unit and consequently saw little combat . From July to September , 3rd Battalion operated all throughout the I Corps area of operations , moving its command post to ten different locations . Hundreds of Marines were also affected by cellulitis . Following President Johnson ’ s halt of the US bombing campaign on 1 November , 3rd Battalion Marines had to watch as the PAVN brazenly pushed large convoys of men and munitions south along the Ben Hai River . In one instance it took three days for the battalion to get approval for a single airstrike on a North Vietnamese convoy . 
 = = = Taylor Common and Redeployment ( 1969 ) = = = 
 In early 1969 , 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines was sent south of the DMZ for several months to join Task Force Yankee in Operation Taylor Common near An Hoa . This three @-@ month operation focused on destroying the primary base for PAVN forces operating across several provinces and 3rd Battalion was awarded a Navy Unit Commendation for its actions during the operation . Ten Marines from 3rd Battalion were killed during the operation ( out of 183 total US fatalities ) , and American forces captured numerous quantities of PAVN supplies . One Marine , Lance Corporal ( LCPL ) William R. Prom , was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for gallantry during Taylor Common . 
 In July 1969 , the battalion took part in Operations Virginia Ridge and Idaho Canyon , attempting to stop infiltrators from the PAVN 27th Regiment and 33rd Sapper Battalion from coming through the DMZ . The operation continued until September , when the 3rd Marine Regiment was ordered to stop operations in preparation for its redeployment back to the United States . The battalion began to depart on 7 October and had fully arrived at MCB Camp Pendleton by the end of 1969 . Many 3rd Battalion Marines with time still left on their tours of duty were transferred to other units . 3rd Battalion spent over 1 @,@ 600 days in Vietnam and conducted 48 combat operations , the most of any Marine battalion in the conflict . 653 Marines who served in 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines lost their lives during the Vietnam War or were killed while operating with other units . Nearly 2 @,@ 800 others were wounded . 
 = = Late Cold War ( 1969 – 1974 , 1975 – 1990 ) = = 
 The battalion relocated during October and November 1969 to MCB Camp Pendleton and was reassigned to the 5th Marine Amphibious Brigade . They were again reassigned in April 1971 to the 1st Marine Division . The battalion was deactivated 1 June 1974 . 
 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines was reactivated on 1 October 1975 at MCB Kaneohe Bay , Hawaii , and assigned to the 3rd Marine Division . Elements of the battalion deployed to the Western Pacific at various times during the 1970s and 1980s . In June 1979 , Mike Company was deactivated and Weapons Company was stood up . In February 1980 , following the Iran hostage crisis and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan , the battalion was deployed to the Persian Gulf on board the USS Okinawa and was also the back @-@ up force during Operation Eagle Claw . This deployment made 3rd Battalion the first American ground unit to enter the region since World War II . 
 In the summer of 1983 , the battalion was in Mombasa , Kenya as part of the 31st Marine Amphibious Unit ( MAU ) when the Joint Chiefs of Staff ordered it to the Mediterranean Sea to become part of the Multinational Force in Lebanon during the Lebanese Civil War . It arrived on 12 September and spent three weeks off the coast as a reserve force for the 24th MAU on the USS Tarawa ( LHA @-@ 1 ) . It departed on 9 October for the Indian Ocean , two weeks before the Beirut barracks bombing . 
 = = Gulf War ( 1990 – 1991 ) = = 
 = = = Defending Saudi Arabia ( 1990 – 1991 ) = = = 
 On 2 August 1990 , 3rd Battalion was completing a deployment at Camp Hansen on Okinawa when they were notified to be prepared to immediately redeploy to Saudi Arabia as a response to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait . No sooner had the battalion returned to Hawaii then it was shipped out again to Saudi Arabia as part of the 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade . India Company deployed first on 15 August to Singapore to provide onboard security for Maritime <unk> ships bound for the port of Al Jubayl . On 1 September , the rest of the battalion arrived in <unk> . As one of the first Marine units in country , 3rd Battalion found itself defending a key position at Cement Ridge , about 90 kilometers away from the Kuwaiti border . With orders to hold against any Iraqi attack , 3rd Battalion spent most of the months of August and September digging defensive positions . In October , 3rd Battalion and 2nd Battalion 3rd Marines were designated " Task Force Taro " and moved to the extreme right flank of the Marine sector , bordering the King Abdul Aziz Brigade of the Saudi Arabian National Guard . Because of their close proximity , Taro was ordered to begin cross @-@ training with the Saudi forces . This cross @-@ training continued through January , when 3rd Battalion was moved forward to defend Al Mish 'ab along the Saudi coast and became the northernmost Marine combat force in Saudi Arabia . Tragically during this time the battalion lost two Marines , James Cunningham and Anthony Stewart , who were accidentally killed by negligent discharges . 
 = = = Desert Storm , Khafji , and Kuwait ( 1991 ) = = = 
 Operation Desert Storm began on 17 January 1991 , but for the first two weeks 3rd Battalion only conducted sporadic engagements with its Iraqi counterparts across the border . That all changed on 29 January , when several Iraqi divisions unexpectedly crossed the border and seized the Saudi town of Khafji , less than 15 kilometers north of 3rd Battalion 's position . During the attack the Executive Officer along with the Battalion Sergeant Major drove into the town on a rescue mission looking for two Army soldiers who had been captured . Although they were unable to find them , the Marines from 3rd Battalion did encounter an Iraqi patrol and exchanged rounds with them before escaping . While Saudi and Qatari units ultimately retook the town , 3rd Battalion played a vital role in both coordinating the attack and blocking further Iraqi advances southward . In addition , several heavy machine guns and forward air controllers from the battalion were shifted over to the Saudis and took place in the assault . From 19 – 21 February , 3rd Battalion moved from Al Mish 'ab to the forward assembly areas that it would be using to launch its attack into Kuwait . It was also during this period that 3rd Battalion was given its assignment for the ground offensive . Lacking heavy armor or motorized transport , the battalion ( along with 2 / 3 ) would infiltrate Iraqi positions along the Saudi border and provide flank security for the rest of the 1st Marine Division to make its assault into Kuwait . On the night of 22 February , 3rd Battalion crossed the border into Kuwait , infiltrating past Iraqi minefields , tank traps , and other obstacles . Like many American units , 3rd Battalion encountered no Iraqi resistance and the biggest threat to the Marines came from friendly fire . Throughout the ground war , the battalion advanced steadily northwards , encountering no resistance but taking plenty of prisoners . 3rd Battalion arrived outside the Kuwait International Airport around 27 February where a SCUD missile landed near the battalion 's command post . Several months later , 3rd Battalion returned to Hawaii , having suffered no combat casualties . 
 = = Post Cold @-@ War ( 1991 – 2004 ) = = 
 Between its participation in Desert Storm and the Afghan War , 3rd Battalion conducted multiple deployments around the Pacific Rim . In August 1991 the battalion participated in Operation <unk> in Tonga , an international exercise involving elements of the French military and the Tongan defense services . In 1992 it conducted a Unit Deployment Program ( UDP ) to Okinawa . In 1993 India Company participated in Operation Golden Eagle in Australia . In 1994 the battalion conducted another UDP to both Camp Hansen on Okinawa and to Camp Fuji in Japan . On 8 June India Company participated in the 50th Anniversary of the Invasion of Saipan . In October 1994 3rd Battalion was reassigned to the 3rd Marine Division . In 1995 the battalion went to Fort Wainwright , Alaska for Operation Northern Edge , then spent the latter part of the year training at Camp Fuji and Okinawa . In 1997 it conducted another UDP to Okinawa and Pohang , Korea . During that time Weapons Company participated in Exercise Kennel Bear on Guam . Lima Company took part in Operation Valiant Mark with the 1st Guards Battalion of Singapore . In 1998 the battalion participated in Operation Southern Frontier in Australia , Kennel Bear in Okinawa , Forest Eagle / Freedom Banner in Korea , Forest Light on Kyushu , Japan , and Fuji ' 99 . 
 From 1999 – 2002 , 3rd Battalion conducted operations Crocodile ' 99 and Tandem Thrust ' 01 in Queensland and Townsend , Australia , Operation <unk> in Tonga , and then conducted <unk> to Okinawa in 2000 and 2002 . In 2002 the battalion participated in Operation Millenium Edge on Tinian and Guam , then <unk> 02 @-@ 2 in the Philippines , Borneo , Brunei , Korea , Australia , and Japan . In 2003 3rd Battalion became BLT 3 / 3 on the 31st MEU for the second half of the year . Based on the USS Essex , USS Fort McHenry , and USS Harpers Ferry , BLT 3 / 3 participated in <unk> @-@ 03 in the Philippines , provided security for President George W. Bush on Bali , Indonesia , and also visited Japan , Australia , East Timor , and Hong Kong . In May and June 2004 Lima Company participated in Operation Cobra Gold II at <unk> , Thailand and other parts of the battalion participated in Operation Northern Edge JTF @-@ 510 in Alaska . In July the battalion took part in the annual exercise of RIMPAC in Hawaii . 
 = = War in Afghanistan ( 2004 – 2005 , 2010 – 2012 ) = = 
 = = = Regional Command East ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 In late 2004 , 3rd Battalion was notified it would be participating in Operation Enduring Freedom . On 31 October , the first Marines left Kaneohe Bay , Hawaii for an eight @-@ month deployment to eastern Afghanistan . While serving in Afghanistan , 3rd Battalion conducted Operation Spurs in February 2005 , where they were inserted into the <unk> valley and conducted both counterinsurgency and humanitarian operations . In March , 3rd Battalion launched a similar sweep called Operation Mavericks . During their time in Afghanistan , the Marines from 3rd Battalion engaged the Taliban in 22 firefights . In one of them the battalion suffered its only fatalities for the deployment when LCPL Nicholas <unk> and Corporal Richard <unk> were killed during a three @-@ hour firefight in <unk> which also resulted in twenty @-@ three Taliban killed . During the fighting , Lieutenant Stephen Boada was awarded the Silver Star for calmly directing bombing runs on Taliban positions , despite having been wounded several times . In May the battalion launched one final operation , Operation Celtics , in the Tora Bora region . The operation was for the most part uneventful , although NBC news journalist Ron Allen was almost killed while traveling with Kilo Company when his Humvee ran over an IED . 
 = = = Helmand Province ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In mid @-@ May 2010 3rd Battalion began deploying to the Nawa @-@ I @-@ <unk> District in Helmand Province , relieving the 1st Battalion , 3rd Marines . Partnering with Afghan National Army soldiers from the 215th Corps , the battalion found itself in an area awash with money as the U.S. Agency for International Development was in the process of spending $ 30 million in an attempt to increase agricultural production ( and create jobs for thousands of otherwise @-@ potential Taliban recruits ) , but was also resulting in tensions between the local community council and tribal elders . In @-@ mid June , Lima Company took part in Operation New Dawn , establishing observation posts in southern <unk> , an area in between Nawa and Marjeh . In late July , the battalion suffered the loss of Corporal Joe <unk> , who drowned in the Helmand River while attempting to save the life of an Afghan National policeman . Just days later 3 squads from 3 different platoons were ambushed by Taliban fighters in which they had to secure the crash site of Dealer 54 , an <unk> @-@ 369 helicopter which was shot down near Lashkar Gah while flying a close air support while supporting firefight 3rd Squad at PB Meinert . India Company became involved in fierce firefights engaging the enemy at times just meters away . Throughout India Company 's 7 @-@ month deployment they only called in 8 friendly evacuations after being engaged in over 92 <unk> and reported 74 enemy KIA . India Company operated out of | COP Spin Ghar | Patrol Base ( PB ) <unk> | PB Meinert | PB Poole | PB <unk> | PB Swenson | India Company 's Marines were highly Awarded for their actions in Helmand during their operations including First Sgt. William Pinkerton awarded The Bronze Star Combat V. First Sgt. Pinkerton led the company ’ s Marines from the front during 16 IED , 19 device , 14 cache finds and captured 6 insurgents . First Sgt. Pinkerton was first to push a squad to the Dealer 54s crash site through heavy Taliban Machine Gun fire and set up a safe perimeter to keep Taliban fighters from getting to downed pilots . Around this time , India Company conducted Operation Thresher and later Operation Mako in areas of Nawa District under heavy Taliban influence , finding several cache sites and taking some detainees . In September , while providing pre @-@ election security for the Afghan parliamentary elections the battalion suffered another loss when 1st Lieutenant Scott Fleming was shot and killed . Nevertheless , on election day Nawa District was the one location in Helmand Province with no reported Taliban attacks . Residents claimed that the Marines from 3rd Battalion had implemented good security measures and encouraged the people to cooperate with the government , preventing the Taliban from firing a single shot . By the end of 3rd Battalion 's deployment in the fall of 2010 , Nawa was regarded by many as " a model of counterinsurgency operations and the most stable district " in southern Afghanistan . 
 In October 2011 , 3rd Battalion deployed again to Helmand Province , this time to the Garmsir District . Located in southern Helmand , directly south of Nawa District , Garmsir was both a historically infiltration route for Taliban coming from Pakistan , and is considered to have a culture very similar to Pakistan 's . The deployment was marred by tragedy at the very beginning when the Chief of Police , LtCol <unk> Khan Rashidi , ( who had previously served as Nawa District 's Chief of Police during 3 / 3 's deployment there ) was killed along with two other Afghan National Police ( ANP ) by an IED on 6 November . Two days later , Hajji Abdullah Khan , an influential tribal elder with the <unk> Tribe in the Sar <unk> area , was gunned down by a member of the Andar Tribe following a shura with 3rd Battalion Marines . Afghan Border Police ( ABP ) were able to arrest the murderer , who was then successfully prosecuted under Afghan law . A Taliban commander was also killed in <unk> <unk> around the same time . In mid @-@ December , a squad from Lima Company was able to rescue an entire Afghan family when their car plunged into the Helmand River . Starting in January 2012 , 3rd Battalion and elements of the 215th Corps of the Afghan National Army began a series of airborne assaults at sparsely @-@ populated and historically Taliban @-@ controlled areas in Garmsir . On 4 January they launched Operation <unk> Shamal ( Shifting Winds ) , aimed at clearing Taliban fighters from the western side of the Helmand River . On 10 February they followed up with <unk> <unk> ( Eagle Storm ) , a joint effort with the ABP aimed at interdicting smugglers moving through the desert in southeastern Garmsir . On 17 April , over 2 @,@ 200 Afghans went to the polls to elect the Garmsir District Community Council , which – due to increases in security – now represented the entire district instead of just the northern part . Four days later , on 21 April , a suicide bomber killed four Afghan Police in Garmsir ; while <unk> the police , a UH @-@ 60 Black Hawk helicopter crashed , killing all four aboard . 
 = = Iraq War ( 2006 – 2009 ) = = 
 = = = Al Anbar Province ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 In March 2006 , 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines conducted its first OIF deployment to Al Anbar province in western Iraq . They relieved the 3rd Battalion 1st Marines in the Haditha area and were based out of the Haditha Dam . This deployment was particularly sensitive , coming around the same time that news of the Haditha killings ( where Marines had killed 24 civilians in the same area the previous November ) broke in the United States . Once it arrived in Iraq , 3rd Battalion was given the mission of " fighting insurgents , working with locals to improve local economy and quality of life , and training Iraqi soldiers . " The Battalion was also partnered up with the 2nd Battalion , 2nd Brigade of the 7th Iraqi Army Division . 3rd Battalion attempted to secure Haditha by using an approach of " constant presence " . The battalion operated from a series of forward operating bases in the local cities of Haditha , <unk> , Haqlaniyah , and Baghdadi from which the rifle and weapons companies sent out constant patrols to keep the insurgent groups off balance . However , the battalion was unable to create a working local police force , due to the overwhelming intimidation by insurgent groups . Battalion Commander LtCol Norm Cooling observed , " We didn 't have the manpower to control the [ main roads ] and hold Haditha . The Iraqi Army was as blind as we were . The insurgents killed anyone who spoke to us . " One group of 15 police volunteers was murdered by insurgents in Baghdadi in May . Then in June a Marine mistook a local tribal leader driving near a convoy for a possible suicide bomber and killed him . Another groups of Marines in the same city had more success when they cornered a band of insurgents in the Haqlaniyah Hotel and blew it up . By June , attacks against Marines in Haqlaniyah had become common , with their base getting mortared about twice a week and some insurgents getting close enough to throw grenades over the wall into the base . On 3 June three insurgents opened fire on the Haqlaniyah base but were quickly killed after a group of Marines led by Gunnery Sergeant Jim Lanham launched a hasty counterattack . In early September , 3rd Battalion launched a second effort to recruit police called Operation Guardian Tiger IV . This recruitment drive was more successful than its predecessors and also detained 30 suspected insurgents . On 6 October , 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines returned to Kaneohe Bay . During their time in Haditha the Marines from 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines conducted more than 8 @,@ 000 patrols , located 54 weapons caches and detained more than 800 suspected insurgents . The battalion had 11 Marines killed and 85 wounded . 
 The following year in August 2007 , the battalion made its second Iraq deployment , this time to the Fallujah area where they served under the Regimental Combat Team 6 during the closing phases of Operation Alljah . Their mission was to complete the Clear Hold Build operation in the areas of Karmah and <unk> which the 2nd Battalion , 5th Marines and 2nd Battalion , 7th Marines had begun two months earlier . Karmah had become an important insurgent stronghold due its proximity both Baghdad and Fallujah . Unlike other cities , Karmah had no definable perimeter to hold , making it easy for outsiders to access . In addition , as insurgents were pushed out of Baghdad by other offensives they found it easy to flee to Karmah . In early September , Kilo Company moved into a cluster of villages northeast of Karmah that was the last major insurgent staging ground in Anbar . The insurgents fled without firing a shot . For the first few months the Marines took small @-@ arms and mortar fire nightly . A 20 @-@ minute attack on 5 October against the Iraqi Police station in Karmah was repulsed by Jim Lanham , now a First Sergeant . By late 2007 the Marines frequently found themselves mediating between sheiks , assisting locals with reconstruction projects , and mentoring the Iraqi police units in the area . One company commander , Captain Quintin Jones , observed that , " On one end I ’ m fighting , and on the other end I ’ m disputing between tribal leaders . The other part ( is ) trying to stimulate the economy . So , it ’ s a three @-@ block war here and it ’ s very , very dynamic . " The battalion spent more than $ 1 million on Karmah , including a city council and a medical clinic . On 1 December , the battalion staged an elaborate reopening of " Victory Circle " , or " The Lollipop " , the marketplace in the center of Karmah which had earlier been the scene of fierce fighting between Marines and insurgents . In February 2008 the battalion rotated back to the United States without suffering a single casualty . 
 = = = Task Force Military Police ( 2009 ) = = = 
 In April 2009 3 / 3 deployed for a third time to Iraq , this time to Al Asad Airbase in Al Anbar Province . On that deployment they made up Task Force Military Police ( <unk> ) . Task Force Military Police was a support unit fulfilling security responsibilities in Anbar Province , including conducting convoy security missions and detainee releases , running regional detention facilities , and also managing the military working dogs in Anbar Province . In addition , since November 2008 it had been tasked with securing Combat Outpost Heider in Rabiah , Nineveh Province , as part of Operation Defeat Al Qaeda in the North ( <unk> ) . 3rd Battalion India Company was also augmented with Reserve Military Police Marines from MP Company , 4th Marine Division and Reserve Infantrymen from AT Battalion , Rochester NY . These Marines were formed into Alpha Company . These Marines of Alpha Company detained over 150 suspected terrorist at the Syria @-@ Rabiah / Iraq Border . Alpha Company maintained Syria @-@ Iraq border by combat patrols and spending time with local populous in market place winning their hearts and minds . Alpha Company out of Cop Heider only took pop shots and encountered 2 IEDs throughout the entire deployment . Their work on the border was gratefully appreciated and noted by President Obama . In late July , Marines from H & S and Kilo Company operated as Task Force Personnel Recovery where they participated and were responsible for the eventual recovery of a pilot , Navy Captain Scott Speicher , who had been missing in action since the 1991 Gulf War . President Barack Obama later said he was " grateful to the Marines who pursued the information that led to Captain Speicher 's recovery so that he can now come home . " The deployment was mostly uneventful and 3 / 3 was ultimately relieved by 3rd Battalion , 24th Marines , which was the last Marine infantry battalion to deploy to Iraq . En route back to the United States one of the companies was detained in Mumbai , India for two days . The battalion lost one Marine , LCPL Ray Spencer , who died in a <unk> incident . 
 With the exception of Weapons Co. who was deployed back to Fallujah under 1st Battalion 7th Marines . To assist in combat operations , and turn over to Iraq authority . 
 = = Unit awards = = 
 Since the beginning of World War II , the United States military has honored various units for extraordinary heroism or outstanding non @-@ combat service . This information is compiled by the United States Marine Corps History Division and is certified by the Commandant of the Marine Corps . 
 = = America 's Battalion = = 
 According to research by the Marine Corps ' History and Museum Division , the name " America 's Battalion " originated in the mid @-@ 1980s when LtCol Charles Krulak was the battalion 's commanding officer . It comes from the nickname " America 's Team " , which was used by the Dallas Cowboys . Krulak , who was a big Cowboys fan , modified the nickname to apply to 3rd Battalion . According to Krulak , at one point a friend of his sent him a letter addressed to the " Commanding Officer , America 's Battalion " . With nothing else on the envelope , the United States Postal Service still managed to deliver the letter properly . Krulak commented that " if the U.S. Postal Service recognized 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines as ' America 's Battalion , ' then they certainly must be . " So from then on , he considered it ' official ' . 3rd Battalion is one of two battalions to have the nickname " America 's Battalion " , the other being 2nd Battalion 8th Marines based out of Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune . 
 = = Notable 3rd Battalion Marines = = 
 Among the many decorations for valor and bravery awarded to Marines from 3rd Battalion , five Medals of Honor and over twenty Navy Crosses have been awarded . In 1965 , Corporal Robert Emmett O 'Malley from India Company became the first Marine in the Vietnam War to be awarded the Medal of Honor . Two other Marines from 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines , Robert J. <unk> ( 1958 – 1959 ) and Howard V. Lee ( 1959 – 1960 ) , would later be awarded the Medal of Honor in Vietnam while serving with other units . Colonel John Ripley ( hero of the bridge at Dong Ha ) was in command of Lima Company in 1967 , and the company was frequently referred to as " Ripley 's Raiders " . One of his platoon commanders was former Major League Baseball player Chuck Goggin . Oliver North served as a platoon commander in Kilo Company from 1968 – 1969 and Frank <unk> , a Congressman from Texas , was a Kilo NCO for the same period . In 1979 , James Mattis served as commander of Kilo Company during the battalion 's deployment aboard a MEU in the Indian Ocean . Charles Krulak , the 31st Commandant of the Marine Corps , also commanded Lima Company during the Vietnam War and later served as Battalion Commander from 1983 – 1985 . Krulak is also credited with giving 3rd Battalion 3rd Marines the nickname " America 's Battalion " . In more recent years , War on Terror alumni include Medal of Honor recipient Dakota Meyer , Navy Cross recipient Luis Fonseca , Terminal Lance creator Maximilian <unk> , The <unk> Blog creator Paul <unk> , and Castra Praetoria <unk> Michael Burke . 
 = Stew @-@ Roids = 
 " Stew @-@ Roids " is the 13th episode of the seventh season of the American animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on the Fox network on April 26 , 2009 . The episode features Stewie after he is attacked at an outdoor party by Joe 's infant daughter , Susie . While training Stewie , Peter injects him with performance @-@ enhancing drugs , and Stewie becomes incredibly muscular . Meanwhile , Chris becomes the fake boyfriend of popular student Connie D 'Amico . He begins to like her , and the two begin a serious relationship , leading him to become mean and self @-@ centered towards everyone around him . 
 The episode was written by Alec Sulkin and directed by Jerry Langford . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references , in addition to receiving criticism from the Parents Television Council . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed by 6 @.@ 80 million viewers on its original airdate . The episode featured guest performances by Wilhoit , Meredith Baxter @-@ Birney , Jeff Bergman , Gary Cole , Chace Crawford , Camille Guaty , Wentworth Miller and Mae Whitman along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Joe and Bonnie host a backyard barbecue , where Joe 's baby daughter , Susie , gets into a fight with Stewie over a doll and attacks him . Upset by this , Peter takes Stewie to train at the local gymnasium . A trainer notices Stewie struggling with <unk> and offers steroids . Peter injects the drugs into Stewie , who becomes incredibly buff and develops an aggressive personality , much to the horror of his family . Stewie becomes tormenting towards Brian . As time passes , Stewie 's drugs gradually wear off , much to his shock . His skin becomes incredibly loose and flabby . Stewie jumps out of his bedroom window to avoid Brian 's wrath , only to have his loosened skin help him glide to safety . 
 At school Meg tells Connie that since she heard her talking about High school musical and said that she watched the who 'll series . Then Connie tells her not to listen to wants she 's saying and that she was talking sarcastically and that she a loser for watching " High School Musical " . Elsewhere , Connie D 'Amico decides that she is tired of dating the popular boys and instead tries to find the least popular in school . At lunch Meg sitting with Chris , Meg sees that Lois packed her nothing but Chris 's crusts and a photo of her holding a turkey leg . Then Connie comes up to Chris and Meg and tells Meg that she has a good post and tells her to scram which Meg happily does . After that Connie tells Chris that he 's the biggest loser in the school and tells him to come to the school with him next week . 
 She settles on Chris almost immediately . During their first date , Chris reveals that he really likes Connie , who is surprised by his true heart and actually becomes attracted to him . Chris ' popularity increases at school , which leads to accolades by the jocks and other socially powerful students . Meg tries to use the relationship to gain popularity herself . Later , Chris and Connie plan a house party at the Griffins but Meg finds out that she isn 't invited as her breasts are big enough to meet demands . During the party Meg is crying in her room with Lois comforting her as she tries to make her go to the party but Meg says that she hates her life to which Lois stops caring as she happily goes to the party . 
 Down stairs Connie sees that Chris is cheating on her as he reveals that beating up a jewish kid ( possibly " Neil Goldman " ) made him popular and this results in conning <unk> outcast . She turns to a reluctant Meg , who relents when a javelin thrown by Chris impales Meg 's shoulder . They publicly release a video of Chris dancing naked in his room in the style of Buffalo Bill from The Silence of the Lambs a reference to what Seth Green based Chris 's voice off . Chris quickly becomes unpopular , as Meg sees that Connie will never be her fried as she says that she can 't think about her in the tub . At dinner Chris tells Meg about his time being popular so Meg can forgive him , but Chris says how it was , as Stewie now normal says that " I flew today " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stew @-@ Roids " was written by series regular Alec Sulkin in his first writing job for the season . It was directed by former Mission Hill and The Oblongs director Jerry Langford , who had joined the show 's staff that season when he directed the episode " Tales of a Third Grade Nothing " . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors . 
 The role of Kevin Swanson has been portrayed by several people , including actor Jon Cryer in the second season episode " There 's Something About Paulie " , was revealed to have died in the Iraq War . This would later be developed more in the tenth season episode " Thanksgiving " , in which he was voiced by actor Scott Grimes . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actors Meredith Baxter @-@ Birney , Jeff Bergman , Gary Cole , Chace Crawford , Camille Guaty , Wentworth Miller , Mae Whitman and Lisa Wilhoit guest starred in the episode . The episode featured many of the show 's recurring guest voice actors including : Alexandra Breckenridge , Chris Cox , Ralph Garman , and writers Danny Smith , Alec Sulkin , and John Viener also made minor appearances . Recurring voice actors Jennifer Tilly and Patrick Warburton reprise their roles of Bonnie and Joe Swanson respectively . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode includes various cultural references , including Johnson & Johnson 's " No more tears " slogan . Peter is seen watching Spike TV . Stewie enters a fight with Susie over a Barbie doll . Stewie composes a song about his toned body , pronouncing the word body as " bah @-@ dy " a reference to the pronunciation of the word in John Mayer 's " Your Body Is a Wonderland " . Chris 's nude dance is a reference to a similar scene in The Silence Of The Lambs ; this is in itself an in @-@ joke as Chris Griffin 's voice was initially Seth Green 's impression of Buffalo Bill . Brian compares Stewie 's muscular body to actor Lou Ferrigno 's feces . Lois and Brian sit on the couch while they watch Lady and the Tramp and Michael Vick . Adam Sandler 's movie career is referenced . Folkloric figure Santa Claus is seen getting a DUI . 
 Chris says he hates classic rock stations because they always end up playing We Built This City from Starship . The radio station Chris tunes into is " Classic Rock 103 @.@ 7 WHTT " . WHTT was the callsign for the current Boston , MA radio station <unk> , a classic hits station at the time that played the same music the fictional WHTT apparently airs before flipping to Top 40 in 2012 as 103 @.@ 3 Amp Radio . The station had the callsign from 1983 – 86 . This further references Boston influences on the TV show . Another station actually holds the callsigns now , 104 @.@ 1 WHTT @-@ FM in Buffalo , NY , with the same format . After Stewie is injected with steroids , he lifts a <unk> on one side and says " I have the power ! " and the show then shifts scenes the same as in Masters of the Universe . It is mentioned that Connie is the key to One @-@ Eyed Willy ’ s gold , a reference to The Goonies . Paul Sorvino and Chazz Palminteri are seen acting in a fictional movie called " <unk> Trumpet " . After Stewie 's steroids injection wears off and he jumps out the bedroom window , the music playing is from the cartoon The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight drop from the previous week , " Stew @-@ Roids " was viewed in 6 @.@ 80 million homes in its original airing . It also received a 4 @.@ 0 / 6 in Nielsen ratings , the audience measurement systems developed to determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States . 
 Ahsan Haque of IGN gave the episode a score of 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 , commending Chris 's storyline and praising Stewie 's temporary build , but criticizing the staleness of Meg 's continued poor treatment . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club gave a much more critical review giving the episode a grade of a C. Heisler stated that neither of the storylines " held any water " , because they were " ridiculously short " . He also commented : " I 'm starting to wonder if this show is even watchable anymore – 18 minutes of filler , 45 seconds of inspired silliness . " 
 The Parents Television Council , a frequent critic of Family Guy , named " Stew @-@ Roids " its " Worst TV Show of the Week " for the week ending August 28 , 2009 ; the review was based on a repeat airing . The PTC 's review cited the episode 's crude jokes , " tiresome pop culture cutaways " and " its conceit that its content is original . " The latter referred to the plotline about Chris 's sudden popularity at school and having a swelled ego as a result . 
 " Stew @-@ Roids " , along with the seven other episodes from Family Guy 's eighth season and seven from the seventh season , were released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on June 15 , 2010 . The sets included brief audio commentaries by Seth MacFarlane and various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " Road to the Multiverse " , and mini @-@ feature entitled " Family Guy Karaoke " . 
 = Grover Cleveland = 
 Stephen Grover Cleveland ( March 18 , 1837 – June 24 , 1908 ) was the 22nd and 24th President of the United States . He was the winner of the popular vote for president three times – in 1884 , 1888 , and 1892 – and was one of the three Democrats ( with Andrew Johnson and Woodrow Wilson ) to serve as president during the era of Republican political domination dating from 1861 to 1933 . He is the only President in American history to serve two non @-@ consecutive terms in office . 
 Cleveland was the leader of the pro @-@ business Bourbon Democrats who opposed high tariffs , Free Silver , inflation , imperialism , and subsidies to business , farmers , or veterans . His crusade for political reform and fiscal conservatism made him an icon for American conservatives of the era . Cleveland won praise for his honesty , self @-@ reliance , integrity , and commitment to the principles of classical liberalism . He relentlessly fought political corruption , patronage , and bossism . As a reformer Cleveland had such prestige that the like @-@ minded wing of the Republican Party , called " Mugwumps " , largely bolted the GOP presidential ticket and swung to his support in the 1884 election . 
 As his second administration began , disaster hit the nation when the Panic of 1893 produced a severe national depression , which Cleveland was unable to reverse . It ruined his Democratic Party , opening the way for a Republican landslide in 1894 and for the agrarian and silverite seizure of the Democratic Party in 1896 . The result was a political realignment that ended the Third Party System and launched the Fourth Party System and the Progressive Era . 
 Cleveland was a formidable <unk> , and he also drew corresponding criticism . His intervention in the Pullman Strike of 1894 to keep the railroads moving angered labor unions nationwide in addition to the party in Illinois ; his support of the gold standard and opposition to Free Silver alienated the agrarian wing of the Democratic Party . Critics complained that Cleveland had little imagination and seemed overwhelmed by the nation 's economic disasters — depressions and strikes — in his second term . Even so , his reputation for probity and good character survived the troubles of his second term . Biographer Allan Nevins wrote : " [ I ] n Grover Cleveland the greatness lies in typical rather than unusual qualities . He had no endowments that thousands of men do not have . He possessed honesty , courage , firmness , independence , and common sense . But he possessed them to a degree other men do not . " Today , Cleveland is considered by most historians to have been a successful leader , generally ranked among the second tier of American presidents . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood and family history = = = 
 Stephen Grover Cleveland was born on March 18 , 1837 , in Caldwell , New Jersey to Richard <unk> Cleveland and Ann ( née Neal ) Cleveland . Cleveland 's father was a Presbyterian minister who was originally from Connecticut . His mother was from Baltimore and was the daughter of a bookseller . On his father 's side , Cleveland was descended from English ancestors , the first of the family having emigrated to Massachusetts from Cleveland , England in 1635 . On his mother 's side , he was descended from Anglo @-@ Irish Protestants and German Quakers from Philadelphia . He was distantly related to General Moses Cleaveland , after whom the city of Cleveland , Ohio , was named . 
 Cleveland , the fifth of nine children , was named Stephen Grover in honor of the first pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of Caldwell , where his father was pastor at the time . He became known as Grover in his adult life . In 1841 , the Cleveland family moved to Fayetteville , New York , where Grover spent much of his childhood . Neighbors later described him as " full of fun and inclined to play pranks , " and fond of outdoor sports . 
 In 1850 , Cleveland 's father took a pastorate in Clinton , Oneida County , New York , and the family relocated there . Despite his father 's dedication to his missionary work , the income was insufficient for the large family . Financial conditions forced him to remove Grover from school into a two @-@ year mercantile apprenticeship in Fayetteville . The experience was valuable and brief , and the living conditions quite austere . Grover returned to Clinton and his schooling at the completion of the apprentice contract . When the Clinton pastorate proved too arduous in 1853 , Cleveland 's father took an assignment in Holland Patent , New York , near Utica and the family moved again . Shortly after , he died . 
 = = = Education and moving west = = = 
 Cleveland received his elementary education at the Fayetteville Academy and the Clinton Liberal Academy . After his father died in 1853 , he again left school so as to help support his family . Later that year , Cleveland 's brother William was hired as a teacher at the New York Institute for the Blind in New York City , and William obtained a place for Cleveland as an assistant teacher . He returned home to Holland Patent at the end of 1854 , where an elder in his church offered to pay for his college education if he would promise to become a minister . Cleveland declined , and in 1855 he decided to move west . He stopped first in Buffalo , New York , where his uncle , Lewis F. Allen , gave him a clerical job . Allen was an important man in Buffalo , and he introduced his nephew to influential men there , including the partners in the law firm of Rogers , Bowen , and Rogers . Cleveland later took a clerkship with the firm , began to read the law , and was admitted to the bar in 1859 . 
 = = = Early career and the Civil War = = = 
 Cleveland worked for the Rogers firm for three years , then left in 1862 to start his own practice . In January 1863 , he was appointed assistant district attorney of Erie County . With the American Civil War raging , Congress passed the Conscription Act of 1863 , requiring able @-@ bodied men to serve in the army if called upon , or else to hire a substitute . Cleveland chose the latter course , paying $ 150 to George <unk> , a thirty @-@ two @-@ year @-@ old Polish immigrant , to serve in his place . 
 As a lawyer , Cleveland became known for his single @-@ minded concentration and dedication to hard work . In 1866 , he successfully defended some participants in the Fenian raid , working on a pro bono basis ( free of charge ) . In 1868 , Cleveland attracted professional attention for his winning defense of a libel suit against the editor of Buffalo 's Commercial Advertiser . During this time , Cleveland assumed a lifestyle of simplicity , taking residence in a plain boarding house ; Cleveland dedicated his growing income instead to the support of his mother and younger sisters . While his personal quarters were austere , Cleveland enjoyed an active social life and " the easy @-@ going sociability of hotel @-@ lobbies and saloons . " He shunned the circles of higher society of Buffalo in which his uncle 's family traveled . 
 = = Political career in New York = = 
 = = = Sheriff of Erie County = = = 
 From his earliest involvement in politics , Cleveland aligned with the Democratic Party . He had a decided aversion to Republicans John Fremont and Abraham Lincoln , and the heads of the Rogers law firm were solid Democrats . In 1865 , he ran for District Attorney , losing narrowly to his friend and roommate , Lyman K. Bass , the Republican nominee . In 1870 , with the help of friend Oscar Folsom , Cleveland secured the Democratic nomination for Sheriff of Erie County , New York . He won the election by a 303 @-@ vote margin and took office on January 1 , 1871 at age 33 . While this new career took him away from the practice of law , it was rewarding in other ways : the fees were said to yield up to $ 40 @,@ 000 ( US $ 800 @,@ 000 today ) over the two @-@ year term . 
 Cleveland 's service as sheriff was unremarkable ; biographer Rexford Tugwell described the time in office as a waste for Cleveland politically . Cleveland was aware of graft in the sheriff 's office during his tenure and chose not to confront it . A notable incident of his term took place on September 6 , 1872 , when Patrick Morrissey was executed , who had been convicted of murdering his mother . As sheriff , Cleveland was responsible for either personally carrying out the execution or paying a deputy $ 10 to perform the task . In spite of reservations about the hanging , Cleveland executed Morrissey himself ; he hanged another murderer , John Gaffney , on February 14 , 1873 . 
 After his term as sheriff ended , Cleveland returned to his law practice , opening a firm with his friends Lyman K. Bass and Wilson S. Bissell . Elected to Congress in 1872 , Bass did not spend much time at the firm , but Cleveland and Bissell soon rose to the top of Buffalo 's legal community . Up to that point , Cleveland 's political career had been honorable and unexceptional . As biographer Allan Nevins wrote , " Probably no man in the country , on March 4 , 1881 , had less thought than this limited , simple , sturdy attorney of Buffalo that four years later he would be standing in Washington and taking the oath as President of the United States . " 
 It was during this period that Cleveland began a brief relationship with a widow , Maria Crofts Halpin , and later assumed responsibility for supporting her and a child born at the time . The matter became a campaign issue for the GOP in his first presidential campaign . 
 = = = Mayor of Buffalo = = = 
 In the 1870s , the municipal government in Buffalo had grown increasingly corrupt , with Democratic and Republican political machines cooperating to share the spoils of political office . In 1881 the Republicans nominated a slate of particularly disreputable machine politicians ; the Democrats saw the opportunity to gain the votes of disaffected Republicans by nominating a more honest candidate . The party leaders approached Cleveland , and he agreed to run for Mayor of Buffalo , provided that the rest of the ticket was to his liking . When the more notorious politicians were left off the Democratic ticket , Cleveland accepted the nomination . Cleveland was elected mayor with 15 @,@ 120 votes , as against 11 @,@ 528 for Milton C. Beebe , his opponent . He took office January 2 , 1882 . 
 Cleveland 's term as mayor was spent fighting the entrenched interests of the party machines . Among the acts that established his reputation was a veto of the street @-@ cleaning bill passed by the Common Council . The street @-@ cleaning contract was open for bids , and the Council selected the highest bidder at $ 422 @,@ 000 , rather than the lowest of $ 100 @,@ 000 less , because of the political connections of the bidder . While this sort of bipartisan graft had previously been tolerated in Buffalo , Mayor Cleveland would have none of it . His veto message said , " I regard it as the culmination of a most bare @-@ faced , impudent , and shameless scheme to betray the interests of the people , and to worse than squander the public money . " The Council reversed itself and awarded the contract to the lowest bidder . Cleveland also asked the state legislature to form a Commission to develop a plan to improve the sewer system in Buffalo at a much lower cost than previously proposed locally ; this plan was successfully adopted . For this , and other actions safeguarding public funds , Cleveland 's reputation as a leader willing to purge government corruption began to spread beyond Erie County . 
 = = = Governor of New York = = = 
 New York Democratic party officials began to consider Cleveland a possible nominee for governor . Daniel Manning , a party insider who admired Cleveland 's record , was instrumental in his candidacy . With a split in the state Republican party in 1882 , the Democratic party was considered to be at an advantage ; there were several contenders for that party 's nomination . The two leading Democratic candidates were Roswell P. Flower and Henry W. Slocum . Their factions deadlocked , and the convention could not agree on a nominee . Cleveland , in third place on the first ballot , picked up support in subsequent votes and emerged as the compromise choice . The Republican party remained divided against itself , and in the general election Cleveland emerged the victor , with 535 @,@ 318 votes to Republican nominee Charles J. Folger 's 342 @,@ 464 . Cleveland 's margin of victory was , at the time , the largest in a contested New York election ; the Democrats also picked up seats in both houses of the New York State Legislature . 
